Title: 

URL Source: https://www.nrl.navy.mil/Portals/38/PDF%20Files/Taking_Technology_Higher_Amato.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 11 Jul 2023 19:00:23 GMT

Markdown Content:
www.nrl.navy.mil 

> Taking Technology Higher
> The Naval Center for Space Technology and the Making of the Space Age

# Taking Technology Higher 

# The Naval Center for Space Technology 

# and the Making of the Space Age 

## IVAN AMATO 

# In the summer of 1923, on a bucolic plot 

## of land along the Potomac River where 

## it cuts southward through the bottom 

## of the District of Columbia, a few of the 

## twenty founding radio researchers of the 

## newly opened Naval Research Laboratory 

## already were craning their necks toward 

## space. This first generation of NRLers, who 

## commuted to the laboratory on dirt roads 

## and by boat from Virginia just across the 

## Potomac, could not have known it then, 

## but their militarily significant interest in 

## the upper atmosphere’s effects on long-

## distance radio communication would 

## set the lab on a path to becoming one the 

## most consequential players in the gestation, 

## birth, and maturation of the Space Age. 

## From these personal and institutional roots 

## in the 1940s and 1950s would emerge a 

## culture of innovation that for the rest of the 

## 20th century, and into the 21st, would lead 

## to some of the highest of high technologies. 

## These include the world’s first spy satellite, 

## a portfolio of space-based intelligence, 

## surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) 

## capabilities; the Global Positioning System 

## (GPS) for planet-wide navigation and time 

## synchronization (without which Internet 

## and cell phone communication would be 

## shadows of what they are); and battlefield 

## technologies that sometimes played world-

## changing roles as they were deployed in the 

## Cold War and in every phase of war and 

## peace since. In the 1980s, the Department 

## of Defense would acknowledge NRL’s 

## preeminent role in developing defense-

## related space technologies by designating 

## the lab to be the home of the Naval Center 

## for Space Technology. This book chronicles 

## the people, personalities, and institutional, 

## political and geopolitical influences that 

## together have woven into one of the 

## country’s great places of innovation. 

## Ivan Amato is a writer, podcaster, documen -

## tarian, and science café host who has covered 

## the science and technology landscape since 

## the late 1980s. In addition to writing hundreds 

## of articles for publications that include  Sci -

## ence News , Science , Nature , Scientific Ameri -

## can , Chemical & Engineering News, Time, For -

## tune , the  Washington Post , and  The Guardian ,

## he has written several books. Among these is 

## Pushing the Horizon , an institutional history 

## of the Naval Research Laboratory published 

## in 1998 in honor of NRL’s 75th anniversary, 

## and the  New York Times  Notable Book  Stuff: 

## The Materials the World is Made Of. 

> ON THE COVER:
> The successful launch of Navigation Technology
> Satellite 2 (NTS-2), the first NAVSTAR GPS
> satellite, marked the beginning of a new era
> in navigation and timekeeping history. Developed
> by the Naval Research Laboratory, NTS-2 was
> launched on 23 June 1977 aboard an Atlas F
> launch vehicle from the Vandenberg Air Force
> Base Launch Complex in California.

# Taking Technology Higher Taking Technology Higher 

# The Naval Center for Space Technology 

## by IVAN AMATO 

# and the Making of the Space Age 

NTS-2 engineering model, the anchor satellite of the GPS constellation, 

displayed at the Smithsonian Air & Space Museum. Cleared for public release. 

IR -8100-22-1-U 

June 2022 Mr. Christopher Dwyer Superintendent, Space Systems Development Department FOREWORD 

December 2018 

If you are a space professional who has spent most of your life in the civilian side of the 

business—human spaceflight, space science and astronomy, telecommunications, environ-

mental monitoring—then it is entirely possible that you have barely, if ever, heard of the Naval 

Center for Space Technology at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. Yes, you might recall a 

mission called “Clementine” that in the mid-1990s took the first pictures of the moon since the 

time of Apollo and, by the way, discovered deposits of ice at the lunar poles. After all, this was a 

discovery that, in its time, made it to the NBC “Today” show. And so you might even recall that 

it was, surprisingly, sponsored and managed by the Department of Defense Strategic Defense 

Initiative Office, the “Star Wars” missile defense program created by President Reagan a decade 

earlier. But you are very unlikely to know, or to remember if you once knew, that the spacecraft 

itself was built and the mission was flown by NRL. 

If your career has been in the national security space business, then you are much more 

likely to know about NRL and NCST, but still it will not be uppermost in your thoughts. The 

typical insider’s perception of the national security space program is much like that of an 

intelligent layman who is in touch with current events: the United States operates numerous 

imagery and electronic intelligence (ELINT) collection satellites, managed by an amorphous 

group of “three-letter agencies” such as NSA, NRO, CIA, and NGA. The Air Force is some-

where in the mix, because their logo is on the launch vehicles that might get a 5-second sound 

bite on network news when a new “bird” goes up. But few even in the intelligence community 

spend much time thinking about the Navy’s or NRL’s role, or remember GRAB and Poppy—the 

first ELINT spacecraft—if indeed they ever knew of them. 

The development of satellite-based navigation follows a similar pattern. GPS and its 

multitude of applications are today so ubiquitous, so embedded in the fabric of daily life, that 

if GPS is noticed at all by the general public it is regarded as a public utility, likely known only 

by its acronym. Few who use the term even know what the letters represent, and almost no one 

knows that the history of satellite navigation is a Navy history, for both GPS and the lesser-

known system which preceded it, TRANSIT, originated in Navy laboratories. In particular, 

without NRL’s pioneering concept for precision time-based navigation and the proof of that 

concept with the Timation mission, the USAF-managed development of today’s GPS constel-

lation would not have occurred. 

There is a recurring theme here: at NRL, the Navy operates the best little space program of 

which you have never heard. If that is true for you, the reader, the book you are holding in your 

hand offers a bountiful education about the largely unwritten and quite commonly unknown 

piece of American space history, a history of contributions that range from open scientific 

discovery to deeply hidden successes, and some failures, in the national security space arena. 

More than that, this book offers fascinating insights into space development at a time, and in 

a place, where results were more important than bureaucratic processes, and when a lead -

er’s worth was judged not by the modern standards of the media-smooth, politically-correct 

talking heads we too often see today at the helm of an enterprise, but by the technical respect in 

which he or she was held by those being led. At NRL, those old standards still apply. In a world 

of constant change, this is a trait that is more than worth preserving. 

Mike Griffin 

Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering 

(NASA Administrator 2005–2009) CONTENTS 

Foreword .............................................................................................................................  v

Acknowledgements  ...........................................................................................................  vii 

Introduction  .......................................................................................................................  1

Chapter 1 — Minding the Sky  .........................................................................................  11 

Chapter 2 — A Rocket State of Mind  .............................................................................  17 

Chapter 3 — Science First  ................................................................................................  33 

Chapter 4 — The Rocket Science Club  ...........................................................................  49 

Chapter 5 — Transcending the Atmosphere: Project Vanguard  ................................  63 

Chapter 6 — The Lorenzen Factor  ..................................................................................  83 

Chapter 7 — Report 5097: Beyond Vanguard  ...............................................................  93 

Chapter 8 — The Prelude to Space Reconnaissance  .....................................................  113 

Chapter 9 — Raising the Periscope: GRAB 1 and 2  .....................................................  129 

Chapter 10 — Doubling Down: Poppy  ..........................................................................  155 

Chapter 11 — Where and When, Everywhere and Always: The Global 

Positioning System  ....................................................................................................  195 

Chapter 12 — Cutting the Cord and the Birth of the Naval Center for 

Space Technology .......................................................................................................  231 

Chapter 13 — The Changing Neighborhood  ................................................................  247 

Chapter 14 — Ocean Surveillance, Everywhere and Always  ......................................  285 

Chapter 15 — C4ISR: A Quest for Omniscience  ..........................................................  301 

Chapter 16 — C4ISR 2.0  ..................................................................................................  327 

Chapter 17 — NCST Inside  .............................................................................................  347 

Chapter 18 — The House of Wilhelm  ............................................................................  371 

Bibliography, References, and Sources  ...........................................................................  395 

Index  ...................................................................................................................................  412 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This book is the second I have written for the Naval Research Laboratory. The 

first one,  Pushing the Horizon , was published in 1998 as part of the lab’s celebration of 

its seventy-fifth anniversary. 

The earlier book is an institutional history, a chronicle of a place that started 

small and focused on radio science and engineering in the 1920s and then became 

one of the country’s great, broad-based research and development organizations. It is 

a place, with an overall mission founded in furthering the cause of national defense, 

which combines traits of major science and technology-driven universities like the 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology and top-tier corporate laboratories like Du -

Pont’s Experimental Station in Wilmington, Delaware, or the former and famous Bell 

Laboratories. 

I never thought I would work on a massive project again for NRL, but in 2011 

I was awarded a contract to write a book-length chronicle on the Naval Center for 

Space Technology, one of NRL’s major organizational divisions. I had known about 

NCST and some of its accomplishments from my coverage of it in  Pushing the Hori -

zon , so I knew the project would be fantastically interesting. 

Then I realized what I had gotten myself into. Within three years, I would have to 

discover through my reporting, interviewing, and research a narrative arc that would 

usher readers on an engaging tour of the origin, evolution, and significance of NCST’s 

overall role in the Space Age, and of the scientists, engineers, and managers who have 

comprised the lab’s adventure in space technology. It also was my personal hope that 

I would do so in a way that amounted to a welcome contribution to the scholarship 

in the areas of the history of the Space Age and the history of technology. I can only 

leave it to others to assess the degree to which I might have succeeded in these goals 

(the 2019 timing of publication is due, in part, to the extensive review process within 

NRL and the Department of Defense, as well as leadership shifts at both NCST and 

NRL). 

What I must concede from the start is that this book, fat as it is, only captures 

a fraction of the many hundreds of people whose collective professional lives, over 

seventy years, sum into the life and times of the Naval Center for Space Technology. 

And even as the book chronicles only some of the scientists and engineers who have 

contributed to the life of NCST, it leaves yet more hidden the nontechnical personnel 

who contributed to the success of NCST with their essential management, admin -viii NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

istrative, and financial expertise and creativity. Without them, NCST surely would 

have been grounded. I thank Louise McDonald, one of those devoted and invaluable 

support staff, for her careful review of a draft of this book. To those living and dead 

who remain unmentioned, I apologize. My task was not to write a yearbook rife only 

with names and caption-length tidbits, but a long-form narrative that spans time and 

space and that hopefully would engage audiences even beyond those closely asso -

ciated with the Naval Research Laboratory. As such, I strove to identify a series of 

projects, events, accomplishments and human players that all are like pixels which, 

when connected and arranged, reveal at least some worthy and informative picture of 

what a place like NCST has been about. I had to surrender to the reality that a place 

like NCST cannot be fully captured within the covers of a book. 

I want to specially thank the late David van Keuren, a former NRL historian 

whose generosity and collaborative spirit helped me in my first NRL book project 

and, thereby, in this second book project as well. Without his partnership, I never 

would have been able to get my arms around the institutional, cultural, sociological, 

technological and other complexities of NRL as quickly I did. 

I thank Art Collier whose patient devotion to the goal of producing a chronicle 

of NCST has kept me on track. His first-hand insight into how defense- and intel -

ligence-related R&D plays out behind the scenes has helped me see sociocultural 

dynamics that I otherwise would have missed. He too has read more drafts of this 

book than I am sure he would have cared to. Chris Dwyer, head of NCST’s Space 

Systems Development Department, has been my primary liaison within NCST and 

has been a welcome partner in figuring how to tell the NCST’s story. His reviews and 

comments have helped to greatly improve the result and accuracy. Pete Wilhelm, 

director of NCST when it was established in that name in 1986, and a leader of NRL’s 

space technology for decades before that, somehow managed to find time for multiple 

interviews and text reviews. He finally retired, after 56 years of service, at the very end 

of 2014. His power of recall and clarity of thought and expression are nothing short 

of amazing and have been a great asset to me. I thank also his successor, John Schaub, 

NCST’s former director, for his patience and encouragement and for several invalu -

able discussions during the research phase of the book. I thank Lee Hammarstrom 

whose depth of knowledge of how NRL has operated in the larger context of the 

Navy, Department of Defense, and national leadership has been important and I am 

grateful for the partial draft of his own memoir that he shared with me. On that score, 

I am enormously grateful to James Winkler for sharing with me his memoir as a space 

technology engineer throughout some of NRL’s and NCST’s most golden years in the 

space technology business. 

In the references and bibliography section, I have listed many other NRL and 

NCST scientists and engineers who I interviewed and who helped me with both the 

broad brushstrokes and the detailing of this narrative. Many of them generously read 

one or more drafts of chapters for which they had particular expertise or relevance. ix ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I heap thanks upon the staff of Praxis Inc., the company that held the primary 

contract with NRL under which my subcontract for the book project was executed 

and managed. In that context, I thank in particular Jane Schaub, Kelly Davis, Kris 

Cheesebrew, and Sara Mateer. They have been a delight to work with. I thank Kathy 

Parrish, Claire Peachey, Jonna Atkinson, Gayle Fullerton, and the other publishing 

professionals at NRL who worked out the countless details that it takes to transform 

a raw, submitted manuscript into a hold-in-your-hand book, the kind I still like the 

most, even in an age of eBooks. 

At home, where so much of the brooding, document shuffling, writing, rewrit -

ing, editing, and other tasks of writing a book unfolded, I thank my wife, Mary Am -

ato, a prolific book author, for her relentless support. I also credit my sons, Simon 

and Max, for making me proud of them and for making me want them to be proud 

of my accomplishments, this book among them. Finally, I thank you, dear reader, for 

validating the entire effort. INTRODUCTION 

In the summer of 1923, on a bucolic plot of land along the Potomac River where it 

cuts southward through the bottom of the District of Columbia, a few of the 20 found -

ing radio researchers of the newly opened Naval Research Laboratory already were 

craning their necks toward space. This first generation of NRLers, who commuted to 

the laboratory on dirt roads and by boat from Virginia just across the Potomac, could 

not have known it then, but their militarily significant interest in the upper 

atmosphere’s effects on long-distance radio communication would set the lab on a 

path to becoming one the most consequential players in the gestation, birth, and mat -

uration of the Space Age. From these personal and institutional roots in the 1940s and 

1950s would emerge a culture of innovation that for the rest of the 20th century, and 

into the 21st, would lead to some of the highest of high technologies. Among these 

are space-based intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities, the 

Global Positioning System (GPS) for planet-wide navigation and time synchronization 

(without which Internet and cell phone communication would be shadows of what 

they are), and battlefield technologies that sometimes played world-changing roles as 

they were deployed in the Cold War and in every phase of war and peace since. 1  

> It begins. In the summer of 1923, the Naval Research Laboratory opened for business
> along the east bank of the Potomac River in the southwest sector of Washington, DC.
> Building 1, the sole research building at the time, stood opposite a coal-fired power
> plant, a pattern shop, a foundry, and a machine shop, then the largest structure on
> campus. (NRL photo 23-060834(2)) 2NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

NRL’s status as a major and transformative participant in the still-unfolding his-

tory of the U.S. space program is little known by the general public. Ask most people 

on the street what constitutes the U.S. space program and they will quickly answer 

“NASA,” referring to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, which 

President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed into existence on July 29, 1958. 2 Some people 

might be aware that central to the original composition of NASA were the 8,000 em -

ployees, multiple research and test facilities, and $100 million budget of the National 

Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, or NACA. However, unknown to most people 

is that much of the original expertise in rocket engineering and space science at what 

would become known as NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Mary -

land, and much of NASA’s original capabilities for managing entire operational satellite 

systems, resided in the presidentially mandated transfer of scientists, engineers, and 

technicians from the Naval Research Laboratory to the fledgling NASA and its multi -

ple facilities. 

NRL, first designated by the Department of the Navy during the lab’s conceptual 

development as the Naval Experimental and Research Laboratory, 3 got started in the 

rocket business when one of its leaders in guided-missile research and development 

in the 1940s, Ernst Krause, secured access for the lab to captured V-2 rockets that the 

Nazis had deployed as terror weapons in England and Belgium during World War II. 

These V-2 rockets could not loft anything into orbit, but they were the most powerful 

rockets in the world at the time. In addition to seeing their value for missile research, 

Krause, a Wisconsin farm boy turned physicist, knew the captured rockets offered a 

unique scientific opportunity for some of his NRL colleagues who had long coveted 

the possibility of making direct, in situ measurements of the upper atmosphere. With 

data from measurements like those, it was more likely that the NRL radio scientists 

would be able to tease out how ultraviolet radiation and X-rays from the sun affect 

the ionosphere at the edge of space and thereby the long-distance radio communi -

cation that was important to the Navy. 4 In the years following the war, NRL’s upper 

atmosphere researchers, with access to V-2s and with leadership positions on the 

multi-institution panel that decided how the nation’s scientists and engineers could 

use the rockets, became among the most influential in the world in their field of upper 

atmosphere research. 

With Krause opening the pathway to rocket-based science at NRL, which had 

world-class scientists and engineers on campus—among them Herbert Friedman, who 

would become a giant in the astronomy community; Jerome Karle and Herbert Haupt-

man, who in 1985 would share a Nobel Prize in chemistry for developing techniques 

for determining the specific arrangements of atoms in crystals; and Howard Loren-

zen, who earned the moniker “Father of Electronic Warfare” for the innovations in 

electronic countermeasures that he and his colleagues provided the fleet during World 

War II—the lab became one of the earliest and most passionate adopters and then de-

signers of rockets in the 1940s and 1950s. 5 And once rockets entered the lab’s portfolio 3INTRODUCTION 

of tools and methods, they turned the heads of other creative scientists and engi-

neers at the lab who envisioned how rockets for the first time could boost artificial 

satellites into orbit and how such orbiting platforms could perform many jobs for 

the Navy, Department of Defense, and the nation. Firing the imaginations of NRL’s 

first generation of space technologists were wish-list possibilities that included com-

municating to far-flung vessels by bouncing radio signals off of satellites (including 

the original and natural satellite—the moon!); gathering intelligence and conducting 

surveillance and reconnaissance (on adversaries’ anti-ballistic and air defense radar 

systems, for example); and navigating on land, on the seas, and in the air. 6

This rocket-mindedness was ascendant at the lab in the years following World 

War II, so much so that the nation’s leaders chose NRL in 1955 to execute Project 

Vanguard. This forward-looking national technology initiative proposed to launch 

into orbit, toward the end of the decade, the country’s and perhaps the world’s first 

artificial satellite, unless, that is, the Soviet Union’s rocket engineers beat the United 

States to that prize. Project Vanguard was the nation’s most audacious component of 

an already magnificently ambitious international science collaboration, known as the 

International Geophysical Year (IGY), in which researchers around the world would 

collectively study the planet’s geophysical properties and behavior more comprehen-

sively than had ever been done before. 7

Like the United States, the Soviet Union also had publicly pledged to launch a 

satellite within the scientific context of IGY. And on October 4, 1957, Soviet engi -

neers ended up beating the U.S. into orbit with their radio-beeping Sputnik 1. It was 

a humbling and, to many in the U.S., supremely threatening moment that might 

have been more endurable had Project Vanguard’s attempt two months later to 

realize the nation’s IGY promise to launch an instrument-bearing prototype satellite 

not resulted in a spectacular, televised, seen-by-all fireball of failure. It was widely 

derided with names like “flopnik” and “kaputnik.” It was a dark episode for NRL’s 

space pioneers. 8

These were among the influences that led to the passing of the National Aero-

nautics and Space Act in the summer of 1958. Its central feature was the creation of 

a national civilian space agency, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

(NASA) and, with it, the near death of NRL’s dozen-year exploration of rocket engi -

neering and rocket-borne science. When NASA officially opened for business, some 

200 NRL staff members from Project Vanguard were assigned by an Executive Order 

by President Eisenhower to become founding scientists, engineers, technicians, 

managers, and leaders at the brand new civilian space operation. 9 Initially called the 

“Beltsville Space Center,” the Maryland campus would become known as the God-

dard Space Flight Center. This wholesale transfer of expertise would have spelled the 

end of NRL’s advances into the Space Age had it not been for a handful of visionary 

space-minded engineers who remained at NRL—and some who applied to return to 

NRL from their transfer to the new NASA. 4NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Among those who returned was Martin Votaw. He had worked on one of the 

world’s first satellite-tracking systems, NRL’s Minitrack system for Project Vanguard, 

and was adamant about the Navy’s need to maintain its own expertise in the emerging 

Space Age. In 1959, Votaw became head of the small, newly formed Satellite Tech-

niques Branch, and with his colleagues would begin to resurrect a space technology 

operation at NRL. At the end of that year, Votaw took one of the most important 

personnel actions of his career and, as it would turn out, for the U.S space program: 

he hired a young engineer, Peter G. Wilhelm. Wilhelm would become a giant in the 

military space program and would become one of the longest continuously working 

engineers in the history of the U.S. space program. At the end of 2014, the 80-year-old 

Wilhelm had only just retired as the first and, until then, only director of the Naval 

Center for Space Technology, the Navy’s premier in-house space engineering facility, 

headquartered at NRL. 

To this Satellite Techniques Branch cadre, space was the vast ocean above in 

which the Navy and the nation would have to become present and capable, just as 

they were on the oceans below. This small group dedicated to keeping the Navy in 

space would emerge into a low-profile but high-impact component of the country’s 

fledgling military space program. In time, this group (along with a few others at 

institutions such as the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory) would 

become for the Navy and national defense something like what NASA became for the 

high-profile civilian component of the space program. Over the next 50+ years, NRL’s 

space technologists would conceive of, invent, develop, build, deploy, and operate at 

least 100 intelligence-gathering, surveillance, reconnaissance, navigational, communi-

cations, tactical, meteorological, scientific, and other kinds of payloads and satellites. 

These national assets have helped U.S. presidents, military and intelligence leaders, 

and even individual warfighters to counter uncertainty, ignorance, fear, and paranoia 

with data, information, and knowledge. The lab’s central role in the creation of the 

Global Positioning System also connects its work to virtually every citizen in the U.S. 

and millions of others around the world who by way of their GPS-equipped naviga -

tion tools know where they are and where they are going. 

Although the history of the last 60 years cannot be rewound and run again with-

out these NRL-developed capabilities for comparison, it is defensible to claim that 

the lab contributed to the collective success of avoiding the dreaded alternate ending 

to the Cold War: mutually assured destruction by way of all-out nuclear war with the 

Soviet Union. 

During those same years, NRL’s low profile in the familiar NASA-centric nar -

rative of the U.S. space program follows naturally from this reality: much of NRL’s 

contribution to the country’s space technology and capabilities has been classified 

at the highest levels. What may be said in general terms is that circling the globe 

in space as you read this sentence are what often are coyly referred to as “national 

technical means,” a term that also includes ground-based command-and-control and 5INTRODUCTION 

tracking stations profuse with massive antennas and geodesic radomes, the sophisticat -

ed computer analysis techniques that can pull out telling signals from the electromag -

netic cacophony that fills the airwaves, and other associated technologies and facilities 

around the country and the world. (Drive along highways in, say, rural Maryland and 

Virginia, and you might just catch sight of some of the massive geodesic radomes of 

these ground stations.) At least portions of the stories behind some of these feats of 

technology, those whose operational lives ended in the 1960s and 1970s, now can be 

told publicly. 

Among these stories are ones about NRL’s roles in the arena of satellite-based intel-

ligence gathering, reconnaissance, and surveillance. GRAB and Poppy, the code names 

of two of the nation’s and world’s first spy satellite programs during the Cold War, were 

top secret and unutterable in public until recent years. 

It was evident from the start of the Space Age that satellites merely were the “orbit-

ing peripherals” of what would become much larger and more complex global systems 

by which data from the satellites would become ever more useful to ever more end 

users. The NRL space technologists would have to develop expertise in designing and 

running ground stations for communicating with, controlling, and tracking satellites. 

They would have to invent and build a menagerie of electronic boxes for processing, 

encrypting, decrypting, interpreting, packaging, and distributing data for both stra-

tegic uses (such as mapping out enemy ability to track ballistic missiles) and tactical 

applications on the battlefield (such as determining a platoon’s location in a featureless 

desert). 10  And once others in the government, at national, state, and regional levels, 

began to see this range of capabilities the NRL space cadre had managed to realize, 

demand for tailored versions of these abilities grew from customers ranging from po-

lice departments to emergency response teams to the White House Communications 

Agency. 11 

It hasn’t all been secrets for NRL’s several generations of space technology engi-

neers. Much of NRL’s space technology program, which since 1986 has been sub-

sumed within the NRL directorate known as the Naval Center for Space Technology 

(NCST), has been unclassified. This open work has many facets that reveal how NRL 

has been an integral partner with civilian, private, military, and other government 

efforts to push the envelope of space-based capabilities.  

> NCST Logo. The Naval Center for Space Technology
> logo features a generic satellite, but with details that
> pay homage to NRL’s earliest satellites: the antenna-
> studded sphere resembles both Vanguard 1 and the
> satellite the public knew as SOLRAD 1 but that also
> housed a second, classified payload, GRAB 1. 6NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

One of NRL’s crowning and most visible achievements in this context is its semi-

nal role in the creation of the Global Positioning System (GPS), which has expanded 

into civilian use beyond anyone’s wildest prognostications in the 1960s when NRL 

and Air Force researchers began fleshing out GPS’s conceptual foundations. Origi-

nally reserved for military uses ranging from missile targeting to ship navigation to 

location-finding for ground forces, and also for the equally important role of synchro-

nizing the military’s far-flung clocks, GPS has become a household acronym. It has 

become a contemporary wonder of technological innovation that many millions of 

people and countless industries have come to rely on. Whether you are a command-

er of a nuclear submarine in charge of an arsenal of sea-launched missiles, a dad in 

search of a soccer field in the Bay Area of California, or a teenager with a smart phone 

bent on locating the closest source of pizza in Worcester, Massachusetts, GPS now has 

become part of routine life. It has transformed how ordinary citizens navigate from a 

billion Point A’s to a billion Point B’s. 

Less visible but just as critical is the system’s capability in relaying “time syn-

chronization” signals from a master clock (maintained at the U.S. Naval Observatory 

in Washington, DC) to millions of internal clocks in computers, cell phone towers, 

electric grid components, receivers, transmitters, and other devices in our increas-

ingly high-tech systems. Without such precise synchronization, these devices and 

systems would be unable to, among other things, communicate with each other, tease 

apart multiple signals from a mix of signals, keep electrical current flowing stably 

through the grid, or make targeting calculations. 12  The GPS is just one of the more 

visible life-changing technological systems with NRL’s mark all over it that this book 

chronicles. 

Another high point for the lab was its leading role in the ambitious 1990s project 

known by most as Clementine but also more formally as the Deep Space Program 

Science Experiment (DSPSE). Originated by NASA and the Department of Defense 

as a joint mission to demonstrate the capability for low-cost, high-value space ex-

ploration, the project integrated small, lightweight, and remarkably capable sensors, 

imaging technologies, and navigation, propulsion, and other components and systems 

into a smaller, “smarter” satellite. Administration and funding fell under the wing of 

the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO), known later as the Ballistic Mis-

sile Defense Organization (BMDO) and now the Missile Defense Agency (MDA). 13 

Just 22 months after NRL was tasked with leading the multi-agency effort, a Titan 

II booster lofted Clementine toward its first destination, the moon, where it would 

map the lunar surface more thoroughly than ever before and from which it was to 

set off for its second destination, the near-Earth asteroid Geographos. In both cases, 

the spacecraft was to demonstrate that it could hone in on, mostly autonomously, an 

object in space and then observe and record it in great detail. Clementine succeeded 

spectacularly with its moon rendezvous, during which it amassed 1.8 million imag-

es that amounted to, at the end, the finest visual mapping of Planet Earth’s one and 7INTRODUCTION 

only natural satellite. Disappointingly, a software error crippled the spacecraft before 

it could make it to Geographos. Even so, President Bill Clinton publicly lauded the 

accomplishment. Said Clinton, “The relatively inexpensive, rapidly built spacecraft 

constituted a major revolution in spacecraft management and design.” 14 

A few years later, the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, 

would find expression in NCST’s research and development portfolio. As the attacks 

starkly demonstrated how the world’s security threats were shifting from primarily 

nation states to include also nationless terrorist organizations, the lab redoubled its 

efforts to leverage the space-based technologies it had helped develop over the years 

into ones that could serve in the emerging “homeland security” context. C4ISR is the 

acronym that applies here: Command, Control, Computers, Communications, Intel-

ligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance. One major embodiment of NRL’s work in 

this arena falls under the rubric of “maritime domain awareness” for keeping a watch 

on thousands upon thousands of vessels on the world’s oceans. This has meant fusing 

many types of intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance data, along with secure 

communications systems, into a versatile C4ISR framework that can be tailored for a 

diversity of threats, such as terrorists trying to deliver weapons of mass destruction to 

American ports, and a diversity of end users, such as emergency response teams deal -

ing with in- frastructures wrecked by hurricanes and other natural or human-made 

disasters, and police forces ensuring safety and security at iconic national and inter -

national events like the Super Bowl or Olympics. 

NRL was founded several years after Thomas Edison suggested in 1915 to the 

Secretary of the Navy, Josephus Daniels (whose ban on liquor and encouragement of 

coffee on Naval vessels during the prohibition brought us the phrase “Cup of Joe”), 

that the Navy needed its own invention factory. When the lab opened its doors in 

1923, it was destined to evolve into the Navy’s version of the corporate laboratory, 

akin to Edison’s own “invention factory” in Menlo Park, New Jersey, Corning’s glass 

research and development facility in upstate New York (Sullivan Park), and DuPont’s 

Experimental Station in Wilmington, Delaware. NRL’s mission in life would be to 

apply new scientific knowledge and engineering know-how to develop more capable 

technologies that are useful to the Navy. 15  In time, its clientele would expand beyond 

the Navy to the rest of the Department of Defense and then to the entire citizenry of 

the country. 

From its original contingent of radio scientists and engineers, NRL has grown 

into an R&D campus with scores of buildings at several location and more than 2,200 

scientists, engineers, technicians, and support personnel working on an annual R&D 

budget in recent years of about $1 billion. It operates under a Working Capital Fund 

model, which means its researchers only work and get paid if they can offer scientific 

or technology development projects that others want and are willing to pay for. With -

out these paying customers, mostly in other parts of the government, NRL would 

all but shut down. About half of the technical staff are physicists and engineers and 8NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

the other half have expertise in chemistry, materials science, acoustics, ocean science, 

astronomy, astrophysics, mathematics, computer science, robotics, electronic warfare, 

sensor systems, systems engineering, and dozens of other areas. This unique diversity 

within the Department of Defense’s research and development infrastructure is what 

has allowed NRL as a whole, and the Naval Center for Space Technology in particular, 

to develop a successful track record in solving inherently multidisciplinary technology 

challenges. Behind the scenes but just as essential were those carrying out the adminis -

trative and logistical tasks that come with developing new space technology. Establish -

ing and manning international field sites to monitor and perform command and control 

functions of spacecraft during orbit, for example, demanded creativity and skills sets 

in areas such as real estate, financial tracking, security operations, and contracts and 

procurements. 

Even as it resides within this diversity, NCST itself has evolved into one of the 

world’s more technically diversified workforces with access to one of the world’s more 

fully equipped sets of space technology and satellite operation facilities. Between its two 

divisions—the Space Systems Development Department (SSDD, Code 8100) and the 

Spacecraft Engineering Department (SED, Code 8200)—NCST’s some 250 scientists, 

engineers, technicians, and support personnel collectively supply just about every type 

of expertise needed to usher spacecraft from their conceptual cradles, onward through   

> The NRL Campus. In its more than 90 years, NRL has evolved into a large R&D campus with some 100 buildings
> and nearly 2,500 full-time employees, more than half of which hold master’s or doctoral degrees. The largest, hangar-
> like structure, Building A59, is the primary home of the Naval Center for Space Technology. (NRL photo 160217-N-
> JF840-068) 9INTRODUCTION

development, assembly, testing, launch, and operation phases, all the way to the 

end of their service lifetimes. 16  NCST maintains a close partnership with industry 

throughout these stages, as the following chapters will show. 

NCST has just about all the facilities and equipment that it takes for this rich 

bastion of human talent to build, assemble, test, and otherwise prepare spacecraft for 

launch. A partial list of such facilities includes voluminous “high bays” for satellite 

fabrication and assembly; the “Big Blue” thermal vacuum chamber for subjecting 

entire spacecraft to simulations of extreme space environments; a launch-simulating 

acoustic reverberation chamber; RF (radio frequency) anechoic chambers for testing 

antenna behavior; an electromagnetic interference and compatibility (EMI/EMC) 

chamber for testing how a spacecraft’s myriad electronic and RF components interact; 

spin tables for characterizing the balance and behavior of spacecraft in orbit; clean 

rooms for fabricating specialty microelectronic chips and other high-precision and 

sensitive components; an atomic clock testing and characterization facility; a fuel 

testing facility; leading-edge integration and testing facilities for electronic, RF, and 

optical components and systems; computer-aided design and manufacturing (CAD/ 

CAM) capacity; and tools and algorithms for determining, tracking, and analyz -

ing orbital trajectories, known more technically as ephemerides. And once NCST’s 

payloads are in orbit—and increasingly also the payloads built by others—the Center 

also has the right human stuff and technology to operate and manage them at NCST’s 

telemetry, tracking, control, and communications stations at Blossom Point, Mary -

land (one of the world’s first satellite ground stations), the Midway Research Center in 

Stafford, Virginia, and elsewhere. 17 

With a mission to prepare for the Navy’s and nation’s imminent and future 

needs in space, NCST’s research and development portfolio spans an astonishingly 

wide spectrum. A very partial listing of NCST’s scores of research areas includes 

systems engineering, satellite mission analysis and simulation, stem-to-stern space 

and aircraft payload design and implementation, laser-based satellite ranging and 

communication, advanced data management, orbital dynamics, autonomous naviga -

tion, interplanetary navigation, communications theory and systems, ground station 

engineering, tactical communications systems, antenna design, precision navigation 

and timing technology, precision tracking and ranging, all aspects of satellite design, 

testing, and fabrication, propulsion systems, machine vision, hydraulics and pneu -

matics control … the list goes on and on. It is what has given NCST the confidence to 

sometimes associate its own sense of self with the Star Trek–inspired slogan visible on 

some of NCST’s walls: “To Boldly Fly What Has Never Been Flown Before.” 18     

> 1See, for example, Ivan Amato, Pushing the Horizon: Seventy-Five Years of High Stakes Research
> and Technology at the Naval Research Laboratory (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laborato-
> ry, 1998); Herbert Gimpel, “History of NRL,” two volumes (first 50 years), unpublished, 1975;
> Bruce Hevly, Basic Research Within a Military Context: The Naval Research Laboratory and the

10 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Foundations of Extreme Ultraviolet and X-ray Astronomy, 1923–1960  (Baltimore, MD: Johns 

Hopkins University, 1987).  

> 2

“National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958,” Public Law 85-568, 72 Stat. 426. Signed by 

the President on July 29, 1958.  

> 3

Annual Report of the Department of the Navy for the Fiscal Year of 1920, 1921 (Washington, 

DC: Government Printing Office, 1921), pp. 64–65.  

> 4

Louis A. Gebhard,  Evolution of Naval Radio-Electronics and Contributions of the Naval Re-

search Laboratory , NRL Report 8300 (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1979), p. 

303.  

> 5

Herbert Friedman, “From the Challenges of World War II to the Frontier of Space,” in  1992 

NRL Review  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1992).  

> 6

NRL Report 5097, “A Satellite and Space Vehicle Program for the Next Steps Beyond the Pres-

ent Vanguard Program,” December 10, 1957.  

> 7

See, for example, Constance Green and Milton Lomask,  Vanguard: A History  (Washington, 

DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1970).  

> 8

Hugh Sidey, “The Man Who Took the Beating for Vanguard,”  Life Magazine , March 31, 1958, 

p. 35.  

> 9

See, for example, Lane E. Wallace,  Dreams, Hopes, Realities: NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Cen -

ter, The First Forty Years  (Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 

1999), pp. 18–19; Green and Lomask,  Vanguard . 

> 10

Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author, March 12, 2012.  

> 11

Robert Richard, George Arnold, and Bruce Morgan, in joint interview with author, April 19, 

2012.  

> 12

Ivan Amato, “Why, in the Jurassic Era, an Earth Day May Have Been Only 23 Hours Long,” 

Washington Post , September 23, 2013.  

> 13

A Clementine Collection  (NRL/PU/1230-94-261) (Washington, DC: Naval Research Labo-

ratory, June 1994, reprinted March 1999). President Ronald Reagan announced the Strategic 

Defense Initiative (SDI), which came under the auspices of the SDI Organization (SDIO). A 

decade later, in 1994, the Secretary of Defense renamed SDIO as the Ballistic Missile Defense 

Organization (BMDO) and in 2002 the organization underwent another name change to the 

Missile Defense Agency (MDA).  

> 14

William J. Clinton, “Report on Aeronautics and Space for Fiscal Year 1994,” Congressional 

Record (Senate), p. S7388, May 24, 1995.  

> 15

See Amato,  Pushing the Horizon , p. 14.  

> 16

On the to-do list for NCST, as it is for just about any organization that builds and operates 

satellites, is to figure how to manage, recycle, reposition, and otherwise manage dead and 

orbiting spacecraft. The massive and growing population of space debris already poses hazards 

for operating in space and the problem will only get worse unless innovators at NCST and 

elsewhere come up with solutions.  

> 17

For information on NCST’s facilities and research programs, see these Naval Research Lab-

oratory corporate publications, available at http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/publications:  NRL 

Major Facilities  (online only);  NRL Fact Book  (information on NRL’s structure, personnel, and 

programs, printed every other year); and  NRL Review  (collection of research articles from all 

research divisions, published annually).  

> 18

This slogan appears sometimes on posters and other media that end up in, among other 

places, NRL meeting rooms and PowerPoint presentations. MINDING THE SKY 

With its establishment in 1923, the Naval Research Laboratory became “the Na -

vy’s sole in-house organization with full responsibility for advancing the Navy’s radio 

capability,” noted radio engineer Dr. Louis Gebhard. A devotee of wireless trans-

mission technology 1 since his high school days early in the century, Gebhard would 

work at NRL for more than 40 years and become one of its most spaceward-looking 

leaders. 2 It was this pursuit of improvements in one of the Navy’s most basic technol-

ogy categories, communications, which inexorably required NRL radio experts to ask 

questions about the upper atmosphere’s effects on long-range radio communication. 

It was the scientific challenge of answering those questions about the upper reaches of 

the sky that would turn NRL into a spawning ground of the Space Age. 

The first director of NRL’s Radio Division was Dr. Albert Hoyt Taylor, a Chi-

cago-born, pipe-smoking physics professor who joined the Naval Reserve prior to 

World War I, attained the rank of lieutenant, and became officer-in-charge at the 

Great Lakes Naval Radio Station after the Great War began. He was promoted to the 

rank of Commander in 1918. As ground was breaking in 1920 for construction of 

NRL’s first buildings, Taylor was the Navy’s top radio scientist and a natural choice 

for director of the lab’s Radio Division. The lab’s only other division in 1923 was the 

Sound Division, then staffed by a handful of researchers focused on the science and 

# 1  

> Radio Men. Dr. A. Hoyt Taylor (left), shown here in a World War II era photograph, was the Navy’s
> top radio scientist when he assumed leadership of the Naval Research Laboratory’s Radio Division in
> 1923. Dr. Louis Gebhard (right), shown here in 1954 when he was in charge of NRL’s Radio Division
> II, was one of the first at the lab to envision using rockets to study the upper atmosphere’s effects on
> radio communication. (NRL photos 60834(H-602) and 60834(H-555A)) 12 NRL AND THE S PACE AGE

technology underlying the detection of submarines. Until 1949, when the lab reorga-

nized to have a civilian director of research, the head of the lab was a military man, 

the first one being Rear Admiral William S. Smith. 

At a time when most radio technology was based on long-wavelength, low-fre-

quency signals, Taylor was betting that short-wavelength, high-frequency signals 

would be a major trait of future naval radio technologies, and not just for commu-

nication. One pragmatic reason Taylor was leaning toward developing capabilities 

with high frequencies was that the public broadcasting stations at the time had been 

encroaching on the low to mid frequencies—from 550 kilohertz (550 thousand waves 

per second) to 1.5 megahertz (1.5 million waves per second)—that the Navy had been 

using. This encroachment was extensive enough that, in the words of Gebhard, “Con-

siderable political pressure was brought to bear upon the Navy to relinquish its use of 

this band.” 3 That swath of frequencies became known as the “radio-broadcast band.” 4

One potential military perk of developing communications techniques at higher 

frequencies, which generally refers to those frequencies between a few megahertz and 

30 megahertz, was that the energy these signals carries tends to be absorbed by the 

atmosphere more so than is the case for lower-frequency signals. Particularly with 

a low-power transmitter, it would be harder for an adversary to eavesdrop on these 

signals from far away, and that made them attractive for secure ship-to-ship commu-

nication channels. But it also meant that systems using high frequencies needed to be 

more sensitive to weak signals and have more capable amplification circuitry. 

“Although we did not see the tremendous possibilities [beyond expected gains 

in areas such as ship-to-ship communications] for the use of high frequencies in the 

field of naval communications, we did see that they would be extremely valuable 

provided we could sufficiently stabilize transmitters and receivers to make use of 

such frequencies practical under naval conditions,” Taylor stated later. 5 This was engi-

neering research and development, through and through. But it also was, in a sense, 

out of reach. The behavior of high-frequency radio waves is intimately connected to 

properties and phenomena at the edge of space, and thereby, to the sun and the ener-

gy it sends Earthward. In the 1920s, there was no way to directly observe and measure 

what was going on scores of miles overhead. 

Radio operators around the world had become well aware of a seeming paradox 

about high-frequency signals: the signals could be transmitted over astoundingly far 

distances, many thousands of miles. This was a big part of radio’s “magic.” The radio 

community also knew that there seemed to be patterns to the long-distance transmis-

sions. But the patterns were quirky, often wildly so. A key clue to the physics behind 

the transmission would come from observations that the signals were receivable at 

specific distances, called skip distances, from the transmitter. No one quite knew how 

this was working, but for Navy commanders coveting the seemingly impossible ability 

to communicate with their far-flung ships on the world’s seas, the prospect of reliable 

long-distance radio communication—at the speed of light, no less, and without re-13 CHAPTER 1 — M INDING THE S K Y 

quiring the outlandish and impractical task of tapping into undersea telegraph cables 

while at sea—was alluring indeed. 

The leading theory for the skip distance phenomenon was spelled out in math-

ematical detail in 1924 by British scientist Sir Joseph Larmor, 6 who proposed that 

the upper atmosphere included a layer of electrically charged atoms, or ions, which 

behaved like a spherical radio mirror enveloping the planet. This layer—itself com-

prising several discernible layers, each of which reflects radio waves—became known 

as the ionosphere. 

With the Earth’s surface having a similar radio mirror effect, a high-frequency 

radio signal could begin at a transmitter in, say, Washington, DC, and then ricochet 

between the ionosphere and the surface multiple times as the signal bent around the 

Earth’s curvature toward distant receivers. When Taylor’s radio colleague Leo Young, 

who previously had worked with Taylor at the Great Lakes Naval Radio Station, 

demonstrated that a 50-watt, high-frequency transmitter at NRL could communicate 

more reliably with Navy facilities in Balboa, along the Panama Canal, than could a 

massive 250,000-watt transmitter of long-wavelength signals, the Navy’s Communi-

cation Service was won over. 7 This was akin to seeing a dim light bulb thousands of 

miles away. 

In early experiments using a transmitter designed to emit particularly high fre-

quency signals with unprecedented stability—an important feature when using radio 

wavelengths like rulers for measuring distances—Young and Gebhard determined 

that the height and thickness of the ionosphere varied during the day, across seasons, 

and in different locations on the planet. These variations appeared to be confined 

within an altitude range of 55 to 130 miles. 8 The higher the ionosphere, the farther 

the ricochet distance for a radio signal. 

Although the NRL researchers could determine some of the ionosphere’s most 

basic geometric characteristics with their remote radio probing, this upper part of the 

atmosphere was literally unreachable for any direct measurements of, say, its chem-

ical composition or the density of electric charges. Yet the NRL radio researchers 

knew they needed just those kinds of measurements to understand the ionosphere 

enough so they could transform the hit-or-miss aspect of ionosphere-mediated radio   

> Skip Distance. Navy radio researchers were both vexed
> and intrigued by the ability of high-frequency radio waves
> to be received at specific locations thousands of miles
> away from a transmitter. Physicists at NRL and elsewhere
> uncovered how layers of the ionosphere, in the far upper
> atmosphere, acted like mirrors for radio waves, causing
> the waves to ricochet between the ionosphere and Earth,
> thereby bending signals around the curvature of the
> Earth. (Army Training Document, https://rdl.train.army.mil/
> catalog/view/100.ATSC/8594DF18-D94D-432C-823B-
> 7D40C4B4BE4A-1274317197310/9-64/chap2.htm) 14 NRL AND THE S PACE AGE

communication into a set of guidelines the Navy could use to render its high-fre-

quency communication more predictable and reliable. 

In lieu of a full understanding about how the ionosphere affected radio transmis-

sion, and still with no means to make direct measurements of the ionosphere, Taylor 

turned to the world’s postal system to map out propagation patterns, in particular 

those skip distances that corresponded to the ricochet points of the radio waves. 

“Taylor and other amateurs were discovering skip distances just by calling in the dark 

and seeing who answered,” recounted Dr. Edward O. Hulburt, who joined NRL in 

1924 to run the newly established Heat and Light Division. “He’d say, ‘Stand by, boys, 

I’m working tomorrow night on three meter [radio] waves. What do you hear? Send 

me postcards.’” 9 This network of amateurs and the postcard campaign revealed that 

the average skip distance increased as the wavelength of the radio signal decreased. 

For wavelengths of 16, 21, 32, and 40 meters (corresponding to high frequencies in 

the tens of megahertz range), for example, the skip distances were 1,300, 700, 400, 

and 175 miles, respectively. With this data, and a model of the ionosphere as a sea of 

free electrons whose population and thickness at different parts of the world depend-

ed on the amount of solar energy impinging on it, the NRL radio team was moving 

toward a science-to-technology payoff. The picture of the ionosphere that was emerg-

ing was that of a radio mirror whose position in the sky could rise or fall in different 

places around the world depending on the solar energy flux. 

The Navy’s commitment to high frequencies meant that the NRL radio wiz-

ards, along with scientific colleagues who also were investigating the electrical and 

magnetic features of the atmosphere, would have to obtain a much more detailed 

understanding of long-distance radio propagation. And this meant they would need 

to observe, measure, probe, and otherwise examine the ionosphere, a region of the   

> Ionosphere Science. When Dr. Edward O. Hulburt
> came to NRL in its first years in the 1920s, he added
> his expertise in optical physics to the study of radio
> behavior, opening a pathway to understanding how
> the ionosphere affects the propagation of radio
> signals. (NRL photo Hulburt(H)) 15 CHAPTER 1 — M INDING THE S K Y

atmosphere that began above the stratosphere and went all the way to that poorly 

defined height where the sky ends and space begins. It was a place where no person, 

balloon, or any other human-made object had ever been. Since it was not possible 

to study it directly, it would take unprecedented ingenuity to gather enough data to 

understand it via indirect means. 

There was something else that was curious to Taylor about high-frequency radio 

signals, something that eventually would set the lab’s innovators on a trajectory even 

above the ionosphere. In 1922, while at the nearby Anacostia Aircraft Radio Laborato -

ry awaiting the official opening of NRL, Taylor and Young had made a discovery—one 

that would have enormous consequences—during their surveys of radio transmission 

and reception along the Potomac River. In particular, they were puzzled one day by a 

series of signal fluctuations. Then they realized what they were witnessing: reflections 

of radio signals from a wooden steamer, the Dorchester, sailing by on the river. 10 

This was one of the world’s first glimpses of the type of electromagnetic behavior 

underlying “radio detection and ranging,” or radar, for short. It would be a fateful ob -

servation that led to the birth of naval radar in the 1930s and 1940s and to the devel -

opment of a range of enormously important radio-based technologies in World War II 

and ever since. It was not lost on Taylor that high frequencies were what would make 

this phenomenon valuable to the Navy; low frequencies had wavelengths hundreds 

of meters long, too large to rely upon for locating most ship-sized objects precisely 

enough. Using wavelengths longer than the object to be detected would be akin to try -

ing to sift grains of rice using a screen with a one-inch mesh. NRL’s initial discoveries 

in radar would open its engineers’ imaginations over subsequent years in magnificent 

ways. Historians of technology would come to rate the invention and development of 

radar at NRL, at MIT’s “Rad Lab,” and in England as one of the most important of the 

20th century. 11 

Radar R&D would become one of NRL’s greatest strengths. Included in NRL’s 

research portfolio were technologies for detecting, characterizing, and jamming the 

radar systems of adversaries. Along these lines, during the height of the Cold War in 

1960, NRL space technology pioneers, particularly Howard Lorenzen, Martin Votaw, 

and Reid Mayo, would launch the world’s first intelligence-gathering payload into 

orbit. Known by the then-classified designator Dyno 1 (and more widely by its cover 

name GRAB, for Galactic Radiation Background experiment), the Cold War payload 

listened in on and helped characterize Soviet anti-aircraft and anti-ballistic-missile 

radar. 

The story of the first spy payload and its more capable follow-on versions would 

only begin coming out to the public, at least in parts, in 1998, on the occasion of the 

75th anniversary of NRL, and then again in 2005. 12  But the original incentive to reach 

higher up in the sky than humanity ever had gone before was in place at NRL from its 

beginning by virtue of the militarily relevant challenge of pushing radio communica-

tion into high frequencies. Another step toward an era of space science and technol-16 NRL AND THE S PACE AGE 

ogy would unfold in those early years by way of the forward-looking mindset of E.O. 

Hulburt, whose fundamental studies with Taylor into the propagation of electromag-

netic radiation, whether in the form of visible light or invisible radio signals, would 

help put NRL onto the scientific map.  

> 1

Bruce Hevly,  Basic Research Within a Military Context: The Naval Research Laboratory and the 

Foundations of Extreme Ultraviolet and X-ray Astronomy, 1923–1960  (Baltimore, MD: Johns 

Hopkins University, 1987), p. 21.  

> 2

Louis A. Gebhard,  Evolution of Naval Radio-Electronics and Contributions of the Naval Re-

search Laboratory , NRL Report 8300 (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1979).  

> 3

Gebhard,  Evolution of Naval Radio-Electronics , p. 44; Susan J. Douglas,  Inventing American 

Broadcasting 1899–1922  (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1987).  

> 4

Gebhard,  Evolution of Naval Radio-Electronics , p. 44. 

5 A. Hoyt Taylor,  The First Twenty Five Years of NRL  (Washington, DC: Navy Department, 

1948), p. 17. 

6 Sir Joseph Larmor, “Why Wireless Electric Rays Can Bend Around the Earth,”  The London, 

Edinburgh and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science  48 (1924): 1025–1036; 

A.H. Taylor and E.O. Hulburt, “The Propagation of Radio Waves Over the Earth,”  Physical 

Review  27, no. 2 (February 1926): 189–215. 

7 Taylor,  The First Twenty Five Years , p. 17. 

8 G. Breit and M.A. Tuve, “A Test of the Existence of the Conducting Layer,”  Physical Review  28 

(1926): 554–575. See also Tuve and Breit, “Note on a Radio Method of Estimating the Height 

of the Conducting Layer,”  Terrestrial Magnetism and Atmospheric Electricity  30 (1925): 15–16; 

Hevly,  Basic Research , pp. 31–32. 

9 Edward O. Hulburt, oral history, NRL History Office.  

> 10

David Kite Allison,  New Eye for the Navy: The Origin of Radar at the Naval Research Laborato -

ry , NRL Report 8466 (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1981), pp. 39–40.  

> 11

See Robert Buderi,  The Invention that Changed the World: The Story of Radar from War to 

Peace  (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996).  

> 12

Robert A. McDonald and Sharon K. Moreno,  Raising the Periscope…Grab and Poppy: Ameri-

ca’s Early ELINT Satellites  (Chantilly, VA: National Reconnaissance Office, 2005). A ROCKET STATE OF MIND 

Catalyzing great discoveries through interdisciplinary mixing of minds, con-

cepts, and methodologies was a hot topic of discussion in late 20th century univer-

sity culture. At NRL, this culture had begun taking hold far earlier. Dr. Edward O. 

Hulburt, one of the lab’s early hires, received his Ph.D. from Johns Hopkins University 

in optical physics. But he knew of radio too. During World War I, Hulburt worked 

in an Army Radio Signal Corps workshop in Paris’s Latin Quarter where he and his 

coworkers built radio sets, delivered them to the troops on the front lines, and then 

quickly worked on the next improved generation of radio sets based on feedback from 

the front. 1

As an optics expert, radio waves were to Hulburt just longer-wavelength versions 

of the infrared, visible, and ultraviolet light he was more accustomed to studying. 

Light and radio—both were just different embodiments of electromagnetic radiation. 

Graphical depictions of the electromagnetic spectrum typically line up long-wave-

length microwave and radio waves to the left of infrared, visible, and ultraviolet 

wavelengths, which line up to the left of shorter wavelength portions of the spectrum, 

including X-rays and gamma rays. 

# 2 

> The Electromagnetic Spectrum. When viewed together on an electromagnetic
> spectrum, the common physics underlying X-rays, light, and radio becomes apparent. 18 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

Hulburt and A. Hoyt Taylor, superintendent of the lab’s Radio Division, com-

bined their respective knowledge regarding the reflection and propagation properties 

of electromagnetic radiation and the particular traits of radio waves. In 1926, in the 

journal  Physical Review , they published what became a hugely influential paper in 

which they laid out a general mathematical model to account for how the ionosphere 

affected the propagation behavior of radio waves. 2 The paper described the mecha -

nism by which radio frequencies from 100 kilohertz (kHz) to 20 megahertz (MHz) 

(corresponding to low-frequency wavelengths of about 3000 meters to modestly 

high-frequency ones with wavelengths of about 15 meters) were reflected by and 

through a medium of heavy ions and electrons, which presumably was what the iono-

sphere was like. Their theory adequately explained the skip-distance effect and agreed 

with experimental data at distances up to 16,000 kilometers from the transmitter, or 

about two-fifths the distance around the world. 3

This paper would become NRL’s most prominent early contribution to the sci-

entific literature. It simultaneously furthered basic understanding of the ionosphere 

and provided guidance to the Navy for how and when to choose specific frequencies 

for high-frequency communication. Almost 70 years later, the American Institute of 

Physics would include this paper among the most seminal papers published in the 

seminal journal  Physical Review  in all of the 20th century. 4 This was a paper in which 

theory and math matched empirical, on-the-ground observations by radio operators 

around the world who recorded when and where they were able to receive high-fre-

quency signals from transmitters run by NRL’s Radio Division. Still lacking, however, 

was the deeper scientific foundation of how the ionosphere behaved and affected 

radio signals, and this could only be constructed from actual measurements of the 

electrons and ions in the ionosphere at different times of the day and year. 

Direct measurements of that sort indeed were on the wish lists of upper atmo-

sphere researchers at NRL and elsewhere. Hulburt, for one, was well connected with 

Dr. Merle Tuve and Dr. Gregory Breit, both young ionosphere researchers at the 

nearby Department of Terrestrial Magnetism (DTM) of the Carnegie Institution of 

Washington (CIW) located in a bucolic, forested section of Washington, DC. They 

too wanted to study the ionosphere in its own lofty venue and Hulburt would join 

them in attempts to drum up political and financial support to move forward on their 

audacious desires. Hulbert first got to know Tuve at Johns Hopkins University where 

Hulbert taught Tuve, who was a graduate student there. Tuve continued his connec-

tion with Hulburt at NRL in 1925 where he secured access to a powerful set of radio 

transmitters at an NRL-run radio station known as KDF for probing the upper atmo-

sphere with radio signals. 5 Tuve would later run Johns Hopkins University’s Applied 

Physics Laboratory (APL), which was established as part of the country’s technology 

development effort during World War II, and thereafter would become both a some-

time partner and sometime rival of NRL in space technology development. 19 CHAPTER 2 — A ROCKET STATE O F MIND 

Of all scientific specialists, those interested in the upper atmosphere were the ones 

most tuned in to any development that might bring them physically closer to their 

favorite object of study. Word of one such development began circulating in 1926. On 

March 26 of that year, Robert Goddard, a rocket visionary since his high school days, 

launched his first liquid-fueled rocket in Auburn, Massachusetts. Its engine fired for 

about 2.5 seconds, enough to loft the rocket 41 feet and send it half a football field from 

the launch point. 6

To be sure, it was a modest accomplishment for what Hulburt, Tuve, and Breit had 

in mind; what they needed was a rocket that could travel straight up to the ionosphere, 

which was more than 50 miles above their heads. Goddard’s own vision for rockets in 

fact went way beyond the ionosphere. In late 1919, for example, the Smithsonian Insti -

tution published his essay titled “A Method for Reaching Extreme Altitudes.” 7 In it, he 

mused about building a rocket charged with “flash powder” that could reach the moon, 

at which time the powder would ignite spectacularly on impact so that the feat would 

be visible to observers on Earth. 

Even earlier, Russian rocket visionary Konstantin Tsiolkovsky wrote of “reactive 

devices,” something like rocket engines, for launching artificial satellites. Beyond 

that, he imagined building orbiting space platforms as way stations for interplanetary 

flight. 8 German rocket visionary Hermann Oberth followed suit in the 1920s when he 

published his machinations of using rockets for planetary exploration. 9 So by the late 

1920s, rocket visionaries in the United States, Germany, and the Soviet Union all had 

strongly registered in writing their inclinations to build vehicles for reaching space. 

And Goddard had taken some of the first concrete steps to do so. It would be these 

same three countries over the next few decades whose space-bound ambitions would 

compete and clash while driving one another to achieve technological feats that stand 

out as among humanity’s most consequential accomplishments, for better and for 

worse. 

Hulburt would be the most influential early carrier of rocket visions into NRL. 

Goddard’s rockets particularly grabbed him. Despite their modest abilities, Hulburt 

took them to signify that any scientific imaginings about shuttling instruments all 

the way to the heights of the ionospheric radio mirror were not just pipe dreams. And 

Hulburt didn’t waste time to try to move that feeling onward and upward. 

In a letter dated June 17, 1927, to Dr. John A. Anderson of the Carnegie Institu-

tion of Washington’s Mt. Wilson Observatory in California, Hulburt, along with Tuve 

and Breit of DTM, described their efforts to generate support for the high-altitude 

research direction that Goddard’s little rockets so vividly suggested to them. Ander -

son recently had been in Washington, DC, for a scientific conference, where he spoke 

about his institution’s support of Goddard’s rocketry work. The three scientists wrote 

to Anderson, “After your visit in Washington at the time of the April meeting of the 

Physical Society, we have been very much interested in the rocket for the purpose 20 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

of exploring the upper atmosphere.” Hulbert noted that the military commander 

of NRL, Captain Edgar G. Oberlin, was talking up the idea within Navy circles. 

Colleagues of Breit and Tuve at the DTM’s Geophysical Laboratory had looked into 

collaboration with the Army. The letter writers also noted that they would consider 

approaching “some wealthy people” if they could learn more details of Goddard’s 

rockets. 10 

Practical rocket technology for upper atmosphere research, let alone for placing 

satellites into orbit, was still decades away. But the discussion about rockets, once 

begun in this circle, would continue at the lab, historian Dr. Bruce Hevly observed 

in his Ph.D. dissertation in which he analyzed the emergence of upper atmosphere 

research at NRL. In 1929, for one, Dr. John Fleming, then acting director of CIW’s 

DTM, wrote to Hulburt, asking him how he would put a rocket to use. In his reply, 

Hulburt proposed, in Hevly’s words, “that rockets would be useful in an intermediate 

region from 30 to 70 kilometers, between regions understood from balloon-borne 

instruments and those examined using radio waves. He recommended instruments 

to collect air samples, measure temperature, detect various atmospheric gases, and 

measure the action of the winds and the propagation of sound. Special photographic 

plates could be prepared to measure X-rays and ultraviolet light.” 11 

Cognizant of where his paycheck was coming from, Hulburt crafted the letter to 

Fleming so that it stressed the possibility that rockets could become a cheaper means 

than, say, enormous long-range guns, for delivering destructive and lethal ordnance 

to the enemy over long distances. The letter’s less violent ulterior motive was not 

camouflaged: it made it clear that a secondary use of the same technology could be 

to ferry scientific measuring payloads to higher locations of the planet than had ever 

been reached before. Rockets could push forward the scientific understanding of the 

ionosphere and thereby could improve high-frequency radio communication for the 

Navy, the letter said. Noted Hulburt, for clarity, “The behavior of the projectile might 

yield information of interest to certain departments of the Army and the Navy.” 12 

Goddard’s modest accomplishment in 1926 and in the years that followed may 

have catalyzed a hunger for rockets in Hulburt and thereby at NRL. But it could be 

little more than a hunger pang for 20 years, at which time another giant of NRL’s 

history, Dr. Ernst Krause, would secure the means—in the form of the V-2 rockets 

that the Nazis had used as a terror weapon during World War II—by which NRL’s 

scientists and engineers (and their colleagues in upper atmosphere research at other 

institutions) could get a taste of what rocket technology would enable them to do. 

Krause, a self-supporting graduate student in physics in 1938 at the University of 

Wisconsin in Madison, got his first job at NRL when the lab was still more known for 

its engineering than for its science. Taylor wanted to beef up NRL’s radio research and 

development work with some fundamental scientific expertise and he went in search 

of the same at UW Madison, where he himself had taught several decades earlier. 13 21 CHAPTER 2 — A ROCKET STATE O F MIND 

“Much of the work at the Laboratory at that point was being done in the field of 

radio, and they had people who were ex-radio operators in the Navy, and some hams,” 

Krause recalled later, referring to radio hobbyists who amounted to one-person radio 

stations working out of basements, sheds, and garages. Taylor, he said, “wanted to 

inject more physics into the Laboratory’s activities.” 14  Taylor, who had earned his 

own Ph.D. at the University of Göttingen in Germany in 1909, 15  checked in with the 

physics department at the familiar-to-him University of Wisconsin for top-notch 

students who might help the Navy push radio-based technology further in the interest 

of national defense. 16 

Krause’s name came up during Taylor’s inquiry. With a freshly minted Ph.D. in 

hand, Krause hadn’t done much work in electronics or radio, but he was one of the 

physics department’s smartest students. That sounded spot-on to Taylor, who also 

wanted to move quickly. So rather than taking the time-consuming and bureaucratic 

route of hiring Krause as a civil servant, he offered the young man a one-year contract 

for $2,400, an alluring sum at the time. Although he had never been to Washington, 

DC, let alone NRL, Krause accepted the job at the lab sight unseen. The toughest 

consequence of that decision, Krause recalled later, was that it meant he would have 

to leave his girlfriend, Constance Fraser, behind in Wisconsin. Later, the two would 

marry. 17 

He moved to his new job in September 1938 and, along with a few other new 

recruits, was quickly brought into a secret world. “Upon arrival there, they took 

us through the laboratory and one of the things they showed us … was a then very 

highly classified project, and that was a working radar.” 18  In late 1934, about a dozen 

years after Taylor and Young’s discovery of radar’s physical basis, this NRL duo, along 

with colleague Lawrence A. Hyland, were assigned U.S. patent number 1,981,884 for a 

“System for Detecting Objects by Radio.” 19  The patent described systems for detecting 

both ships at sea and flying aircraft; a later generation of NRL engineers would extend 

the same basic technology for detecting objects in space. 

In the few years following the 1933 filing of their seminal radar patent, NRL 

engineers had made progress, Krause observed. The transmitting unit was on the roof   

> Rocket Hunter. Dr. Ernst Krause, a champion of
> guided-missile research during World War II, would
> secure access for laboratory scientists to V-2 rockets
> that Allied forces captured from the Nazis at the end
> of the war. For NRL, it would be a transformational
> development. (NRL photo Krause(1))

22 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

of the lab’s radio laboratory building. Sticking out was a spiraling antenna element 

that looked something like a gun barrel and also like a big stretched-out bedspring. 

Powered by a battery of state-of-the-art, baseball-sized vacuum tubes, it sent out a 

probing signal of 400 megahertz—about 400 million electromagnetic waves every 

second, each about 2.5 feet from crest to crest. A separate receiving antenna picked up 

the reflections and shunted the signals to an indicator device, such as a set of head-   

> Echo Catchers. Early radar antennas, including CXAM and XAF, atop a
> building at NRL. (NRL photo 60834(H-136))
> Radio Vision. A page from the historic radar patent,
> number 1,981,884 issued on November 27, 1934, to
> NRL’s A. Hoyt Taylor, Leo C. Young, and Lawrence A.
> Hyland. 23 CHAPTER 2 — A ROCKET STATE O F MIND

phones or a meter, the latter of which rendered the signals visually apparent. “Very 

clearly, one could see reflections of airplanes and other objects,” Krause recalled. 20 

The 20-something Krause already was setting on a personal course that 

within a decade would have transformative consequences for the laboratory’s place in 

the history of technology. In time, his mark would become apparent in the country’s 

ability even to survive the harrowing and violent decades to come in both hot and 

cold wars. The first project in his new position in the lab’s Communications Security 

Section within the Radio Division, for one, involved adapting for military commu-

nications the short radio pulses that radar systems used to ping off of objects such as 

ships and submarine periscopes. 

“We thought this would be a very clever way of conducting secret communica-

tions that couldn’t be intercepted,” Krause said, adding that the work led to a series of 

fundamental patents, some classified by NRL as secret. Some of these advances would 

prove relevant to ground-to-satellite communication technologies in the coming 

Space Age. Among the patents were ones for inventions in telemetry, which allowed 

for the remote transmission of data, measurements, and commands, eventually even 

from satellites. 21 

Short radio pulses, which were akin to needles in an electromagnetic haystack for 

any adversary who might want to search for them and listen in, held promise for other 

militarily pertinent needs. Krause and his NRL coworkers, for example, would exploit 

the secrecy-preserving power of such pulses to develop IFF (Identification Friend or 

Foe) technologies that were crucial for preventing incidents of friendly fire in confus -

ing battle contexts. They also tried to use pulse techniques for guiding missiles, but 

found that reflections of the original pulses from the Earth’s surface could result in 

the reception by missile guidance systems of multiple identical commands, which was 

not well advised when it came to controlling projectiles that are intended to blow up 

in a precise location at a precise time. 22 

During World War II in the 1940s, Krause rose quickly in the ranks of the Com-

munications Security Section to become coordinator of the lab’s research in guided 

missiles. That work had roots extending back to the 1920s in the development of 

radio-controlled aircraft, 23  early precursors to the 21st-century era drones, including 

missile-equipped Predators and other unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) that have 

been transforming warfare, intelligence, and homeland security strategies and tactics. 

In 1943, the German war machine unleashed a new type of weapon that would 

force Krause and NRL to develop a new line of expertise, which later would take the 

laboratory along a trajectory that would make it a leader in the global push to enter 

the Space Age. “The Germans were dropping some guided missiles [from airplanes] 

on our ships in the Mediterranean, and it was causing a great deal of panic,” recalled 

Krause, 24  who died in 1989. 25 

In his history of NRL’s radio work, published in 1979, Louis Gebhard recounted 

that “the Germans started to use these air-launched missiles, the HS-293 and FX, in 24 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

late August 1943 and were able to sink a number of British and American vessels in 

the Mediterranean Sea and Bay of Biscay.” 26  By then, the laboratory already had en-

tered the arena of radio countermeasures, most notably the jamming of enemy radio 

communications, by identifying the frequency of communication and then burying 

the intended signal in nonsense noise by flooding the airwaves with a torrent of radio 

energy in that same frequency. It fell on the laboratory’s shoulders to come up with 

radio-based countermeasures that would throw off the radio-guidance of the new 

German missiles. 27 

“Occasionally one of these devices would hit the stern of a ship, and a few pieces 

would break off and lie on the deck,” said Krause, noting that these artifacts provided 

the only information he and his NRL colleagues had regarding the new weapons. 28 

In addition, he noted, “we had gone to various naval stations in the Mediterranean, 

which at that point meant the North African coast, in order to discuss with many of 

the officers and operators our analysis of these German guided missiles, and what 

they should do to counter them.” 29 

The NRL contingent reasoned that the Germans could only field a guidance sys-

tem based on radio knowledge and techniques that were in hand a few years earlier, 

since anything on the leading edge of radio science would be years away from making 

it into the field in any practical weapons system. That line of reasoning indicated 

that the guidance signals were likely in the form of an amplitude modulation (AM) 

system in which the commands were encoded by varying the strength of the signal, 

as opposed to frequency modulated (FM) systems in which the command would be 

encoded by changing the signal’s frequency in specified ways that the receiver would 

be able to parse. 

With that hunch as the basis, the NRL team built a radio receiver that would 

automatically scan frequencies in search of amplitude-modified ones, as though a 

hidden hand were turning a radio receiver’s tuning knob through the entire range. A 

similar technique would become important years later when the lab began building 

the world’s first ELINT—that is, electronic intelligence—satellites, which is to say 

satellites designed to detect and characterize electromagnetic signals, including radio 

and radar signals, of real or potential adversaries. 

“The scanning receivers were connected to an oscilloscope,” Krause explained, 

and the NRL engineers soon learned that the bet on amplitude modulation was a 

good one. “When a pip came, you stopped the receiver, then you had the frequency 

of that signal that was coming at you. We knew we had to do all of this in a matter of 

something like two or three minutes,” a speed that was unheard of at the time. 

The second half of the countermeasure followed naturally. “You had to intercept this 

signal, identify it, then get a transmitter cranked to the right frequency, and turn the 

transmitter on and jam it.” Explained Krause: “[We] built a transmitter whose 

frequency could be adjusted very quickly, and monitored by the same oscilloscope.” 30 25 CHAPTER 2 — A ROCKET STATE O F MIND 

The entire countermeasure system took about a month to get together. This was a 

breakneck pace that couldn’t have been otherwise; each additional day during which 

the German’s guided missiles could be deployed was a day of terror and potential death 

for thousands of Navy sailors and officers. It was in this way that the war experience of 

sailors at sea and soldiers in the field thousands of miles away could produce a sense of 

urgency in an R&D laboratory on the outskirts of Washington, DC. 

There was a serious gamble in this commitment to an AM-based countermeasure. 

Some Navy personnel familiar with the German guided-missile attacks raised the 

possibility that the weapons could have been receiving commands in the form of much 

shorter infrared wavelengths, rather than radio wavelengths. This was possible, Krause 

conceded, but he had confidence in his experience and knowledge. “It was my suspi-

cion that the infrared techniques had not been developed that far,” he said to bolster 

his decision to go with the AM framework. 31  It was a case of a U.S. physicist and engi -

neer getting into the mind-set of enemy physicists and engineers. Best would have been 

if the Allies could have captured some fully intact guided missiles, or transmitters used 

to send guidance signals, or documents specifying how the enemy systems worked. 

In lieu of the hardware and documentation, the NRL team had to make an educated 

guess. They bet on the AM-based control tactic and built jamming devices based on 

that hunch. 

To hedge against the guesswork, Krause and his engineering team also worked 

with their Navy counterparts in the war zone to obtain crucial technical intelligence. 

“Two destroyers, the USS  Davis  and USS  Jones , were equipped with radio intercept and 

recording equipment provided by NRL and were sent to the active warfare area 

to obtain information on frequency range and type of control signals. Analysis of the 

data obtained provided the basis for the development of a complete, integrated mis -

sile intercept-jamming system by NRL,” Gebhard recounted. 32  These were harrowing 

missions in which the destroyers served essentially as bait for the sea-based ELINT 

mission. 

“Four complete search and jamming equipments were rushed to completion and 

shipped by air to Africa for use on ships operating in the Mediterranean,” Geb- hard 

recounted. “Two more destroyers, the DD-225 [USS  Pope ] and the DD-227 [USS  Pill -

sbury ] were outfitted with similar equipment at the New York Navy Yard under NRL 

guidance before proceeding to active duty protecting convoys from missiles in the 

same warfare area.” 33 

With the basic design proven, NRL was able to secure contracts with commercial 

firms for production of many more of these systems. That sequence, of NRL innovators 

building prototype units of new technology and then handing these off to industry 

partners for manufacturing production units, was a pillar of the lab’s modus operan-

dus. “During the spring of 1944, fourteen equipments of similar design were built for 

use in the protection of the Normandy invasion fleet. The operators of these equip-

ments were trained by NRL. Fifty equipments, the design of which was modified by 26 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

NRL, were also constructed in a rush. Including these equipments, 65 ships 

equipped for jamming participated in the invasion of southern France. No ships so 

equipped were ever hit, and the ships were so placed that they protected large num -

bers of other ships.” 34 

“We prided ourselves on the fact that we really had accomplished something,” 35 

Krause recalled. The NRL-developed countermeasures appeared to have taken away 

the military value of the Germans’ radio-guided bomb. At the same time, Krause 

and others could see that the strategy of using radio for guidance, command, and 

control held enormous potential and peril, depending on who had the upper hand. 

After the war, the mix of technologies behind radio guidance, including antenna 

design and telemetry, would become foundational in the minds of NRL’s pioneering 

generation of rocket and then satellite designers and engineers. Krause would be 

more responsible than anyone for getting all of that going. 

As part of his wartime leadership role in the Communications Security Section 

of the lab’s Radio Division, Krause had undertaken a Mediterranean tour in late 

1944 to examine captured German air-to-ground missiles. He made this voyage just 

months after the war-turning D-Day invasion of Normandy by the Allied powers. 

It was a transformative experience for him. “Krause had become convinced that 

German rocketry was far ahead of anything the Allies had,” noted David DeVorkin 

in his comprehensive history about how German V-2 rockets led to the birth of U.S. 

space science. 36  As Krause saw it, this was a wake-up call to NRL that the lab would 

have to reposition itself after the war to elevate guided missile development as one 

of the lab’s primary strengths. Guided missiles, Krause believed, represented an 

important part of the future of warfare and that meant his lab had to earn a position 

at the front of the curve. 

In the summer of 1945, as the war was winding down, Krause, along with a 

contingent of NRL colleagues in the Communications Security Section, were back   

> The V-2 Connection. Designed and deployed
> by Germany as terror weapons during World
> War II, V-2 ballistic missiles, like these partially
> built ones still within the underground V-2
> factory known as Mittelwerk, would enable
> U.S. upper atmosphere researchers to ferry
> measuring instruments higher than ever
> before. (http://www.v2rocket.com/start/
> chapters/mittel.html) 27 CHAPTER 2 — A ROCKET STATE O F MIND

in Europe, collecting intelligence about Germany’s wartime developments in guided 

missiles and other technologies. As part of this mission, Krause was among a cadre 

of American scientists who interrogated German rocket scientists and engineers who 

had fled their country’s facilities for developing and manufacturing V-2s. 37 

Krause later recounted his dealings with these rocket engineers. “The group was 

… incarcerated in a large girls’ dormitory in Garmisch Partenkirchen, a delightful 

place” near Munich on the border with Switzerland, Krause recalled. “When we went 

to interview the German technical people in Garmisch … the intelligence officer said, 

‘Now, don’t you technical fellows start talking. We have to soften these people up first. 

We have experience in this, and let us get them softened up first and then they’ll start 

talking. ’ We agreed. Our first interview was with three of the Germans, two of whom 

were technical people. As soon as these three Germans sat down and we sat down at 

the table, the Germans began talking and talking and talking about what they had 

developed, what further advances they had on the drawing board, what they could do 

with the V-2 to improve it, to expand it, to extend its range, to improve its guidance 

accuracy—all of these things they had worked out in great detail, and they wanted to 

tell us about it … Pretty soon they pointed out that they had on the drawing boards 

the complete analysis and design for a V-2 which would extend its range to 3,000 

miles … They argued that if only the Americans would now get behind us, and take 

them—the group—to the U.S., they could set this up in so many days (they’d worked 

it all out), and they’d bomb Tokyo.” 38 

At first, Krause and the interrogation team were surprised by the Germans’ 

eagerness to reveal all of these details, but then the reason dawned on them: the Ger -

mans had come out of Peenemünde (a V-2 design and assembly location on the Baltic 

coast), which the Russians had captured, and according to the Geneva Convention, 

prisoners from that area should have been turned back to whoever had taken the area. 

“So this whole group was supposed to have been turned back to the Russians,” Krause 

said. “And if there’s any one thing that the Germans didn’t want, it was to be turned 

over to the Russians. Anything but that! So they were willing to cooperate to the nth 

degree.” 39 

For his part, Krause was most interested in German innovations in guidance sys -

tems. In his interrogations, his questions focused on technical issues regarding gyros, 

missile accuracy, and inertial guidance systems. 40  He picked up a few more stunning 

details along the way. One of the more frightening discoveries was a plan by German 

scientists to build a 118-foot-long submerged cylinder that Nazi submarines could 

tow to the coasts of the United States, erect to a vertical position by flooding one end, 

and then use the skyward-pointing tube to launch V-2 strikes. 41  Not only was that 

a reminder of how inventive and dangerous scientists and engineers could be when 

their talents and imaginations are applied to military causes, but it also highlighted 

the value of intelligence. You can defend best against the threats you know about. 28 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

During this intelligence-gathering tour in Germany, Krause made some con -

tacts that would end up placing NRL at the forefront of America’s nascent rocket 

development efforts in the aftermath of World War II. In particular, Krause crossed 

paths with Colonel Holger Toftoy, chief of the Enemy Equipment Intelligence Sec -

tion of the Army Ordnance Department, and Richard R. Porter of General Electric 

(GE). The Army had contracted GE to organize Project Hermes, a secret effort to 

develop rockets for the purpose of long-range delivery of munitions just as the V-2s 

had done for the Nazis. 42 

When the Army first heard reports about German efforts to develop long-range 

missiles, in the summer of 1943, it stepped up its own efforts toward that same end. 

Its sole rocketry experimentation contract was with the Guggenheim Aeronautical 

Laboratory of the California Institute of Technology (GALCIT). 43  This lab had done 

pioneering work with jet-assisted takeoff (JATO) technologies—including experi-

ments with rockets in the late 1930s—but it suddenly was unmatched to the Army’s 

sense of urgency. 44  Hence the contract with GE. 

But it was Germany that had pushed rocket technology further than any other 

nation. Its technical know-how and unused rocket hardware at the end of the war 

were to become windfalls to the Army and, because of Krause’s presence, to NRL 

and the Navy as well. The primary booty, which Toftoy learned about and took con -

trol of in April 1945, was at the underground German site known as Mittelwerk. At 

this site, thousands of slave laborers, many of whom died, had forcibly assembled the 

V-2 rockets that rained down on Britain and Belgium in the last phases of the war 

beginning in 1944. 45 

The U.S. Army had captured the subterranean V-2 factory just weeks before the 

treaty-sanctioned Russian occupation of this part of Germany had actually begun.  

> A Frightening Plan. The German engineers
> that developed the V-2 missiles had drawn
> up plans for a version that could be towed in
> a capsule across the Atlantic to the coast of
> the United States, where the capsule could
> be rendered upright into a floating launching
> platform. These were never developed into
> operational units.
> Length: 120 feet
> Max Diameter: 19 feet
> Max Depth: 25 meters 29 CHAPTER 2 — A ROCKET STATE O F MIND

Toftoy had no time to waste. As preparations for the transition to the Russians were 

under way, the Army packed up 360 metric tons of V-2 parts and equipment and 

shipped the rocketry hardware to White Sands, New Mexico, where the Army was 

establishing a missile testing ground. The Army wanted to use the V-2s as tools for 

learning how to handle and launch big rockets. 46 

Krause returned to NRL from Germany in June 1945 with a rocket-filled vision of 

NRL’s near future, although his initial focus was more on guided missiles as weapons 

rather than rockets for the purpose of conducting space science and operations. 47 

Referring to the impression left on him by his tour in Europe during the war, Krause 

recalled that “it was very clear to me and to some of my associates that we just had 

to put much more emphasis on this whole subject of guided missiles. That was where 

warfare was going.” 48  In late 1945 and early 1946, Krause met repeatedly with an 

increasing number of NRL colleagues, among them Dr. Milton Rosen and Dr. Homer 

Newell, to discuss how they might put V-2s to use for studying the upper atmosphere. 

“Everyone was quickly and favorably disposed to the concept of doing this type of 

research, because most of us were research type people. And we wanted to get away 

from warlike efforts,” Krause recalled, despite his own continued focus on weapons. 49 

As a first step, DeVorkin noted, Krause “managed to convert his old Communications 

Security Section into a guided-missiles research and development unit.” 50  Krause was 

not alone in his enthusiasm. NRL’s military director at the time, Commodore Henry 

A. Schade, had been a major participant and designer of the Navy’s technical mission 

to Europe and was well aware of the German work in guided missiles and rocketry. 

He joined Krause in the cause to place missile research and development as a center -

piece of NRL’s post-war portfolio of research. 51  This quickly would become subsumed 

in a yet more expansive upper atmosphere research structure. This emerging em -

phasis at the lab meant that NRL was soon to become home of some of the country’s 

leading-edge rocket engineers and rocket-equipped upper atmosphere scientists.                 

> 1Edward O. Hulburt, oral history, NRL History Office.
> 2A.H. Taylor and E.O. Hulburt, “The Propagation of Radio Waves Over the Earth,” Physical
> Review , 27, no. 2 (February 1926): 189–215.
> 3P. Binning and J. Mddour, “A Brief History of NRL’s Early Firsts in Spaceflight,” Advances in
> the Astronautical Sciences , 129 (2008): 1233–1250.
> 4H. Henry Stroke, Physical Review: The First 100 Years: A Selection of Seminal Papers and
> Commentaries (New York: AIP Press/Springer Verlag, 1995).
> 5Gregory Good (ed.), The Earth, the Heavens and the Carnegie Institution of Washington
> (Washington, DC: American Geophysical Union, 1994), pp. 139–141.
> 6http://www.nasa.gov/centers/marshall/news/news/releases/2003/03-125.html_prt.htm.
> 7Robert Goddard, “A Method for Reaching Extreme Altitudes,” Smithsonian Miscellaneous
> Collection, vol. 71, no. 2 (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1919).
> 8Homer E. Newell, Beyond the Atmosphere: Early Years of Space Science (NASA SP-4211)
> (Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1980), pp. 27–28; Asif Sid -
> diqi, Challenge to Apollo: The Soviet Union and the Space Race , 1945–1974 (Washington, DC:
> National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2000), pp. 1–2.

30 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

9 Newell,  Beyond the Atmosphere , p. 10.  

> 10

Bruce Hevly, “Building a Washington Network for Upper Atmosphere Research,” in  History 

of Geophysics , vol. 5,  The Earth, the Heavens and the Carnegie Institution of Washington 

(Washington, DC: American Geophysical Union, 1994).  

> 11

Bruce Hevly,  Basic Research Within a Military Context: The Naval Research Laboratory and 

the Foundations of Extreme Ultraviolet and X-ray Astronomy, 1923–1960  (Baltimore, MD: 

Johns Hopkins University, 1987), pp. 51–52.  

> 12

David H. DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance: How the Military Created the U.S. Space Sci -

ences after World War II  (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992), p. 9.  

> 13

http://www.physics.wisc.edu/sites/physics/files/news98.pdf; https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 

Albert H. Taylor.  

> 14

Ernst Krause, oral history conducted by David DeVorkin in Newport Beach, California, on 

August 10, 1982 (AIP, http://www.aip.org/history/ohilist/28022.html).  

> 15

http://www.ieeeghn.org/wiki/index.php/Albert_H._Taylor.  

> 16

Krause, oral history.  

> 17

Krause, oral history.  

> 18

Krause, oral history.  

> 19

U.S. Patent 1,981,884, issued November 27, 1934.  

> 20

Krause, oral history.  

> 21

Krause, oral history.  

> 22

Krause, oral history.  

> 23

Ivan Amato,  Pushing the Horizon: Seventy-Five Years of High Stakes Research and Technology 

at the Naval Research Laboratory  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1998), p. 168; 

Angelina Long Callahan, “Reinventing the Drone, Reinventing the Navy,”  Naval War College 

Review  67, no. 3, (Summer 2014): 98–122.  

> 24

Krause, oral history.  

> 25

http://www.nytimes.com/1989/08/29/obituaries/ernst-h-krause-76-aerospace-executive. 

html.  

> 26

Louis A. Gebhard,  Evolution of Naval Radio-Electronics and Contributions of the Naval 

Research Laboratory , NRL Report 8300 (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1979), 

p. 303.  

> 27

Gebhard,  Evolution of Naval Radio-Electronics , pp. 300–307.  

> 28

Krause, oral history.  

> 29

Krause, oral history.  

> 30

Krause, oral history.  

> 31

Krause, oral history.  

> 32

Gebhard,  Evolution of Naval Radio-Electronics , p. 303.  

> 33

Gebhard, p. 303.  

> 34

Gebhard, pp. 303–304.  

> 35

Krause, oral history. After the war, as part of a technical team charged with finding out as 

much about German wartime weapons research as possible, Krause learned that at least some 

of the failures of the guided weapons also likely were due to incompetence on the part of the 

military personnel, who had procured the weapons from the scientists and engineers who had 

designed them but did not ask for assistance in using them. “So whether or not our counter -

measures were really successful, or whether it was disorganization among the Germans that 

really stopped these missiles at this point is very difficult for me to say,” Krause said.  

> 36

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 48.  

> 37

Krause, oral history. This was complementary to a larger technology reconnaissance effort 

known as Operation Paperclip. See also Michael J. Neufeld,  Von Braun , Dreamer of Space, 

Engineer of War  (New York: Alfred Knopf, 2007).  

> 38

Krause, oral history.  

> 39

Krause, oral history.  

> 40

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 28. 31 CHAPTER 2 — A ROCKET STATE O F MIND  

> 41

Bruce Hevly, “Building a Washington Network for Upper Atmosphere Research,” referenc -

es this sea-based variation on the V-2 theme to Marvin Lasky, “Historical Review of Under -

sea Warfare Planning and Organization 1945–1960, with Emphasis on the Role of the Office 

of Naval Research,”  Journal of Underwater Acoustics,  16 (1976).  

> 42

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , pp. 47–48.  

> 43

DeVorkin, pp. 47–48.  

> 44

DeVorkin, pp. 47–48.  

> 45

DeVorkin, p. 45 and footnote 4, p. 54.  

> 46

Amato,  Pushing the Horizon , p. 168; DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 48.  

> 47

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 48.  

> 48

Krause, oral history.  

> 49

Krause, oral history.  

> 50

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 48.  

> 51

DeVorkin, p. 49. SCIENCE FIRST 

Since guided missiles were to become important additions to national arsenals 

around the world, Dr. Ernst Krause was adamant that NRL’s engineers would keep 

the country on the leading edge of this new category of high-tech weaponry. “I felt 

at least a quarter of the laboratory’s effort should be devoted to missiles, because it 

was the weapon of the future,” Krause told a historian years later. 1 In this same post– 

World War moment, however, NRL’s leadership wanted to place renewed emphasis 

on basic science on the lab’s grounds, a sentiment that was in place before the war 

but had been supplanted by immediate wartime equipment research, development, 

testing, and deployment needs in the first half of the 1940s. 2 In this context, Krause 

and the lab’s military director Commodore Henry Schade began pushing the idea of 

rockets as exciting new tools that would bring to the lab a new era of upper atmo -

sphere research. With rockets, NRL’s scientists finally would have a means of lofting 

measuring instruments directly into the ionosphere and beyond the obscuring, even 

blinding, effects of the atmosphere. Edward O. Hulburt’s modest push for rocket-

based science 20 years earlier was looking rather prescient. 

What was different now was that NRL, thanks to Krause, had secured the means 

to bring rockets into its research portfolio. In a laboratory report dated December 3, 

1945, which served as a proposal toward this end, Krause wrote, “There is now avail -

able to us a new tool, the rocket, which already has reached altitudes four times as 

high as a balloon and ten times as high as an airplane.” 3 His in-lab lobbying paid off. 

On December 17, what previously had been known at the lab as the Guided Missiles 

Subdivision of the Electronic Special Research and Development Division, became 

known (by the beginning of 1946 after some organizational shifting) as the Rocket 

Sonde Research Section of Radio Division I. 4 The word sonde refers to instrumented 

probes that automatically send data about their surroundings. 

Unlike the first rockets to carry satellites into orbit, beginning with the Soviet 

launch of Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, a rocket sonde merely shoots as high as its 

fuel plus a period of unfueled coasting will take it before falling back to Earth in the 

second half of a parabolic trajectory. It’s a trip that lasts only a few minutes at best. 

Krause was assigned to head the new section. Its functions were defined in Labo -

ratory Order No. 46-45 as follows: “to investigate the physical phenomena in and the 

properties of the upper atmosphere with a view to supplying knowledge which will 

influence the course of future military operations.” To carry out these functions, the 

# 334 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Section was charged with doing the basic research to develop the “techniques, instru-

mentation, and devices required.” 5

The Rocket Sonde Research Section (RSRS) would become NRL’s institutional 

beachhead for the lab’s charge in the 1950s into the Space Age. It would influence 

much of the basic research that over the next few decades would put NRL more vis-

ibly on the scientific map than it had ever been before. The rocket sonde researchers 

would work closely with other groups in Radio Division I, including a Radio Wave 

Propagation Group led by John Hagen, whose wartime radio investigations would 

help open up the lab’s pathway to radio astronomy 6 and who would become hugely 

influential in bringing the world into the Space Age. This role would place him 

squarely in the media spotlight with an excruciating failure—indeed, one of the most 

embarrassing moments in the history of the Cold War and a decidedly trying time 

for NRL—in the late 1950s 7 (see Chapter Seven). Hagen would later summarize NRL’s 

approach to the Space Age as a three-stage structure: “The Naval Research Laborato-

ry was born out of World War I. It grew to maturity in preparing for World War II, 

excelling in its achievement during the War. It blossomed into a full-fledged scientific 

institution in applying the talents of its people after the war.” 8 A standout petal on this 

blossom was rocket-based science, made possible by the rocket fever born in Krause 

during the war. 

When the Rocket Sonde Research Section formed, the Army already had con -

tracted the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)—which budded from the California 

Institute of Technology during World War II and is now operated for NASA by that 

institute—to develop missile and rocket technology. In October 1945, JPL had scored 

an exciting success when it launched its WAC Corporal to a height of 70 kilometers 

(44 miles), a record at the time and tantalizingly close to the ionosphere. 9 Krause too 

had dealings with JPL, in part because he wanted several of his staff, including Dr. 

Milton Rosen, who would become a giant in rocket engineering at NRL and then 

NASA, to spend time at Caltech to get up to speed on the latest techniques in rocket 

development. 10 

As it turned out, the WAC Corporal 11  was too small to carry enough of a scientific 

payload high enough to meet NRL’s rocket sonde researchers’ needs. It could carry 

only about 25 pounds of payload to altitudes of about 20 miles, far below the upper 

reaches of the atmosphere that so interested the NRL investigators. 12  So Krause and 

his team were poised at the end of 1945 for the long and novel haul of developing a 

rocket that could meet their specific needs. To them, NRL was destined to become 

a place where leading-edge rocket engineering would have to be done if they were 

going to do the science the lab’s scientists wanted to do. 

Then on January 7, 1946, a most welcome opportunity opened up for NRL’s upper 

atmosphere scientists. That’s when Krause and other members of the RSRS learned 

at a meeting convened by Lieutenant Colonel James G. Bain of the Army Ordnance 

Department about the Army’s imminent plan to launch infamous V-2 rockets, as-35 CHAPTER 3 — SCIENCE FIRST 

sembled from the captured cache of V-2 parts, at the then-under-construction White 

Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico. 13  The Army’s interests in firing the rockets 

(for which the NRL team initially believed there were enough intact parts on hand to 

assemble perhaps 75 vehicles) 14  largely were military in nature—to learn how to han-

dle, use, and track rockets of V-2 dimensions that could carry explosive payloads. But 

Bain also indicated that the Army was interested in gathering data about the upper 

atmosphere. If he and his Army brethren were going to be shooting rockets into the 

upper atmosphere, they needed to know what that place was like—its temperature 

ranges, compositions, and pressures. 15  This was a research endeavor the Army was 

ill-equipped to pursue on its own. 

The stars were aligning for NRL’s full embrace of rocket technology. There was the 

U.S. Army about to fire the world’s biggest and most powerful rockets, but they had 

no atmospheric measurement tools to loft skyward on them. And there was NRL with 

a new basic research section aiming to do rocket-borne scientific studies of the upper 

atmosphere, yet expecting to wait perhaps years before having a suitable rocket in 

hand made by a not-yet-specified contractor. 

At the behest of Krause, a follow-up to the January 7 meeting took place on 

January 16 at NRL. Forty-one representatives from a dozen institutions attended. 

What emerged from that was a research-coordinating body, known as the “V-2 Panel” 

and more formally as the Upper Atmosphere Rocket Research Panel (UARRP), with 

Krause assuming a leadership role. 16  These developments placed NRL at the titular 

forefront of rocket-borne research in the United States. NRL’s Rocket Sonde Research 

Section became part of a tight club composed of other government and academic 

groups with kindred interests to take part in the effort to measure properties of the 

upper atmosphere. It was a plan that “was enthusiastically received and accepted” at 

the lab, Krause wrote in his research group’s first report on their V-2 work. 17 

It was a moment of convergence for NRL, when an emerging technology that 

could change the course of military tactics and strategy (if there were no defenses 

against missiles, these weapons could render naval vessels ineffective, for example) 

would provide the means for conducting upper atmosphere research to literally new 

heights and for making sure NRL researchers were in the forefront of that emerging 

science. 

NRL had company in its interest in rocket-borne research. The Army Signal 

Corps Laboratory, which had developed early radar systems alongside NRL in the 

1930s and during World War II, was getting in on the wave. So was the Applied Phys -

ics Laboratory (APL), a legacy of the wartime research coordination organization, the 

National Defense Research Committee (NDRC). Run by Johns Hopkins University, 

APL’s initial World War II mission was the development of proximity fuses to help 

Navy ships defend more effectively against air attacks. Other players in on the rocket 

action were General Electric (which the Army contracted to help run the missile and 

rocket launchings at White Sands Proving Ground), 18  the National Bureau of Stan-36 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

V-2s for Science.  A V-2 rocket, captured from 

the Nazis at the end of World War II, is readied 

for launch by Army engineers in 1946 at the 

White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico. 

NRL jumped at the invitation to use V-2s for 

upper atmosphere research. The Nazis had 

used the rockets in Europe as a terror weapon 

during the war.  (Photo image1_132-11r) 

Assembly work in a White Sands Proving Ground hangar.  (NRL photo 60834(H-585-6)) 37 CHAPTER 3 — SCIENCE FIRST 

dards (renamed in 1998 as the National Institute of Standards and Technology, or 

NIST), and several universities. 

Just three months after the formation of the V-2 Panel, on April 16, 1946, the first 

American-launched V-2 roared skyward from White Sands. Perhaps to consolidate 

NRL’s leading role in pushing rocket engineering forward, Krause arranged for NRL 

to provide telemetry and radio-control equipment for these early rockets and to cus-

tom-design and produce the vehicles’ nose cones by way of the Naval Gun Factory. 19 

Some 60 more V-2s would follow suit over the next four years. “The rockets carried a 

total of twenty tons of scientific instrumentation to altitudes ranging from 50 to 100 

miles,” according to a Navy-produced chronicle of the military service’s role in the 

U.S. space program. 20 

NRL’s Dr. Herbert Friedman, whose astronomy research and discoveries would 

earn him a place among the titans of astronomy, witnessed many of these launches: “No 

matter how many times you witnessed it, the launch of these rockets was always inspir -

ing. After the short-lived bursts and rapid acceleration that characterized the firings of 

small rockets, the slow, majestic rise of the V-2 and the sudden vanishing of the roar of 

the rocket in the eerie quiet of burnout was a breathtaking experience. Silent, snaking 

vapor trails marked the passage of the rocket through the stratosphere, and sound 

returned only near landing when shock waves reverberated from the mountains.” 21 

The V-2 based research program had a healthy portion of difficulty, however. 

Though far more powerful than JPL’s WAC Corporal, the V-2 was designed to trans-

port explosives into enemy territory, not to carry scientific instrumentation to great 

atmospheric heights. “Eleven hundred pounds of lead have been poured into the nose 

of a V-2 when the instrument load was insufficient to provide static stability,” recalled 

Milton Rosen and Richard Snodgrass, members of Krause’s Rocket Sonde Research 

Section. 22  The V-2’s technology also was replete with bugs, not made any easier by the 

fact that these were German-designed vehicles being assembled in the United States  

> An Astronomy Giant. Dr. Herbert Friedman, shown
> here in 1961, pioneered rocket-based measurement
> of solar radiation in the late 1940s and 1950s on
> his way to becoming one of the world's most noted
> astronomers. Author of several books on astronomy,
> he was a successful popularizer of science too.
> (NRL photo Friedman(9))

38 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

with American crews, albeit with considerable help from some of the very German 

scientists and engineers that had developed the missile in the first place. According 

to Friedman, “The first five of the huge rockets all returned nose down in streamlined 

flight and buried their pulverized remains in craters about 30 feet deep and 80 feet in 

diameter. One reversed direction from north to south and headed for El Paso, Texas. 

It crossed the Mexican border and struck next to Tepeyac Cemetery, about a mile and 

Science Warheads.  To adapt captured V-2 rockets for upper atmosphere research, 

NRL engineers designed replacement warhead assemblies that could accommodate 

scientific instruments. Shown here are two NRL-made science “warheads,” including 

one in a laboratory where a cosmic ray telescope on the warhead is being tested 

for a March 7, 1947, launch. Forty-five Geiger-Muller counters and more than a half 

ton of lead were used in this experiment.  (Top: Nosecone1_1947; “The Navy Upper 

Atmosphere Research Program With Rocket Vehicles, Part 1,” published on April 10, 

1947; Bottom: NRL photo 60834(H-297)) 39 CHAPTER 3 — SCIENCE FIRST 

a half from Juarez. The impact barely missed a warehouse full of commercial blasting 

powder and dynamite. This event may be recorded as the first U.S. ballistic missile 

strike on foreign soil.” 23 

Krause and others in the rocket science arena always had considered the V-2s as 

stopgap vehicles for a new field of rocket-borne research that would outlast the supply 

of the German missiles. Even as preparations for the first White Sands V-2 launch-

es were under way, Krause and Rosen of NRL teamed up with the Applied Physics 

Laboratory to jointly procure an APL-developed scientific rocket—the Aerobee. The 

vehicle featured an engine designed by the Aerojet Engineering Company 24  in south-

ern California and relied on additional engineering and production work by Douglas 

Aircraft (later to be combined with McDonnell Aircraft to form McDonnell-Douglas) 

and JPL. Twenty feet high and capable of reaching a height of 75 miles, it was simpler 

and cheaper to launch, compared to the V-2s, whose supply was limited. It could hoist 

150 pounds of payload in its 88-inch-long nose cone. 25  For the longer-term supply of 

more capable rockets, NRL began designing its own rocket, the Viking, 26  for which 

Rosen would be designated the project director. 27  The first successful Viking launch 

would take place from White Sands in 1949. 

Despite the uncertainty that some V-2 launches amounted to, NRL researchers 

quickly began reaping the kinds of scientific riches they had envisioned would come 

with rockets. The first to bring home gold was Dr. Richard Tousey and his colleagues 

in the Optics Division, who had become infected with the enthusiasm of Krause’s 

Rocket Sonde Research Section.   

> Trial and Error. The early V-2 tests for upper atmospheric research ended in crash landings that
> pulverized the scientific warheads and everything in them. (NRL photo 67718)

40 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Tousey, a Harvard-educated optical physicist and life-long bird watcher, 28  was 

hired into the NRL Optics Division in 1941 where he soon dove into wartime proj-

ects centered on atmospheric challenges to navigation by starlight and would later 

leverage his graduate work on ultraviolet (UV) radiation in the vacuum to designing 

instruments for studying the sun’s UV spectrum. 29  It is no surprise that Hulburt, 

the first researcher hired at NRL with the express freedom to choose his topic as an 

academic scientist might, would be the one to hire scientists like Tousey and Fried-

man. Both of these men would realize the ideal of NRL as a bastion of basic research 

unfolding side-by-side with research and engineering applied to military ends and 

national security. 

When word of the lab’s access to V-2s started getting around NRL beyond the 

Rocket Sonde Research Section, Hulburt, who had been thinking about rockets 

longer than anyone at NRL, immediately saw immense potential. 30  After all, he had 

devoted much of his research to revealing and measuring the physical features of the 

upper atmosphere that affect long-distance communication. This led to important 

results including empirically derived protocols enabling Navy radio operators to de -

termine what wavelengths to use at different times and locations. Useful as that may 

have been, Hulburt and his colleagues still wanted to understand the atmospheric 

phenomena that required them to develop such protocols in the first place.  

> Sun Watcher. Dr. Richard Tousey, an optical
> scientist at NRL, examines an instrument-
> laden nose cone before a V-2 launch at
> White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico.
> (NRL photo newimage0(4)) 41 CHAPTER 3 — SCIENCE FIRST

It was widely known that radiation from the sun was what set these upper atmo -

sphere mechanisms—including the fluctuating character of the ionosphere—into 

motion. A theoretical understanding of what was going on had been elusive, however. 

A big part of the problem was that so much of that solar radiation could never make it 

beyond the absorptive upper reaches of the atmosphere to measuring instruments 

below or to ones carried even beyond airplane altitudes via research balloons. Hulburt 

could see that rockets could break through the blindness imposed by the very atmo -

sphere he wanted to understand. 

Hulburt challenged Tousey to put a wavelength-recording instrument, a spectro -

graph, on a V-2 at White Sands. 31  That way, as he and Tousey both knew, an instrument 

capable of detecting the spectrum of ultraviolet radiation would for the first time soar 

above the stratospheric ozone layer which absorbs UV wavelengths shorter than 3,000 

angstroms. The visible spectrum spans between about 3,000 and 7,000 angstroms. The 

ultraviolet spectrographs that Tousey and his NRL coworkers designed and built con -

tained special gratings of ultrafine lines that diffract different wavelengths of UV radi -

ation at different angles, thereby spatially separating the many component wavelengths 

of a UV source such as the sun. The spectrograph directed these separated components 

onto a photographic plate. The resulting exposures represented the source’s rainbow of 

UV light, otherwise known as a UV spectrum. 

Tousey’s interest in measuring the extreme ultraviolet radiation, the portion of UV 

light that approaches the even shorter-wavelength X-rays, began in his graduate days 

when he worked under Harvard University professor Theodore Lyman. Dr. Lyman 

had developed techniques to measure UV spectra emitted by excited chemical species 

such as gaseous hydrogen atoms, which he would confine within a vacuum chamber so 

that there would be no air molecules to absorb the more extreme UV wavelengths. The 

laboratory preparation was Lyman’s way of emulating the hydrogen in space. One of 

the more prominent hydrogen-derived wavelengths, which astronomers had observed 

to be strongly absorbed as the hydrogen emissions in space make their way to detectors 

on Earth, became known as Lyman-alpha. 

Atmospheric researchers began to suspect in the 1920s that Lyman-alpha emission, 

measured at 1,215.7 angstroms, might play a large role in electron-energizing mecha -

nisms in the ionosphere. This was not merely an academic issue, since high-frequency 

radio fadeouts appeared linked to changes in the ionosphere wrought by solar activity. 

The sun is composed primarily of hydrogen. 

One mechanism proposed to account for the fadeouts, which could interfere with 

naval communication for days, involved the injection of solar energy (in ultraviolet 

and X-ray ranges) into atoms in the Earth’s upper atmosphere. Based on gas-phase ex-

periments in ground-based labs, like those of Professor Lyman, atmospheric scientists 

expected this process to generate populations of free electrons in certain regions of 

the upper atmosphere, thereby affecting the ionosphere. If that indeed were the case, it 

would help explain such phenomena as fadeouts that coincide with high sunspot ac-42 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

tivity. Without direct measurement above most or all of the stratospheric ozone layer 

where most of the extreme ultraviolet radiation (including Lyman-alpha) is absorbed, 

however, no one could tell for sure if this proposed mechanism was anything more than 

an intellectually satisfying story. Hulburt, Tousey, and their colleagues at NRL hoped 

a UV spectrograph in the nose cone of a V-2 would help them to separate fact from 

fiction in this scenario. 

Their first try took place on June 28, 1946. It was the sixth V-2 shot. The rocket 

lifted off from its launch site at White Sands and then careened back to Earth. With 

nothing to slow its descent, its impact created a crater from which virtually nothing 

from the rocket, including the spectrograph, was recovered. 

Failures and frustration always have been parents of invention, and the steps 

Tousey and colleagues took to ensure success in future V-2 firings presaged the sort of 

innovation that would become part and parcel of the U.S. space program. For exam-

ple, Tousey realized that conventional spectrograph designs using prisms to disperse 

incoming light into its component wavelengths would not work in the setting of a 

V-2; there would be no way to keep the prism, which would have to be located in a 

specific place on the rocket’s spinning nose cone, aimed in the direction of the sun. So 

Tousey and his colleagues devised a system in which glass beads, about the size of shot -

gun pellets, embedded in openings dispersed in the nose cone would collect solar light 

like fisheye lenses no matter which way the nose cone was oriented. The 

light from the beads would shine onto a diffraction grating—a flat, finely ruled optical 

element—which would then spread the light, without the need for other optical ele-

ments, onto a photographic film. 32 

As Tousey’s science-minded team devised the new spectrograph so that it could ob -

tain the desired UV data in a rocket whose orientation could not be controlled, Krause’s 

more engineering-minded staff worked out the myriad challenges to integrating the 

new spectrograph design into the V-2 nose cone space, which during World War II had 

contained deadly explosive warheads. NRL was one of the few places in the country 

that had on its staff the diversity of expertise, including precision manufacturing and 

machining capabilities, required for solving all of the novel problems associated with 

rocket-based science. 

The twelfth V-2 flight, which took place on October 10, would reveal how this 

teamwork could pay off. Not only did Tousey equip the vehicle with a new spectro-

graph, but this time the NRL team managed to mount the instrument on one of the 

rocket’s four stabilizing fins rather than in the more vulnerable nose cone. Also, in 

another tactic to reduce the energy of impact, operators remotely blasted the falling V-2 

into less-streamlined parts that would descend more slowly. 

This time, Tousey was able to retrieve the spectrograph. And it harbored data no 

one had seen before—the solar UV spectrum down to 2,200 angstroms. This previous-

ly unmeasured portion of the sun’s UV emission spectrum was called the “new UV.” A 

subsequent V-2 flight on March 7, 1947, yielded another 300 newly observed UV lines 43 CHAPTER 3 — SCIENCE FIRST 

between 2,200 and 3,000 angstroms. With these, and knowledge of how atoms absorb 

and emit light, the NRL scientists were able to identify the presence of 17 chemical 

elements in the sun, 33  yet another scientific payoff of lofting measuring instruments 

higher than ever before. These newly observed components of the solar spectrum 

were the shortest UV wavelengths ever measured from the sun. Even so, this ex-

panded spectrum still did not reach far enough to include the Lyman-alpha line, an 

extreme UV wavelength a full 1,000 angstroms shorter than any in the “new UV.” 

These first flights only whetted the scientists’ appetites. After all, the atmosphere 

not only relentlessly screened UV radiation below 3,000 angstroms from Earth-

bound and sky-lofted instruments, but it also blocked transmission of many of the 

even higher-energy cosmic emanations, including X-rays and gamma rays. The same 

was true for much of the infrared radiation and low-frequency radio waves below 20 

kilohertz. In effect, before 1946 and the first V-2 flights, the atmosphere had blinded 

scientists to a plethora of astronomical “colors” that could reveal previously unknown 

phenomena associated with the atmosphere, the sun, the rest of the cosmos, and 

militarily relevant issues such as problems with long-distance, high-frequency radio 

communication. 

Spectrographic measurement of those shorter and fainter wavelengths was ham-

pered by the V-2’s tendency to spin and wobble as it rode out its parabolic path from 

launch to peak to crash site. Although Tousey’s spectrographs enabled NRL scientists 

to record more of the sun’s UV emission than ever before, pushing the spectrograph’s 

view even further would require that the instrument’s optics point more stably and 

for longer periods of time at the sun than could the optical beads. 

To gather better and more revealing data, the NRL team turned to a “sun follow-

er,” a gadget that would rely on a photoelectric tube to monitor the location of the sun   

> Radiation Revealed. When NRL’s scientists began installing radiation detectors on V-2 rockets, they
> quickly obtained novel data. Shown here, from a launch on October 10, 1946, is the first ultraviolet
> spectrum from the sun’s radiation ever recorded above the atmosphere. (NRL photo 60834(H-293)) 44 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

with respect to the rocket’s orientation and then send signals to a mechanical servo 

system that would reorient the spectrograph in the nose cone so that it would spend 

more precious seconds of each fleeting V-2 flight actually pointing toward its solar 

target. 

“Most of the sun follower’s electronic and mechanical systems were adopted di-

rectly from a radar tracking unit developed at MIT’s Radiation Laboratory during the 

war, with the substitution of a light-sensitive receiver for the radio-frequency radar 

system,” according to historian of technology Dr. Bruce Hevly, who carefully investi-

gated NRL’s role in early rocket-based astronomy. 34  The NRL team was quickly able to 

adapt the wartime radar tracker into a peacetime sun tracker. 

Unfortunately, a string of five consecutive launch failures involving V-2 rockets 

and one newly available Aerobee rocket frustrated Tousey and his colleagues in their 

attempts to be the first to measure the coveted Lyman-alpha emission. Better fortune 

befell a group at the University of Colorado, which had developed a less weighty sun 

follower under an Air Force contract. 35  Their stabilized spectrograph finally did bag 

the world’s first Lyman-alpha measurements of the sun in 1953. Tousey followed the 

Colorado scientists’ achievement with a definitive observation of his own of Lyman-

alpha radiation just months later in 1954. 

Amidst all of the bad luck with the rockets—or one could equally well say, amidst 

the steep learning curve—in the late 1940s, Tousey’s team managed to develop an 

alternative means of measuring not only UV radiation but also a portion of the X-ray 

spectrum (with shorter wavelengths than UV) that abuts the extreme edge of the UV 

spectrum. The principle of this alternative measurement was thermoluminescence. 36 

UV or X-ray radiation would hit carefully chosen phosphors, which are chemicals 

that emit light when exposed to radiation. The principle at work was much the same 

as that inside the cathode ray tubes of televisions in which electrons shot from the 

tube would hit light-emitting phosphors coated on the inside of the TV’s glass screen. 

For Tousey, the phosphor-generated light due to incoming UV light and X-rays 

would, in turn, expose film. The intensity of the exposure qualitatively indicated the 

intensity of the radiation. And by using different filters that would allow only pre-

selected ranges of radiation through to the phosphors, Tousey and his colleagues 

could determine the approximate wavelengths of the incoming radiation. 

Of the six V-2s that Tousey equipped with thermoluminescence systems, he was 

able to retrieve data from four. The first success was on February 17, 1949, when the 

sun was particularly active. It revealed the unusual presence of X-rays below an alti-

tude of 79 miles. None of the other experiments duplicated that result, probably be-

cause none of the others flew at a time when solar activity was high. During that first 

success, measurements from ground-based instruments simultaneously monitored 

ionospheric disturbances. This happy concurrence would help the NRL scientists dis-

cern the different atmospheric roles played by extreme UV radiation and X-rays from 

the sun. 45 CHAPTER 3 — SCIENCE FIRST 

Five weeks after the flight, the Navy touted the meaning of the result in a press 

release. It harkened back to the lab’s earliest days when the pioneering NRLers studied 

skip distances. [The] “intense . . . ultraviolet rays apparently produce the ionospheric 

layers necessary for long distance radio transmission,” the release suggested, “while 

sudden bursts of X-rays apparently cause radio fadeouts and disrupt radio commu-

nication . . . On flights when intense X-rays were detected, solar flares were observed 

by astronomers and radio fadeouts occurred all over the world during the time the 

rocket was in flight.” 37 

All four successful thermoluminescence experiments detected radiation in a 

swath of ultraviolet wavelengths including the Lyman-alpha line. With the new data, 

Tousey’s team was able to deduce the intensity of solar-derived extreme-UV radiation, 

and thereby the amount of energy the sun injects into the atmosphere. Their findings 

confirmed previous suspicions by others that a disproportionate amount of solar UV 

radiation is in the sub-3,000 angstrom regime. They also were able to calculate ozone 

concentrations at different atmospheric heights up to about 70 kilometers. 38 

The thermoluminescence data were intriguing. But they were the result of a 

largely indirect, qualitative measurement because exposure of the spectrograph’s film, 

which was the data-recording medium, was due directly to light from the thermolu-

minescence process, not from the incoming solar radiation. Therefore, observations 

of exposed film were not enough to determine exactly which UV or X-ray wave-

lengths were reaching the instrument’s phosphors. There was plenty of incentive for 

other researchers, including Herbert Friedman, to develop more direct and quantita-

tive techniques for measuring solar radiation at various levels of the atmosphere. 

Just as A. Hoyt Taylor’s technological interest in high-frequency radio commu -

nication had steered the Radio Division into scientific issues, such as the way the 

ionosphere affects the propagation of high-frequency radio waves, the interest of 

Krause and his colleagues in the Rocket Sonde Research Section in rockets for upper 

atmosphere work was opening new scientific doors, this time in astronomy. 39  In a 

move that reflected the lab’s growing and diversifying R&D portfolio, Krause left 

the Rocket Sonde Research Section in 1947, along with about 20 others, when his 

responsibilities in the arena of nuclear weapons testing became a higher priority. 40  He 

handed the rocket sonde baton to Homer Newell, under whom Milton Rosen would 

oversee booster development for the V-2’s sequel, the Viking, as well as launch vehicle 

development for that project’s follow-on, the ultra-high-profile Project Vanguard. 

Top leadership at NRL was evolving in a way that would be friendly to spaceward 

aspirations. In 1949, for one, Hulburt shed his role as head of the Optics Division to 

become the first civilian Director of Research at NRL, an administrative evolution in 

line with the laboratory’s concerted effort to emulate the academic model of research. 

With the origin of his own rocket fever anchored in the early launches of Robert 

Goddard in the mid-1920s, Hulburt’s ascent also ensured that rockets would continue 

rising in importance and profile at NRL. 46 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

While Tousey and Friedman were becoming world-class leaders in rocket-borne 

upper atmosphere and astronomy research in the first half of the 1950s, NRL as an 

organization was about to take one of the deepest plunges yet—or more accurately, 

one of the highest leaps—into the still young field of rocket engineering.  

> 1

Ernst Krause, oral history conducted by David DeVorkin in Newport Beach, California, on 

August 10, 1982 (AIP, http://www.aip.org/history/ohilist/28022.html).  

> 2

A. Hoyt Taylor,  The First Twenty Five Years of NRL  (Washington, DC: Navy Department, 

1948), p. 53; Ivan Amato,  Pushing the Horizon: Seventy-Five Years of High Stakes Research and 

Technology at the Naval Research Laboratory  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 

1998), especially Ch. 6; Bruce Hevly,  Basic Research Within a Military Context: The Naval Re -

search Laboratory and the Foundations of Extreme Ultraviolet and X-ray Astronomy , 1923–1960 

(Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University, 1987), pp. 70–92.  

> 3

Ernst Krause, “Report on a Proposed Guided Missile Program of the Naval Research Labora-

tory,” December 3, 1945. See also David H. DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance: How the Mili-

tary Created the U.S. Space Sciences after World War II  (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992), p. 79.  

> 4

Hevly,  Basic Research , pp. 111–139; Naval Research Laboratory, “The Navy Upper Atmosphere 

Research Program with Rocket Vehicles, Part 1,” Washington, DC, April 10, 1947.  

> 5

Laboratory Order No. 46–45, Navy Department, Office of Research and Inventions, Naval 

Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., December 1945; Amato,  Pushing the Horizon , p. 169.  

> 6

Hevly,  Basic Research , p. 113.  

> 7

Hugh Sidey, “The Man Who Took the Beating for Vanguard,”  Life Magazine , March 31, 1958, 

p. 35.  

> 8

Hevly,  Basic Research , p. 92.  

> 9

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , pp. 169–171; http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/jplhistory/early/ 

wartime.php.  

> 10

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 68.  

> 11

The early Army rockets were named after enlisted ranks, as in Private, Corporal, and Ser-

geant. The WAC Corporal served as a scientific rocket rather than a weapon and it was smaller, 

not larger than its predecessors. The WAC acronym referred to “Without Active Control,” the 

rocket’s originators later claimed (see DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 169).  

> 12

http://airandspace.si.edu/collections/artifact.cfm?object=nasm_A19590009000.  

> 13

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 61.  

> 14

“The Navy Upper Atmosphere Research Program with Rocket Vehicles, Part 1,” pp. 6–7.  

> 15

A good compilation of the many measurements the NRL researchers aimed to make with 

rocket-borne instruments is in “The Navy Upper Atmosphere Research Program with Rocket 

Vehicles, Part 1.” Another source that does the same thing but looking backwards after a dozen 

years of upper atmosphere research is this 18-page document, “History of the Upper Air Rock -

et Research Program at the Naval Research Laboratory, 1946–1957.”  

> 16

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 63. The UARRP underwent several name changes, 

including, early on, “the V-2 Panel.” See DeVorkin, p. 168, and http://history.nasa.gov/SP-4211/ 

appen-c.htm.  

> 17

Ernst Krause, Rocket Sonde Research Section Report.  

> 18

Hevly,  Basic Research , p. 122. White Sands Proving Ground was renamed White Sands Mis-

sile Range in 1958.  

> 19

Hevly,  Basic Research , p. 136; “The Navy Upper Atmosphere Research Program with Rocket 

Vehicles, Part 1,” pp. 38–45.  

> 20

Applied Research Laboratory, The Pennsylvania State University (ed.),  From the Sea to the 

Stars: A Chronicle of the U.S. Navy’s Space and Space-related Activities , 1944–2009  (revised and 

updated edition, 2010), available at https://www.history.navy.mil/research/library/. 47 CHAPTER 3 — SCIENCE FIRST  

> 21

Herbert Friedman, “From the Challenge of World War II to the Frontiers of Space,”  1992  NRL 

Review  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1992), p. 24.  

> 22

Milton Rosen and Richard Snodgrass, “The High Altitude Sounding Rocket in Upper Atmo-

sphere Rocket Research.”  

> 23

Friedman, “From the Challenge,” p. 24.  

> 24

Hevly,  Basic Research , pp. 137–138; Applied Research Laboratory,  From the Sea to the Stars ,

p. 11.  

> 25

Applied Research Laboratory,  From the Sea to the Stars . 

> 26

Its initial names were the High Altitude Sounding Rocket (HASR-1 and HASR-2) and the 

Neptune; see Hevly,  Basic Research , p. 300, and “The Navy Upper Atmosphere Research Pro-

gram with Rocket Vehicles, Part 1,” pp. 48–49.  

> 27

Homer E. Newell,  Beyond the Atmosphere: Early Years of Space Science  (NASA SP-4211) 

(Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1980), pp. 27–28; Asif 

Siddiqi,  Challenge to Apollo: The Soviet Union and the Space Race , 1945–1974 (Washington, 

DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2000), pp. 1–2. Available online at 

https://history.nasa.gov/SP-4211/cover.htm.  

> 28

http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/biomems/rtousey.html.  

> 29

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 81.  

> 30

For E. O. Hulburt’s scientific and managerial roles and accomplishments at NRL, see Hevly, 

Basic Research ; also see Amato,  Pushing the Horizon . 

> 31

This account of Tousey’s rocket-based studies of solar UV radiation borrows heavily from 

Amato,  Pushing the Horizon . 

> 32

Naval Research Laboratory,  Labstracts , 75th anniversary pullout section, July 1998; DeVor -

kin,  Science with a Vengeance , pp. 197–200.  

> 33

Hevly,  Basic Research , p. 159.  

> 34

Hevly, p 161.  

> 35

Hevly, pp. 165–166.  

> 36

Hevly, pp. 166–172.  

> 37

Press Release, “Radio Fade-Outs Linked to X-rays from Sun,” National Military Establish-

ment, Department of the Navy, Washington, DC, March 24, 1949.  

> 38

Hevly,  Basic Research , pp. 168–171.  

> 39

By 1950, rocket science and upper atmosphere research accounted for over 8 percent of NRL’s 

research and development budget, amounting to almost $1,500,000. See Hevly,  Basic Research ,

p. 186.  

> 40

Constance Green and Milton Lomask,  Vanguard: A History  (Washington, DC: National 

Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1970), p. 9; DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 

185. THE ROCKET SCIENCE CLUB 

Even in the first months of 1946, the NRL rocket cadre was looking into the 

possibility of launching an instrument-laden satellite into orbit. But they reluctantly 

concluded, according to one historical account of NRL’s work in the 1950s, “that en-

gineering techniques were still too unsophisticated to make it practical; for the time 

being, the Laboratory would gain more by perfecting instruments to be emplaced in 

and recovered from V-2s.” 1 It was during this time—with sounding rockets that went 

high up and then all the way down, but never into orbit—that Dr. Richard Tousey, Dr. 

Herbert Friedman, and their respective teams ushered NRL into the rarefied club of 

space science. They also would ensure that NRL maintained its own bastion of space 

science and astronomy even as NASA (beginning with its establishment in 1958) and 

other institutions became national focal points for that new discipline. 

It would be another contingent of NRL researchers that set the lab on a related 

trajectory into space technology. 2 It was a pathway that, like space-based science, was 

also dependent upon rockets. But this time NRL would be in on the design and man -

ufacture of the rockets. And immersion in that business would instill at the lab 

a mind-set that would come to view space as more than just scientifically interesting. 

At NRL, space would become a new place for its many-faceted engineers to consider 

furthering military capabilities such as communications, navigation, intelligence-

gathering, and perhaps—as booster technology evolved enough to carry many tons of 

materiel into orbit—even weaponry. 

As researchers continued to use the finite supply of V-2s in 1947, and as smaller, 

less expensive launch vehicles started becoming available—including the Applied 

Physics Laboratory’s Aerobees and Rockoons, a technology championed by Univer-

sity of Iowa astronomer Dr. James Van Allen (formerly of APL) in which a balloon 

hoists a small rocket about 10 miles into the sky before the rocket then boosts a small 

payload to higher altitudes—the 90 or so members in the Rocket Sonde Research Sec-

tion 3 were beginning to realize, by necessity, their original ambition to develop their 

own rocket to take the place of, and to go beyond, the disappearing V-2s. 4

Originally named Neptune, NRL’s V-2 follow-on was dubbed the Viking when 

the NRL team learned that there already was an aircraft named Neptune. 5 The Ap-

plied Physics Laboratory, under a contract with the Navy’s Bureau of Ordnance and 

the Office of Naval Research, 6 was developing a modified version of the WAC Corpo-

ral. 7 This was a rocket development project that had its origins within the auspices of 

Project Hermes, the U.S. Army–initiated rocket and missile project during World War 

# 450 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

II. 8 Although that rocket was to be fin-stabilized and so presumably would provide a 

better platform for scientific instruments, the NRL team wanted even more perfor-

mance than that: a rocket with a steering mechanism and gyroscopic control of the 

rocket’s orientation. Such a trait would greatly enhance the ability of instruments on 

board to keep their optical, X-ray, and other electromagnetic sensors aligned with the 

sun. 9

The chief of rocket development on the Viking project was Milton Rosen, whom 

Ernst Krause had sent to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) for an eight-month de-

tail beginning in August 1946 to absorb what he could in one of the nation’s bastions 

of rocket engineering. Only two years earlier, JPL had emerged as a contract-engi -

neering laboratory from a reorganization of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Labora -

tory of the California Institute of Technology. 10  For Rosen and thereby for NRL, that 

stint at JPL amounted to a world-class apprenticeship in the art of missile and rocket 

design, building, and testing. 11 

Expanding from specifications that Krause and laboratory leadership had been 

considering even before the V-2s became available to the Rocket Sonde Research Sec-

tion, Rosen and NRL coworker Carl Harrison Smith conceptualized the rocket that 

would become the Viking, 12  though Rosen would become the name most attached to 

that accomplishment. More than a replacement for the V-2, the Viking would push 

the art of rocket design; it would have a weight-saving aluminum frame, for exam-

ple, and a gimbaled engine that could guide the vehicle by shunting the thrust gas at 

different angles. Moreover, the Viking was larger and so could carry heavier payloads 

than the Aerobees and Rockoons, which had become workhorses of sorts for upper 

atmosphere research, and take those payloads much higher. 13 

The commercial rocket manufacturing industry was just getting under way, 

with the primary impetus being design and construction of intermediate and long-

range ballistic missiles for delivering nuclear weapons. There were fewer skilled and 

proven contractors than needed for the approved projects. Out of high-level discus -

sions—involving (1) Krause, (2) the Navy’s Office of Research and Invention, or ORI   

> Rocket Man. Milton Rosen is shown here
> as he looked in the 1950s, at a period
> when the Naval Research Laboratory was
> getting into the business of rocket design.
> In 1958, he would transfer to the brand
> new National Aeronautics and Space
> Administration. (NRL photo Rosen)

51 CHAPTER 4 — THE ROCKET SCIENCE CLUB 

(to become, only months later in 1946, the Office of Naval Research, or ONR), (3) 

Colonel James Bain, who had been charged by Holger Toftoy of the Army Ordnance 

Department with overseeing interservice activities related to the use of V-2s for scien-

tific research, and (4) other players—emerged a plan. According to a 2007 historical 

account by two NRL space technologists, “it was one of the most audacious acts in 

our country’s fledgling space program: NRL’s Milton Rosen and his small branch with 

four people decided they would have their own rocket built to replace the V-2s.” 14 

“After several months of clearing procurement details through channels at the 

[Navy’s] Bureau of Aeronautics (BuAer), in April 1946, the Chief of Naval Research 

approved the $2 million project as a combined NRL, ORI, and BuAer initiative to 

build 10 high-altitude sounding rockets,” recounted historian David DeVorkin. 15  The 

task of building the propulsion units went to the New Jersey firm Reaction Motors, 

Inc. The Glenn L. Martin Company in Baltimore, which had made its name in build-

ing aircraft, including the Enola Gay and Bockscar planes that dropped atomic bombs 

in 1945 on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, 16  won its bid to build the overall Viking rocket. 

The company’s experience in using lightweight aluminum, which the NRL designers 

wanted to use for the Viking, helped to make it a company of choice. 17 

Rosen was determined that the lab would play a more hands-on role in the 

design and testing of the vehicle than contractors like Glenn L. Martin were used to. 

High on his mind was the issue of flight stabilization, for one, which Rosen came to 

respect due to failures in V-2 firings at White Sands that he knew were due to break-

downs in the stabilization vanes. Also an initial point of contention with Martin was 

Rosen’s requirement that a prototype of the rocket be subjected to a full static firing 

test (in which the rocket would be bolted down) to gather reliable data about the 

thrust and duration of the burn. This step depended on timely delivery of the engine  

> See-through Viking. Exploded diagram of a Viking rocket, manufactured by the Glenn L.
> Martin Company in Baltimore, showing the gimbaled engine. The diagram dates to 1956.
> (1956-rocket-diagram1, http://libraries.mit.edu/150books/2011/04/12/1956/1956-rocket-
> diagram-2/) 52 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

from Reaction Motors, something that was out of Martin’s or NRL’s control. And it 

became a problem. As delivery of the engines slipped several months, Martin engi-

neers proceeded with other tasks, among them designing and building other Viking 

components and systems. Only in December 1948, almost a year behind schedule, 

did Martin deliver a fully assembled Viking that was suitable and ready for a full test 

firing. 18 

The NRL and Martin rocket teams, as well as the country’s other rocket and 

missile development teams, were learning just how hard this business was. During 

static tests, for example, peroxide (a corrosive, oxygen-rich fuel component) leaked 

repeatedly in the engine’s turbine. There also were telemetry failures. These and other 

difficulties added yet more delays to the original scheduled date for the first launch. 19 

That day finally arrived on May 3, 1949. Viking 1, which stood 49 feet tall and 

weighed nearly 5 tons, lifted off from the flats of White Sands and ascended 80 kilo-

meters. It had soared into the ionosphere. As it approached five minutes into its flight, 

it was still way short of achieving its hoped-for maximum altitude of 190 kilometers, 

and it failed to handle intense aerodynamic pressures as it passed back downward 

from the rarefied ionosphere into the denser atmosphere below. It was torn apart and 

debris from NRL’s first fully made-in-America rocket distributed over an area the size 

of 10 square kilometers. 20 

It was a sobering story that Newell—a University of Maryland mathematician-

turned-physicist who joined the lab in 1944 and who took over the helm of the Rock-

et Sonde Research Section from Krause when the latter left for a “crash program” of 

nuclear weapons testing at Eniwetok Atoll in the Pacific 21 —had to bring to the Upper 

Atmosphere Rocket Research Panel (UARRP). This panel, with Krause as its head, 

had been orchestrating V-2-borne research since 1946 (when it was known as the 

“V-2 Panel”). 22  But Newell emphasized the positive, pointing out that just getting the 

Viking off the ground was an important achievement. He also told the panel that with 

the lessons learned, later versions of the Viking would feature improved motors that 

would take the rocket to an altitude of 300 kilometers, deep inside the ionospheric 

layer, while bearing almost 500 pounds (230 kilograms) of instrumentation. 23 

The next two flights, on September 1949 and February 1950, did not reach pre-

dicted heights either. But they showed that the gimbaled and thereby pointable rocket 

nozzles provided more stability and control than the V-2 had offered and that the 

whole Viking system appeared on track to working as planned. 

In parallel with the scientific rocket sonde project that Viking represented, the 

country was in a full-throttle push to develop rockets for IRBMs, or intermediate 

range ballistic missiles, and ICBMs, intercontinental ballistic missiles. The missile 

race was on with the Soviet Union, something that the Office of Naval Research was 

well aware of. Also mindful that there were far more rocket-centric ambitions than 

there were national resources to support them all, ONR representatives and Newell 

began touting the Viking program to higher-level military and civilian decision 53 CHAPTER 4 — THE ROCKET SCIENCE CLUB 

makers not only as a means for conducting upper atmosphere research but also, as 

DeVorkin recounted, “as a test vehicle for ballistic missile development.” 24 

The tack that Rosen and others pushed to render NRL’s Viking program relevant 

to ICBM development was to suggest modifications to the rocket that would make it 

valuable to the vexing research problem of developing new super tough materials that 

could withstand the hellish conditions of heat and friction that an incoming ICBM 

warhead, still under thrust, would experience as it reentered the atmosphere in the 

descent phase of its trajectory. 25  To do this, the NRL designers came up with a Viking 

flight test vehicle that could simulate reentry conditions. The crux of the scheme was 

to stack three rocket stages on top of one another, but use the third stage to accelerate 

the rocket downward rather than to continue the payload’s upward trajectory. It would 

be like shooting a bullet down through the ever-thickening atmosphere below from 

the more rarefied altitudes above. Calculations indicated that the downward kick of 

the third-stage rocket, in addition to the pull of gravity, would amount to a realistic 

test for experimental materials designed to withstand reentry from orbit. 

It was all part of a gambit to gain favor amidst a competition for national resourc-

es, but it carried dangers too. It riled the Air Force and Army, which had their own 

ballistic missile programs to defend. Representatives from both services contested 

NRL’s claim of Viking’s relevance to ballistic missile development at the powerful Re-

search and Development Board (RDB) hearings. At the same time, the NRL argument 

that Viking was furthering the cause of ballistic missiles made it vulnerable to the 

perception that it, or another missile program, might be redundant and so not worth 

funding. Consider, for example, that the Viking and an Air Force rocket program, 

the MX, both featured propulsion systems made by Reaction Motors, both included 

gimbaled thrusters, and both used the same propellants and pressurizing agents. 26 

Ironically, to gain favor for the MX program, the Air Force argued in early 1949 that 

its MX-774 rocket, although built with military applications at the fore, could be used 

for upper atmosphere research too. After all, the conditions in the upper atmosphere 

had to be understood since they would affect the performance of missiles speeding 

through it. 27 

A primary concern for each player in this dynamic was that there was only so 

much funding to go around. As an advocate for NRL, Newell felt that the RDB, as a 

top-level decision-making body for the Department of Defense, would favor expend-

ing national treasure on military missiles that could also do double duty as carriers of 

scientific instruments, rather than on rockets such as the Aerobee that were designed 

exclusively for science. The space scientists at NRL felt they were on their way to get-

ting wedged between hard places. The cost of the big Viking rockets was becoming a 

concern for laboratory leadership, which strongly approved of the lab’s work in space 

science but questioned whether the lab should be in the business of rocket building, a 

heavy engineering lift that could only take financial resources and brain power away 

from more scientific pursuits. 28 54 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Inklings of that tension, recounted DeVorkin, were apparent even as the Viking 

was under development and testing. “In May 1948, when Newell asked for additional 

Aerobees and Vikings, his division superintendent, Dr. John M. Miller, shot back, ‘No 

funds are being specifically budgeted by ONR or NRL’” for upper atmosphere rockets. 

The budget at the time would buy 10 Vikings and almost certainly a larger number of 

Aerobees, which had a cheaper per-copy price. All of this implied that the future of 

the Viking was shaky, but it—among all the major rocket development projects going 

on—received approval from the Upper Atmosphere Rocket Research Panel. And that 

helped sway the RDB to keep supporting it too. 29 

Viking 4, which was launched on the eve of the Korean War on May 12, 1950, 

stood out as a complete success and then some, because it was fired with high pub-

licity from the deck of a ship, USS  Norton Sound , as it sailed close to the equator. Al-

though the mission payload was all about upper atmosphere science, the ship-based 

launch venue was an unmistakable demonstration that American missile technol -

ogy could be literally shipped near any border in the world. Because of the military 

relevance of a rocket launch at sea, most of the engineering and technical details of 

the Viking 4 launch were initially classified. 30  Launching from an at-sea platform 

did make scientific sense too since the structure of the atmosphere varies at different 

geographic locations and a ship would provide a versatile means of launching from 

many places. Bearing cosmic ray detectors and pressure and temperature sensors, the 

vehicle rose to 180 kilometers in a well-behaved trajectory.     

> High-Profile Launch. Major media reporters were on hand to watch the launch of
> Viking 4 from the deck of USS Norton Sound in 1950. NRL engineers are shown
> adjusting electronic components for timing solar radiation measurements in the
> scientific “warhead.” (NRL photo P-238) 55 CHAPTER 4 — THE ROCKET SCIENCE CLUB

The Navy turned to public relations to capitalize on the achievement. It wanted 

the public to know that it was working hard for the country’s defense by developing 

ways of projecting missile-based defenses farther than ever. Reporters from  Popular 

Science , Time , Life , and other press outlets were invited to witness the Viking launch 

off of  Norton Sound . Wrote the  Life  reporter about the Navy’s launch: “they had 

proved for the first time that big rockets, capable of carrying A-bombs several hun-

dred miles, could be launched from the deck of a ship.” 31 

With this success in hand, Newell talked up the Viking program to the science-

oriented UARRP as well as to the RDB of the Defense Department. As he saw 

it, a Viking ultimately would reach an altitude of 500 kilometers. That would place it 

within the so-called F-layer of the ionosphere where no other instrumented rocket 

had yet been able to go. 32  These still were the early years of rocket engineering, of 

course, so the success of Viking 4 did not guarantee equally good results in subse-

quent flights. Viking 5 did score another success, bringing a bevy of data-harvesting 

instruments to a height of about 170 kilometers, 33  but Viking 6 did not fare so well. Its 

lightweight aluminum fins buckled and collapsed mid-flight, sending the rocket into 

a crash landing 7 miles from the launch site. 34 

Even as the Viking program survived harrowing top-level debates—all the way up 

to the President’s office—about duplication and resource allocation, the world contin-

ued to turn. In the spring of 1950, as Cold War tensions were building to a war pitch 

in the Korean Peninsula, the Navy’s Bureau of Aeronautics shut down funding for 

improved Viking rockets, which originally were conceived of in a context of scientific 

research despite any recasting in a military mold that NRL’s rocket cadre had attempt-

ed. The nation’s and the Navy’s priority would have to go with the presidential-level 

National Security Council’s call for rearmament. 35 

With that budgetary writing on the wall, however, Rosen scrambled to portray 

the Viking even more in a ballistic missile context. His boss, Radio Division I super-

intendent John Miller, 36  demonstrated his support of this revised way of thinking 

by creating the Rocket Research Branch in December 1950. The notable absence of 

“sonde” in the name was an indication that this branch could focus on rocketry and 

guided-missile work and not so much on the scientific probing that the rockets make 

possible. In that new institutional context, Rosen and colleague J. Carl Seddon, an 

ionosphere researcher who had adapted ground-based measuring tools for rocket-

based studies, 37  prepared a confidential report claiming that it would take little extra 

investment to leverage the $3.5 million already spent on the Viking program for the 

purpose of developing a world-class guided missile. With a radio-controlled guidance 

system, the Viking could, in DeVorkin’s recounting of the report, “deliver a 230 kilo-

gram warhead to a target 240 kilometers away, with an accuracy +/− 450 meters. They 

also claimed a Viking could be made ready for launch within two hours [of a decision 

to use one.]” 38  War-readiness was an increasingly important concern as the Cold War 

heated up. 56 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

It was a tough sell, though, and in the end, the Bureau of Aeronautics declined 

to commit the $2.5 million that NRL proposed it would need to build a half-dozen of 

the modified Vikings. Stacking the deck against NRL too was that the Navy as 

a whole at this time also had its eyes on a competing BuAer missile program, the 

submarine-launched Regulus. And the Applied Physics Laboratory soon would enter 

its own contender, the Triton. There was plenty of competition for a finite amount 

of funding and resources. The rejection of the NRL program by BuAer, the primary 

sponsor of the lab’s rocket work, meant that the Viking’s days were numbered. 

Viking 7 was the last of the first-generation Vikings. It went up a minute shy of 1:00 

a.m. on August 7, 1951. And its engine burned one second longer than was needed 

to break the altitude record for a single-stage rocket. Rosen and his Viking project 

colleagues had wide eyes as the rocket continued to coast higher and higher. Its ascent 

ended at 217 kilometers, shattering the previous record of 182 kilometers set by a 

V-2 launched nearby almost five years earlier. Only this time, the rocket that held the 

record was conceived of, designed, and built in the United States of America under 

the direction of NRL. 39 

The next three Vikings under the original contract with the Glenn L. Martin 

Company would be fatter and heavier, a slight sacrifice in aesthetics for the hope of 

attaining higher altitudes. They would demonstrate, however, that rockets still rose 

on a mixture of thrust and a prayer. 40  This new Viking series started out ominously 

on June 6, 1952, when the Viking 8 rocket ripped from its tie-down blocks during a 

test firing of its motor and then crashed in the desert about 4 miles southeast of the 

launch site. The next Viking fared better. Even so, its engine stopped earlier than ex-

pected, lofting the rocket to a height of about 216 kilometers, or about 80 kilometers 

shy of its intended peak. During the up and down round trip, onboard instruments 

enabled NRL researchers to make, among other things, solar radiation and cosmic ray 

measurements. 

The June 30 firing of Viking 10 turned harrowing when the rocket’s tail section 

exploded, setting off a fire. Despite the unintended pyrotechnics, no one was hurt. 

Workers were even able to quash the fire soon enough to salvage much of the rocket. 

The rocket was rebuilt and, like Lazarus coming back from death, the reconstructed 

Viking 10 soared upward from White Sands on May 7, 1954, to a record-equaling 

height of 217 kilometers. It provided the first measurements ever of positively charged 

ions in the ionosphere at that altitude. 41 

In between the death and resurrection of Viking 10, NRL awarded the Glenn L. 

Martin Company another contract for four more Vikings. Viking 11, launched only 

two weeks after Viking 10, surpassed the performance of its predecessors, taking the 

altitude record to 158 miles, or more than 250 kilometers. What’s more, NRL scien -

tists were able to retrieve the armored steel film cassette from an aerial camera 

that survived the rocket’s crash landing. In it was a cache of spectacular high-altitude 

portraits of the Earth, revealing magnificent cloud formations and global weather 57 CHAPTER 4 — THE ROCKET SCIENCE CLUB 

patterns. The then-novel pictures ran in many newspapers and magazines, thereby 

associating NRL in the public eye with the nascent rocket age. 

Viking 11 also carried innovative detectors that recorded emissions due to cos -

mic rays (an interest that old-timer and NRL’s early rocket champion, E. O. Hulburt, 

had brought into the lab and then handed off to others including Herbert Friedman) 

and telemetered the data down to Friedman and his colleagues. 42  Viking 12’s February 

4, 1955, launch did not live up to the building expectations that came with Viking 11. 

But its camera produced some of the best high-altitude pictures of Earth that yet had 

been taken. 

As exciting as all the Viking firings were, they were expensive by the standards of 

the day, on the order of $400,000 per shot. And the scientists who had spent many   

> The Lazarus Viking. In a hangar at the White Sands Missile Range in
> New Mexico, NRL engineers conduct an instrument check on Viking 10.
> On the first launch attempt on June 20, 1953, the engine exploded, but
> the rocket was subsequently rebuilt and successfully launched on May
> 7, 1954. It reached an altitude of 136 miles (217 kilometers). Shown also
> is the scroll of telemeter data from the flight. (NRL photos 53-061582(22)
> and 54-061582(17))

58 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

months designing experiments or equipment to fly on the rockets never quite knew 

what to expect. There never were guarantees that their rocket program would last 

long. For one thing, smaller, more reliable rockets like the Aerobees and WAC Corpo-

rals would become the go-to vehicles for studies in which the flights lasted only a few 

minutes. Also at play were policy debates, like those within the RDB about allotting 

funds and human resources to scientifically driven rocket development and produc-

tion if military and national security requirements ought to take precedence. 

There also was something unique about NRL’s funding that would prove both 

disadvantageous and advantageous at different times and in different national and 

geopolitical contexts. Here’s how a team of two historians, who examined NRL’s early 

rocket research and achievements in a NASA-funded historical analysis, characterized 

the situation: 

“NRL had been founded in 1923, but a post-World-War-II reorganization within 

the Navy had brought the Office of Naval Research into being and given it adminis -

trative control of the Laboratory’s finances. ONR allotted the Laboratory a modest 

fixed sum annually, but other Navy bureaus and federal agencies frequently engaged 

the Laboratory’s talents and paid for particular jobs. The arrangement resembled that 

of a man who receives a small retainer from his employer but depends for most of his 

livelihood on fees paid him by his own clientele for special services. NRL’s every con-

tract, whether for design studies or hardware, had to be negotiated and administered 

either by ONR or by one of the permanent Navy bureau[s],” 43  such as the Bureau of 

Aeronautics.   

> Lofty View. Among the last of NRL’s Viking series to launch, Viking 12 reached an
> altitude of 143 miles (230 kilometers). During its parabolic trajectory, an onboard
> camera snapped this picture of the planet below. (NRL photo 60578(35))

59 CHAPTER 4 — THE ROCKET SCIENCE CLUB 

This funding reality—which essentially remains in place today and means the 

lab operates by way of a “working capital fund” protocol that largely decouples its re-

search portfolio decisions from year-to-year Congressional budget appropriations— 

meant the nearly decade-long program of research that NRL had conducted with big 

rockets since Krause secured access for the lab to captured V-2s in 1946 always was at 

high risk. But in 1955 there still were two more Vikings left in the extended contract 

with Martin. Rather than getting dubbed Viking 13 and 14, they would become 

known as TV-0 and TV-1, where the TV stands for test vehicle, a designation that 

would prove to be painfully ironic. These Vikings-turned-test-vehicles would become 

central parts of a national goal to go beyond the short flights of sounding rockets 

designed to take measuring instruments for a once-only, up-and-down excursion and 

rather to place artificial satellites into orbits that would repeatedly circle the Earth 

over extended periods of time. The program to do so became known as Project Van-

guard. 

Talk of such world-circling spacecraft had been going on in a variety of circles 

for many years, and most vociferously in the 1950s within the Air Force, which had 

viewed itself as the natural federal locus of any U.S. space program. 44  The new effort 

became a sensational highlight and headliner of an ambitious scientific initiative, 

called the International Geophysical Year, which ultimately would involve 

67 countries, to study the Earth as a whole from the land, sea, sky, and—everyone 

hoped—from space. 45  The launch of what originally had been designated TV-3 would 

become a pivotal event in the history of the Naval Research Laboratory and the U.S. 

space program.  

> 1

Constance Green and Milton Lomask,  Vanguard: A History  (Washington, DC: National Aero -

nautics and Space Administration, 1970). Available online at http://history.nasa.gov/SP-4202/ 

toc2.html.  

> 2

Homer E. Newell,  Beyond the Atmosphere: Early Years of Space Science  (NASA SP-4211) 

(Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1980), pp. ix–x.  

> 3

David H. DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance: How the Military Created the U.S. Space Scienc-

es after World War II  (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992), p. 73.  

> 4

Naval Research Laboratory, “The Navy Upper Atmosphere Research Program with Rocket 

Vehicles, Part 1,” Washington, DC, April 10, 1947, pp. 7–9, 49–58.  

> 5

Green and Lomask,  Vanguard ; Milton Rosen,  The Viking Rocket Story  (New York: Harper & 

Bros., 1955); Homer Newell, oral history conducted by Richard F. Hirsh in Wintergreen, 

Virginia, July 17, 1980, Niels Bohr Library and Archives, American Institute of Physics, College 

Park, MD, http://www.aip.org/history/ohilist/4795_1.html.  

> 6

The Office of Naval Research was established in 1946 out of the Navy’s short-lived Office of 

Research and Inventions, which was established at the end of World War II. ONR became a 

model for the civilian sector National Science Foundation, which was established in 1950 to 

further basic research at U.S. universities.  

> 7

See, for example, http://www.boeing.com/boeing/history/mdc/wac.page, a Boeing history web 

page.  

> 8

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , pp. 47, 168–171. 60 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE  

> 9

Green and Lomask,  Vanguard . 

> 10

DeVorkin, S cience with a Vengeance , p. 169.  

> 11

DeVorkin, p. 175.  

> 12

DeVorkin, p. 175.  

> 13

Rosen,  The Viking Rocket Story ; M.W. Rosen and J.M. Bridger, “Rocket Research Report No. 1 

—The Viking No. 1 Firings,” NRL Report 3583, 1949, pp. 49–58.  

> 14

P.W. Binning and J.W. Middour, “A Brief History of NRL’s Early Firsts in Spaceflight,”  Advanc -

es In Astronautical Sciences  129 (2008): 1233–1250.  

> 15

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 175.  

> 16

http://www.marylandaviationmuseum.org/history/martin_aircraft/index.html.  

> 17

Binning and Middour, “A Brief History.”  

> 18

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , pp. 175–177.  

> 19

DeVorkin, pp. 175–177.  

> 20

DeVorkin, p. 176.  

> 21

DeVorkin, p. 167; see Ernst Krause obituary in the  New York Times : http://www.nytimes.com/ 

1989/08/29/obituaries/ernst-h-krause-76-aerospace-executive.html.  

> 22

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 168.  

> 23

DeVorkin, p. 176.  

> 24

DeVorkin, pp. 177–184.  

> 25

Binning and Middour, “A Brief History,” see ref. 20.  

> 26

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 178.  

> 27

DeVorkin, p. 179.  

> 28

DeVorkin, p. 179.  

> 29

DeVorkin, pp. 178–180.  

> 30

DeVorkin, p. 177.  

> 31

DeVorkin, p. 181.  

> 32

On February 24, 1949, a Bumper WAC Corporal, a two-stage rocket built in a project of the 

Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Wernher von Braun’s rocket team with the Army, reached a 

record altitude of 250 miles, but it did not carry scientific instruments. It was the first rocket to 

reach outer space and featured a JPL WAC Corporal rocket atop a V-2. The head of JPL would 

later suggest this launch could mark the beginning of the space age; see S. Starr, “The Launch of 

Bumper 8 from the Cape, The End of an Era and the Beginning of Another,” paper associated 

with a talk given at the 52nd International Astronautical Congress 1–5 October 2001, Toulouse, 

France.  

> 33

Bruce Hevly,  Basic Research Within a Military Context: The Naval Research Laboratory and 

the Foundations of Extreme Ultraviolet and X-ray Astronomy, 1923–1960  (Baltimore, MD: Johns 

Hopkins University, 1987), pp. 207–208.  

> 34

Ivan Amato,  Pushing the Horizon: Seventy-Five Years of High Stakes Research and Technology 

at the Naval Research Laboratory  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1998), Chapter 

8; a summary of Viking flights 5 through 12 appears in  Space Frontiers  2(2), (May-June 1986): 

3–20.  

> 35

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 180.  

> 36

http://en.goldenmap.com/John_Milton_Miller.  

> 37

Newell,  Beyond the Atmosphere , pp. 76, 78.  

> 38

DeVorkin,  Science with a Vengeance , p. 181.  

> 39

Amato,  Pushing the Horizon , Chapter 8.  

> 40

The Viking story has been told repeatedly. See, for one, Rosen,  The Viking Rocket Story . 

> 41

Green and Lomask,  Vanguard . 

> 42

Herbert Friedman, “Reminiscences of 30 Years of Space Research” (Washington, DC: Naval 

Research Laboratory, August 1977).  

> 43

Green and Lomask,  Vanguard . 

> 44

One of the most influential reports that paved the way for an era of satellites was titled 

“Preliminary Design of an Experimental World-Circling Spaceship.” It was published in May 61 CHAPTER 4 — THE ROCKET SCIENCE CLUB 

1946 under a government contract and program, Project RAND, by an engineering unit of the 

Douglas Aircraft Company in Santa Monica, CA. The organization created for Project RAND 

would evolve in 1948 into the nonprofit think tank, the RAND Corporation.  

> 45

Green and Lomask,  Vanguard .TRANSCENDING THE ATMOSPHERE: 

# PROJECT VANGUARD 

In the summer of 1954, during early planning for the International Geophysical 

Year (IGY)—which would last 18 months, from July 1, 1957, to December 31, 1958— 

the trajectory of big-rocket development for science at the Naval Research Laboratory 

would take a turn upward. Suddenly, a top-priority scientific basis for rocket develop-

ment, ostensibly divorced from any military basis, swooped into the national agenda 

in a way that would keep NRL in the rocket business. Members of the International 

Scientific Radio Union, one of the organizations that built momentum for the IGY 

in the early 1950s, recommended an idea that had been percolating in both classi-

fied and open rocketry circles: that the IGY planners consider the ambitious though 

plausible idea of going beyond sounding rockets, like the Viking, Aerobee, and WAC 

Corporal, to designing and launching artificial world-circling satellites as platforms 

for research. 1

The call for such technology launched the collective imagination of the IGY com-

munity into orbit with a sense that the time finally was ripe for crossing over the line 

from fiction to reality. Later in 1954, the U.S. National Committee (USNC) for the 

67-nation IGY set up advisory groups to study the feasibility of launching a satellite 

sometime during the IGY time frame and to determine whether a satellite would 

genuinely be a boost for research. To no one’s surprise, the answers were yes and yes. 

With the nods of advisory bodies, the USNC proceeded in 1955 to draw up plans for 

a satellite program. 

On July 29, 1955, the White House publicly announced jointly with the Belgium-

based Special Committee for the International Geophysical Year (IGY’s international 

headquarters) that the United States intended to launch “small unmanned earth-cir -

cling satellites” as part of the IGY. “This program will for the first time in history 

enable scientists throughout the world to make sustained observations in the regions 

beyond the atmosphere,” President Eisenhower’s press secretary, James Hagerty, told 

reporters at the White House. 2

The timing of the announcement was in part due to fears that the Soviet Union 

would snatch the glorious moment. 3 Four days later, as it turned out, Moscow 

announced that the Soviet Union would place its own satellite in orbit during the 

IGY. Though national leadership did not portray the promised satellite launches as a 

technology race, it was just that to many of those involved, and the world-startling 

# 564 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

result of the dueling programs in 1957 would retroactively enlarge the dual efforts to 

build a scientific satellite into a race for international prestige and global technologi-

cal predominance. 4

As historians Constance Green and Milton Lomask have pointed out, those in 

rocket circles knew the Soviet authorities had been promoting space exploration to 

the country’s citizenry. “As everyone present knew,” the historians observed, “A.N. 

Nesmeyanov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences had said in November 1953 that 

satellite launchings and moon shots were already feasible; and with Tsiolkovsky’s 

work now recognized by Western physicists, the Americans had reason to believe in 

Russian scientific and technological capabilities. In March 1954 Moscow Radio had 

exhorted Soviet youth to prepare for space exploration, and in April the Moscow Air 

Club had announced that studies in interplanetary flight were beginning.” 5

Despite all the rhetoric, when the U.S. and U.S.S.R. made their dual announce-

ments for plans to put satellites into orbit, no one knew exactly how it could be done. 

No rocket on Earth could do it. Only two groups of U.S. rocketeers, within the Army 

and NRL, respectively, were serious contenders for taking on the responsibility. At the 

time of Hagerty’s White House announcement, a high-level committee, the Stewart 

Committee, directed by rocketeer Homer Stewart of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at 

the California Institute of Technology, was convened at the behest of Assistant Sec-

retary of Defense Donald Quarles. The committee’s charge was to decide which U.S. 

rocket engineering team would get the once-in-history shot at being the first to put an 

artificial satellite into Earth orbit. 

The Air Force considered itself a natural contender but its development work on 

the Atlas rocket, which was slated to become the launch vehicle for ICBMs, by law 

had to take precedence over a scientific rocket project. That left two tight-knit and 

proud groups of rocket designers—one at NRL under Milton Rosen and Dr. Homer 

Newell, and one at the Army’s Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, Alabama, under Dr. 

Wernher von Braun, the high-profile German rocketeer behind the V-2s whom the  

> Stamp of Approval. A 3-cent U.S. postage stamp in 1957 marks the
> country’s involvement in the International Geophysical Year, an earth
> science collaboration among 67 countries. 65 CHAPTER 5 — TRANSCENDING THE ATMOSPHERE: PROJECT VANGUARD

U.S. Army, much to the Soviet Union’s chagrin, had “acquired” for its own rocket and missile ambitions after the war. The Army proposal rested mostly on the strength of the booster component and actually included NRL-developed telemetry and satellite tracking components. 6 Von Braun would become an iconic figure in the U.S. civilian space program when it would begin to organize later in the decade. The Army proposed that the nation go with its satellite, dubbed the Orbiter, some of whose components already had been under development with funds from the Office of Naval Research. 7 It called for a multistage rocket that could put a 5-pound satellite into orbit. NRL’s proposal was for a three-stage rocket using a Viking-based design and an Aerobee-based design for the first and second stages, respectively, and a newly designed, yet-to-be-tested upper stage. Rather than a tiny 5-pound payload, however, the NRL proposal called for a 40-pound payload of scientific instrumenta-tion. NRL also had in hand a workable plan for a radar tracking system, called Mini-track, which NRL researchers John Mengel and Roger Easton had developed to track Viking trajectories. Minitrack began a technology lineage that would lead to today’s systems that track satellites and orbital debris. This was a big advantage for NRL since the challenge of finding and tracking a 5-pound or 40-pound satellite in the vast or-bital expanses around the planet mocked the trouble of finding a needle in a haystack. The Stewart Committee assessed the pros and cons of each proposal and sent its recommendation to the Secretary of Defense in early August 1955. The committee’s vote was close and controversial. For one thing, note NRL space systems scientists Jay Middour and Patrick Binning in a historical account of NRL’s early space efforts, “one member of the committee was unable to attend the formal vote. At the vote, three members supported the NRL proposal, two members supported the Orbiter proposal, and the remaining two members sided with the majority explaining that they were not guided-missile experts. The outcome might have been different had the absent member voted for the Orbiter proposal, as it [was] rumored he would.” 8 So it was by the slimmest of a majority that the Stewart Committee favored NRL’s proposal over the Army’s. It took another head-to-head round involving detailed reports and testimonials by generals, scientists, engineers, and company executives before the Stewart Com-mittee made its final decision. According to a NASA analysis, the Army proposal was stronger on the booster side, but its proposal of a small, poorly instrumented satellite was a far cry from the instrument-laden Vanguard satellite that NRL was proposing. 9

In September, it became official. NRL had won stewardship of the satellite pro-gram, which became known as Project Vanguard. NRL would never be the same. In typical government fashion, Middour and Binning point out, “NRL was not notified of its selection for two months [after the Stew art Commmittee’s recommendation in August]. On September 9, 1955, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, Reuben Robertson, formally notified the Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force that the Navy was in charge of the tri-service program. Then, the Secretary of the Navy waited more 66 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

than two weeks, until September 27, 1955, to formally designate the Office of Naval 

Research as Administrator. Two more weeks, a full two months after the recommen-

dation was made, on October 6, 1955, the Chief of Naval Research officially notified 

NRL that it was to take charge.” 10 

The objective of Project Vanguard was far-reaching, nothing less than to design, 

build, and launch a three-stage booster system, six test vehicles, and another half-

dozen mission vehicles with the ultimate goal of delivering an instrument-equipped 

IGY satellite into orbit where it could make measurements of geophysical relevance. 

The booster would feature first and second stages that already had proven them-

selves and a new third stage that according to the project’s director, Dr. John Hagen, 

“would be, when built, a real advance in solid-fuel rocket technology.” 11  Given the 

well-known rate of failure in the rocket business, the Vanguard team’s stated metric 

of success went like this: at least one of the mission rockets should make it into orbit; 

the team would track and verify its orbital path; and the satellite would accomplish at 

least one scientific experiment, all before the end of the IGY. 12 

As is apparent in once-classified documents from the National Security Council, 

the science-centered Project Vanguard was part of a geopolitical agenda for President 

Eisenhower and the national security community. By launching a scientific satellite 

during the IGY, the U.S. would be able to establish a legal “open skies” precedent by 

which the jurisdiction of sovereign states over their own air space would not extend 

to outer space. With a “freedom of space” definition established, it then would be 

quite legal to fly surveillance satellites directly over Soviet territory. 13  Of course, this 

same freedom would give the Soviet Union license to fly spacecraft over U.S. territory. 

Even if Project Vanguard scientists were serving a second duty of influencing global 

space policy without deliberately doing so, the scientific opportunities in satellites 

remained as exciting as they possibly could get. “Recognizing that the project was of 

a magnitude greater than that for which a division was geared to handle and that the 

successful development of the project would call for talents from many divisions in 

the Laboratory, NRL’s Commanding Officer, Capt. Samuel Tucker, and the civilian 

Director of Research, Dr. E. O. Hulburt, decided to form a group outside the division 

structure to carry out the project,” recalled Hagen, superintendent of the Atmosphere 

and Astrophysics Division and the man who was chosen as Director of Project Van-

guard. 14  Life  magazine would later describe Hagen’s experience in Project Vanguard as 

“one of the most trying ordeals ever imposed on an American scientist in the course 

of his work.” 15 

Hagen had three years to pull off the task, which required as much administra-

tive orchestration as technical innovation. The Vanguard team organized into groups 

devoted to designing the rocket, designing the satellite, miniaturizing instruments 

and telemetering equipment so they could fit into the satellite, developing orbital 

calculations and computerized means of handling the payload, and building a global 

rocket and satellite tracking system. Scheduling, budgeting, and liaison with other 67 

parts of the Defense Department also fell under the aegis of Hagen and the Vanguard 

team. Moreover, the team had to work closely with the Glenn L. Martin Company, the 

prime contractor on Viking and now with the Vanguard project, to build the first stage 

and to assemble the completed vehicle with the second and third stages and other 

components coming in from other contractors. 

The first-stage engines and pumps, which formed the heart of what essentially 

were modified Viking rockets fueled with kerosene and liquid oxygen, came from 

General Electric, for example. In the company’s design, the breakdown of another 

liquid, hydrogen peroxide, produced superheated steam and a flow of oxygen that 

powered the turbine-driven fuel and oxidizer pumps, while inert helium gas pressur-

ized the fuel tanks. 16  The Aerojet General Company, the firm that built the Aerobee 

rockets, was contracted to supply the liquid-fueled second-stage rockets, incorporat-

ing a guidance package supplied by the Minneapolis-based Honeywell Company. 17 

The technology-pushing, solid-fuel third stage, which would take the Vanguard 

satellite into orbit from the high perch that the previous two stages had achieved, had 

its own set of contractors. Most notable among them was the Grand Central Rock-

et Company and Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory, whose novel proposal featured a 

weight-saving Fiberglas casing instead of metal. 18  Also pitching in were research and 

technology organizations such as IBM, Caltech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and the 

Bendix Corporation (which would later become Allied Signal), which was contracted, 

in Hagen’s words, for “the construction and installation of the tracking devices which 

were developed under the name ‘Minitrack.’” 19 

Equally as challenging as organizing the construction of the rockets was the job 

of securing and preparing a launch site. For a multi-stage rocket whose second stage 

would drop from the sky as far away as 1,500 miles from the launch site, the familiar 

White Sands missile site was too close to populated areas. With its over-ocean launch-

es, Cape Canaveral on the Florida coast was the logical choice. But when the Van-

guard team approached the Army with a request to share the launchpad associated   

> Play Ball. Project Vanguard director
> Dr. John Hagen holds a model of the
> satellite that would be placed in orbit and
> make measurements of solar energy,
> temperature, and other geophysically
> relevant phenomena. (NRL photo
> 255-PV-VAN-1731 DR HAGEN WITH
> SAT MODEL.jpg) 68 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

with von Braun’s Redstone missile, the team was quickly turned down, Hagen wrote, 

“on the basis that any interference with the Redstone program would be harmful to 

the U.S. ballistic missile program,” 20  a defense program that had higher national prior-

ity than an IGY scientific program. 

“In the end, because the Air Force and Army claimed full occupation of launch 

facilities and since Vanguard had no military priority, we were forced to build our 

own hangar, blockhouse, and launch stand,” Hagen recounted. “All the while, the 

Scientific Program group worked with the committee for the IGY of the National 

Academy of Sciences to select a series of experiments from scientists around the 

country and then to work with those scientists in preparing the experiments so that 

they would stand the rigors of launching and flight.” 21  It was a nonstop orchestration 

of thousands of people distributed across the country working on scores of projects at 

a cost ultimately of over $100 million. 22 

The first sign of difficulty in the program came early after NRL had signed a 

letter of intent with the Glenn L. Martin Company. Unknown to NRL, the company 

previously had also been selected as the prime contractor for a top-priority Air Force 

project to develop the Titan, a second-generation intercontinental ballistic missile. 

Many of the top-flight Martin engineers who had worked on NRL’s Viking rockets 

were now assigned to the higher-priority Titan project. That left Project Vanguard 

with a less experienced Martin crew. 

The original plan was to progress toward a series of six satellite launch attempts 

but not before working out the engineering kinks with a set of six test vehicles, desig -

nated TV-0 through TV-5. The first tests would use up the two leftover Viking rockets 

and check out new telemetry hardware, as well as the new third stage. TV-2 would 

be the first test of a newly designed first stage, which essentially was a Viking with a   

> Vanguard Revealed. A rough exploded view of the Vanguard rocket design shows
> the small spherical satellite at the top of the three-stage booster. (Vanguard_rocket_
> cutaway_view) 69

more powerful engine. TV-3 would be the first full test of the three-stage design. As-

suming enough information about the rocket’s performance had been gleaned from 

the prior tests, TV-4 would shed some of the rocket testing and diagnostic instrumen-

tation and telemetry. That would open the way for the final test vehicle, TV-5, which 

would use up the sixth and final test booster and would include a dummy satellite in 

its payload bay. Following TV-5 would then come the six satellite-launching vehicles 

(SLVs), each of which could carry a 20-inch sphere with an IGY payload. 23 

Tracking the satellite was a central part of the plan and John Mengel, whom Ha-

gen named to head the Tracking and Guidance Branch for Project Vanguard, would 

be most responsible for that task. It was a role he would continue later at NASA when 

the country’s civilian space program began operating in October 1958. Mengel started 

his NRL career in 1946 with work on submarine detection and tracking. Later, in 

the Rocket Sonde Research Section, he developed expertise in radio control systems 

and was a natural choice to head Project Vanguard’s Tracking and Guidance Branch. 

Helping him get the tracking component of Project Vanguard up and running was 

Roger Easton, destined to become a hall-of-famer in the history of navigation tech-

nology as a central figure in the development of the modern-day Global Positioning 

System (GPS). 

Because their professional home was one of the country’s premier bastions of 

ex- pertise in radio and other invisible swaths of the electromagnetic spectrum, the 

NRL approach to tracking would piggyback on the lab’s more than 30 years of work in 

radio tracking and ranging, that is, radar. Tracking spacecraft was a brand new game, 

however, so IGY leadership hedged its bets by also supporting “optical tracking” 

based on high-power, ground-based telescopes. For that tracking tack, the Nation-

al Academy of Sciences gave the Smithsonian Astronomical Observatory (SAO) 

$3,380,000 to build a worldwide network of Baker-Nunn telescopes. These instru-

ments presumably could determine a satellite’s swiftly moving position by comparing 

it with the locations of stars behind it, relying on a photographic system attached to 

the telescope to capture the lights in the night sky on film. 24 

Within a few years, SAO had set up a dozen optical stations on every continent 

except Antarctica. These stations were distributed over a wide swath of latitudes, 

ranging about 40 degrees north and south of the equator. The scale and audacity of 

the network matched the scale and audacity of deploying the Vanguard satellites, but 

the optical tracking technique suffered from what was known as the acquisition prob-

lem. In short, it was extremely difficult to find the object to track in the first place, 

especially one that was merely several feet across or less and flying hundreds of miles 

overhead at many thousands of miles per hour. Moreover, the weather had to be good 

with not too much cloud cover. And for any particular optical station, the lighting 

had to be just right: just before sunrise or sunset when the sun would illuminate the 

satellite against a dark background. The champions of the system demonstrated it 

could work, but its drawbacks were impossible to ignore. 70 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Because of the “acquisition problem,” Rosen, one of the Vanguard program’s 

leaders at NRL, was adamant that an optical approach would not work with satellites. 

So he asked Dr. Richard Tousey, one of his in-house optics experts who had embraced 

the V-2s and Vikings for his studies of the solar spectrum of UV and X-ray radiation 

in the upper atmosphere, to look into the practicalities of the approach. Tousey found 

that it indeed would be possible for a camera to detect a small Vanguard satellite. 

But there was a catch: Tousey calculated that it would be immensely unlikely that 

the camera would be able to find the satellite at all, unless, that is, the operator of 

the camera system already knew where to look. It was a paradox: you could track a 

satellite optically if you already knew where it was and where to look, but then why 

would you need an optical tracking system? In Tousey’s opinion, wrote Sunny Tsiao, a 

scholar who has chronicled the history of satellite tracking, “the probability of 

successful optical acquisition of a Vanguard-sized satellite on the first visual pass was 

only 1×10 −6 , that is, literally one in a million.” 25 

This is where radar and hence NRL come prominently into the Vanguard track-

ing story, and from there even into today’s tracking of many thousands of manmade 

orbiting objects. With its roots in the 1920s, radar had become in the 1940s an enor-

mously consequential technology that influenced the outcome of World War II. The 

world’s military powers and technologically advanced nations would also put radar to 

use on their way toward the Space Age. As the Army ramped up its missile develop-

ment work and testing at White Sands in New Mexico, it turned more and more to 

radar tracking instead of optical tracking. Part of the incentive for this shift was that 

the radar data was in electronic form from stem to stern and bypassed any need for 

transforming raw optical, photographic, or other analog forms of data into electronic 

forms, perhaps by way of paper punch cards that a computer could read. The all-elec-

tronic advantage of radar made the tracking data amenable not only to computer 

analysis and trajectory calculations (even with the vacuum-tube-based electronic 

computers of the 1950s), but also to networking across tracking stations, to command 

and control signaling, and to telemetry. 26 

Among the first radar tracking systems was one built by the Radio Corporation 

of America (RCA). It featured mobile units powered either by commercial power 

sources or by generators if deployed to underdeveloped sites. These were linked into 

a network “to transmit data to a control center where consoles displayed information 

on the radar returns for the test engineers,” according to Tsiao. 27 

Mengel, Easton, and colleagues at NRL had built and tested at White Sands what 

proved to be an even more capable radio-based system for tracking ballistic missiles. 

Built for use in the Viking rocket program, it relied on an interferometric principle 

in which a radio signal originating from a flying or orbiting object (either from a 

transmitter or in the form of a reflection of a probe signal) would reach two receivers 

at ever so slightly different times. 28  That time difference entailed that the waves likely 

would arrive at the two receivers with a difference in their phases. A comparison of 71 

the phases of these received signals, together with knowledge of the precise distance 

between the receivers, and the well-known speed of light, was sufficient for calculat-

ing the angle from the receivers at which the object was situated when it emitted or 

reflected the signal. 

Several such measurements over a period of time from one pair of antennas, or 

from sequences of well-positioned pairs of antennas, would enable NRL trackers to 

determine an object’s trajectory, which in the case of a satellite would amount to an 

orbital trajectory. “This technique had the advantage of yielding highly accurate 

tracking angles and could be used under virtually any atmospheric condition,” noted 

Tsiao. 29 

So Rosen turned to Mengel and his staff in the Tracking and Guidance Branch to 

come up with a practical alternative to the optical tracking techniques that most were 

still betting on. What was foremost on these radio engineers’ minds was the need to 

keep their transmitting system small and lightweight. It would have to be placed on 

a satellite, which would weigh in its entirety only a few pounds. What Mengel’s team 

came up with on short order was a transmitter that weighed in at 13 ounces. 

Mengel’s name for the system, Minitrack, short for “minimum-sized tracking 

system,” relied on a transmitter as miniaturized as possible while still being able to 

transmit signals to antenna pairs at a ground station. The resulting Minitrack oscilla-

tor was quartz-crystal-controlled and fully transistorized, which was still novel at the 

time. The battery-powered transmitter had a 10-milliwatt output, operated on a fixed 

frequency of 108 megacycles (megahertz), and had a predicted lifetime of 10 to 14 

days. 30 

“What apparently had sold the Defense Department on our proposal was the fact 

that it consisted of a good radio system which would be infallible in picking up the 

satellite in orbit,” explained Mengel, referring to the choice between NRL’s and the 

Army’s proposal for orchestrating the nation’s promise to orbit a scientific satellite for 

the IGY. This pioneering global tracking system, which required the construction of 

a worldwide network of stations, was to become operational in 1957 at a cost of $13 

million. 31 

Getting the IGY’s community of scientists to become confident in new radar 

tracking concepts over optical tracking techniques was a hard sell. Toward that end, 

by way of technical papers and talks, Mengel and his team, most notably NRL’s Roger 

Easton and Dr. Paul Herget, who was director of the Cincinnati Observatory and a 

consultant for Project Vanguard, fleshed out the daunting tracking challenges and 

stunning capabilities of the Minitrack system. On one occasion in front of a group 

of scientists and engineers, Mengel described the tracking feat required for Project 

Vanguard this way: “Let a jet plane pass overhead at 60,000 feet at the speed of sound, 

let the pilot eject a golf ball, and now let the plane vanish. The apparent size and speed 

of this golf ball will closely approximate the size and speed of a satellite 3 feet in diam -

eter, at a height of 300 miles.” 32 72 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

With a series of receiving stations separated every 500 or 600 miles in a north-

south line from rural Blossom Point, Maryland—which would become a prominent 

and long-lived outpost about 45 minutes from NRL for all subsequent generations of 

NRL space technologies—through the southern states and Central and South Amer-

ica all the way south to Santiago, Chile, the researchers designed a “radio fence” that 

could track Vanguard satellites. Additional Minitrack stations went up in Australia 

and South Africa. The prototype station, at the Naval Electronics Laboratory (NEL) in 

San Diego, which was not positioned to track Vanguard satellites, would be, in early 

October 1957, among the first stations to verify that the Space Age had begun when 

the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1. 

With launches slated to go from the Florida coast and tracking stations set up 

around the world, the Vanguard team established a control center at NRL with tele-

type connections to all relevant locations. Among these was a link to the Vanguard 

Computing Center, which was situated at 615 Pennsylvania Avenue NW in Washing-

ton, DC (about one mile from the White House) and equipped with a state-of-the-art 

IBM 704 computer for orbital computations. 33 

The space vehicle and ground pieces of the Vanguard project were coming to-

gether. By the spring of 1957, the first two test launches, TV-0 and TV-1, had together 

demonstrated that the telemetry and tracking systems worked. They also had shown 

that a third stage indeed could be ignited in the near vacuum of the upper atmo-

sphere, a must-happen event that no one knew was actually possible. As all rocketeers   

> Minitrack Footprint. A pivotal component of Project Vanguard, the satellite-tracking
> system called Minitrack would become the prototype of the nation’s primary satellite
> tracking system, NAVSPASUR, in the early years of the Space Age. This 1956 photo
> shows the primary site of the Minitrack system in Blossom Point, Maryland. (NRL
> photo 56-045950.jpg)

73 

knew from experience, nothing could be taken for granted in this fetal stage of the 

Space Age. 34 

Then, with TV-2—that is, test vehicle number 2—installed on the launch pad, the 

Vanguard team and the rest of the world heard on October 4, 1957, a revelation that 

could not have been more shocking. The morning started out for Hagen at an IGY 

meeting in Washington on missiles and rockets. At the meeting, Hagen had sought 

out Sergei Poloskov, a Russian rocket expert who was in attendance. “Hagen asked 

if the U.S. would be given time to change its radio tracking equipment should the 

Russians soon launch a satellite,” according to a  Life  magazine article published the 

following March about what would become Hagen’s rough ride as director of Project 

Vanguard. “Poloskov smiled and said plenty of notice would be given.” 35 

That evening, Hagen skipped a cocktail party at the Russian embassy and re-

turned to his home in Arlington, Virginia. There, his 16-year-old son Peter told him 

what he had just learned from a phone call he had taken at the house: the Russians 

had launched the world’s first artificial satellite—Sputnik. The senior Hagen was 

stunned. 

Friedman, who soon would become NRL’s premier and most publicly visible 

astronomer, recalled the immediate aftermath: “Public reaction was initially mild, re -

flecting President Eisenhower’s comment that ‘it does not raise my apprehension one 

iota about national security.’ The numbness wore off quickly, and public figures began 

to decry the shameful situation with the usual accusations of administration pen -

ny-pinching, shortsightedness, lack of vision, and general stupidity. Truman blamed 

the McCarthy era for having deprived America of its best brains. By implication the 

Vanguard team was a bunch of second-raters. The Senate Preparedness Committee 

chaired by Lyndon Johnson immediately began an inquiry into the status of U.S. 

rocket and satellite programs.” 36   

> Vanguard Downtown. Located at 615 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, not far from the White House, was the storefront
> Vanguard Computing Center where the trajectories of Vanguard satellites were computed from signals picked up
> by the Minitrack station in Blossom Point, Maryland, and associated stations elsewhere. (NRL photos 255-PV-
> VAN-1172 VANGUARD COMPUTING CTR 1.jpg and 255-PV-VAN-1168 VANGUARD COMPUTING CTR 2.jpg) 74 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

Scooped and embarrassed, Hagen and the Vanguard team had to push on. They 

successfully launched TV-2 on October 23, 1957. It reached an altitude of 109 miles 

before coming back to Earth 335 miles downrange. As such, it was still in the cate-

gory of a sounding rocket or a ballistic missile. Two weeks later, on November 3, the 

Soviets launched Sputnik 2, this one with a canine passenger, Laika, which became 

the talk of the world. Laika would not return alive from her trip into space. 

The launch of the Sputniks may have raised blood pressures at NRL, but an un-

fortunate miscommunication following a White House briefing by Hagen and several 

colleagues on Project Vanguard would raise pressure to the bursting point. Hagen 

recalled what happened: “we briefed President Eisenhower, giving him a very factual 

report of our standing and telling him that we had planned in December to launch 

the first full-fledged test vehicle in the Vanguard program, emphasizing it was only a 

test vehicle which had a very remote bonus—a satellite. This was the TV-3, the first 

attempted launching of a complete Vanguard vehicle with all three live stages.” 37 

Although TV-3 always had been planned as an engineering test whose outcome 

would help the Vanguard team build toward the real thing, perceptions that it actually 

was the real thing—and suddenly also the nation’s answer to Sputnik—were about 

to get way out of hand. On November 11, 1957, shortly after the briefing, James 

Hagerty, Eisenhower’s press secretary, released a White House statement saying that 

Project Vanguard would launch a satellite in the near future. “In other words,” Hagen 

said, “our first live three-stage launching was billed as a satellite launching success 

in advance and committed us to a public deadline with an untried vehicle.” 38  Once 

released, there was no stopping the media frenzy. No matter what the rocket scientists 

might have intended, the U.S. citizenry was convinced that NRL would launch the 

U.S. answer to Sputnik at the very next Cape Canaveral firing on December 6. 

On that day, with the world watching, and after several tension-amplifying 

weather delays, the countdown went to zero. Friedman later recalled the moment. 

“When the rocket flame ignited on December 6, the vehicle rose only a little over a 

meter and faltered. As it fell back, the fuel tanks ruptured and the rocket rumpled 

to the ground enveloped in hellish flames and billowing smoke. From the top of 

the three-stage rocket the silvery 6-inch satellite plummeted 25 meters through the 

flames and bounced on the concrete deck. There our wounded bird, its antenna badly 

bent, radiated a futile signal at 108 megahertz.” 39 

In an interview 52 years after the disastrous failure, Martin Votaw, who had built 

the transmitters inside the satellite, recalled that after crews had cleaned up the site, 

he actually was able to retrieve the injured, would-have-been spacecraft, place it in 

a cardboard box, and hand it off to Roger Easton. According to a written account by 

Easton’s son, Richard, and coauthor Eric Frazier, Roger Easton “nonchalantly carried 

the box with satellite aboard a commercial flight back to Washington, DC,” where it 

first sat on his kitchen table. He later brought the sorry memento of one of the worst 

moments in the history of American technology to the director of the Vanguard pro-75 

gram, John Hagen, who ultimately would hand it off to curators at the Smithsonian 

Institution’s National Air and Space Museum on the national mall in Washington, 

DC. 40  Today, in this museum, only steps away from the satellite is a backup Vanguard 

rocket that also enjoys a second life as a monument to the early Space Age. 

Amidst all of the subsequent report-writing and public humiliation, Hagen and 

his team, inveterate engineers that they were, still had a test schedule to complete. The 

failure also stimulated, in the words of one analyst, “more careful engine system tool-

ing and rocket construction techniques by GE and [Glenn L. Martin], respectively, in 

preparation for future Vanguard firings.” 41 

But there would be no mercy. On January 22, a series of delays scrubbed the 

scheduled flight of America’s second attempt to answer the two Sputniks. The ridicule 

was brutal. “The Soviet delegation to the United Nations jokingly offered to include 

us in the USSR program of technical assistance to developing nations,” Friedman 

recalled. 42  The joke at the Pentagon was a new Navy salute—a hand clasped to the 

forehead. 43  The media ran articles and commentaries that referred to the failed Van-

guard as “Sputternik,” “Goofnik,” “Dudnik,” and “Kaputnik.” 44 

Stuck plugs and a leaky fuel system on subsequent days prolonged the delay. 

That’s when Wernher von Braun and his rocket crew with the Army Ballistic Missile 

Agency (ABMA), working with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, received presidential     

> In the Hot Seat. When the Soviet Union launched Sputnik,
> the world’s first satellite, on October 4, 1957, pressure
> skyrocketed on NRL’s Project Vanguard to quickly match
> the feat by launching a Vanguard satellite as part of the
> International Geophysical Year. Shown here is Project
> Vanguard director Dr. John Hagen explaining how the launch
> would unfold. The first attempt, on December 6, 1957,
> would be a spectacular failure, but the successful launch on
> March 17, 1958, would ultimately vindicate NRL and Project
> Vanguard. (NRL photo 81968(5).tif)
> The Almost Satellite. On December 6, 1957, in
> the context of NRL’s Project Vanguard, the United
> States attempted to match the Soviets’ October 4
> achievement of placing a satellite into orbit. The
> launch failed, and the TV-3 test satellite fell out of
> the rocket fairing; it was subsequently retrieved,
> burnt and battered, at the launch site. This artifact of
> a historical failure now resides in the Smithsonian’s
> National Air and Space Museum on the national mall
> in Washington, DC. (NRL photo 255-PV-VAN-1082
> TV-3 SATELLITE 3.jpg) 76 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

authorization to launch a Jupiter C missile topped off with a satellite, dubbed Explor-

er 1, instead of its intended payload, a nuclear warhead. The ABMA-JPL team had 

pined to become the Stewart Committee’s original choice for the IGY satellite, but the 

Committee and President Eisenhower were concerned the team’s primary mission— 

to develop intermediate-range and intercontinental ballistic missiles—was opposite to 

the scientific context the country wanted this satellite to reside within. The launch of 

the first Sputniks before any U.S. satellite made it to orbit, however, shifted the admin-

istration’s priorities. 45 

Providing some solace to the Vanguard team, the Army satellite was fitted with 

an electronics package the NRL team had built for a Vanguard satellite. 46  The “Van -

guard electronic stack was adapted to a cylindrical instrumentation package that 

would remain attached within a fourth-stage rocket casing after burnout and orbit 

as a 31-pound, 80-inch long, bullet-shaped satellite,” recounted a 2002 version of a 

classified history of early U.S. space-based reconnaissance. 47 

On the night of January 31, 1958, a four-stage version of the Jupiter C rocket, 

dubbed Juno 1 (the name of Roman god Jupiter’s wife and sister), 48  did not explode 

in front of the world’s eyes. Instead, it carried the Explorer 1 into orbit where it began 

circling the Earth as the country’s first satellite (and the world’s third satellite), a fact 

all too clear to the NRL team tracking its orbit with the Minitrack system they had 

built specifically for tracking Vanguard satellites. In the end, it was the Army, not the 

Navy, which Americans would remember as first meeting the Soviets in the space 

race. 

Hagen’s ordeal was not yet complete. After several more delays in early February, 

another satellite-tipped Vanguard rocket, the TV-3BU (BU stands for backup), finally 

lifted off on February 3, 1958. But a control system malfunctioned after 57 seconds 

of flight, resulting in the loss of attitude control. A subsequent investigation revealed, 

in the words of historians Green and Lomask, “that spurious electrical signals had   

> Flopnik. The failure of TV-3 elicited scathing
> derision, as evidenced by the headline of this front-
> page newspaper article. (1720067_orig.gif, http://
> turningpointsthespacerace.weebly.com/the-space-
> race.html) 77

created motions of the first-stage engine in the pitch plane. These in turn developed 

dynamic structural loads, coupled with a rapid pitch-down that superimposed air 

loads of about the same magnitude. As a result, the vehicle broke up at the aft end of 

the second stage.” 49  On March 5, the Army was hit with its own failure. The fourth 

stage of a Redstone rocket carrying the Explorer 2 satellite did not ignite. Rather 

than entering an orbital trajectory, both the rocket and satellite fell into the Atlantic 

Ocean. 50 

During the next weeks, the next launch attempt by Project Vanguard, with TV-4, 

was delayed multiple times, including once when a plug involved in the fuel pressur-

ization process failed to come free. What everyone hoped would be the final count-

down began to unfold early on St. Patrick’s Day, but it wasn’t smooth. Note Green and 

Lomask: “At 6:50 a.m. there was a short hold: more electronic problems. At almost 

literally the last second, there was another and even shorter hold, or more exactly, 

a ‘stretch-out,’ when calculations showed that if the countdown concluded at that 

moment, Explorer I would be passing overhead just as TV-4 arched into the heavens. 

Passage of the Army satellite at that time, according to the electronics men, might 

interfere with the signals from the Vanguard payload.” 51 

The luck of the Irish finally came Hagen’s and NRL’s way at 7:15 a.m. It might 

have been “5 months and 13 days after the launch of Sputnik I, and about 6 weeks 

after the launch of Explorer,” 52  but on this day a Vanguard rocket soared upward to 

deliver its satellite payload into orbit. 

The orbit of Vanguard 1, a 6-inch-diameter sphere that Soviet premier Nikita 

Khrushchev later would refer to as “the grapefruit satellite,” 53  entered an elliptical or-

bit with its farthest point from Earth (apogee) at 3,966 kilometers and its closest point 

(perigee) at 653 kilometers. Although Project Vanguard suffered adversities in the 

realm of public relations, and continues to be misperceived as a failure, it was an as-  

> Final Assembly. Vanguard team member Dave
> Corbin assembles the Vanguard 1 satellite flight unit in
> preparation for the March 17, 1958, launch. (NRL photo
> Votaw_1.jpg) 78 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

tounding achievement in rocketry from an engineering point of view. In just two and 

a half years, a new rocket system and scientific satellite for the International Geophys-

ical Year had gone from an all-paper design stage to a successfully launched satellite. 

NRL’s Jay Middour, head of the Advanced Systems Technology Branch at NRL as this 

book was being researched and written, and Patrick Binning, an aeronautical engi-

neer who has worked at NRL and in managerial roles at NRL partner organizations, 

such as the National Reconnaissance Office, summed it up this way in a paper they 

prepared for the American Astronomical Society: 

“Vanguard met 100 percent of its scientific objectives, providing information on 

the size and shape of the Earth, air density, temperature ranges, [and] micrometeorite 

impact, and improved the accuracy of world maps. Project Vanguard established a 

number of scientific and engineering firsts. The rocket employed a strapped-down 

gyro platform, and rotatable exhaust jets on the first stage engine for roll control, and 

a C-band radar beacon. The Vanguard I satellite achieved the highest altitude of any 

man-made vehicle to that date. It was the first solar powered satellite and the first 

to use miniaturized circuits. Observations of its orbital motion established a very 

accurate value for the flattening ratio between equatorial and polar Earth radii and 

established beyond doubt geologists’ suspicions that the Earth is pear-shaped.” 54 

The satellite remains in orbit today and stands as the oldest human-made object 

in space. 

A month after this stupendous win, the Vanguard team tallied a string of losses. 

The launch of Project Vanguard’s final test vehicle, TV-5, on April 28, 1958, expe-

rienced problems in its second stage and failed to make orbit. And so too did the 

9.8-kilogram, 50.8-centimeter spherical satellite enclosed within it, which carried  

> Vindication Liftoff. Following the terrible failure
> of TV-3 in front of the world on December 6,
> 1957, the Vanguard team celebrated their
> successful launch from Cape Canaveral
> of the Vanguard 1 satellite on March 17, 1958.
> (NRL photo 78439.jpg) 79

instruments for measuring aspects of the space environment, including intensity vari-

ations in X-rays arriving from the sun. 55  The next three launches of the Project Van-

guard’s planned SLV vehicles, the ones that were supposed to stand a better chance of 

making it to orbit based on lessons learned from the test vehicle (TV) series, all failed 

due to attitude, propulsion, and other performance problems with the second and 

third stages. The first stage, the one derived from the Viking programs, proved to be 

the most reliable overall. 

NRL itself would never get to launch SLV-4, SLV-5, or SLV-6, or TV-4BU (also 

known as SLV-7), which was another backup (BU) vehicle still on hand. These four 

vehicles—two of which would fail and two of which would place Vanguard 2 and 

Vanguard 3 satellites into orbit—would become learning launches during the first 

year of a brand new civilian space agency, the National Aeronautics and Space Ad-

ministration, which quickly would become a household name. NASA was established 

by an act of Congress on July 29, 1958, and began operating just over two months 

later. 

Although NRL did not launch the last of the Vanguard rockets, it was essentially 

the NRL team that did: by law, the entire Project Vanguard team, about 160 people, 

had been transferred to NASA where it “became the human core of the Goddard 

Space Flight Center at Greenbelt, MD,” according to project director Hagen, who was 

among the transferees. 56  About 40 NRL staff from other divisions also transferred. 

Instruments on the 71.5-pound Vanguard 2 carried into orbit aboard SLV-4 on 

February 17, 1959, measured reflectivity characteristics from the topsides of clouds. 

The satellite remains in orbit and will be there for many years to come. Seven months 

later, on September 18, 1959, the final satellite of the series, Vanguard 3, was launched 

into orbit with the backup test vehicle, TV-4BU (SLV-7). The 52-pound spacecraft 

carried sensors that measured X-rays, Lyman-alpha radiation (certain ultraviolet 

wavelengths), and space environment conditions, including temperature and mag-

netic field strength. 57  The Van Allen radiation belts ended up swamping the radiation 

detectors, but the satellite provided temperature measurements over a stretch of 77 

days. Data about Earth’s magnetic field, magnetic disturbances, lightning-induced 

ionization in the upper atmosphere, and interplanetary cosmic dust particles poured 

in from the satellite. The dust measurements, for one, indicated that some 9 billion 

kilograms of extraterrestrial matter was raining down on the planet every day. 58 

In addition to Project Vanguard space science successes, the engineering legacy 

of the Vanguard rocket designs would trace forward through future NASA and 

Air Force vehicles. Meanwhile, the Minitrack system would feed into the evolution 

of much of the nation’s radio-based satellite tracking, including the advanced and 

comprehensive naval space surveillance system known for short as NAVSPASUR, or 

sometimes simply SPASUR. With NAVSPASUR, the U.S. could detect unannounced 

launchings of satellites by foreign nations even if those satellites were silent and not 

broadcasting signals of their own as Sputnik had done. 59 80 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

To Hagen, none of these technical achievements were the most important out-

comes of NRL’s pioneering thrust into orbit. “The greatest achievement of Project 

Vanguard,” he opined, “. . . was the development of a group of dedicated and talented 

scientists and engineers who came to understand thoroughly, perhaps the hard way, 

the overall complexities of the space programs.” 60 

For NRL, though, the transfer of Project Vanguard’s personnel and hardware to 

NASA in 1958 could have ended the lab’s status as a player in the still young arena of 

space technology. But a small contingent of visionaries would set NRL off into yet 

another pioneering Space Age venture, one they would have to keep deeply secret for 

40 years.  

> 1

Homer E. Newell,  Beyond the Atmosphere: Early Years of Space Science  (NASA SP-4211), 

(Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1980), Chapter 5.  

> 2

Constance Green and Milton Lomask,  Vanguard: A History  (Washington, DC: NASA, 1970), 

available online at http://history.nasa.gov/SP-4202/toc2.html; Homer Newell, “Artificial Earth 

Satellite Program for the IGY,” April 15, 1956; John Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” 

Technology and Culture  4, no. 4 (1963): 435–451.  

> 3

Newell, “Artificial Earth Satellite Program”; Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard.”  

> 4

See, for example, Paul Dickson,  Sputnik : The Shock of the Century  (New York: Walker & Com -

pany, 2001).  

> 5

Green and Lomask,  Vanguard . 

> 6

Green and Lomask, p. 18.  

> 7

Green and Lomask,  Vanguard . 

> 8

P.W. Binning and J.W. Middour, “A Brief History of NRL’s Early Firsts in Spaceflight,”  Advanc -

es in Astronautical Sciences ; 129 (2008): 1233–1250.  

> 9

David Portree,  NASA’s Origins and the Dawn of the Space Age  (Monograph in Aerospace 

History, No.10), July 1998; available online, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/mono-

graph10/.  

> 10

Binning and Middour, “A Brief History.”  

> 11

Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” p. 439.  

> 12

Ivan Amato,  Pushing the Horizon: Seventy-Five Years of High Stakes Research and Technology 

at the Naval Research Laboratory  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1998), see 

Chapter 8; Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” p. 438.  

> 13

See, for example, papers associated with the conference “Reconsidering Sputnik: Forty Years 

Since the Soviet Satellite,” which was held at the Smithsonian Institution from September 30 to 

October 1, 1997. In particular, see Dwayne A. Day’s “Cover Stories and Hidden Agendas: 

Early American Space and National Security Policy” and Kenneth A. Osgood’s “Before Sputnik: 

National Security and the Formation of U.S. Outer Space Policy, 1953–1957.” The conference 

proceedings were later published as a book:  Reconsidering Sputnik: Forty Years since the Soviet 

Satellite , edited by Roger D. Launius, John M. Logsdon, and Robert W. Smith (Amsterdam: 

Harwood, 2000).  

> 14

Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” p. 439.  

> 15

Hugh Sidey, “The Man Who Took the Beating for Vanguard,”  Life Magazine , March 31, 1958, 

p. 35.  

> 16

Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” pp. 441–442.  

> 17

The fuel featured fuming nitric acid and a highly explosive form of dimethylhydrazine.  

> 18

Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” p. 441. 81  

> 19

Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” p. 442; Charles Merguerian, “The Vanguard Program,” 

in F. N. Magill, editor,  Magill’s Survey of Science, Space Exploration Series  (Pasadena, California: 

Salem Press, Inc., 1989).  

> 20

Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” p. 443.  

> 21

John Hagen, “Vanguard—The Laboratory Ventures Into Space,” in  NRL Progress  (Washington, 

DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1973), p. 31.  

> 22

Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” p. 446.  

> 23

Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” p. 442.  

> 24

Sunny Tsiao, “ Read You Loud and Clear! ”:  The Story of NASA’s Spaceflight Tracking and Data 

Network , NASA SP-2007-4233 (Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administra -

tion, 2008).  

> 25

Tsiao, “ Read You Loud and Clear! ”, p. 10.  

> 26

Tsiao, p. 8.  

> 27

Tsiao, p. 9.  

> 28

Tsiao, p. 11.  

> 29

Tsiao, p. 9.  

> 30

Tsiao, p. 12.  

> 31

Tsiao, p. 12.  

> 32

Tsiao, p. 13.  

> 33

http://history.nasa.gov/computers/Part3.html; http://history.nasa.gov/SP-4202/chapter9.html.  

> 34

Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” p. 447.  

> 35

Sidey, “The Man Who Took the Beating for Vanguard,” p. 35.  

> 36

Herbert Friedman, “Reminiscences of 30 Years of Space Research” (Washington, DC: Naval 

Research Laboratory, August 1977), p. 16.  

> 37

Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” p. 438.  

> 38

Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” p. 448.  

> 39

Friedman, “Reminiscences,” p. 16.  

> 40

Richard D. Easton and Eric. F. Frazier,  GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smartphones 

(Potomac Books: A University of Nebraska imprint, 2013).  

> 41

Merguerian, “The Vanguard Program,” pp. 2077–2082.  

> 42

Friedman, “Reminiscences,” p. 16.  

> 43

Sidey, “The Man Who Took the Beating for Vanguard,” p. 36.  

> 44

Dickson,  Sputnik , pp. 158–159.  

> 45

Dickson,  Sputnik , pp. 84, 87, 147–149.  

> 46

Binning and Middour, “A Brief History.”  

> 47

Binning and Middour, “A Brief History,” p. 5. Binning and Middour cite a document by 

Ronald L. Potts, an insider-chronicler of National Reconnaissance Office history. The reference 

reads as follows: “R.L. Potts, unpublished, classified work in progress on America’s early ELINT 

satellites, June 3, 2002 version.”  

> 48

Dickson,  Sputnik , p. 170.  

> 49

Green and Lomask, V anguard . 

> 50

Green and Lomask,  Vanguard . 

> 51

Green and Lomask,  Vanguard . 

> 52

Binning and Middour, “A Brief History.”  

> 53

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/vanguard50/legacy.php.  

> 54

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/vanguard50/legacy.php; R. Jastrow, “Results of the Space Science 

Program,”  Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society , 106, no. 1 (Feb. 15, 1962): 82–87.  

> 55

Green and Lomask,  Vanguard . 

> 56

Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” p. 451; Lane E. Wallace,  Dreams, Hopes, Realities: NA -

SA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, The First Forty Years  (Washington, DC: National Aeronautics 

and Space Administration, 1999), pp. 18–19.  

> 57

Green and Lomask,  Vanguard .82 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE  

> 58

Merguerian, “The Vanguard Program,” p. 2081.  

> 59

Tsiao, “ Read You Loud and Clear! ”.  

> 60

Hagen, “The Viking and the Vanguard,” p. 451. THE LORENZEN FACTOR 

The Naval Research Laboratory became a bastion of world-class rocket engi-

neering in the 1940s and 1950s. Even Project Vanguard, which the world remembers 

mostly for the spectacular launchpad failure of December 6, 1957, ended up suc-

cessfully fulfilling its technological and scientific goals, so much so that its hardware 

(as in the Vanguard rocket and orbital tracking technology) and its brainware (the 

project’s engineering personnel and some of its upper atmosphere science research-

ers) became a prominent part of the nation’s civilian space program with the estab-

lishment of NASA in 1958. 

All the while, another essential thread stemming from NRL’s work to counter 

World War II with innovative electronic countermeasures, such as radar jammers, 

was developing in a lower-profile, more secret way. It was a thread that would 

combine with the lab’s growing rocket-mindedness. In time, these institutional traits 

would usher NRL into becoming one of the nation’s most innovative and consequen-

tial centers of space technology for military and security purposes. 

The 1950s was a decade of grinding Cold War fear and peril. It was a time when 

the dearth of information about the Soviet Union was so deep that national lead-

ership was determined to push intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) 

technology at an unprecedented pace. No one at NRL leveraged this context more 

effectively than Howard Otto Lorenzen—“Harv” to his friends. 1

He became known as the father of electronic warfare because of his innovations 

and leadership during World War II. After the war, he got the lab used to thinking 

big. His focus had been on developing radio- and electronics-based means of protect-

ing floating and airborne military assets from enemy radar tracking, guided missiles, 

and other threats that depended on reception or emission of radio, microwave, and 

other electromagnetic wavelengths. Beginning in the late 1950s, Lorenzen would be 

one of the lab’s driving forces for steering the in-house talent in the direction of intel-

ligence, reconnaissance, and surveillance from space. 

Lorenzen had been working at Zenith Radio in Chicago, Illinois, designing 

commercial radios and components, when he got a job offer from NRL in 1940. 2 This 

was a time when the lab’s radar pioneers, among them Dr. A. Hoyt Taylor, Dr. Robert 

Page, Dr. Louis Gebhard, and Dr. John Hagen, had convinced Congress that it needed 

to support the development of radar technology for the war effort. When the lab 

offered a renewable, annual contract with a starting salary that was more than he was 

making at Zenith, the 28-year-old Lorenzen accepted the position. 

# 684 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

The primary radar mission at the time was to protect battleships, aircraft carriers, 

cruisers, and other ships in the Navy’s fleet from air attack by providing them with the 

means for spotting hostile aircraft or guided missiles from far enough away and with 

enough time to do something about them. The workhorse technology was in the form 

of a 200-megahertz, 15-kilowatt search radar. Lorenzen demonstrated his aptitude 

and originality in the electronics arena by building a lightweight version of the system 

that operated at twice the frequency, 400 megahertz. It was one of his first assign-

ments in the Special Projects Section of the Radio Division. 3

A search radar working at the shorter wavelength would reveal more precise loca -

tions and trajectories of aircraft, missiles, and other objects, but the system required 

new designs for just about every part of its anatomy. The task required new sensitive, 

high-gain antennas, for example, and Lorenzen knew he needed to build anti-

jamming features into the system. “We started from scratch,” Lorenzen said. “We de-

veloped everything that was in the receivers, the indicators, and transmitters.” 4 Once 

Page, Lorenzen, and their colleagues made modifications, the new NRL-designed-

and-built 400-megahertz unit became a prototype for production. 5 In July 1941, five 

months before the U.S. entered World War II by way of the surprise attack by Japan 

on the country’s Navy base in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, this unit was successfully proven 

on the destroyer USS  Semmes . RCA and General Electric then got busy manufactur-

ing production units for installation on the fleet’s destroyers and smaller vessels. 6

Early in his NRL career, Lorenzen developed a deep appreciation for the military 

opportunities and pitfalls inherent in the exploitation of, and reliance upon, elec-

tromagnetism, including the radio frequency (RF) and microwave portions of the 

electromagnetic spectrum. The learning curve was steep in the radar business and 

Lorenzen quickly got a feel for how vulnerable radar receivers were to jamming. A 

radar engineer working a few stories above where Lorenzen and some colleagues were 

working came over to him with a question: “You guys got anything operating around 

200 megahertz?” Lorenzen answered that they did. “Leave that darned thing off,” the 

radar engineer said. “You are jamming our radar in the penthouse and we can’t see 

anything on the scope.” It was Lorenzen’s first encounter with radar jamming. 7  

> Father of Electronic Warfare. Howard Otto Lorenzen,
> shown here in a 1958 photograph, became known as the
> father of electronic warfare for his work during World War
> II, which he followed in the Cold War with work on, among
> other projects, electronic intelligence (ELINT) satellites. (NRL
> photo Lorenzen(2).jpg) 85 CHAPTER 6 — THE LORENZEN F ACTOR

“This made quite an impression on me,” Lorenzen recalled, indicating how 

impressed he was at how easy it was to jam radar equipment at the lab, which means 

jamming surely would be a major vulnerability for ships at sea. 8 A short time after 

that, British RF scientists gave Lorenzen and his radar-engineering colleagues at NRL 

a classified briefing about their work. They told us, Lorenzen recalled, “how they were 

jamming German radars and how they were doing deception … We weren’t autho -

rized to discuss anything, but they were trying to get us interested.” 9

Lorenzen was so precocious in his first year at NRL that the Radio Division’s su-

perintendent, A. Hoyt (“Doc”) Taylor, and Assistant Director Louis Gebhard reward-

ed him in several ways. They turned a blind eye to the machine shop Lorenzen had 

set up to fabricate engineering models. This move by Lorenzen was a deliberate end 

run around lab policy and practice, which would have had him relying on a central-

ized machine shop. Taylor and Gebhard also kept adding more jobs and responsibility 

onto Lorenzen’s shoulders. They assigned to him more and more engineers and tech-

nicians to supervise. He was an obvious talent and the division leadership wanted to 

let him fly at a time when the war in Europe was taking ominous turns. In December, 

when the U.S. was drawn into the war by the Pearl Harbor attack, Lorenzen super-

vised an ever-accelerating pace of innovation and production of radar systems—in-

cluding transmitters, receivers, cathode ray tube displays, and motors for sweeping 

the antennas across the sky—for ships, aircraft, and onshore installations. 10 

Upon installation in the fleet, the value of the technology for carrying out mil-

itary operations, defending against enemy actions, and saving the lives of U.S. and 

Allied servicemen became evident. With a constant drive to improve the technology 

and develop more capable and more compact versions and variations that could find 

uses in more venues and tactical situations, Lorenzen sought out and interacted with 

radar scientists elsewhere. He established contacts with his cohorts in Britain and at 

MIT’s Radiation Laboratory, for example, and with the National Defense Research 

Committee, which was coordinating wartime R&D in multiple categories in the Unit-

ed States. He could not have known then how his networking would open doors later 

that would change the laboratory and the character of national security and defense. 

As Lorenzen remembered it during a discussion with a historian, 11  he and the lab 

first got into countermeasures and electronic warfare as a result of German inno -

vations in air-launched guided bombs. During the invasion of Solarino, on Sicily’s 

east coast, he noted, the Navy retrieved an errant radio-guided bomb that had gone 

down in shallow waters without exploding. “It was immediately rushed here to NRL,” 

Lorenzen said. The lab’s chief radio scientist, Doc Taylor, assigned Dr. Ernst Krause to 

lead a team, including Lorenzen, “to analyze this thing and get some equipment out 

that would counter it.” It was a high-priority effort at NRL and included the Special 

Projects Section, which included Lorenzen’s machinists and others who had a reputa-

tion, Lorenzen noted, “for turning stuff out, and in good shape, and in rapid time.” 12 86 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Ronald L. Potts, a participant in NRL’s and the nation’s emerging intelli-

gence-gathering technologies in the 1960s and who later became a historian of the 

same, recounted how Lorenzen took on this project: “He developed a system installed 

on two destroyer escorts to intercept, record magneti- cally on steel wire, and analyze 

German aircraft radio signals that controlled the glide bombs built to sink allied war -

ships in the Mediterranean Sea. The knowledge helped NRL’s Special Projects Section 

develop intercept-jammers that defeated the Henschel-293 [glide bomb] system, and 

the unwitting Luftwaffe engineers concluded that the RF energy was too fickle or 

pilots too inept to make the intricate control system work as designed.” 13 

Thwarting enemy jamming and eavesdropping on enemy radio frequency 

emissions and signals became the deadly serious sport of Lorenzen and his fellow RF 

wizards. Their approach to the challenge and their successes earned NRL a superlative 

reputation in the arena of electronic intelligence, or ELINT. This is a category of intel-

ligence that listens in on electromagnetic signals, such as those used by radar systems, 

whether for search and tracking purposes or for targeting and controlling muni-

tions. 14  The same principles and technologies soon would apply in another emerging 

venue for warfare and national security: space. 

Even as he was pushing technology development at NRL, Lorenzen also was 

ensconcing himself intricately with decision makers, policy bodies, and other compo-

nents of what would become a complex infrastructure overseeing electronic warfare, 

countermeasures, and the nation’s overall signals intelligence (SIGINT) program, 

which included ELINT. During World War II, teams of NRL personnel frequently 

traveled to war zones to install countermeasures equipment and train servicemen 

how to use it. On those forays, the NRL staff wore special military-like uniforms, 

labeled “U.S. Technician,” to reduce the likelihood they would be accused of spying in 

the event they were captured by the enemy. 15 

Among those NRL engineers and technicians was a young and stout Reid Mayo, 

who arrived at the lab for the first time at the very end of 1943, after a stint at the 

Navy’s Radio Material School in Illinois where he learned to maintain and repair 

radio equipment. 16  At NRL he trained as a technician in radio countermeasures 

with the Special Projects Section and spent most of the war in the Northern Pacific 

installing countermeasures equipment on ships and training crew members in its use. 

Just before Mayo was deployed, he became the first NRL employee to get married in 

what was then a brand new chapel on the NRL campus, commissioned earlier on the 

wedding day! 17  Mayo also saw combat in 1945 in the Okinawa campaign and was on a 

ship near Japan when the U.S. dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima. 18 

After the war, Mayo returned to Washington, DC, earned a degree in electrical 

engineering from George Washington University, and then returned to NRL as a new 

hire in 1949 in Lorenzen’s recently established Countermeasures Branch in the Radio 

Division. 19  Nine years later, Mayo would have an aha! moment, an insight as simple as 

it was ingenious, while holed up at a Pennsylvania restaurant with his family during 87 CHAPTER 6 — THE LORENZEN F ACTOR 

a late spring snowstorm. That moment would help determine and differentiate NRL’s 

role in the U.S. space program throughout the Cold War. 

While Mayo was still in the Pacific installing countermeasures devices on ships, 

the country began mobilizing all the scientific and engineering talent and know-how 

it could muster in a goal to defeat Germany and its allies. Among the lasting orga-

nizational innovations that emerged at this time were national-level oversight and 

planning bodies, including the National Defense Research Committee (NDRC), which 

later became the Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD). These orga-

nizations became models for the establishment of the Office of Naval Research (ONR) 

in 1946 and the civilian version, the National Science Foundation (NSF), in 1950. 

The call for accelerating technological developments could not have come from 

higher places. Just before the U.S. entered World War II, President Franklin D. Roos-

evelt called on NRL to conduct frank and open exchanges with British radar experts. 

Lorenzen was the lab’s point man for this mandate. And those new liaisons would 

evolve into an intense collective effort by the Allies’ engineers to predominate in the 

electromagnetic spectrum. 20  In a key acquisition that would feed into some of the 

most important countermeasures work the lab would do in the 1940s and 1950s, 

Lorenzen and several like-minded coworkers from the nearly dozen small groups he 

supervised during the war procured a cache of electronic equipment from Germany 

and Japan that Allied forces had captured in Europe and Asia. 

By the end of the war, Lorenzen had earned himself a status as the nation’s human 

hub for just about all things regarding what he and then others came to think of as 

ECM, or electronic countermeasures, as a way to generalize the field beyond merely 

radio countermeasures. If the Pentagon had a question about, for example, whether 

the enemy could use some kind of electromagnetic signal to cause one of the coun-

try’s nuclear bombs to detonate prematurely, Lorenzen would be a go-to guy to get an 

answer. 21 

His managerial and leadership skills also brought tremendous credibility and 

support to the lab. “Sponsorship for NRL’s intercept, direction finding, jamming, and   

> Countermeasures Man. Shown here on the day of his
> marriage to Margaret Block, Reid Mayo had installed
> countermeasures equipment on ships during World War
> II and a decade later helped to bring some of the lessons
> learned into space. (NRL photo Mayo(1).jpg) 88 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

decoy systems came from the Navy Bureaus of Ships and of Yards and Docks, which 

also shepherded transitions to industry for systems produced in quantity,” Potts wrote 

in a profile of Lorenzen. 22  He was becoming an ever more influential force in the 

policy-making and leadership side. For example, during the war, Potts noted, Loren-

zen “was a key member of a countermeasures partnership between NRL and the Of-

fice of Naval Intelligence in the Pentagon, which interfaced with the NDRC Division 

14 (countermeasures) and industry.” 23 

After the war, Lorenzen maintained and nurtured the military and civilian 

contacts he had made and continued to expand upon these. His role on commit-

tees and working groups associated with present and future countermeasures needs 

continually increased in the post-war years. In time, Lorenzen’s employment status 

took a great leap upward when he was designated as a presidential appointee (under 

the World War II–era Public Law 313, which gave the President a portfolio of powers 

in the interest of national security). This status change gave Lorenzen an enormous 

amount of power, access to decision makers at the highest government levels, and 

options for circumventing bureaucratic choke points. “When need be, he explained 

his projects on Capitol Hill, the Pentagon, the United States Intelligence Board, the 

President’s Scientific Advisory Committee, the Bureau of the Budget, the General 

Services Administration, and the intelligence agencies (CIA, DIA, NSA, and NRO),” 

Potts explained. 24  His exceptional stature put him in a position to have, in some re-

spects, more power and access to classified information at NRL than did even the lab’s 

director of research. 

“I don’t think there is anybody like Howard Lorenzen at the lab today, not at a 

level where they are capable of effecting change personally,” observed Dr. John Mont-

gomery, who joined NRL in 1968 where he began a long career in electronic warfare 

research and, in 2002, became the lab’s Director of Research until his retirement in 

2016. 25  Consistent with Montgomery’s appraisal of Lorenzen was the singular post-

mortem honor that the Department of the Navy bestowed in 2010 upon this father of 

electronic warfare: the christening of USNS  Howard O. Lorenzen , a 534-foot Missile 

Range Instrumentation Ship brimming with advanced radar and other technologies 

for collecting performance and engineering data during missile launches. Only one 

other NRL scientist had ever been so honored and that was ocean acoustics expert Dr. 

Harvey C. Hayes when USNS  Hayes  launched in 1970. 26 

But back in the late 1940s, as the Iron Curtain—a phrase famously coined by 

Winston Churchill—descended around the east European satellite nations of the 

Soviet Union and the Cold War began heating up, Lorenzen and Edwin Speakman, 

another of the lab’s radar and electronic countermeasures pioneers, were able to 

convince laboratory leadership to put more emphasis on their area of research by 

establishing what became known as the Countermeasures Branch. 

“Lorenzen’s prior investigations of German equipment and documents soon paid 

off, for Soviet adaptations of German technology and techniques began to appear,” 89 CHAPTER 6 — THE LORENZEN F ACTOR 

noted Potts. “The Branch developed intercept and DF [direction finding] systems for 

deployment to Navy ships, shore stations, and aircraft.” 27  In the context of electro-

magnetic signals, the term “direction finding” refers to locating the emission sources 

of electromagnetic signals, whether they are from, say, a search radar on the eastern 

coast of Russia, a targeting radar system on a naval vessel at sea, or a command and 

control transmitter for a guided missile. Lorenzen, Speakman, Mayo, and those work-

ing with them at NRL were major innovators in this area, including the development 

of high frequency direction finding (HF/DF) technology, often known as “huff-duff.” 

Among other consequential payoffs, huff-duff influenced the outcome of the Cuban 

Missile Crisis in 1962 by enabling the U.S. to detect and track Soviet submarines 

making their way to Cuban waters. 28 

Lorenzen’s success came in part from his penchant for viewing “people in the 

field as his clients,” noted Dr. Bruce Wald, one of the most colorful and mathematical -

ly gifted scientists in NRL’s history and who retired after serving many roles at NRL. 29 

Wald was a central contributor in some of the lab’s then most classified initiatives 

such as the Huff-Duff projects know as Bullseye and Boresight. Lorenzen, who 

supervised these projects, “traveled extensively, largely to the Naval Security Group 

[for which signals intelligence was a major concern], and intelligence organizations. 

He traveled all over the world,” Wald said. 30  It is safe to say that Lorenzen had earned 

himself a position to think big and an expectation that at least some of his visions, 

including space-based ones, would be realized. 

Before ELINT devices could go into orbit, they would go onto aircraft. NRL’s 

ELINT developments in the decade before satellites were launched included, accord-

ing to Potts, the “first tunable airborne microwave intercept receiver,” installed at the 

end of the 1940s on P4M-1Q Mercators, PB4Y-2 Privateers, and P2V Neptunes. 31 

Similar technology became the heart also of land-based “ferret” probes distributed in     

> USS Lorenzen. Howard Lorenzen, often referred to as the father of electronic warfare, was honored by the Navy
> for his pioneering contributions in electronic countermeasures by having a Missile Range Instrumentation Ship
> named after him. USNS Howard O. Lorenzen (T-AGM 25) was commissioned in 2012. Also shown here is the
> ship’s coat of arms. (NRL photos Lorenzen.jpg and Lorenzen_coat_of_arms.tif) 90 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

undisclosed locations along the periphery of the Sino-Soviet bloc. Still other versions 

of this ELINT theme were fitted on ships and submarines. 32 

As the flow of ELINT intensified from an ever-increasing number of listen-

ing posts, Lorenzen and his NRL colleague Robert D. Misner, an expert in signals 

processing, wanted to get a feel for how the systems were working in the field and to 

identify shortcomings. To increase the amount of intercept data they could examine, 

they worked in collaboration with the Stromberg-Carlson Company, which was a 

major player in telecommunications and electronics technologies, to produce in 1949 

the IC/VRT-7, or the Radio-Countermeasures Sound Recorder-Reproducer. They 

designed the unit specifically to record intercepted signals on magnetic tape for later 

retrieval and analysis. Noted Potts, this was the country’s “first magnetic tape recorder 

for intercept work.” 33 

Lorenzen’s reach into the nation’s electronic countermeasures programs just kept 

expanding and in so doing he was helping establish an infrastructure that would 

underlie what would become one of the most extensive and audacious intelligence-

gathering efforts in history. He helped organize a Countermeasures Intercept Analysis 

Group (under the auspices of an office in the Department of Defense’s Joint Chiefs 

of Staff) 34  with participation and sponsorship by the highest levels of the military’s 

technology-based commands, boards, committees, and councils. The Analysis Group 

would further evolve in 1955 into a national-level electronic intelligence program and 

the previously established Army-Navy Electronic Evaluation Group also would take a 

more inclusive nationalized flavor in the form of the vaguely named National Techni-

cal Processing Center (NTPC). 35 

On the hardware side, Potts reported, “Lorenzen’s countermeasures team provid-

ed equipment (antennas, receivers, recorders, analysis devices), technical support and 

technology transfer for various surveillance platforms—via the Navy Bureaus of Ships 

and Aeronautics, the Army Signal Corps (ELINT vans), the CIA Office of ELINT 

(U-2 aircraft, crash boats, and agent devices), and ONI [Office of Naval Intelligence] 

(covert installations and equipment on loan to friendly foreign navies).” 36 

This was all happening in parallel, throughout the post–World War II years and 

on into the period of the Korean War, when the likes of Ernst Krause, Milton Rosen, 

Homer Newell, Herbert Friedman, and Richard Tousey were building up the labora-

tory’s familiarity and expertise in rocketry, rocket-based upper atmosphere research, 

and ancillary technologies such as telemetry for command, control, and data manage-

ment. It was all happening too when mere talk and musings about satellites was pro-

gressing in the mid-1950s toward the Space Age itself as the United States and Soviet 

Union pushed forward in their Vanguard, Sputnik, and Explorer programs toward the 

world’s first orbiting satellites. For their parts, Lorenzen, Mayo, and a cadre of NRL 

colleagues were embarking on a startling technological adventure that stood a chance 

of steering the Space Age into one of its most exciting trajectories. Their ambitions 

and what became of them would have to remain secret for 40 years. 91 CHAPTER 6 — THE LORENZEN F ACTOR  

> 1

Howard Lorenzen, oral history, conducted by NRL Historian John A. S. Pitts at NRL on Octo -

ber 18, 1983.  

> 2

Lorenzen, oral history; also see Ronald L. Potts, “A Tribute to the Father of Electronic War -

fare,” a profile of Howard Lorenzen in  Labstracts , November 24, 2008 (original version written 

in 2000 as a long obituary and printed by NRL as a press release); online version, http:// www. 

nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2000/a-tribute-to-the-father-of-electronic-warfare.  

> 3

Ivan Amato,  Pushing the Horizon: Seventy-Five Years of High Stakes Research and Technology 

at the Naval Research Laboratory  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1998), p. 119– 

123; Howard Lorenzen, “Short History of Countermeasures at the Naval Research Laboratory.”  

> 4

Lorenzen, oral history.  

> 5

Lorenzen, oral history.  

> 6

Potts, “A Tribute.”  

> 7

Amato,  Pushing the Horizon , p. 120.  

> 8

Lorenzen, oral history.  

> 9

Lorenzen, oral history.  

> 10

Potts, “A Tribute.”  

> 11

Lorenzen, oral history.  

> 12

Lorenzen, oral history.  

> 13

Potts, “A Tribute.”  

> 14

There are many categories of intelligence and at least as many acronyms associated with 

them. Electronic intelligence (ELINT) and signals intelligence (SIGINT) are sometimes used 

interchangeably. Sometimes SIGINT refers to a combination of ELINT and voice-based com-

munications intelligence (COMINT).  

> 15

Lorenzen, oral history.  

> 16

Robert A. McDonald (ed.),  Beyond Expectations—Building an American National Reconnais -

sance Capability: Recollections of the Pioneers and Founders of National Reconnaissance  (Bethes -

da, MD: National Reconnaissance Office and the American Society for Photogrammetry and 

Remote Sensing, 2002), pp. 129–138.  

> 17

McDonald,  Beyond Expectations , p. 130.  

> 18

McDonald,  Beyond Expectations,  p. 131.  

> 19

McDonald,  Beyond Expectations , pp. 131–132.  

> 20

Lorenzen, oral history. In the oral history with John A. S. Pitts, Lorenzen indicates he was 

convinced that the British use of a device, called a duplexer (which enabled the same antenna 

to both emit search signals and detect the echoes), emerged from its dealings with NRL. With 

it, he says, the British “could see clear back to the air fields in France” and so could know when 

the German planes had stopped taking off from airfields there. “In the Battle of Britain they 

committed every damn fighter that they had and the reason they could do this is because they 

knew there were no more [German fighters] taking off from France.” Said Lorenzen, “it was the 

thing that turned the tide in the Battle of Britain.”  

> 21

Labstracts , Naval Research Laboratory, March 27, 2000.  

> 22

Potts, “A Tribute.”  

> 23

Potts, “A Tribute.”  

> 24

Potts, “A Tribute.” The acronyms stand for the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), Defense 

Intelligence Agency (DIA), National Security Agency (NSA), and National Reconnaissance 

Office (NRO).  

> 25

John Montgomery, interview with author, May 30, 2012.  

> 26

Labstracts , Naval Research Laboratory, July 26, 2010, pp. 1 and 6.  

> 27

Labstracts , Naval Research Laboratory, July 26, 2010, p. 7.  

> 28

W. Craig Reed,  Red November  (New York: Harper Collins, 2010).  

> 29

Bruce Wald, interview with author at Wald’s home on May 23, 2012.  

> 30

Wald interview. 92 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE  

> 31

Potts, “A Tribute.”  

> 32

Potts, “A Tribute.”  

> 33

Potts, “A Tribute”; Reed,  Red November , pp. 40–44.  

> 34

The group was organized in association with the Joint Communication and Electronics Com-

mittee, JCEC, of the Joint Research and Development Board, JDRB.  

> 35

Potts, “A Tribute.”  

> 36

Potts, “A Tribute”; Lorenzen, oral history. REPORT 5097: BEYOND VANGUARD 

The greatest early threat to NRL’s longevity as a player in the evolving U.S. space 

program derived, ironically enough, from the ultimate success in 1958 of Project Van-

guard, which culminated for the lab in the St. Patrick’s Day launch of Vanguard 1. The 

grapefruit-sized satellite placed in orbit that day stands as the oldest human-made 

object still circling the planet. 

President Dwight Eisenhower had new plans for NRL’s Vanguard team. When he 

signed Public Law 85-568, the National Aeronautics and Space Act, on July 29, 1958, 

the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) was created as an act of 

public policy. By then, there were pockets of rocket expertise around the country—at 

NRL, the Army Ballistic Missile Agency that had put Explorer 1 in orbit earlier in the 

year, the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory 

(JPL), the Applied Physics Laboratory (APL), and several other places. The new law 

bestowed the President with the authority to transfer to NASA “any functions … of 

any other department or agency of the United States, or of any officer or organiza-

tional entity thereof, which relate primarily to the functions, powers, and duties of 

[NASA].” 1

“It was a foregone conclusion that NRL’s Vanguard group—150 strong—were 

to become part of NASA, as they did on November 16, 1958,” according to one of 

NASA’s own accounts of its early history. 2 Although different accounts of the NRL-

to-NASA transfer cite different specific numbers in this transfer, most indicate that 

approximately 200 NRLers became part of NASA’s initial staff. The NASA account of 

the early days of the Beltsville Space Center (as the Goddard Space Flight Center 

was known originally) 3 breaks down the transfer in more detail. The account specifies 

that 157 NRL staff from Project Vanguard transferred in the first and largest wave just 

after the official opening of NASA, followed by another 47 scientists from the Rocket 

Sonde Research Section in December, and then finally another 15 NRL scientists, 

who joined NASA’s new Theoretical Division. 4,5  Even some of the original hardware 

that enabled the Beltsville Space Center to get its operations going transferred over 

from NRL. Of the seven rockets that NASA inherited from previous rocket programs, 

one was a Vanguard rocket that NRL never got to use. And to complete the pack-

age, NRL transferred to NASA the nine-station Minitrack system that John Mengel 

and Roger Easton had devised as part of the IGY-inspired Vanguard program. The 

tracking system went over to NASA control in 1959, after which it was upgraded with 

two more stations and served as the primary satellite-tracking system for the fledgling 

# 794 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

civilian space program until 1962 after which it evolved into the Space Tracking and 

Data Network (STADAN). 6

The leaders of Project Vanguard when they were at NRL—including Dr. Homer 

Newell, Milton Rosen, and Dr. John Hagen—took over high-level positions at 

NASA’s headquarters in downtown Washington, DC. These men and their many NRL 

colleagues who worked on the rockets from the V-2 days onward through the Viking 

and Vanguard programs were among that group of people responsible for the ascent 

of NASA and its subsequent public identification as the focal point for the advent of 

the Space Age in the United States. From the NASA that these NRL pioneers helped to 

create—in their case, by comprising part of the original technical expertise at the 

Goddard Space Flight Center—would come planetary orbiting and robotic landing 

missions, flyby and landing missions, and orbiting astronomy and astrophysics labora -

tories including the Hubble Space Telescope and the Chandra X-ray observatory. 

Once at NASA, the transferred Vanguard team orchestrated three more Vanguard 

launches and then closed out the program at a total cost of $110 million. But the Van-

guard science and technology teams, and lessons learned in the management of large 

and complex systems such as rockets and spacecraft, left a legacy. Many NASA and De -

partment of Defense space systems would build upon advances made within the aus-

pices of the Vanguard program in areas ranging from rocketry, lightweight materials, 

miniaturized electronics, solar power, rechargeable batteries, thermal control, payload 

command, telemetry, and tracking. 7

The creation of NASA and the wholesale transfer of NRL’s Project Vanguard to 

Greenbelt where the group became known as NASA-Vanguard Division could have 

been a deathblow to NRL’s dozen-year advance into the emerging Space Age. But 

even before the actual transfer had taken place, NRL leadership anticipated that space 

technology and science would have to become a permanent part of the lab’s fabric. In 

February 1958, five months before the legislative act that would create NASA, NRL’s 

Director of Research, Robert Morris Page, appointed an “Ad Hoc Committee on Rock -

et, Satellite, and Space Research” to assess NRL’s program in space research and to rec-

ommend a long-range research program. Not surprisingly, the committee concluded 

“the Navy must have a research program in space and will look to the Laboratory for 

a part of this effort. To provide proper response to the Navy needs in this regard, the 

only logical conclusion is that the Laboratory must strongly support a program in 

space research.” 8

One catalytic consequence of this soul-search was the establishment of the Satellite 

Techniques Branch (Code 5170) to, in the words of one laboratory summary of this 

action, “provide a technical core around which a Navy competency in satellite research 

and development could be maintained and developed.” 9 Some 200 NRL space tech-

nology and science pioneers might have moved their offices and labs 18 miles north 

to NASA’s new Goddard campus, but a few deliberately transferred back to NRL to 

restock NRL with the initial skill sets it would need for the Satellite Techniques Branch. 95 CHAPTER 7 — REPORT 5097: B EYOND VANGUARD 

Some of these post-NASA roots, the ones that stem back to Ernst Krause’s 

countermeasures program from World War II and to Howard Lorenzen’s compre-

hensive vision of the versatility and military significance of electromagnetic sig-

nals, would grow into an invisible yet enormously consequential component of the 

country’s space program. By necessity, this extension of NRL’s space mission would 

submerge into deep secrecy. It would have everything to do with the Cold War im-

perative to prevent another Pearl Harbor, one in a new era in which nuclear weapons 

rather than conventional munitions could be what would fall on Americans. 

One of these space-minded Cold Warriors was Martin (Marty) Votaw, who had 

originally transferred by law to NASA with the rest of Project Vanguard’s person-

nel, but then jumped on the earliest opportunity to reapply to work at NRL. Votaw 

originally had joined the lab in 1947 when he began work on radar antennas and 

later focused on radio frequency (RF) systems for missile tracking on the Viking and 

Vanguard programs. 10 

“Votaw convinced people that staying in space was important and that the Navy 

shouldn’t get out of the business,” recounted Peter Wilhelm, who started working for 

Votaw in late 1959 in the newly formed Satellite Techniques Branch (STB). 11  Wilhelm 

grew up in Yonkers, New York, earned a degree in electrical engineering from Purdue 

University in Indiana, and worked on classified submarine electronic development 

at a Chicago engineering firm before joining NRL to work initially on radio-based 

IFF (Identification Friend or Foe) systems for preventing friendly fire in battle situa-

tions. 12  When Wilhelm heard from a friend at the lab who had moved from the IFF 

group to the new Satellite Techniques Branch that STB was hiring, he let Votaw know 

he was interested. 

“I felt kind of bad about it, you know. I’d only been with the IFF group for—what 

would it have been?—about six months. But the chance of working on a satellite just 

absolutely blew me away,” Wilhelm said. 13  It would turn out that hiring Wilhelm 

would be the most important managerial act at NRL for Votaw, who in 1962 left the 

lab for a top position in the nascent commercial communications satellite business.   

> Satellite Maverick. Martin Votaw advocated that NRL maintain
> a strong capability in the satellite engineering business even as
> the entire Project Vanguard, and thereby most of NRL’s rocket
> and satellite expertise, transferred in 1958 to the newly formed
> NASA. Votaw is shown here in 1961, soon before he left NRL to
> become part of the fledgling satellite-based telecommunications
> industry. (NRL photo VotawM(1).tif) 96 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE

Wilhelm would become part of just about every vision and technical step that NRL’s 

space technologists would take for the next half-century and then some. He would 

become one of the most decorated engineers and leaders in the country’s non-civilian 

space program. 14 

To get the new branch off the ground, Votaw managed to scrounge up $100,000. 

“There was still some residual hardware around that NASA had not scarfed up,” 

recalled Wilhelm. 15  A junior member of the branch, Wilhelm’s first task was to build 

radio frequency transmitters for what became known as SOLRAD 1, NRL’s first 

post-Vanguard scientific payload, whose mission was to measure solar radiation. 

It was a research goal snugly linked to Dr. A. Hoyt Taylor’s and Dr. E. O. Hulburt’s 

ionospheric studies in the 1920s and the ongoing science and technology challenges 

associated with long-distance communication. 

Besides Votaw and Wilhelm, there were a handful of others in the new branch 

that comprised NRL’s post-Vanguard resurrection in the field of satellite engineer-

ing. Among them was Ed Dix, much more mild mannered than Votaw. Wilhelm 

described Dix as “the technical leader of the group” and from whom he had learned 

more about satellite design than anyone else. Sam Shover, an RF technician, was 

among the pioneers, as was Vance Winfrey, “an antenna guy,” according to Wilhelm. 

There were several technicians who specialized in telemetry components that kept 

track of the satellite’s condition and the measurements it was making and broadcast 

these to receiving antennas on the ground. “We had an electrical power systems guy 

named Joe Yuen who took care of the solar cells and batteries,” recalled Wilhelm, and 

a “mechanical guy” who worried about the satellites’ structures and how they attached 

to the booster. 16 

Also in on the satellite adventure from the get-go were master technicians Vince 

Rose and Ed Becke who together could build, or would know how to acquire, just 

about any component a radio frequency engineer could imagine or want. Becke 

never stopped coming to the lab and only his death, in 2013 at the age of 90, ended 

his life-long involvement with NRL’s history in space. From the start, Rose and Becke 

worked with their NRL colleagues on missions to measure the characteristics of space 

and to calibrate the nation’s space surveillance system (the one that started with the 

Vanguard program’s Minitrack system). And they also would work with electronic 

countermeasures giant Howard Lorenzen to initiate a deeply secret program that 

would provide national leadership with space-based “national technical means” for 

gathering otherwise inaccessible information about the Soviet Union’s military assets 

and capabilities. 

The first project of NRL’s regenerating space science group—SOLRAD 1—proved 

to be a good omen. The satellite’s name is a contraction of the phrase “solar radiation.” 

On June 22, 1960, the NRL SOLRAD satellite and a navigation satellite called Transit, 

built by the Johns Hopkins University’s Applied Physics Laboratory, sat together with-

in the fairing at the top of a Thor Able Star rocket. That rocket successfully ferried 97 CHAPTER 7 — REPORT 5097: B EYOND VANGUARD 

The Originals.  A photo taken in 1958 or 1959 shows the group of NRL engineers who began rebuilding a space 

technology capability after the entire staff of Project Vanguard transferred to the brand new civilian space program 

with the creation of NASA. Standing leftmost is the first head of the Satellite Techniques Branch, Martin J. Votaw, who 

would be succeeded in that role in the early 1960s by Edgar L. Dix (fourth from right), who at the time of the photo was 

head of the Systems Design Section. Next to Votaw is Louis T. Ratcliffe, head of the Structures Design Section. Next to 

Ratcliff is Ground Instrumentation Technician Phillip R. McRay. To Dix’s right is SOLRAD Technician Paul Lester (of the 

Atmosphere and Astrophysics Division), then Structures Technician Roy A. Harding. Among the others in the photo is 

Telemetry Systems Section Head Gordon Van Loo.  (NRL photo GRABGroup.jpg) 

Longest Timer.  Ed Becke, shown here in 2009, joined NRL during World War II. His service, as a 

skilled and versatile technician with expertise in antenna design, spanned more than half a century. 

(NRL photo Becke.jpg) 98 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

the two satellites into orbit where SOLRAD 1, for the next 10 months, telemetered 

data about the sun to NRL scientists. This achievement of a dual launch was simulta-

neously a birth of satellite-based navigation, a technology that NRL also would soon 

get into in the biggest way possible, and an optimistic rebirth for the contingent of 

solar scientists that NRL still had on its roster. Because the SOLRAD satellite carried 

sensors for measuring both X-rays and ultraviolet radiation (including Lyman-alpha 

radiation), the data harvest enabled lead scientist Herbert Friedman and his colleagues 

to confirm his theory that X-radiation, not ultraviolet radiation, was the form of solar 

radiation responsible for activating the ionosphere in ways that caused radio fade-

outs. 17 

There was also a third mission on that flight. It was top secret and hidden within 

the very same shell that housed SOLRAD 1. It was so secret that Howard Lorenzen 

and his team in the Countermeasures Branch that was behind the mission could not 

even talk to the SOLRAD scientists about it. Wilhelm only learned about the hidden 

payload a month after he began working in the Satellite Techniques Branch on 

a transmitter he assumed was devoted to the SOLRAD payload. In a “screen room” 

normally used to prevent external RF signals from leaking inside during sensitive 

measurements, Votaw and several others in the STB revealed to Wilhelm, in his words, 

“a second payload that I had no idea about. And I had been working there on the same 

floor. I mean the security was incredibly good.” 18 

The STB engineers working on this classified payload kept it secret even from 

their space sciences colleagues working on the SOLRAD experiment. “They actually 

prohibited the countermeasures people from going across the mall [of the NRL cam-

pus] in daylight to the place where the satellites were being built,” noted Reid Mayo, 

whom Lorenzen had hired a decade earlier. “We had to go over there at night time and   

> SOLRAD 1. In Building 222 on the NRL campus is an exhibit hall that houses models of a dozen or so satellites
> built and operated by NRL’s space technologists. Shown here is an engineering model of SOLRAD 1, which
> hosted in the same shell the classified electronic intelligence payload known as GRAB 1. The scientific payload
> made the first continuous measurements of both X-rays and ultraviolet radiation reaching the Earth from the sun.
> Data accrued from six months of observation contributed to a better understanding of the sun and its effect on
> the Earth’s ionosphere and on high frequency communication. The labeled image indicates major components of
> SOLRAD 1. (NRL photos 77112(6).jpg and 60407.jpg)

99 CHAPTER 7 — REPORT 5097: B EYOND VANGUARD 

get the shell and bring it over to the roof of our building and run antenna patterns, 

and so on, in the dark on the top of our building.” 19 

In the classified world, this payload was associated by several nomenclatures, 

but GRAB, short for Galactic Radiation Background experiment, became the most-

used code name. 20  Canes, another code word associated with the program, referred 

primarily to the security and classification framework by which project insiders had 

to abide to keep everything secret, but it was confusingly used at times in reference 

to the payload too. GRAB featured a proof-of-concept orbiting sensor designed to 

detect and characterize defense radar systems deep in the heartland of the Soviet 

Union. This payload, to become known as GRAB 1, would become the world’s first 

spy satellite. 21  As a young engineer on the project, Wilhelm recalled that he had never 

even heard the term “Canes.” “To those of us actually working on the satellite, it was 

just, you know, ‘Keep your mouth shut,’” he said. 22 

The origin of this hush-hush program resided in a visionary document authored 

by several dozen NRL scientists and engineers. On December 10, 1957, only four days 

after Project Vanguard’s satellite-topped TV-3 rocket exploded in front of millions of 

observers watching the launch on live TV, the laboratory published the secret, 121-

page report. It was designated as “NRL Report 5097” and titled “A Satellite and Space 

Vehicle Program for the Next Steps Beyond the Present Vanguard Program.” The 

report, which was declassified in 2001, amounted to a compilation of thought, inten-

tion, and engineering imagination that would secure for the laboratory a critical role 

in the U.S. space program even as it would undergo a massive change in the following 

year when NASA was created and began to operate.  

> Beyond Vanguard. Cover page of a pivotal
> report, 5097, that outlines NRL’s own vision of its
> role in the advent of the Space Age. The 1957
> report was declassified in 2001. ( NRL photo
> BeyondVanguard-1.pdf) 100 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE

“The present Project Vanguard IGY Satellite Program is expected to be completed 

during the latter half of 1958,” the document states in its opening, stressing that none 

of the Vanguard satellites for the IGY will “include any military equipment, per se.” 

And yet, the document continues, “recent thinking, stimulated in part by the Soviet 

satellites, has brought into focus the fact that there are a number of very important 

military and operational applications of satellites which must be exploited if the Na -

tion’s relative military position is not to be seriously impaired.” 23 

Despite appearances, the timing of NRL Report 5097 with respect to the Van -

guard explosion on December 6, 1957, was fortuitous. Under the guidance of Van -

guard 

chief John Hagen, a total of 53 NRL staff had previously prepared contributions for a 

forward-looking manifesto of sorts, which amounted to NRL’s vision for “America’s 

space program beyond Vanguard,” according to a once-secret history of the nation’s 

first electronic intelligence, or ELINT, satellite programs. 24  (ELINT refers to “informa-

tion derived from electronic signals that do not contain speech or text,” whereas inter-

ception of signals that do contain speech and text goes under the rubric of communi-

cations intelligence, or COMINT. 25  COMINT and ELINT combined can go under the 

larger category of signals intelligence, or SIGINT.) 

With an eye toward securing funding so the lab could pursue the spaceward 

vision articulated in Report 5097, which included a far-reaching compilation of 

recommendations for national satellite and space vehicle programs, Dr. Louis Geb-

hard, Superintendent of the Radio Division, delivered a copy to the Navy’s Bureau of 

Ordnance on December 24, 1957. At this time, the Navy bureaus were the primary 

sponsors for and funders of NRL research and development work. The most devel-

oped space-based intelligence-gathering concept in the report, primarily from Loren-

zen, was a reconnaissance package designed to characterize a radar system deployed 

around “the Moscow defense complex” and that was “out of range for ground-based 

sites and conventional airborne platforms.” 26  A month later, Captain Peter H. Horn, 

NRL’s Commanding Officer at the time, forwarded the report to the Chief of Naval 

Operations (CNO), Admiral Arleigh Burke, who early on discerned how important 

the newly accessible realm of space would be for naval operations. From there, the re-

port underwent review in the top echelons of military and civilian leadership, straight 

up to President Eisenhower. 

On January 31, 1958, nine days after the review and approval process for NRL 

Report 5097 had gotten under way, the Army launched Explorer 1, the first U.S. 

satellite to make it into orbit after the Soviet Union’s successes with Sputniks 1 and 

2. In addition to shoring up the country’s listing confidence in the wake of the Soviet 

Union’s firsts in the space race, the Explorer mission was a fast scientific success. Data 

from this mission would help Dr. James Van Allen of the University of Iowa discover 

the radiation belts around the Earth that would be named after him. 101 CHAPTER 7 — REPORT 5097: B EYOND VANGUARD 

Although nothing would assuage the emotional weight that the high-profile 

launch failure of the TV-3 Vanguard rocket in early December had placed on the 

shoulders of NRL’s Vanguard team, Explorer 1 carried with it a vindication of sorts— 

and one unknown to most—for the NRL engineers and space scientists. Within the 

31-pound, bullet-shaped satellite was a cylindrical, 20-pound “Vanguard instrumen-

tation package,” a miniaturized telemetry module 27  that NRL had transferred to the 

Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena where Explorer 1 was being readied for inte-

gration into the booster. Then swiftly came a bitter chaser for the NRL team. Five days 

after the Explorer 1 launch, the second attempt by NRL to launch a Vanguard satellite 

failed one minute after launch, this time due to a glitch in the control system. 28 

In this time of both promise and frustration, and of growing Cold War angst, the 

laboratory’s vision of its future in the just-born Space Age was circulating among the 

highest strata of Navy leadership and from there within the top tiers of military, 

intelligence, and civilian government decision makers. It was a time when the absence 

of reliable information about the military capabilities of the Soviet Union begat worst-

case scenarios that could not be refuted by evidence, because so little hard data was 

in hand. “Military and intelligence potential of space-based systems quickly gained 

appreciation in the DoD,” according to naval-officer-turned-historian Ronald Potts, 

referring to systems like those proposed by Lorenzen and his team. “Study efforts 

became projects,” 29  observed Potts, who also had personal experience in the data 

analysis side of NRL’s early ELINT satellites. 

The institutional and programmatic infrastructure for supporting and expedit-

ing this space-directed ambition was getting installed. Just weeks after that second 

attempt to launch a Vanguard satellite failed on February 5, 1958, for example, the 

Advanced Research Projects Agency (known now as the Defense Advanced Research 

Projects Agency, or DARPA) was established to coordinate and oversee space-related 

research and development throughout the defense sector. Among the initial actions of 

ARPA was to continue development of the Army’s Explorer program and to fully back 

a top secret, camera-based reconnaissance program. Proposed by the Air Force and 

known initially as the Sentry Program—though the code name Corona is the one that 

would stick the most—it would entail the mid-air retrieval of canisters of film ejected 

back through the atmosphere from the camera-carrying satellites. 30  Among the play-

ers who were pushing camera and film technology to new limits were Edwin Land 

(inventor of the Polaroid camera and its self-developing film system) and Kodak, the 

camera and film company. This was an era of technological audacity and a readiness 

to support that audacity with taxpayers’ money. 

Amidst the full sprint to more high-tech means for gathering intelligence about 

the Soviet Union’s military capabilities and operations, the Navy’s Bureau of Aero-

nautics, or BuAer (whose Avionics division specified electronic countermeasures, 

or ECM, requirements for the fleet 31 ), sent a confidential letter on March 5, 1958, 

to NRL. This same day, another Army attempt to put an Explorer satellite into orbit 102 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

failed. The letter called on the lab “to design, develop and fabricate an Electronic 

Counter- measures System, subminiaturized, lightweight, for supersonic vehicles,” 

a category that includes rockets and advanced aircraft. This call for new technology 

superseded a related long-term project for early warning aircraft that the lab had been 

pursuing, a sign of how priorities were shifting toward space. 32 

Specifications for the system included an intercept receiver for a frequency range 

from 50 megahertz (high frequency) to the thousand-fold-higher frequency of 50 

gigahertz (“extremely high frequency”), an ability to function on both manned and 

unmanned vehicles, and a telemetry system for automatically transmitting intercept-

ed signals to existing naval receiving stations. The high-priority request from BuAer 

instantly raised Lorenzen’s Countermeasures Branch to an even more privileged place 

at the lab than it already enjoyed. And the branch got busy. “Intercept equipment 

developed by the branch included antennas and receivers, recorders, and analysis 

devices,” Potts noted, referring to the lab’s non-space work. “These equipments were 

often upgraded to exploit new technology and keep pace with the threat signal en-

vironment as it spread into higher regions of the radio frequency spectrum. Several 

generations of signal direction finding (DF) equipment had been developed for shore 

stations, ships, and aircraft, including long-range patrol planes and electronic signal 

ferrets.” 33  (Here, the term ferrets refers to airborne missions that would deliberately fly 

near or over adversaries’ borders to provoke the activation of radar equipment, which 

receivers on the aircraft could then intercept for later analysis.) 

Taking in all of this talk and planning about space-based ELINT technology 

was the Secretary of the Air Force, Donald Quarles, who in the summer of 1955 had 

assumed the responsibility of assembling and implementing a national ELINT 

program. Quarles had done radar development work previously when he worked on 

military electronic systems at Bell Laboratories. 34  Confidence that such a program 

was worth pursing was due, in part, to the technical advancements that Lorenzen 

and his electronic countermeasures team had made since the end of World War II. 

“By 1955, magnetic drum and magnetic tape recording technology and protocol had 

advanced to the point that electromagnetic signals of interest could be preserved on 

tape and then analyzed elsewhere in detail after the collection event,” Potts recount-

ed. 35  This progress in recording technology provided the means to tease out a Soviet 

radar “order of battle.” That, in turn, supplied important intelligence for the Strategic 

Air Command (SAC), whose long-range bombers would have to follow survivable 

routes as they carried their nuclear bombs to targets in the Soviet Union in the event 

that World War III had been triggered. 

Illustrative of the increasing value that ELINT was gaining in military circles was 

the establishment in 1957 of the National Technical Processing Center (NTPC) and 

its co-location with the ELINT-centered Naval Security Group on Nebraska Avenue 

in northwest Washington, DC, near the campus of American University. 36  There, a 

staff of about 100 personnel from the Army, Navy, Air Force, and CIA formulated the 103 CHAPTER 7 — REPORT 5097: B EYOND VANGUARD 

“objectives and general intelligence requirements” 37  for the nation’s overall ELINT 

program, which, if approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, would then serve in the field 

as guidance for signals collection by ECM-equipped operational forces. 

NRL’s Countermeasures Branch participated in and supported the national 

ELINT program by serving on technical committees; developing intercept equipment; 

evaluating data acquired from ECM configurations installed on Navy, Air Force, and 

CIA platforms; and technically supporting the NTPC, Potts noted. 38  All this involve-

ment by NRL had Lorenzen to thank for it. 

A significant factor that contributed to NRL’s pioneering role in the development 

of ELINT satellites derived from Lorenzen’s wartime contacts with the British Admi-

ralty through which he was able to procure captured German electronic equipment. 

One of these pieces of equipment, the Athos system, included a crystal whose elec-

trons responded to weak probing radar signals and then converted these into discern-

ible electronic signals. German lookouts on submarines had relied on Athos detectors 

to pick up airborne radar signals at wavelengths of 10 centimeters and 3 centimeters, 

which are on the short side of the radio frequency spectrum. 

At the time, Mayo had been developing crystal-based receiver technology for 

airborne and shipborne electronic countermeasures applications. And in 1957 he 

was using the captured Athos crystal receivers as his point of departure for designing 

systems that could detect new higher-frequency signals from Soviet radars. 39  Mayo’s 

systems featured a so-called wide-open receiver that, Mayo later pointed out, “looks 

at all frequencies that are capable of being detected by the antenna.” 40  As such, they 

were well suited for determining what radar and other electromagnetic signals were 

out there on the airwaves, from either known or unknown sources. 

Another piece of captured German hardware that proved pivotal for the design 

of NRL’s ELINT satellites was a device for precisely measuring the angle of incoming 

RF signals. Known as a Wullenweber goniometer, it ended up in a shack at the center 

of an array of antenna elements that formed into a circle with a diameter of 400 feet. 41 

The array was located on the Hybla Valley Coast Guard Communication Station 

near Mt. Vernon, Virginia, only a 30-minute drive from downtown Washington, DC. 

The goniometer “combined the signals from a subset of the antennas to produce a 

high-gain beam that rejected interfering signals from directions other than that of 

the signal of interest,” explained Dr. Bruce Wald, whom Lorenzen had hired into the 

Countermeasures Branch in 1953 and who would become one of the lab’s most bril-

liant researchers and early computer programmers, working mostly on classified pro-

grams. 42  With the goniometer in place, Lorenzen and his colleagues were convinced 

it would be possible to accurately determine the angle at which shipborne emitters at 

sea were sending out high frequency radio signals. 

As the NRL electronic countermeasures team was working to move this con-

cept forward, the Soviets placed Sputnik 1 into orbit where its radio beacon sent out 

pulses at 20 megahertz for the entire world to listen in on. Those around the coun-104 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

try who were part of the effort to launch a satellite, under the auspices of the global 

International Geophysical Year collaboration, or who were part of the military effort 

to develop ballistic missiles, also were in the business of tracking rocket-powered 

projectiles. Mayo and several others in the DF (direction finding) section of the 

Countermeasures Branch were diverted to the task of repurposing the Hybla Valley 

DF installation so that it could track Sputnik and determine its trajectory. Rather than 

seeking out Soviet aircraft and ships, the installation suddenly was in the brand new 

business of seeking out an orbiting satellite. 

“It was a very exciting time when Sputnik went [up],” Mayo recalled. “Everyone 

was excited by it, and the talk about space was everywhere—everyone was trying to 

get up to speed. I was anxious to think of how we could do other things from space … 

the opportunity of a wide-open system being useful to look into the heartland of the 

Soviet Union was pretty obvious.” 43 

In addition to the crystal detectors and the direction finding system, there was a 

third key technical influence directing the NRLers toward the invention of an orbiting 

ELINT platform. Just two months after the first Sputnik launch, Mayo and his assis-

tant Vince Rose, an antenna expert, were diverted yet again, this time by a counter-

measures group within the Navy’s Bureau of Ships, to modify a periscope-mounted 

system that could detect radar signals in the periscope’s line of sight. 

“The submarine service had us install a small spiral antenna inside the top of the 

periscope, inside the glass of the periscope, and affixed to that antenna was a small 

diode detector,” Mayo recalled. “It allowed the submarine skipper to have an electro-

magnetic ear above the surface, as well as an eye.” 44  To pull this off, Mayo and Rose 

worked closely with the Maine-based periscope manufacturer, Kolmorgen Optical, 

and then oversaw the installation and testing of the equipment on a submarine. The 

vessel was scheduled for a mid-January deployment after which it would participate   

> Huff-Duff. Known formally as a Wide-
> Aperture Circularly Disposed High
> Frequency Radio Direction Finder,
> this array of antennas and processing
> equipment in the central building is
> capable of identifying the direction from
> which high-frequency radio signals
> are emanating. This array, used by
> NRL in the late 1950s and 1960s, was
> located at Hybla Valley, Virginia, not
> far from Washington, DC. (NRL photo
> 58-039971. jpg, 58-040249.jpg, or
> 60-45951(1).jpg) 105 CHAPTER 7 — REPORT 5097: B EYOND VANGUARD

in DF tasks at sea. Mayo and Rose did the same for subsequent submarine deploy-

ments in February and March. 

While Mayo engineered the submarine ECM device, Lorenzen and his boss, 

Louis Gebhard, were promoting space-related applications of the crystal-based detec-

tion technology. 45  Their deliberations became the basis for a key, seven-page portion 

of NRL’s Report 5097 about its post-Vanguard vision. 46  The section described what 

would become the world’s first electronic reconnaissance satellite. In ways that only 

he could, Lorenzen tapped into back channels to secure support and the necessary 

high-priority “problem request” from a sponsor. That came through when an elec-

tronic countermeasures expert at the Bureau of Aeronautics called for Lorenzen’s 

group to move the satellite concept that the lab had outlined in Report 5097 toward 

concrete plans for producing hardware. 

The full 121-page “Beyond Vanguard” report laid out an ambitious and compre-

hensive program that could only emerge from the minds of engineers driven by the 

excitement of rocket technology, the urgency of Cold War tension when another Pearl 

Harbor could mean a surprise attack with nuclear bombs, and the hands-on expe-

rience with actual rocketry and rocket-borne science they had been acquiring, first 

with V-2s and then other rockets including the Aerobees, Vikings, and Vanguards. 

The report called for, among other ambitious goals, a rapid series of three upgrades of 

the Viking rockets leading to a booster that could ferry 1,500 pounds of payload into 

orbit; the development of launch operation protocols; military and operational satel -

lite development; and improved satellite tracking and orbital determination abilities. 

The original plan in the report called for a fantastic launch schedule featuring some 

42 satellite-topped rockets by April 1961. 

In addition to discussing space-based scientific studies of biological, meteoro-

logical, geophysical, lunar, solar, interplanetary, and other phenomena, the report 

pointed to development of satellite techniques such as guidance, means for measuring 

satellite conditions during orbit, and procedures for recovering satellites (for manned 

missions, for example). It also outlined a raft of intelligence pursuits, among them 

electronic intelligence and reconnaissance associated with nuclear tests and missile  

> Moon Visions. Figure 26 of Report
> 5097, showing “Pioneer Moon Rocket”
> for making physical measurements of
> the moon. The report was declassified
> in 2001.
> (NRL photo BeyondVanguard-1.pdf) 106 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE

tests. TV, navigation, and communications roles were also on the list. One chapter of 

the report, titled “Pioneering Lunar Vehicles” envisioned “Earth to moon” vehicles that 

would measure the moon’s magnetic field, establish a lunar orbit, and even—in 

a nod toward Robert Goddard’s own visions almost 40 years earlier—smash into the 

moon in a manner that would be discernible and documentable from Earth. 47 

For NRL, chapter two of the report would prove to be the most prescient part 

regarding the future place of the lab in the U.S. space program. First to move forward 

would be its plan for the world’s first ELINT satellite for identifying and characterizing 

adversaries’ radar installations. With precise-enough orbital determination calcula-

tions from the satellite tracking system, the report suggested, the proposed satellite 

would be able to provide “considerable information relative to the locations of the 

sources of the [radar] signals.” 48 

There was more. Report 5097 also included a section in which the NRLers floated 

an early articulation of the fundamental geolocation-determining and navigational 

concept behind the present-day Global Positioning System, or GPS. “The theory of 

the determination of the position of an observer by means of zenith distance observa -

tions of artificial satellites is presented in this section,” the report stated. “The principal 

advantage of radio navigation by means of satellites lies in the fact that it enables one 

to take advantage of present-day techniques for measuring time with high accuracy.” 49 

More than anyone else, Roger Easton, a physicist who began working in NRL’s 

Radio Division in 1943 on radar beacons and techniques for blind landing of aircraft, 50 

would take on this mission in the coming years. Key among Easton’s accomplishments 

was to push the technology of atomic clocks to ever-higher regimes of timekeeping 

accuracy, which was a prerequisite to ever more accurate position determinations. He 

also was central in working out the theory and practice of the necessary communi-

cation between satellites and the people and objects whose positions are to be deter-

mined. 

Also in that visionary chapter of Report 5097 were sections on detecting and 

characterizing details of nuclear weapons tests by the Soviet Union by way of sat -

ellite-borne detectors of heat, particulate emissions, and optical and other types of 

electromagnetic radiation. These proposed reconnaissance systems included memory 

and telemetry components that would enable the storage of data by satellites until 

they were within the line of sight of a receiving station such as the ones built for the 

Minitrack system. The NRL authors also described a system for detecting neutrons, 

that could differentiate a detonation of a nuclear device on the ground or in the at-

mosphere from one in space, where the attenuating effect of air on neutrons would be 

absent. 

The report also described the potential of satellites to serve as relays or “repeaters” 

for communication circuits that span several thousand miles with the sender, satellite, 

and receiver forming the points of upwardly tilted triangles. 107 CHAPTER 7 — REPORT 5097: B EYOND VANGUARD 

“Communications with submerged submarines are especially important,” the 

report noted at a time when the land, sea, and air triad of the nation’s nuclear strate-

gy—the so-called Single Integrated Operational Plan (SIOP)—was under construc -

tion and deployment. “This is particularly true of atomic submarines which are 

capable 

of launching Polaris missiles carrying nuclear warheads. It is highly desirable that 

these submarines be capable of operating without the need for breaking the surface 

at all, even for the purpose of receiving orders to fire their Polaris missiles.” 51  In 1960 

and 1961, NRL dedicated a series of satellites, the Low Frequency Trans-Ionospheric 

(LOFTI) satellites, to the question of whether it indeed was technically feasible to 

communicate with submerged submarines via satellite—particularly nuclear-weap-

ons-carrying subs underneath the Arctic ice—using very low frequency radio waves, 

which were known to penetrate seawater’s RF-swallowing tendencies. 52  The subma-

rine communication issue involved such details as the angular inclinations of the 

polar orbits that would cover the relevant oceanic regions and the number of satellites 

required for the minimal communication times. 

The NRL satellite planners, with such strong representation from the lab’s elec-

tronic countermeasures experts, were well aware that satellites, although flying much 

higher than any other military assets in the past, still would be vulnerable to sophisti-

cated electronic warfare threats and so included this concern in the report. Of utmost 

importance with any communication with a submarine carrying nuclear weapons, 

they noted, is security and reliability, especially in the highly tense contexts of the 

Cold War. 53 

“Conventional jamming may take the form of interfering with submarine recep-

tion by flying jammer transmitters over the Arctic areas known to be of interest,” the 

report warned. “These might be borne by planes or high-altitude balloons. The only 

basic defenses against this type of interference are to change frequency—considered 

impracticable with present satellite limitations—to increase the transmitter power, or 

to use directional antennas aboard the submarine. This latter course appears to be the 

only feasible one.” 54 

“Another type of jamming might be to jam the satellite receiver at the time of 

loading,” the report added. “This must be done from ships, bases, or planes within 

range of the satellite. Unfortunately, in assuming a loading zone reaching 1000 miles 

east from Boston, a similar jamming zone exists an additional 1000 miles to the east 

for the same satellite at the same time. This area includes some portions of Europe 

and European coastal waters. Again, the only real defense lies in increased transmit-

ter power, this time of the shore-based terminal. Directional transmitting antennas 

[whose narrow beams are harder to jam] are indicated.” 55 

Spoofing, or the enemy’s insertion of false or altered messages in communica-

tion circuits, was also on the list of worries. “The defense against this type of attack 

would appear to lie in providing the satellite receiver with enough intelligence to tell 108 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

a false from a true message,” the report writers argued. “No security system of this 

sort exists, as far as is known, but some thought has been given to the same problem 

for another project, and it is believed that a method can be devised based on storing 

‘unlocking’ codes in the satellite which must be received correctly before a message is 

accepted for retransmission.” 

The mark of Lorenzen was most apparent in the report’s section titled “Electronic 

Reconnaissance Intelligence Satellite.” 56  “To be effective the satellite must, of course, 

have an orbit that passes over the target or at least comes within line-of-sight of it,” 

the report stated, referring to missions to detect and characterize Soviet radar sys-

tems. “The target of prime importance is in the Moscow complex,” where intelligence 

reports using more conventional means had been indicating the possible construction 

of anti-ballistic and anti-aircraft radar systems, as well as missile and atomic testing 

facilities. 57  “The reception of the intelligence transmission from the proposed satellite 

could be accomplished from several sites. A most important fact: these receiving sites 

are already existent and would require a minimum of additional equipment and man-

power,” the report noted, referring to the receiving stations of the Minitrack system 

and likely elsewhere. 58 

This same section of the “Beyond Vanguard” report goes into some technical 

detail about the actual radar-snooping technology, which was based closely on the 

high-frequency direction-finding systems and techniques that Lorenzen’s group had 

developed during World War II and had greatly improved since then. Said the report, 

“The system utilizes a microwave antenna, a bandpass filter, a crystal detector, a sim -

ple video amplifier, a pulse stretcher circuit, a modulator, a tiny transmitter, and   

> Electronic Snooping. Figure 9, page 33, of Report 5097 shows a schematic of a “satellite
> electronic reconnaissance system,” and figure 22 on page 95 shows the trajectory of a
> proposed electronic intelligence satellite. (NRL photo BeyondVanguard-1.pdf) 109 CHAPTER 7 — REPORT 5097: B EYOND VANGUARD

a telemetering antenna. Most of these components are now available in countermea-

sures equipment.” 59 

It is easy to imagine Lorenzen typing out these words: “In conclusion, it is possi-

ble with well-known proved circuits and available components to build an Electronic 

Intelligence Reconnaissance Satellite capable of telemetering information from and 

about the Moscow defense complex to existing U. S. stations. The first device would 

operate on selected prime targets, would weigh less than 5 pounds, and would have 

an operational life of 3 weeks … It is estimated that a satellite of the type described 

above could be readied for flight testing within about a year, assuming that appropri-

ate priorities would be assigned. Equipment for succeeding vehicles could be readied 

at the rate of about one per month.” The voice of the report featured the nonchalant 

bravado of can-do engineers who already know their expertise in the invisible realm 

of electromagnetism had resulted in many significant contributions to the nation’s 

defense. 60 

Lorenzen’s appreciation and demand for secrecy, as well as the high-level connec-

tions he forged for the lab, come through in full force in the report. “The project out-

lined would require the highest possible security control and safeguards. This project 

has been discussed in detail with the cognizant personnel in the Office of the Director 

of Naval Intelligence. The requirements for such a program have been discussed and 

are being made the subject of official correspondence. This program would have one 

of the highest priorities assigned by the intelligence communities.” 61 

In the report, the NRL satellite visionaries also describe space-based techniques 

for more general reconnaissance, not just of the Moscow complex. “An earth-encir-

cling satellite would provide a means of electronic intercept over otherwise inaccessi-

ble territories of potential enemies. The satellite would be equipped with an intercept 

receiver and an electronic memory to permit recording of intercepted signals and 

subsequent retransmission of these signals by a radio transmitter aboard the satellite. 

The memory would be arranged to receive instructions through ground command 

transmissions. These instructions would activate the intercept function over enemy 

territory and the retransmission and command acceptance functions over friendly 

territory on a time basis, thus preventing the enemy from detecting the presence of 

the satellite and of interfering with its operation.” 62  The NRL designers were consider -

ing worst-case scenarios also: “Explosive charges could be arranged to assure destruc-

tion of the satellite upon its return to earth either after performing its mission or in 

case of launching failure. A potential enemy thus could learn little about it through 

possible recovery of its parts.” 63 

ELINT is what these satellites were all about, as opposed to IMINT, or imagery 

intelligence, which the Air Force had begun working on in its Sentry (Corona) 

photoreconnaissance program, or HUMINT, which refers to the more traditional hu-

man intelligence, the feet-on-the-ground, in-person sort of spying. It would not take 

long before NRL’s on-paper ELINT satellite laid out in the report would take a leap 110 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

toward realization. But it would take a Herculean effort of persuasion at the highest 

levels of government to open the pathway.  

> 1

Public Law 85-568, the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958.  

> 2

Lane E. Wallace,  Dreams, Hopes, Realities: NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, The First Forty 

Years  (Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1999), pp. 18–19.  

> 3

The Beltsville Space Center was renamed as the Goddard Space Flight Center on May 1, 1959, 

in honor of Robert H. Goddard, the American rocketry pioneer who sparked Louis Gebhard’s 

dreams of rocket-based science.  

> 4

Wallace,  Dreams, Hopes, Realities , pp. 18-19.  

> 5

The transfer was specified in Executive Order 10783 by the President on October 1, 1958.  

> 6

William Corliss,  Histories of the Space Tracking And Data Acquisition Network (STADAN), the 

Manned Space Flight Network (MSFN),  and the  NASA Communications Network (NASCOM) ,

(Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1974), pp. 4–68; William 

Corliss,  NASA Sounding Rockets 1958– 1968, A Historical Summary  (SP 4401), (Washington, 

DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1971, pp. 35–40.  

> 7

See, for example, John Hagen, “Vanguard—The Laboratory Ventures Into Space,” in  NRL 

Progress  (Washington DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1973), p. 31; and “The U.S. Naval 

Research Laboratory (1923–2005) Fulfilling the Roosevelts’ Vision for American Naval Power,” 

NRL/MR/1001--06-8951 (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, March 6, 2006), p. 26.  

> 8

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/ssdd/ncst.  

> 9

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/ssdd/ncst.  

> 10

Press release, Naval Research Laboratory, August 28, 1962.  

> 11

Peter Wilhelm, interview with author, 1997; Ivan Amato,  Pushing the Horizon: Seventy-Five 

Years of High Stakes Research and Technology at the Naval Research Laboratory  (Washington, 

DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1998), pp. 198–199.  

> 12

Wilhelm, interview with author, 1997.  

> 13

Peter Wilhelm, interview with NRL Historian Leo Slater, August 7, 2009.  

> 14

Peter Wilhelm has received the following honors and awards, among others: Pioneer of 

National Reconnaissance, 2000; Presidential Distinguished Rank Award, 1999; AIAA Goddard 

Astronautics Award, 1999; The Secretary of the Navy Career Service Award, 1999; Department 

of Defense Distinguished Civilian Service Award, 1998; NRL Lifetime Achievement Award, 

1998; National Academy of Engineering, 1997; NRL’s Roger L. Easton Award for Engineering, 

1997; Rotary National “Award for Space Achievement” Foundations Stellar Award for Program 

Management, 1993; Robert J. Collier Award (Team Award), 1992; Elected a Fellow of AIAA, 

1989; Presidential Rank Award, Meritorious Executive, 1988; Captain Robert Dexter Conrad 

Medal (Navy’s highest award for scientific achievement), 1987; E.O. Hulburt Award (NRL’s 

highest award for science; the first and only engineer to win this award), 1983; Navy’s Space 

Systems Program Achievement Award, 1985; IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Group 

“Man-of-the-Year Award,” 1981; Federal SES Performance Awards, 1983, 1984, 1985, 1986, and 

1994; Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation for Development, Acquisition and Opera- tion 

of Space Systems, 1977 to 1981; Elected Fellow of Washington Academy of Sciences, 1971; 

Navy Award of Merit and Special Achievement, 1976; Navy Unit Commendation for Excep-

tional Meritorious Service, 1974 to 1976; Navy Distinguished Civilian Service Award, 1971; 

and Navy Meritorious Civilian Service Award, 1962. See more at: http://www.nrl.navy.mil/ 

media/news-releases/2009/nrls-peter-wilhelm-marks-50-years-of-government-service#sthash. 

ngY2u7Dl.dpuf.  

> 15

Wilhelm, interview with author, 1997.  

> 16

Peter Wilhelm, interview with NRL Historian David van Keuren and Dean Bundy at the 

Naval Center for Space Technology on November 19, 1987. 111 CHAPTER 7 — REPORT 5097: B EYOND VANGUARD  

> 17

T. Chubb, H. Friedman, R.W. Kreplin, W.A. Nichols, A.E. Unzicker, and M.J. Votaw, “Results 

from the NRL Solar Radiation Satellite,” in  Space Research II , H.C. Van de Hulst et al., eds. 

(Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing Company, 1961); http://code8100.nrl.navy.mil/about/ 

NCST/index.htm.  

> 18

Peter Wilhelm, quoted from NRL-produced video, “GRAB—NRL’s Secret Success in Space,” 

released in 1998 when GRAB was declassified.  

> 19

Reid Mayo, quoted from NRL-produced video, “GRAB—NRL’s Secret Success in Space.”  

> 20

For an account of various nomenclatures, see Robert A. McDonald and Sharon K. Morena, 

Raising the Periscope…GRAB and Poppy: America’s Early ELINT Satellites  (Chantilly, VA: 

Center for the Study of National Reconnaissance, National Reconnaissance Office, September 

2005).  

> 21

Ronald L. Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C Electronic Intelligence Satellites (1957–1977) , LEO 

Systems Program Office, National Reconnaissance Office, September 3, 1988, declassified with 

redactions and approved for release from NRO on June 13, 2012.  

> 22

Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009.  

> 23

NRL Report 5097, “A Satellite and Space Vehicle Program for the Next Steps Beyond the 

Present Vanguard Program,” December 10, 1957.  

> 24

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 3.  

> 25

National Security Agency, Cryptologic Almanac 50th Anniversary Series, http://www.nsa. 

gov/public_info/_files/crypto_almanac_50th/six_decades_of_second_par- ty_relations.pdf.  

> 26

NRL Report 5097, P.W. Binning and J.W. Middour, “A Brief History of NRL's Early First in 

Spaceflight,”  Advances in the Astronautical Sciences  129 (2008): 1233–1250.  

> 27

Whitney Mathews, “Telemetering from Explorer,”  Electronic Industries  17 no. 5 (March 1958): 

58–59.  

> 28

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 2–3.  

> 29

Potts, pp. 2–3.  

> 30

See, for example, Dwayne A. Day, John M. Logsdon, and Brian Latell, eds.,  Eye in the Sky: The 

Story of the Corona Spy Satellites  (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1998).  

> 31

Its charge did not include shipborne-associated ECM requirements.  

> 32

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 4.  

> 33

Potts, p. 4.  

> 34

Potts, p. 7.  

> 35

Potts, p. 6.  

> 36

This organization formed from a precursor body known as the Army-Navy Electronics Eval-

uation Group, or ANEEG.  

> 37

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 7.  

> 38

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 7; McDonald and Morena,  Raising the Periscope , p. 132.  

> 39

Reid Mayo, in  Beyond Expectations—Building an American National Reconnaissance Capa-

bility: Recollections of the Pioneers and Founders of National Reconnaissance  (Bethesda, MD: 

National Reconnaissance Office and the American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote 

Sensing, 2002), p. 132; Potts,  U.S. Navy/ NRO Program C , p. 7.  

> 40

McDonald and Morena,  Raising the Periscope , p. 132.  

> 41

Bruce Wald, unpublished memoir shared with the author, p. 11.  

> 42

Wald memoir, p. 11.  

> 43

Peter Wilhelm, quoted from NRL-produced video, “GRAB—NRL’s Secret Success in Space,” 

released in 1998 when GRAB was declassified.  

> 44

Peter Wilhelm, quoted from NRL-produced video, “GRAB—NRL’s Secret Success in Space,” 

released in 1998 when GRAB was declassified.  

> 45

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 12.  

> 46

NRL Report 5097.  

> 47

NRL Report 5097, pp. 98–103.  

> 48

NRL Report 5097, p. 37. 112 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE  

> 49

NRL Report 5097, p. 12.  

> 50

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2005/president-announces-roger-easton-reci -

pi- ent-of-national-medal-of-technology.  

> 51

NRL Report 5097, pp. 39–45.  

> 52

NRL Report 5097, pp. 39–42.  

> 53

NRL Report 5097, pp. 43–44.  

> 54

NRL Report 5097, p. 43.  

> 55

NRL Report 5097, p. 44.  

> 56

NRL Report 5097, pp. 32–38.  

> 57

NRL Report 5097, p. 92.  

> 58

NRL Report 5097, p. 32.  

> 59

NRL Report 5097, p. 33.  

> 60

NRL Report 5097, p. 35.  

> 61

NRL Report 5097, p. 38.  

> 62

NRL Report 5097, p. 36.  

> 63

NRL Report 5097, p. 38. THE PRELUDE TO SPACE RECONNAISSANCE 

It was a during an early spring snowstorm in Pennsylvania that the technical in -

sight underlying the actual hardware for a spy satellite came to Reid Mayo. After long 

hours and overseas duties related to the development and installation of new ship -

board high frequency direction finding equipment, Mayo went on vacation in 1958 

with his family to Grand Rapids, Michigan. On their return, a snowstorm stranded 

them at a Howard Johnson’s along the Pennsylvania Turnpike. “While his wife and two 

children dozed, he began thinking about the work that awaited him upon his return 

to the NRL,” National Reconnaissance Office historian Ronald Potts recounted in his 

once classified narrative of NRL’s satellite ELINT programs. 1

Churning in Mayo’s mind was the periscope-mounted direction finding device 

problem (for the Bureau of Ships), which was two months from completion, and a 

couple of aircraft electronic countermeasures (ECM) problems to take care of. Also on 

his mind was Vanguard 1, which since March 17 had been circling overhead. As the 

snow fell outside the restaurant on March 28, Mayo sketched out on the back of a pa -

per placemat preliminary diagrams and calculations to determine what it would actu -

ally take to be able to listen in on Soviet radar systems—among them air search radars 

NATO referred to as Gage and Token 2—with intercept and relay equipment aboard 

an orbiting satellite several hundred miles overhead. That combination of mental in -

gredients baked into an idea that would help alter the course of intelligence-gathering 

technology, the lab, military and civilian decision making, and the course of the Cold 

War. 

Recalled Mayo: “We thought there might be some benefit in raising the periscope 

just a little bit … maybe even to orbital altitude. So I did some calculations to see if 

truly we could intercept the signals. The calculations showed clearly you could get 

something, up to an altitude of 600 miles.” 3 Mayo realized from his calculations that 

if he could place the S-band (2 to 4 megahertz) portion of the early-warning ECM 

system he had designed for submarines onto an orbiting platform, it would be possible 

to, in his words, “gain access to air defense radars in the Soviet interior.” 4

Among the main questions such reconnaissance equipment could answer was 

whether the Soviet Union had deployed air defense radars in the country’s interior 

that were different from the ones that ferret missions, involving aircraft that some -

times became exposed to lethal peril, already had detected within about 200 miles of 

the country’s periphery. 5 When Mayo got back to the lab, he immediately presented 

the Howard Johnson’s placemat and his big idea to Howard Lorenzen, his supervisor 

# 8114 NRL A ND THE SPACE A GE 

and head of the Countermeasures Branch. An all-important detail: with enough 

miniaturization, an S-band intercept receiver unit could fit into the shell of a 20-inch 

Vanguard satellite. 6

Lorenzen could see this was doable, but he also knew it needed more develop -

ment. To help, he tasked James Trexler, one of NRL’s most audacious thinkers, to work 

out the space-collection task and capabilities in more detail. At the time, Trexler was 

working on one of the grandest and most outlandish, top-secret projects of the entire 

Cold War. Known as Project Moonbounce, the idea was to construct a magnificent 

radar dish as tall as the Washington Monument and with a collection area of more 

than seven acres. It was to be mounted on a massive turntable so that it would be 

steerable from horizon to horizon. Build this “big ear” in a radio-quiet region of West 

Virginia, Trexler had calculated, and it would be possible to intercept radar and radio 

signals bouncing off the moon from the heartland of the Soviet Union, at least for a 

few minutes each day. It was a ground-based approach to the sort of intercepts that 

Mayo had in mind with his satellite proposal. 7

Lorenzen also called on a new hire, Bruce Wald, who had been working on HF/ 

DF, that is, high frequency direction finding technology (known more colloquially as 

“huff-duff ”), including leading-edge data-processing software, to flesh out the overall 

operations of the satellite. The NRL team told the Navy’s Bureau of Aeronautics, 

which would be paying for the satellite, that the estimated price tag was $487,900. 8

Lorenzen served as the point man making sure all appropriate individuals and entities 

within the Navy and national ELINT programs and infrastructures were kept abreast 

of NRL’s spaceward ambitions and he shepherded the approval processes through 

their necessary steps.  

> The Big Ear. In a show of the desperate Cold War desire for information about the Soviet Union, NRL engineer
> James H. Trexler conceived of a gargantuan, 600-foot-diameter, steerable receiving antenna (right image) that could
> pick up signals originating in the Soviet Union that would bounce off of the moon into the antenna’s seven acres of
> reception area. Construction began in the mid-1950s in Sugar Grove, West Virginia, but was abandoned after the era
> of satellites, also known as artificial moons, began. The left image shows the most advanced stage of construction.
> (NRL photos 60741(36).jpg and 60834(H-174).jpg) 115 CHAPTER 8 — THE P RELUDE TO SPACE RECONNAISSANCE

Even as NRL was gearing up to place a first-of-its-kind intelligence-gathering 

tool into space, the lab was asked by the newly formed Advanced Projects Research 

Agency (ARPA) to build a system, designated “weapons system 434,” which “could 

actively detect and track all space objects deployed by the U.S. or other nations.” 9 The 

Department of Defense established ARPA in February 1958, just four months after 

the launch of Sputnik 1, with the mission, in the words of one history of the organi -

zation, “to assure that the United States maintained a lead in applying state-of-the-art 

technology for military capabilities and to prevent technological surprise from her 

adversaries.” 10  ARPA considered NRL a go-to place because of the lab’s experience 

with the Minitrack system for tracking Vanguard satellites and its success in tracking 

Sputnik 1 with the Wullenweber array in Hybla Valley, Virginia. The request entailed 

that NRL build an active radar-emitting counterpart to be used in conjunction with 

each of the original passive Minitrack detection antenna sites built on U.S. territory. 

So in addition to the original ability to passively receive radio signals sent out by 

transmitters aboard spacecraft, the upgraded system would also include ground-

based transmitters that could actively beam probing radar signals upward, which 

would reflect off of non-emitting objects in space back down to the system’s receiving 

antennas. The result would be an electronic detection fence in space, stretching from 

coast to coast over the southern states, that could detect overhead spacecraft whether 

they were transmitting or not. 

The proposal by NRL to fly a spy satellite over the Soviet Union was high stakes 

by every measure—technologically, institutionally for NRL, and militarily and polit -

ically for the United States. The plan could only move forward with approvals all the 

way up the chain to President Eisenhower. The Office of Naval Intelligence would 

champion the proposal within the Navy, the Department of Defense as a whole, and 

national intelligence leadership. NRL too would send out emissaries in search of 

approval. 

“The first Pentagon meeting of a working group to consider the proposal of the 

NRL for an electronic intelligence satellite, occurred on 28 July 1958,” according to 

Potts, who later became an ELINT insider on the project and who eventually chroni -

cled the secret programs for the National Reconnaissance Office. 11  At the meeting was 

an NRL contingent, representatives from the Office of Naval Intelligence, the Office of 

Naval Research, the Naval Security Group (NSG, which oversaw Navy ELINT issues), 

and the Bureau of Aeronautics. The original name of the proposed satellite could not 

have been more straightforward—NRL Electronic Intelligence Satellite. 12  Following 

a recommendation by NSG commander Frederick W. Hitz, Jr., 13  however, the name 

“Tattletale” was initially assigned as the project’s moniker. 

The Pentagon meeting included briefings about what was known regarding Soviet 

air defense systems and an extended discussion about a much larger Air Force space 

reconnaissance project (conceived of for the Air Force by the RAND Corporation), 

designated WS-117L. To the chagrin of its planners, newspaper and magazine outlets 116 NRL A ND THE SPACE A GE 

had also already caught wind of that Air Force project and had dubbed it the “spy in 

the sky satellite.” 14  A representative with the Office of Naval Research (ONR) at the 

meeting noted that the WS-117L program was funded through 1959 with a whopping 

$233.7 million, compared to the initial $100,000 that ONR hoped to make available 

for NRL’s Tattletale proposal. 15  As the WS-117L program shifted from paper stages to 

development stages, it included both photoreconnaissance and electronic intelligence 

payloads. But in early 1958, the two would split into programs that became known as 

Corona and Samos, respectively, though some satellites would carry both photo-

reconnaissance and ELINT payloads. 

Trexler did the talking for NRL at the meeting. After all, he succeeded in winning 

approval for his audacious Big Ear program earlier in the decade. He used five color -

ful and oversized poster board charts that were awkwardly carried around in a large, 

locked canvas pouch from NRL to the Pentagon meeting room and subsequently 

many times for other briefings. One of the charts depicted the beam geometries from 

the Soviets’ Gage and Token radar installations as they would appear above the Earth 

at different potential altitudes for a satellite. Another showed how a satellite in an or -

bit inclined at 70 degrees that took it over Moscow, would be capable of intercepting 

radar signals emanating from sites 1,750 miles to the east and west of the trajectory. 

The resulting swath covered most of the Soviet Union’s territory, which was colored 

red on the chart. 16 

A second meeting at the Pentagon, held on August 6, 1958, brought in represen -

tatives from additional organizations: The National Technical Processing Center (the 

national-level guidance and policy body for the ELINT programs) and the office of 

the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Research and Development. The meeting 

centered on a pros-and-cons discussion regarding NRL’s proposal and another ELINT 

system that several contractors 17  had been tasked with building for the Air Force 

WS-117L-associated Sentry satellite program, whose mission was mostly in the arena 

of photoreconnaissance.   

> Big Charts. When NRL representatives were making their case for the world’s first spy satellite,
> they carried around large poster boards with colorful graphics like these to the Pentagon and other
> government offices. (NRL photos GRAB 3.jpg and GRAB 6.jpg) 117 CHAPTER 8 — THE P RELUDE TO SPACE RECONNAISSANCE

Momentum was building toward a leading role for NRL in placing the world’s 

first spy satellite into orbit, but it was not yet a done deal. The situation was akin to 

when the Stewart Committee was considering competing proposals for a United States 

scientific satellite to be orbited during the International Geophysical Year. To continue 

strengthening NRL’s position, Lorenzen brought Jack Mengel, head of the Minitrack 

component of Project Vanguard, and John Hagen, Vanguard’s overall director, in on 

the top-secret loop of Tattletale. 

At a third Pentagon meeting of the ELINT working group, on August 21, Loren -

zen ran into a problem. Some members expressed skepticism regarding the claim by 

Lorenzen, Mayo, and their NRL colleagues that they could deliver what they were 

promising on such a minuscule budget on the order of hundreds of thousands of 

dollars, especially in light of the Air Force’s multimillion dollar WS-117L program. In 

response, Lorenzen deployed his well-exercised powers of persuasion and convinced 

the working group to endorse the NRL proposal, despite its unlikely combination of 

high ambition and low cost. 

Meanwhile, the Naval Security Group furthered the cause by identifying three 

overseas ELINT stations suitable for receiving relays when they were within “earshot” 

of the Tattletale satellite. And NRL brought to the table a detailed concept for “por -

table equipment shelters,” about the size of a walk-in closet, for additional receiving 

and satellite communications abilities. Among the technicians behind the design and 

acquisition of these shelters, or “huts” as they became known, was Ed Becke, an anten -

na and radio frequency expert who joined the lab in 1945 and would still be working 

there part time even 65 years later. 18  The huts could be readily moved to accommo -

date, among other things, unexpected orbital inclinations due to flaws in a launch 

(which everyone knew were likely) and changes that top-level intelligence officials 

might call for regarding targets for ELINT collection. 19 

The pieces were coming together. The Office of Naval Intelligence, located on Mas -

sachusetts Avenue on the grounds of the U.S. Naval Observatory, agreed to work with 

NRL on analysis of the signals from Tattletale satellites. The Bureau of Aeronautics 

agreed to provide the funds for five satellites and the costs associated with huts and 

ground stations. Providing funding for the launch vehicle fell onto ARPA’s shoulders. 

All this technical momentum was unfolding in a larger context as the nation 

was constructing and reconstructing its intelligence infrastructure. Most relevant to 

Tattletale were provisions of an intelligence directive on September 15, 1958, which 

assigned “operational and technical control of national ELINT intercept and process -

ing activities” to the National Security Agency, specifically in its cryptography and 

communications intelligence (COMINT) arm. That same day, another directive es -

tablished the U.S. Intelligence Board (USIB) to be run by Allen W. Dulles, Director of 

Central Intelligence. It would become the USIB’s charge to guide and oversee overseas 

intelligence operations and, as such, it would have a close hand in Tattletale. 20 118 NRL A ND THE SPACE A GE 

At yet another Pentagon meeting of the ELINT working group, on October 3, 

1958, participants agreed it was time to move forward in the approval chain within the 

Navy and the Department of Defense. The chain would go all the way to the top; the 

participants discussed how the extreme political sensitivity of secret reconnaissance 

over the country’s Cold War adversary would require the White House to approve 

each launch. 21  After a half-dozen more meetings and seemingly endless discussion and 

deliberation, working group chairman Earle Hutchison, who had been appointed to 

be the Navy’s ELINT coordinator, 22  submitted NRL’s final version of the world’s first 

ELINT satellite along with the group’s endorsement to Rear Admiral Lawrence Frost, 

Director of Naval Intelligence (DNI). On short order, Frost directed that a formal pro -

posal be prepared for a dry run in front of CNO personnel and for the Navy’s top man, 

Admiral Arleigh Burke, Chief of Naval Operations. 23 

So eager was Lorenzen to move forward that the positive signal from Frost was 

enough for him and his primary deputies for Tattletale, Trexler and Mayo, to move 

forward as if the lab had received the green light. For Lorenzen, this included securing 

buy-in from five other NRL research branches for development and testing of specific 

elements of the system. This was a tricky business, though, because everyone else com -

ing on board—most of whom were in the lab’s Vanguard division, which had yet to be 

physically transferred to NASA’s new campus in Greenbelt, Maryland—had to be kept 

in the dark regarding any details about the classified payload. Due to his experience in 

managing complex projects, Mayo’s direct boss in countermeasures, Raymond Owens 

(who answered to Lorenzen), was charged with managing the expanded NRL input, 

the funding for the work, and the quarterly reports to the Bureau of Aeronautics. He 

set up a tight schedule calling for the availability of a prototype payload for testing by 

January 1, 1959, and an operational unit by April 1. 

The team got very busy. Mayo and his assistant Vince Rose—who lacked college 

training, yet, like Becke, had a knack for finding solutions to just about any electron -

ics or RF challenge—refined calculations about what the payload would have to be 

able to do to detect Soviet radar from space. By early November, Mayo and Rose had 

prepared a 16-page document with the design and specifications for this mouthful: 

“omnidirectional, microwave transistorized crystal-video radio receiving system 

suitable for mounting in a 20 [inch] metallic sphere.” 24  That was engineeringspeak for 

what would become the data-gathering guts of the world’s first spy satellite. 

Work for the shell, electronics, receivers, transmitters, and downlink antennas 

was assigned to appropriate NRL branches and to people with the requisite skill sets. 

To move forward on the testing of ground equipment, that is, the part of the system 

that would either send command and control signals to the metallic sphere in orbit or 

receive data from it, the team secured two olive-drab electronic equipment vans from 

the Army Signal Corps. Mayo was in charge of all of this. “Charles W. Price, a staff 

engineer at NRL Countermeasures Branch, did the mechanical design for the antenna 

and steering mechanism for the antenna,” Mayo later recalled in an unclassified inter -119 CHAPTER 8 — THE P RELUDE TO SPACE RECONNAISSANCE 

view. “He used a Chrysler emergency brake as a device to clamp the mast, and parked 

it so the wind would not turn it. He used a Mack truck steering wheel, which only 

cost $12.” 25 

All of this unfolded  before  Admiral Burke had approved the project. It was pure 

chutzpah on the part of Lorenzen, a sign of how confident he felt about telling the 

highest echelon of the nation’s military decision makers the way it was going to be. In 

preparation for the all-important briefing for the CNO, Mayo oversaw the production 

of a series of poster boards with artists’ conceptions of Tattletale’s newly designed 

signal-collection architecture and components, including a pastoral view of a radio 

receiving hut, its door open to reveal its electronic equipment. Next came the on-site 

rehearsals, or “murder boards,” in front of all of Lorenzen’s bosses at the lab: Radio 

Division superintendent Dr. Louis Gebhard, his deputy, Dr. Allen H. Schooley, their 

boss, NRL Director of Research Dr. Robert M. Page, and the lab’s Commanding Offi -

cer, Captain Peter Horn. 26 

The NRL team had not yet reached the end of the gauntlet. In yet another im -

portant pre-CNO briefing at the Pentagon on November 25, 1958, Lorenzen’s satellite 

champions managed to secure essential approval for Tattletale from several dozen 

decision makers throughout the Navy’s command structure. In a particularly har -

rowing moment, DNI Frost, who had some expertise in communications, inquired 

about the specific frequency that would be used for command and control with the 

satellite. Lorenzen, always cognizant of the need for maximum security, replied—be -

ginning with a respectful “Sir”—that the DNI did not need to know this operational 

detail. There was a pause. Then Frost wholly concurred, reminding the group that this 

compartmentalization of information was an important security measure for a project 

such as the one they were in the process of furthering. 27 

The next pitch was to the Navy bureau chiefs, the Chief of Naval Materiel, and 

their respective staffs on December 1. Just two days earlier, Convair, an aircraft man -

ufacturer that had diversified into the rocket business, demonstrated a successful full-

range launch of an Atlas ICBM. Confidence in the U.S. entry to space was ascendant, 

but so was a sense of competition with the Soviet Union. 28 

The stage was set for Lorenzen to do a make-or-break briefing on December 8, 

1958, directly to the CNO Admiral Burke and his senior staff at OPNAV (Office of 

the Chief of Naval Operations). Afterward, when the Admiral volunteered to sign 

any necessary papers for getting ARPA to move forward with the launch vehicle, the 

briefing team knew it had successfully navigated through the approval labyrinth, at 

least as far as the Navy and the Defense Departments were concerned. 

As all of the managerial, procedural, and authority-seeking work was going on 

in conference rooms at the Pentagon and elsewhere, RF engineer Marty Votaw was 

moving the hardware side of Tattletale forward at a speed that exceeded Lorenzen’s 

expectations. By December 12, he was able to report that the only component not yet 

ready for integration was the payload’s receiver. 120 NRL A ND THE SPACE A GE 

Given the melding of military and intelligence requirements in this unprecedent -

ed space-based ELINT project, Lorenzen and NRL, and even Admiral Burke and his 

Navy Department in which NRL resided, still needed the intelligence community to 

flash a green light on Tattletale. 29  This time, the briefing team, including Trexler from 

NRL and Hutchison of the Office of Naval Intelligence, took its show on December 18 

to Central Intelligence Agency headquarters in Langley, Virginia. There, they briefed 

17 people with representation from intelligence bodies associated with all of the 

military services, CIA, National Security Agency (NSA), the State Department, and 

elsewhere. Among the CIA representatives was Herbert P. Scoville, who was a prin -

cipal player in the WS-117L program, the Air Force reconnaissance satellite whose 

planning and development was running in parallel with that of Tattletale. 

By now, word of Tattletale’s potential payoffs was circulating in the U.S. Intelli -

gence Board. Additional high-level briefings focused on the satellite’s ability to detect, 

characterize, and localize two of the Soviet Union’s primary air defense radar systems 

(Gage and Token). As such, the ELINT satellite held promise to greatly further the 

overall strategic goal of getting long-range, nuclear-armed bombers to targets deep 

inside the Soviet Union before they could be shot down. 

No matter how many in the military or intelligence communities approved of 

Tattletale, it still would only make it into orbit if ARPA—the organization that would 

be in charge of the satellite’s rocketed ferry ride into orbit—officially shifted its prior -

ities toward supporting the ELINT payload’s launch. On January 19, 1959, Lorenzen 

put on his briefing hat yet again, and with representatives from the Assistant Chief of 

Naval Operations for R&D, made a pitch to a contingent of top-level ARPA officials 

and civilian employees. Among them, conveniently, was James Spriggs, who had 

worked on countermeasures at NRL with Lorenzen during World War II and had 

now been assigned as ARPA’s primary point of contact with the lab. At this meeting, 

ARPA’s deputy director, Rear Admiral John Clark, recommended that the way to 

expedite the project toward deployment was to get the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) to 

formally endorse it and send to ARPA a letter specifying the project’s urgency. 30  This 

was a procedural step that would enable ARPA to make NRL’s ELINT satellite a pri -

ority project. The Secretary of the Navy also urged Hutchison, the Navy’s highest level 

ELINT official, to seek out negotiations with the JCS. 

On January 29, the advocates of Tattletale took up the advice. Trexler briefed 

JCS’s intelligence staff on the project’s technical aspects. Hutchison fielded questions 

regarding the relationship between the new satellite-based means of ELINT that NRL 

was proposing and the National Technical Processing Center, which oversaw national 

ELINT programs and procedures. The vibe was good, so much so that Trexler left 

with suggestions from JCS attendees of future ELINT targets to pursue, a tacit hint 

that a new long-term relationship with JCS was beginning. 31 

All the while, Votaw and his team at NRL were bending metal—the fabrication of 

a 20-inch aluminum sphere in the image of the Vanguard satellites was in the works— 121 CHAPTER 8 — THE P RELUDE TO SPACE RECONNAISSANCE 

and designing and soldering miniaturized circuits. For the mission’s data transmitter, 

engineers at the Army Signal Corps Laboratory in Fort Monmouth, New Jersey, were 

developing a 24-volt power supply with solar cells and rechargeable nickel-cadmium 

batteries. Edgar Dix, second in command to Votaw, was applying his experience in 

developing the Vanguard transmitter to both the space- and ground-based transmit -

ters for the Tattletale communications system. For his part, Mayo had moved the pay -

load antennas from design and prototype phases to a contract phase with Internation -

al Telephone and Telegraph (ITT), which was tasked with producing the antennas. He 

also was assessing the state-of-the-art recording equipment that could be suitable for 

the mission while overseeing Charlie Price and his engineering team as they designed 

the communications huts from which the satellite handlers would conduct command 

and control procedures and collect data from the satellite’s recorders. 32 

All of this was proceeding still without having an official green light in hand. 

Mayo and Lorenzen were doing all they could to secure that approval. For example, 

upon returning by train to Washington, DC, from Fort Wayne, Indiana, where they 

inspected ITT’s payload receiver, they were met at Union Station by NRL colleagues 

carrying the classified briefing boards about Tattletale. The group then drove a few 

blocks to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, which at that very time 

was reviewing Navy space projects. NRL’s Tattletale was not the only satellite proposal 

on the Committee’s agenda, nor was it even the one considered most important. That 

distinction went to the Transit satellite, designed for the Navy by Johns Hopkins Uni -

versity’s Applied Physics Laboratory (APL). Its role? To provide navigational guidance 

to nuclear-missile-carrying submarines at sea. 33 

Cordial as the Committee meeting was, there now was a potential conundrum. 

The Navy had two satellites to launch, but ARPA was only in a position to orchestrate 

a single launch in the near future. These were trailblazing times in the Space Age, so 

this dilemma instigated some creative thinking. At their Pentagon office on March 

12, 1959, ARPA representatives met with Lorenzen of NRL and ONI’s Hutchison 

and boldly suggested that the smaller, lower-profile Tattletale payload and the larger, 

top-priority Transit payload be launched at the same time with one rocket. A first-

ever two-satellite launch! This scenario entailed risks that single-satellite launches 

would not, and these already were highly risky. Even so, subsequent discussions 

culminated in a meeting at APL in Howard County, Maryland. There, Transit engi -

neers Richard Kershner and Theodore Wyatt agreed that a Tattletale co-launch with 

Transit would work and was worth the risk. It looked like Lorenzen and his Tattletale 

colleagues finally had secured a ride into space for their first-in-the-world ELINT 

mission. 

On a particularly busy March 16, Lorenzen and other Tattletale champions 

conferred with former Vanguard team members, who by then were at NASA head -

quarters, to secure the new space agency’s supportive role in providing tracking data 

with the Minitrack system that transferred to NASA with Project Vanguard. Later in 122 NRL A ND THE SPACE A GE 

the same day, Lorenzen, Hutchison, and NRL’s Bruce Wald traveled to the Pentagon 

to meet with ARPA and APL representatives to work out organizational and admin -

istrative details of the Tattletale/Transit dual launch. Although both satellites had the 

ARPA-funded launch in common, each had different sponsors, command, and over -

sight mechanisms. 34  These administrative and sociological factors were every bit as 

complicated as the engineering and technology development aspects of the mission, 

and probably were the ones more likely to scuttle the project. 

As the pieces were falling into place for an actual launch of a Tattletale satellite, 

the national infrastructure for handling the payload’s anticipated highly classified 

data was in the process of getting hammered out. Essentially, all of the ELINT roles 

of the National Technical Processing Center were to transfer to the National Security 

Agency. To hedge against delays in data analysis amidst this reorganization, NRL and 

NSA partners set up a stopgap operation to handle data issues in the near term. 

There never seemed to be a shortage of obstacles, including one posed by the 

Navy itself. The first Transit launch had been scheduled in 1959 and the CNO’s 

office had officially requested that the Bureau of Ordnance (which was funding the 

Transit program) include Tattletale in a piggyback launch. But the Navy’s Bureau of 

Ordnance turned down the request, fearing that there was a good chance the sec -

ond satellite’s inclusion would cause a delay in the launch of Transit, which was an 

all-important navigational component of the submarine-based Polaris missile system. 

Had that launch opportunity for Tattletale been approved, the world’s first spy satellite 

might have made it into orbit before 1960. Instead, the plan was for the first Tattletale 

satellite to ride piggyback on the launch of the second Transit satellite. 35  The delay 

turned into good fortune. As it turned out, the launch of Transit 1A on September 17, 

1959, failed due to a malfunction in the rocket’s third stage. 36 

The risk of getting scuttled seemed always present for another reason: ARPA 

controlled the rockets—the means of getting any military satellite into orbit—and 

the organization was under pressure from many directions. For one thing, there still 

was concern at ARPA that Tattletale could foist delays not only on the Navy’s Tran -

sit payloads but also on the Air Force’s WS-117L-derived Samos program. Among 

the concerns was that any revelation of the ELINT capabilities of Tattletale could 

alert the Soviet Union to U.S. capabilities before subsequent and more sophisticated 

satellite-borne ELINT sensors would have an opportunity to snoop with a fully intact 

covert status. “The possibility of completely covert detection would be lost, and the 

Russians might take steps to thwart or confuse it,” wrote Potts. 37 

A moment of intense angst about security entered the picture at this point. 

For an intelligence project of this novelty and sensitivity, a lot of people—perhaps 

too many—had been brought into the loop. And the risks of that became painfully 

evident by way of an alleged leak: a story on the program that even revealed the code 

name Tattletale appeared in the  New York Times , according to several official but 

short accounts of the program. 38  Because of the alleged leak, the program now was 123 CHAPTER 8 — THE P RELUDE TO SPACE RECONNAISSANCE 

vulnerable to cancellation. In a quest to salvage the program and to do so in a way 

that would tighten its security, leaders in the growing national intelligence program 

hatched a plan in which the ARPA director would send a memorandum to the Under 

Secretary of the Navy that would “disapprove” Tattletale. That same step also would 

open a way to solving a concern about the program’s title, which to some had been 

too suggestive of its actual mission. The program would continue under the far more 

tightly held security control system, dubbed Canes (the security system and the pay -

loads subsumed by it were often referred to by the same word). This time, only those 

who needed to know about it would be brought into the project. 39 

This move would require yet another round of briefings and approvals in top-

level intelligence circles. On June 3, CIA leadership, including Richard Bissell who 

was in charge of the agency’s aerial and satellite reconnaissance program, agreed that 

what was needed was a letter from Roy Johnson, ARPA’s founding director, to the 

Director of Central Intelligence (DCI), Allan Dulles. In the letter, Johnson would spell 

out Canes (and the program formerly known as Tattletale) and the implications it 

might have for the programs under Bissell’s watch, among them, the high-flying U-2 

and supersonic Blackbird photoreconnaissance spy planes. 

On June 8, ARPA envoys delivered that letter to Dulles. The package included a 

cover letter from the office of the Secretary of Defense urging the DCI’s approval of 

NRL’s ELINT satellite proposal as it would significantly reveal and characterize Soviet 

air and missile defenses and other electronic and signals-based technological capa -

bilities. The following day, during a meeting of the United States Intelligence Board, 

Dulles gave the go-ahead. 40 

Tattletale qua Canes—the project upon which NRL’s own future in the Space Age 

would at least partially depend—faced yet additional obstacles. In particular, those 

pushing for the Air Force reconnaissance program, Samos, were still worried that 

the NRL project could sap the same ARPA resources that Samos needed to make it 

into space. Luckily for NRL, ARPA director Johnson had been won over by the lab’s 

proposal. He recommended to the new Deputy Secretary of Defense, Thomas Gates, 

that he send a letter (which Johnson provided) to President Eisenhower requesting a 

green light for Canes. The letter argued that Samos and Canes were complementary, 

that Canes would be able to evaluate the ELINT performance of Samos’s electronics 

package, and that the simplicity of Canes hedged the possibility that the complexity 

of Samos would introduce delays and therefore intelligence gaps. Johnson was playing 

on the sense of Cold War urgency by the President for data on the Soviet Union’s 

anti-aircraft and anti-ballistic missile radar programs. Also in the letter, Johnson 

suggested a name for the scientific cover mission for Canes that NRL would need to 

execute in order to keep Canes secret: Galactic Radiation Experiment Background, or 

GREB. 41  This would not be the cover name that finally would stick. 

The nuanced language in the letter regarding how the top-secret ELINT proposal 

was cast in the larger context of military and national intelligence-gathering efforts 124 NRL A ND THE SPACE A GE 

reveals political realities. The NRL proposal became, in the letter, “an interim elec -

tronic intelligence capability which can be accommodated within the Department of 

Defense’s navigation satellite development program,” referring to the Transit satellites, 

whose role was to improve the targeting and survivability of the submarine-based 

Polaris nuclear missiles. 42 

On July 13, 1959, Deputy Secretary of Defense Gates signed a letter approving the 

“technical development and planning” of Canes—which Lorenzen, Mayo, and their 

engineers and technicians had been doing all along anyway—and had it delivered to 

President Eisenhower. The same day, the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Burke, 

circulated a classified memorandum defining Navy space policy, titled “The Navy in 

the Space Age,” which was based in part on a study orchestrated by Captain Thomas 

Connolly of the Navy’s Bureau of Aeronautics. 43 

“Highest priority within the astronautics program will be given to immediate 

development of space vehicle systems to improve fleet capabilities in the fields of 

reconnaissance, communications, navigation, sea launching and recovery of satellites, 

and meteorology,” the policy memorandum stated. “These will exploit the potential -

ities of U.S. command of the sea and will determine parameters of enemy capabili -

ties.” Highlighted later in the statement was an “ECM satellite program,” referring to 

Canes. 44 

At the same time, the letter from Gates, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, to Pres -

ident Eisenhower hit resistance. One issue was anchored in the valuation by many of 

the photoreconnaissance promised by the Samos program as higher than ELINT data. 

But the major sticking point for the White House’s technical brain trust, helmed by 

Brigadier General Andrew Goodpaster and George B. Kistiakowsky, the President’s 

science adviser, was risk of detection by the Soviet Union. 45 

As such, NRL took up the task of fully analyzing the risk. For that, Lorenzen 

turned to Wald, who was deft in the mathematics of electromagnetism and radio 

frequency technology. He also had expertise in statistics and proved to be a pioneer 

at the lab in the use of electronic computers. His analysis revealed that the Soviet 

Union indeed could detect a Canes satellite, but that the probability of doing so if 

it was unaware of the program’s existence was 0.03 percent, or only about 3 in ten 

thousand. And even if the United States’ Cold War adversary were suspicious that it 

was subject to a covert ELINT program and so made a maximum effort to find U.S. 

ELINT satellites, the probability of discovery, Wald calculated, would increase only to 

1 in a thousand. Key to the calculations was a combination of the ability to turn the 

satellites’ RF emitters on and off and the finite lifetime of the satellites. In short, the 

Soviet Union would not have the luxury of time to find what it was looking for. 46 

In the end, the letter that Secretary of Defense Neil McElroy sent to the Presi -

dent on August 18, 1959, amounted to a strong recommendation to move forward 

with “the Canes project,” 47  here again using the code word for the overall security 

framework for the project. The letter reiterated the value of Canes for capturing and 125 CHAPTER 8 — THE P RELUDE TO SPACE RECONNAISSANCE 

relaying signals from “Soviet radars and other electronic equipment operating any -

where in the USSR,” as opposed to only near the borders where such signals already 

were monitored using land- and air-based intercept equipment. The letter also con -

veyed strong Air Force opposition based on the argument that Canes was essentially 

duplicative with respect to the ELINT capabilities of Samos. Wald’s analysis of the 

risk of detection bolstered the letter’s recommendation to go forward with Canes. The 

letter acknowledged also that the intelligence payoff expected from Canes was not 

big enough to justify its own launch, but that the planned launch of the next Transit 

satellite and the relative cheapness of Canes if launched with the Transit payload, ren -

dered the NRL ELINT program a good one to move on. In the letter to the President, 

Secretary of Defense McElroy included the recommendation from the Secretary of 

State that “the project be approved with the proviso that periods during which the 

device obtains and transmits data be subject to the approval of the President on the 

recommendation of the Secretary of State.” 48 

Weighing in with a modest concurrence at best was science advisor Kistiakows -

ky who told the President’s confidant, Brigadier General Goodpaster, that the Canes 

project could provide some useful information, but that it was not a must-do project. 

“My present position is a recommendation to approve, but not a strong one,” Kistia -

kowsky wrote in a memorandum dated August 20, 1959. “I do not think that a failure 

to approve will hurt our interests seriously.” 49  Whether NRL’s spy satellite would go 

into orbit now hung on a decision by the President of the United States. 

Four days later, with critical assurances by Mayo and Lorenzen that the NRL 

team would conduct a testing phase beyond the range of Soviet detection and they 

would build in an ability to “turn off the payload at a moment’s notice,” President 

Eisenhower approved project Canes. 50  And with his signature, he would help set the 

future course of NRL’s role in the U.S. space program. 

In the approval memo, the President included language that would lead to the es -

tablishment of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) in 1961, an agency whose 

very existence would remain classified until 1992. “This approval highlights the need 

for a control organization within the Defense Department to provide effective and  

> Out of the Box. One of the more colorful characters
> in the history of NRL, Dr. Bruce Wald (shown here
> in 1974), an early adopter of both the soft and hard
> components of digital technologies, played critical
> roles in developing the overall ELINT and other
> systems built by the lab’s space technology teams.
> (NRL photo Wald(2).jpg)

126 NRL A ND THE SPACE A GE 

unified operational control and coordination of these and other satellite devices 

designed to serve operational purposes,” the President wrote to the Secretary of De -

fense. “I understand that you are studying this matter and I look forward to consider -

ing with you a plan for such an organization.” 51 

Two days after that, on August 26, the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral 

Burke, told his senior admirals that satellites, in the coming years, were going to be 

important for naval operations. He recommended that each fleet commander should 

begin setting up small space sections with personnel who would remain cognizant 

of emerging space-based capabilities and how these would influence war planning, 

readiness, and other military basics. 52 

Now, finally, with the full-fledged approval in hand, and authority based in the 

President’s office, the remaining technical steps had to be taken, money had to be 

officially allocated, and final official orders—including from the Bureau of Ordnance, 

which was the sponsor of the Transit satellite on which Canes/GREB would ride pig -

gyback as an ancillary payload—had to be registered. Specific tasks, such as the de -

sign of an interface for the two satellites, also had to be assigned to engineers at APL 

and NRL. Of utmost importance was the Canes security control protocol; only 50 

individuals in the military and intelligence communities were initially signed into it 

and cleared for participation in it. Now, finally, the challenge was largely in the hands 

of NRL’s engineers who were eager to get the world’s first reconnaissance satellite into 

orbit.  

> 1

Ronald L. Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C Electronic Intelligence Satellites (1957–1977) , LEO 

Systems Program Office, National Reconnaissance Office, September 3, 1998, declassified with 

redactions and approved for release from NRO on June 13, 2012, p. 9; see also Robert A. Mc -

Donald and Sharon K. Morena,  Raising the Periscope…Grab and Poppy: America’s Early ELINT 

Satellites  (Chantilly, VA: Center for the Study of National Reconnaissance, National Reconnais -

sance Office, September 2005).  

> 2

Bruce Wald, interview with author, May 23, 2012; script for NRL-produced video, “ GRAB— 

NRL’s Secret Success in Space. ” 

> 3

Reid Mayo, in  Beyond Expectations—Building an American National Reconnaissance Capa -

bility: Recollections of the Pioneers and Founders of National Reconnaissance  (Bethesda, MD: 

National Reconnaissance Office and the American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote 

Sensing, 2002).  

> 4

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 9.  

> 5

Patrick W. Binning and Jay W. Middour, “A Brief History of NRL’s Early Firsts in Spaceflight,” 

Advances in Astronautical Sciences  129 (2008): 1233–1250.  

> 6

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 9.  

> 7

David K. van Keuren, “Cold War Science in Black and White: US Intelligence Gathering and 

Its Scientific Cover at the Naval Research Laboratory, 1948–62,”  Social Studies of Science , vol. 

31, no. 2, Science in the Cold War (April 2001), pp. 207–229.  

> 8

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 10.  

> 9

Potts, p. 10.  

> 10

Richard van Atta, “Fifty Years of Innovation and Discovery,” in  DARPA: 50 Years of Bridging 

the Gap  (Washington, DC: Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, 2008), p. 21. 127 CHAPTER 8 — THE P RELUDE TO SPACE RECONNAISSANCE  

> 11

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 12.  

> 12

Mayo, in  Beyond Expectations , p. 134; see also http://www.fas.org/spp/military/program/ 

sigint/grab.htm.  

> 13

Frederick Hitz would attain the rank of captain; Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C,  p. 158.  

> 14

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 12.  

> 15

Potts, p. 12.  

> 16

Labstracts , Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC, June 22, 1998; “GRAB: Galactic 

Radiation and Background: First Reconnaissance Satellite,” pamphlet prepared by NRL (revised 

edition, April 2000).  

> 17

Airborne Instruments Laboratory, in Mineola, NY, and Haller, Raymond, and Brown in State 

College, PA.  

> 18

Edward Becke obituary,  Capital Gazette , October 15, 2013, accessed online, http://www. 

legacy.com/obituaries/CapitalGazette/obituary.aspx?pid=167547742.  

> 19

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 14.  

> 20

Potts, p. 14.  

> 21

Potts, p. 15.  

> 22

Potts, p. 11.  

> 23

Potts, p. 11.  

> 24

Potts, p. 16.  

> 25

McDonald and Morena,  Raising the Periscope , p. 35.  

> 26

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 16.  

> 27

Potts, p. 16.  

> 28

Potts, p. 16.  

> 29

Potts, p. 18–22.  

> 30

Potts, p. 20.  

> 31

Potts, p. 20.  

> 32

Potts, p. 21.  

> 33

Potts, p. 22.  

> 34

Potts, p. 23–24.  

> 35

Potts, p. 25.  

> 36

Tina Thomson (ed.), Space Log, 1957–1987 (Redondo Beach, CA: TRW, 1988).  

> 37

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 26.  

> 38

The leak to the  New York Times  is mentioned, but not referenced, on page 2 of “A History 

of the Poppy Satellite System,” prepared for the National Reconnaissance Office by Ronald L. 

Potts. NRO released the document, with many redactions. The same leak also is mentioned, 

again without a specific reference, on page 31 of  From the Sea to the Stars: A Chronicle of the 

U.S. Navy’s Space and Space-related Activities , 1944–2009 (revised and updated edition, 2010), 

which was prepared by the Applied Research Laboratory of The Pennsylvania State University 

(editing body), and sponsored by Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Navy (C3I and Space) Dr. 

Gary A. Federici. A search in the  New York Times  archive did not yield the alleged article.  

> 39

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 27.  

> 40

Potts, p. 27.  

> 41

Potts, p. 30.  

> 42

Potts, p. 30.  

> 43

Potts, p. 31.  

> 44

Potts, p. 30.  

> 45

Potts, pp. 31–32.  

> 46

Potts, pp. 31–32.  

> 47

Potts, pp. 31–32.  

> 48

Potts, pp. 31–32.  

> 49

Potts, pp. 31–32.  

> 50

Potts, p. 34. 128 NRL A ND THE SPACE A GE  

> 51

Potts, p. 34.  

> 52

Potts, p. 34. RAISING THE PERISCOPE: GRAB 1 AND 2 

To further its mission to realize the now Presidentially approved ELINT proj-ect, NRL worked in late August 1959 with the Naval Security Group to prepare a top-secret description of “a U.S. electronic satellite experiment.” They referred to the payload with a nonrevealing, innocuous name, GRAB, for Galactic Radiation and Background or, as some sources have it, Galactic Radiation Background experiment (though the acronym still seems to convey a sense of interception!), which, unlike the code name Canes, could be used in unclassified correspondence. 1

A challenge now for Howard Lorenzen and his spy satellite team at the lab was to create a firewall between GRAB, the ELINT payload of the satellite, and the scientific payload that would share the same satellite housing and which would later become publicly known as SOLRAD, for Solar Radiation. So stringent was the security Lorenzen wanted to maintain, that his countermeasures group in the Radio Division (the Canes/GRAB team) had to work entirely separately from Marty Votaw’s Satel-lites Techniques Branch in the Applications Research Division, whose scientists and engineers were building the SOLRAD payload. The challenge in keeping this firewall intact was that both payloads had to be integrated into the same single spherical satel-lite shell. 

No one working on the SOLRAD mission, except perhaps for Herbert Friedman, knew the full story. The countermeasures team working on the GRAB payload did so at night when the Satellite Techniques Branch working on the SOLRAD payload already had gone home. 2 And the two groups were never mentioned together in any distribution list, even of unclassified materials. 

The pieces were coming together, literally. Contractors delivered crystal video receiver and antenna components to Vince Rose in September 1959, for example, and then Rose moved them, under the cover of night, to Building 59 where NRL’s pioneering satellite builders were doing their parts in testing and integrating the spacecraft’s subsystems. Meanwhile, the detailed plans for collecting and distributing GRAB’s expected intelligence harvest over the Soviet Union were getting laid down. For example, under the direction of NRL’s Charlie Price, reception huts would be prepared and installed at existing ELINT stations where technicians would be trained to operate and maintain them. 

“The output of the payload,” NRL’s Bruce Wald recalled in a memoir, would be “sent to receiving huts placed around the periphery of the Soviet Union and recorded 

# 9130 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

on two-track 1/4-inch magnetic tape such as was used to record music.” One track would record the receiver output and the other a time code, he noted. 3

The plan called for the Armed Forces Courier Service to forward data tapes from these huts to NRL in Washington, DC, where the data would be checked, copied, and couriered to the Naval Security Station on Nebraska Avenue, NW, just a few miles away. There, under the auspices of the National Security Agency, ELINT specialists within the office of Collection and Special Analysis (COSA) would make sense of the data. These analysts were charged with eking from the data as much information as possible about an intercepted radar source’s power, location, frequency, pulse pat-tern, and any other technical and physical traits the data could reveal. To brief the commanders of each ELINT station, and work out the logistics for the arrival and operation of the huts, Lorenzen and Mayo all but circled the world with 35-millimeter slides of the original briefing boards they used at the Pentagon and Capitol Hill when the project was still known as Tattletale. 

Despite the momentum, there never were any guarantees that the project would make it through what amounted to a continuous and unending gauntlet of potential showstoppers. This was a time when any single space project would progress in par-allel with a good number of others, each one with its own set of champions, sponsors, approval chains, and organizational, sociological, and cultural peculiarities. Some changes decentralized the various space projects while others seemed to centralize   

> The Huts. An important part of the world’s first ELINT
> spy satellite system were portable command, control, and listening huts placed around the periphery of the Soviet Union and elsewhere by which operators could communicate with GRAB satellites as they passed
> overhead. Included in this photo are Countermeasures Branch Head Howard Lorenzen (leftmost on bottom), GRAB Project Engineer Reid Mayo (leftmost at top), hut operators in the sailor hats, two officers, and Radio Control Hut Engineer William Edgar Withrow (rightmost at bottom). (NRL photo Radio.tif) 131 CHAPTER 9 — RAISING T H E P E RISCOPE: GRAB 1 AND 2

them. For example, in late 1959, ARPA’s ascent toward a central role began to give way to a more balkanized control of space projects in the different military services. As Secretaries of this or that federal department came or left, or as champions of this or that program changed their own personal or professional trajectory, so too would the emphases, priorities, funding, and momentum on different space projects shift. Whatever NRL and other Navy organizations imagined their roles in the U.S. space program would be, these were floating in larger tidal currents. One trend that seemed more discernible than others, as well as more worrying to the Navy’s GRAB team at NRL, was that the Air Force seemed to rise above other government entities in the mix. An unmistakable sign of that resided in a shift of 85 percent of the $487 million that had been designated to ARPA for fiscal year 1960 to the Air Force’s space budget. 

As a tiny and highly classified project amidst giants, and literally piggybacking on the higher-priority Transit program, Canes/GRAB was in constant need of shepherd-ing by its most ardent champions. At this point, fewer than 200 people in the Wash-ington, DC, area had been cleared within the Canes security program. It was a small club that helped maintain security but it also was a liability when it came to keeping the ELINT project in the forefront of decision makers’ minds, especially during bud-getary discussions. An unintended consequence of the public scientific cover for the ELINT payload was that it would help out in this regard. 

Integrated in the same satellite shell along with the GRAB payload was the scien-tific package for measuring solar radiation at the top of the atmosphere and beyond. 4In charge of the science mission, which became known as SOLRAD, was Herbert Friedman and his space science team, which had earned accolades and publicity when they were doing pathbreaking, rocket-based upper atmosphere research, first with V-2 rockets and then with a variety of sounding rockets, most notably Aerobees and Vikings. 

The first SOLRAD would kick off a long series of solar radiation and upper atmo-sphere science payloads that collectively would contribute enormously to space-based science—solar science in particular—and would open pathways for decades to come for NRL’s Space Science Division, the roots of which were established in 1952 even before the Vanguard program had been conceived. 5 SOLRAD 1 would serve double duty as a public cover that would enable the GRAB payload to be integrated into the unclassified Transit launch. But, as mentioned before, that meant one single spherical shell would have to accommodate two payloads. It fell onto the shoulders of Votaw, chief design engineer, and the specialists under his supervision to prepare the satellite for this dual purpose. Among those was a new hire, Peter Wilhelm, who would become one of the most consequential drivers of the country’s non-civilian space program for more than a half century. Under Votaw’s supervision and with Dix’s tech-nical mentoring, Wilhelm’s assignment at the time was to build the satellite’s transmit-ters. Wilhelm knew nothing about the secret payload his work would contribute to, but he knew he was pushing the technology envelope. 132 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

“This transmitter was supposed to operate at—I think it was 136 or 137 mega-hertz [MHz],” Wilhelm recalled. “You know, the Vanguards had operated at 108 MHz. And the thing that enables a transmitter to be stable is a crystal. And physically being able to make a crystal that [small]—the higher the frequency, the smaller the crystal gets—was really pushing it. And they were very thin. They were mechanically fragile, difficult to make. There was a little company up in Pennsylvania, McCoy Crystal, which cut these crystals and polished them. And then you have to plate the anodes on both sides, electrodes ... And so my job was to take all of the crystals that McCoy could make, that [they] even felt [were] worth shipping, and test them and see, you know, what was the frequency stability.” 6

Wilhelm also got the assignment of testing the transistors that Bell Labs was ship-ping to the Satellite Techniques Branch and that presumably would enable Wilhelm to build a small, lightweight transmitter whose components would fit on a palm-sized disk, which would go inside the satellite’s shell. “They would come in ... twos and threes at a time in a little box, and I’d plug them in and test them, and a lot of them wouldn’t operate at all at 130 MHz ... And when you found a transistor that worked, boy, you treated it like gold.” 7

“Everything was on the edge of working or not working,” Wilhelm recounted. “When you would tune these transmitters up, if you put your hand near them, sometimes they would stop oscillating altogether. I mean it was that hairy.” 8 Wilhelm pointed out another huge challenge. “Trying to get everything we needed to get into the satellite within the weight limit—it was only a 40-pound satellite operated on 6 watts of power,” Wilhelm explained. “Everything was really marginal.” 9

Wilhelm soon would learn from Mayo and Rose about the technical details of the classified payload that his transmitter also would serve. 

The data reception and command-and-control pieces of the project, under Price’s leadership, 10 were humming along at the end of 1959. Following mock-up experimen-tation with two electronic equipment vans on loan from the Army, Price took delivery of the Helicop-Huts. Price supervised the fitting of these huts with receiving equip-ment. One of the huts was fitted with a two-way system that specific operators at NRL and elsewhere could use to “interrogate” satellites (receive data and telemetry about a spacecraft’s health) and to send them commands. Another hut was set up to do both. Fully equipped, the huts weighed in at about 2,600 pounds. 11 

About two-thirds of the way into fiscal year 1960, a budget crisis loomed and threatened all the momentum; funds for the GRAB payload were running out. The cost shortfall for the NRL space project was stunningly small, on the order of $172,000, amidst the several-billion-dollar figure for missile programs and the rough-ly $800 million for NASA. Even so, NRL’s ELINT satellite, which had been set for a summertime launch, was in jeopardy again. With an it-will-happen-come-what-may attitude that had come to characterize NRL’s GRAB effort, Price continued getting 133 CHAPTER 9 — RAISING T H E P E RISCOPE: GRAB 1 AND 2 

the huts ready by preparing instruction manuals and sending two-man installation teams to the hut sites around the world. Wilhelm continued working with fickle tran-sistors to build space-worthy satellite transmitters. The same can-do attitude was at work with groups on other satellite subsystems, among them ones for attitude control, power management, and thermal control. The whole team was heartened on April 13, 1960, by a successful launch of a Transit 1B satellite for submarine naviga-tion, the replacement for the satellite that was lost the previous September. 

Another reconnaissance program, one based on high-flying U-2 aircraft shaped like gliders and equipped with powerful cameras, added urgency to the need for ELINT collection. Photos of an April overflight of south central U.S.S.R. revealed, in the words of National Reconnaissance Office historian Ronald Potts, “evidence of huge fixed-array radars in various stages of construction on the western side of Lake Balkhash and perhaps several other locations that remain classified.” 12 At the same time, the Air Force’s Samos project was suffering delays. As such, Secretary of Defense Thomas S. Gates wrote to President Eisenhower on April 27 to inform him that NRL’s GRAB project was on track. He recommended that the ELINT payload be launched with the Transit 2A navigation satellite from the Atlantic Missile Range at Cape Canaveral, so that it could undergo an on-orbit testing phase and then be ready for operational use by June 20. 

On May 1, 1960—four days after the Secretary of Defense sent the letter—one of the Cold War’s most momentous events would accelerate the situation. On that day, a U-2 aircraft on a photoreconnaissance mission was shot down over Soviet territo-ry. Pilot Gary Powers survived the shoot-down and was taken into Soviet custody. The U.S. claimed initially that the aircraft had wandered off course as it was making meteorological measurements. With de facto proof now that the Soviets had both an-ti-aircraft radars capable of tracking high-flying aircraft like U-2s, and surface-to-air missiles capable of shooting them down, President Eisenhower immediately suspend-ed flights of the spy planes. That meant a uniquely revealing intelligence window on the Soviet Union had been sidelined. On May 5, the President approved the GRAB launch, stressing that the ELINT payload was to be activated only if and when he personally gave the OK to do so. 13 

For all of its top secrecy and increasing sense of urgency all the way up to the President’s office, NRL’s engineering team on the program had a flair for moving things forward. “For safe handling and a low profile,” Potts revealed in his once-clas-sified history, “two fully tested, 42 pound satellites, were readied for transport in a private station wagon, which its owner, Ed Dix, would drive down to Florida, accompanied by Mayo and a muscular escort.” 14 Spirits were high among both teams at NRL—Lorenzen’s GRAB team, and Friedman’s SOLRAD team—as the launch date approached. 

The value of redundancy showed itself immediately. One of the satellites, as it turned out, had a cracked solar cell and a couple of flawed circuits in the electronics 134 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

package of the ELINT payload. Luckily, its twin checked out fine. An engineer and technician from NRL attached the small orb to the APL-designed interface atop the larger Transit satellite. The rocket contractor in the project, Aerojet General, secured the payload fairings like eggshells over the satellites and then mated the payload to the upper stage of the Thor Able Star booster. Next came the fueling. And then, at last, the countdown for launch of the world’s first spy satellite began. 

“This was all new to me because I had never been at a launch site before,” Mayo said. “Because of the military mission and my presence in the ELINT community, I was asked to keep a pretty low profile. If any visitor showed up in the area, I would disappear. We were not involved in the countdown process at all. We were not in any pictures. In fact, a rumor existed that we might have some religious feelings about being photographed.” 15 

At 1:54 a.m., in the dead of night, on June 22, 1960, the rocket lifted off and head-ed south by southeast. The second stage separated from the first stage and then fired for 7 minutes, ascending ever higher over Brazil, and then another short booster burst took the two-satellite payload into a circular orbit. There, a spring mechanism sent the payload into a slightly elliptical orbit. Even before it circled the globe once, another mechanism separated the NRL satellite—with its deeply secret mission embedded within its openly scientific one—from APL’s Transit satellite. In short order, the NRL satellite deployed its antennas, and the Minitrack system, now run by NASA, began tracking it. 

The Department of Defense issued a press release with accurate but incomplete news that a solar radiation experiment had been launched along with the Transit 2A satellite. Highlighted was that this was a first-of-its-kind piggyback launch of one satellite atop another. Not mentioned was the enormous space first of putting a spy satellite into orbit. This was a first the Soviet Union now would be unable to claim. But only a few hundred people with top secret clearances could know about this Cold War trophy for the United States.   

> Double First. An artist’s drawing
> depicts the Applied Physics Laboratory’s Transit 2A satellite and the Naval Research Laboratory’s solar radiation
> measurement satellite shortly after their planned separation. On June 22, 1960, the two satellites were launched in a piggyback style and then the smaller
> NRL SOLRAD satellite was released from the Transit satellite by spring force. When this image was publicly released, the GRAB payload inside SOLRAD’s shell was highly classified. (NRL photo 60414.jpg)

135 CHAPTER 9 — RAISING T H E P E RISCOPE: GRAB 1 AND 2 

Even as the satellite circled the planet, the most important question remained unanswered: would the GRAB payload work? A five-man team—Howard Lorenzen, Reid Mayo, Ed Dix, William Edgar Withrow (an antenna design expert), and Vince Rose—loaded with electronic, testing, and other necessary equipment, traveled to a still undisclosed location in Hawaii where a 6-foot by 11-foot hut customized for “in-terrogation and collection” had been set up. On July 4, 1960—the first Independence Day for Hawaii, which had just gained statehood—the team crammed inside the hut, and during the satellite’s 199th orbit, the team picked up the payload’s tracking signal. Then, Ed Dix tried to activate the downlink transmitter, which Pete Wilhelm had designed and built as his first project as a member of the Satellite Techniques Branch. Its job was to send intercepted data from Soviet radar installations to antennas atop receiving huts that had been placed in friendly but undisclosed locations. 

“We pushed the button and nothing happened,” Mayo recounted. “But 30 to 45 seconds later it did work. We had heart failures in between! We were all huddled inside [the hut] waiting for some sound to occur. When it happened, we all let out a shout of glee that it worked! .... We turned it on and we could hear radars from as far away as Japan—practically the whole Pacific area for a range of 3,500 nautical miles in all directions.” 16 

With the satellite streaking overhead at some 19,000 miles per hour, the calibra-tion team had only minutes to get its work done before the satellite would have passed over the horizon. And, to comply with the President’s mandate, Dix could not forget   

> Listening Post. The communications huts associated with the GRAB
> program amounted to 2,600-pound containers that could be readily
> transported. Inside was electronic, radio, and recording equipment, as
> well as an antenna shaft that was rendered steerable with truck steering wheels. (NRL photo Hut_Inside.jpg) 136 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE

to switch off the downlink before the satellite moved beyond the hut’s line of sight. It all got done, but not before the five men in that hut heard, through an audio output, a medley of signals that GRAB had received and relayed during the calibration exercise. They could discern different frequencies (by way of audible tones) and periodicities, pulse rates, beam widths, and scanning patterns. It was music of sorts, only it corre-sponded to the invisible morass of radio frequency energy that had reached the satel-lite’s antennas. Over the next two nights, the team tapped into the satellite on a total of 15 more passes and recorded the signals on magnetic tape so that they could be analyzed later back at NRL. It was clear to the team in that hut in Hawaii that GRAB 1—so named because the plan included more than one GRAB satellite—was ready for its mission: to intercept emissions from S-band air- and missile-defense radar systems throughout the Soviet Union. 17 

This was a national asset, not just NRL’s. The Technical Operations Group (part of the Naval Security Group) managed the operation of GRAB 1, which meant it proposed specific days, orbits, and times when the satellite would be turned on and collect data as it passed over the Soviet Union. When the NSG gave the green light, operators in a “triggering hut” would activate the satellite’s intercept and relay systems. The U-2 incident in early May raised the political stakes of being caught, so additional precautions, such as never operating the satellite on consecutive passes, were implemented to minimize the chance of detection by the Soviets. That way, even if the Soviets detected intermittent emissions of the specific command and relay frequencies, 138.05 MHz and 138.57 MHz, respectively, the absence of these signals over the next passes would make it almost impossible to discern a connection to an orbiting emitter. 

Under Mayo’s supervision, NRL representatives fanned out to all the collection huts and trained technicians at each in how to track the satellite and collect data. Lorenzen, Mayo, Rose, and Withrow traveled from the calibration hut in Hawaii to “an interrogation site” at another location where they would be able to communicate with the satellite as it passed over their Cold War adversary. On July 9, 1960, the NRL quartet listened in on a relay from GRAB 1. This was the start of the satellite’s first col-lection phase, devoted to “engineering-evaluation.” They were stunned by the plethora of signals coming in. It was much richer than the harvest in Hawaii, an abundance that they knew instantly would be a blessing and a curse. 18 

And all of this detection was in the context of one radar band, the S band. “GRAB was successful but we knew there were other Soviet radars at different frequencies and we were only able to detect the ones that were at S-band,” Wilhelm commented much later. “When we tried other frequencies [in later programs], Voila!, they’ve got more.” 19 But that wider surveillance sweep would have to wait. 

The technological capability was coming into place faster than was the ability to manage it and establish a command structure that went all the way to President Eisenhower. A top secret schedule for the first official collection phase was sent from 137 CHAPTER 9 — RAISING T H E P E RISCOPE: GRAB 1 AND 2 

the NSG to the White House. “Chop chains”—rosters of people in the loop at the CIA, Defense Department, State Department, and elsewhere—were established. By the time this authority structure was in place, the aforementioned engineering-eval-uation phase between July 9 and 21, which to the NRL team essentially was a test phase, was almost over. The results were good and tantalizing enough that the Sec-retary of Defense sent a letter to the President on July 20 reporting that the time had come when the President could authorize missions over the Soviet Union. 

When the President sent his approving initials on July 25, the test phase tapes with intercepted Soviet signals from 11 overpasses already were en route to NRL by military courier. For the second collection phase, the more formal tasking and autho-rization procedures would be in place. 20 

The summer of 1960 was a banner year for Navy missile and space endeavors, especially for NRL. In addition to the promising start of the GRAB program, the nation’s first ballistic missile nuclear submarine, USS George Washington , launched a pair of Polaris missiles while submerged; the Naval Space Surveillance System (NAVSPASUR), a direct descendant of the Minitrack system from the Vanguard program, was continuously tracking every object that humanity had so far placed into orbit; and Communication Moon Relay, an NRL project to exploit the moon as an electromagnetic mirror for long-distance radio communication, was inaugurated, allowing for a new and reliable channel for transmitting messages, including facsimi-les, between Hawaii and Washington, DC, for four to eight hours each day. 

At the same time, analysts back at NRL in the signals processing section of Lorenzen’s Countermeasures Branch began receiving packages from the GRAB huts around the world. Initial screens of the tapes provided an exciting yet sobering inkling of how vast the bounty from GRAB 1 was likely to be and how challenging it would be to make sense of the deluge of data. 

“[The data analysts] were accustomed to looking 50 to 200 miles into the Soviet Union from some vantage point from the ground or from an airplane,” Mayo said, referring to traditional ferret missions. “Here, suddenly, they were able to see 3,000,   

> Space Surveillance in the Heartland. Shown here are aerial and close-up views of two of the
> massive antennas of the Naval Space Surveillance (NAVSPASUR) system (left: near Lake Jordan, Alabama; right: near Lake Kickapoo, Texas). NAVSPASUR grew out of the Minitrack system that NRL engineers built during the Vanguard program. (NRL photos 60644(3D).jpg and 61735.jpg) 138 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE

3,500, and 4,000 miles! The magnitude, the massive quantity of signals that were available in one short instance in time, was staggering. They were just unprepared for the millions and millions of pulses they received.” 21 

“Bob Misner had the job of analyzing the tapes,” Wald recalled. “Initially he sent the signal output into a bank of narrow-band frequency filters, with the output of each attached to a pen that made a mark on a roll of wet electro-sensitive paper. The position of the marks across the width of the paper gave an approximate indication of the pulse repetition frequency (PRF) of the intercepted radar. The distance between repeats along the length of the roll indicated the rotation period of the radar’s anten-na.” 22 With specific traits like these, ELINT specialists stood a chance of categorizing intercepted signals as coming from already known Soviet radar equipment or from systems the U.S. had not known about before. 

There would be no way that earphone-wearing analysts in the huts, or even chart-reading analysts at NRL or the National Technical Processing Center, would be able to make much sense or use of the vast amount of ELINT signals GRAB 1 was intercepting. Recasting the signals into charts that rendered them visible helped somewhat in determining the density and east-to-west distribution of radars across the Soviet Union, but it was obvious that data management and analysis could well become the most challenging aspect of ELINT from space. It was like looking at all of the paintings in the National Gallery in an instant rather than taking in one work of art at a time. Automation and computers would have to be integrated into the systems as soon as possible. 

On September 28, 1960, the NRL team lost contact with GRAB 1 as they attempt-ed to undertake a third phase of data collection. The operating life of the world’s first spy satellite had come to an end. In its three-month lifetime, President Eisenhower had approved 22 ELINT collections with the satellite. The initial success of GRAB— mostly as a proof of principle that ELINT collection from space works—meant that the NRL space-based ELINT team now would have a full-time job to improve upon this beginning and to provide the country with ever better orbiting listening posts. 

It would be some time before GRAB 2 would be launched, so the NRL signals processing team, led by Misner, drilled into some of the tapes they had received from the collection huts. They were able to identify signals from early-warning radars (the kind that helped the Soviets shoot down Gary Powers’ U-2) and shipborne radar units deployed by the Soviet Union. They also discerned previously unrecognized signals with unique pulse patterns and frequencies. But the biggest surprise was the sheer volume of intercepted signals. The first inclination of the NRLers was to attribute this volume to some combination of (1) a wider-than- expected detection bandwidth, akin to having a larger and finer-mesh net that would catch more fish and more kinds of fish, (2) the Soviet use of higher-than-expected power in their emit-ters, or (3) a surprising sensitivity of the satellite’s radar-signal interception system. A fourth possibility, which they did not seriously consider at the time, was that the 139 CHAPTER 9 — RAISING T H E P E RISCOPE: GRAB 1 AND 2 

Soviet Union had been installing a massive air defense radar system. 

What was clear is that the satellite worked. Also clear was that the bounty from this new intelligence asset could be lost if some pathbreaking techniques for parsing the massive flow of data were not developed. This is where Misner and his mathemat-ically minded colleagues came in. A starting challenge would be to somehow convert the analog signals captured on magnetic tape into a digital form that a computer could handle. Misner’s team was adept with both equations and hardware and the team built a number of one-of-a-kind pieces of analytical equipment. Misner set into motion a system by which the data on the tapes from the huts would be converted by his team at NRL into visual charts before the tapes were couriered to the National Security Agency (NSA). Transcribing the charted format of the data into digital format by way of punch cards turned out to be the most time-consuming step, amounting to about 20 hours per tape. There were 80 tapes in hand from the GRAB 1 intercepts. Once the signals were encoded onto punch cards, Misner knew, his experts and their computers would be better able to wrench out information of potentially strategic and tactical importance. 23 

Meanwhile, the national-level analysis team at the NTPC was crying uncle. It was overwhelmed by the volume of data and asked the NRL team if it could, in Mayo’s words, “turn down the gain,” which was their way of asking if the intercept receivers could be made less sensitive. 24 The analysts did their best and set their priority on novel signals they had not seen before and in teasing individual signal patterns out of the cacophony so that they could precisely characterize specific types of radars. It was the sort of ELINT data that could help the Omaha, Nebraska–based Strategic Air Command (SAC) integrate the Soviet air defense radars—whose threat was sorely felt in the downing of Gary Powers’ U-2 jet—into its own flight plans and other tactical considerations. In the event that World War III began, SAC would strive to set flight plans for its Stratojet and Stratofortress nuclear bombers that would thread around the purview of Soviet radar installations. 

Secretary of Defense Gates liked what he was seeing and told President Eisenhow-er the same. On October 17, 1960, the President gave NRL the go-ahead for another GRAB satellite. 25 Secrecy remained so tight that the GRAB program remained unmen-tioned in the Secretary of Defense’s classified quarterly reports. 

About a month after GRAB 1 stopped working, there was a scare that the worst had happened. The Kremlin warned the U.S. that it would respond to any attempt at espionage from space “as successfully as it had done with respect to air space,” referring to its May 1 downing of the U-2 photoreconnaissance jet. The timing of the warning made everyone nervous. 26 Was it possible that the Soviets had detected GRAB 1 after all? With more detailed data regarding the satellite’s trajectory and the amount of time that detectable and associated RF signals were in the air, Lorenzen’s crack analysis team determined that the likelihood the mission had been compro-mised was negligible. 140 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

Even without direct knowledge of the GRAB program, the Soviet defense com-munity knew the U.S. would be working hard to add space-based intelligence-gather-ing assets to it airplane-based ones. And the Soviets, who were working toward their own fleet of ELINT satellites, 27 already had been accusing the U.S. of orbiting recon-naissance hardware. 28 

With a Presidential green light for GRAB 2 and little reason to fear that the Soviets had caught onto the program, it was full steam ahead for NRL’s GRAB team. For his part, Misner directed Wald, who had been working on automated signal-pro-cessing techniques for another highly classified project, to help solve the data-analysis challenge that came with GRAB’s massive flow of radar data. On hand for the task was the Naval Research Laboratory Electronic Digital Computer, or NAREC. 29 It was a room-sized, electricity-guzzling, vacuum-tube-based behemoth. The lab acquired the state-of-the-art machine a few years earlier to help parse signals collected at a massive 200-foot parabolic antenna dug into the ground at Stump Neck, Maryland. The massive dish was built to determine if signals bouncing from the moon could be received with enough strength to be useful for naval communications with vessels at sea and for listening in on Soviet RF emissions. Meanwhile, parallel efforts by ELINT specialists at NSA and elsewhere were devoted to figuring out how best to manage, interpret, and use these new lines of intelligence. 

“I was assigned the task of automating the process,” Wald recalled, before con-tinuing to describe the role that he and his wife, Bets Wald, who was also a mathe-matically trained NRL colleague, played. “We digitized the tapes, and Bets and I wrote a NAREC program to deinterleave coincident pulse trains and identify the number of radars seen while accurately determining the PRF [pulse repetition frequency] of each. We called our effort Project Eyestrain, an oblique reference to the manual meth-od we were superseding.” 30   

> Moonbounce. In the 1950s, an NRL engineer conceived of a long-distance communication system
> in which a transmitter would bounce signals off the moon, which then would be picked up by the
> receiving antenna. Shown here is one realization of the moon relay, or moon bounce, concept in the form of a 1.1 acre receiving antenna at NRL’s communications station in Stump Neck, Maryland, as it was in 1958. Until 1957, it was the largest parabolic antenna in the world. The illustration shows how the signal relay would go between a repre-sentative Stump Neck antenna, the moon, and a ship at
> sea. (NRL photos 58-040250.jpg and 61336.jpg) 141 CHAPTER 9 — RAISING T H E P E RISCOPE: GRAB 1 AND 2

Under the supervision of Dix, the Satellite Techniques Branch had been work-ing hard to refurbish the leftover GRAB 1 twin, the one with the cracked solar panel and other injuries, into flight worthiness. On November 30, 1960, just six months after GRAB 1 had become the world’s first spy satellite, GRAB 2—again sharing a single metal shell with a scientific cover payload dubbed SOLRAD 2—hitched a ride skyward with APL’s Transit 3A satellite. But 12 seconds before it was supposed to finish burning, the primary stage of the Thor Able Star rocket fizzled out. In that mo-ment, what the public thought was supposed to have been a launch of another Transit satellite for the Polaris program and a second SOLRAD satellite to study solar-iono-sphere interactions, became an unguided missile that happened to be headed toward Cuba. In it too was the would-have-been GRAB 2 payload. The range safety officer knew something had gone wrong and triggered a self-destruct sequence. Even so, debris from the vehicle rained down on the Cuban countryside, about 10 miles from Holguin, then Cuba’s third largest city. 31 

The Prime Minister of Cuba, Fidel Castro, cast the incident as an act of impe-rialist aggression. Following rumors that some cows had been killed by the debris, a mock- up of a Thor intermediate range ballistic missile with the acronym USAF stenciled on the side was paraded in the streets of Havana as a cow-killing Pentagon rocket. There would be no more launch trajectories over Cuba. 32 

With any new ELINT data from the GRAB program delayed at best, the partic-ipants in the program decided to take a closer look at the data already collected in the 22 missions GRAB 1 had completed. It was clear to analysts from NRL, the Naval Scientific and Technical Intelligence Center (in Suitland, Maryland), and the National Security Agency that the data was vast enough that it would take new techniques, including automated methods using computers running well-designed algorithms, to eke out valuable information from it. Lorenzen had been worried that the program would lose favor by those who had authority to cut it off, but on December 14, 1960, NRL received heartening news from the GRAB program’s sponsor, the Bureau of Weapons (BuWeps). The Bureau informed Lorenzen’s team that “the tremendously successful project will be continued.” In 1961, the Department of Navy provided $3 million for that continuation. 33 

With this fresh support and money, NRL’s GRAB team kicked into a higher gear. Mayo and Rose designed a more capable ELINT payload that could listen in on a wider range of radar frequencies. Pete Wilhelm made corresponding changes in the data transmitter while others in the Satellite Techniques Branch worked with vendors on components or investigated commercial options for recording devices that would enable the satellite to store more data before relaying it to a receiver on the ground. 

The issue of how to manage the deluge of ELINT data so that it actually would be useful and actionable emerged as the issue of most concern and it would presage similar challenges for large-scale ocean-surveillance systems that NRL would help 142 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

develop in the future. At the time, in the early 1960s, Misner and his colleagues still were converting magnetic tape recordings of the raw data into visual readouts from which individual pulse patterns, scan rates, and illumination durations might be more easily discernible. But given the volume, or density, of intercepted radar signals, that procedure was impractically laborious and time consuming. Taking on this so-called “density problem”—as the troublesome abundance of signals was known by insid-ers—entailed that the analyses would have to be heavily automated and Wald would be one of NRL’s principal early innovators in that endeavor. Misner also was taking on the data management problem, including looking into better ways of converting vi-sual data into digital format and of developing new techniques in magnetic recording that could make the raw data easier to work with. But all of that would take time and this was an era when national leadership was impatient to know more about Soviet military capabilities. 

Everyone who had access to the data knew that the United States now had in hand a remarkable new means of intelligence gathering, but the situation was akin to being locked outside of an overstocked chocolate shop. There was so much desirable product inside that it essentially was blocking the entrance. In a January 10, 1961, letter to Fred Hitz of the Navy’s ELINT program, Fred Weldon of the Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI) summed up his assessment of the program for the Omaha-based Strategic Air Command and other end users this way: “It is already obvious that the results from GRAB will have a direct and significant bearing on the consolidated targeting and war planning effort at Omaha 34 as well as upon strike force tactics, weapons, and [electronic warfare] hardware. We owe it to national security to release our tentative results—to the extent they are valuable and of reasonable reliability—as soon as we can …” 35 

At NRL, Lorenzen ramped up the data reduction effort. It was NSA’s charge to develop the means for direct digitization of GRAB tapes—a task then referred to as Audico, short for audio-to-digital conversion—rather than the tape-to-chart-to-punch-card route that had been for the NRL team the primary way to bring comput-ers into the mix. 

Remarkably, this work-in-progress was getting implemented on the fly. The col-lection huts that received ELINT data from the satellite, for example, were all refitted with upgraded recorders (Type GR-2500) from the Consolidated Electrodynamics Corporation, a Pasadena, California, subsidiary of the Bell and Howell Company. The mobilization of talent at NRL was intense. Wald, for one, made sure that the manual conversion of burst records for digital processing with the NAREC continued. The Ph.D. mathematician Bassford Getchell helped Wald in writing programs that could identify actual signals among the noise in the GRAB data; discern pulse, timing, and other patterns in them; and even infer the general location of the sources, that is, the Soviet radar installations. 143 CHAPTER 9 — RAISING T H E P E RISCOPE: GRAB 1 AND 2 

The profile of NRL’s ELINT satellite program continued to ascend. It became a priority for Director of Naval Intelligence Rear Admiral Vernon Lowrance, a World War II submarine commander. In a letter dated January 27 to NRL’s Commanding Officer, Captain Arthur Krapf, Lowrance praised Lorenzen and his team, even as he pressured NRL to speed its efforts at analysis and data processing. 36 In a sign of just how coveted the information from the GRAB program was becoming to the country, the Strategic Air Command, or more specifically SAC’s 544th Technical Reconnais-sance Group at the Offutt Air Force Base in Omaha, Nebraska, was given permission to take steps toward developing its own analyses of the data. The goal was for SAC to include ELINT data in its work to reveal the Soviets’ “radar order of battle,” which in turn would inform targeting, air routes, and development of other tactical details for SAC’s fleet of long-range bombers. 37 The radar order of battle refers to, in this case, the locations and capabilities of all Soviet radar systems on an ongoing basis. 

When NRL was immersed in Project Vanguard, and GRAB was little more than a concept scratched out on a Howard Johnson’s paper placemat, the Air Force and CIA were orchestrating audacious intelligence programs using advanced aircraft and rockets. Among them was a film-return mission, which became known as Corona, in which camera-bearing satellites would take high-resolution pictures of Soviet territory and then drop film-containing canisters back through the atmosphere where they would, ideally, be snatched in midair by Air Force personnel flying modified cargo aircraft. After a dozen straight failures, and following one ship-based recovery, the first successful Corona air recovery took place on August 19, 1960. 38 That was two months after GRAB 1 made it into orbit as the world’s first spy satellite. 

The secret intersection points of intelligence and space had been proliferating, most often in parallel, each with its own innovators, champions, history, and tech-nical, command, and oversight infrastructures. It was an unwieldy process, prone to duplication and/or competition, and it was expensive. But the successes of GRAB and Corona demonstrated that these and other advanced “national technical means” were becoming integral and important components of national defense. 

On Eisenhower’s last day as President on January, 20, 1961, the Deputy Secre-tary of Defense, James Douglas, who was Secretary of the Air Force until the sudden death of Deputy Secretary Donald Quarles in May 1959, circulated a memorandum to the Director of the National Security Agency and all of the military departments’ secretaries about how space-based intelligence would be controlled. It wasn’t good news for the Navy and it did not bode well for NRL’s GRAB team. The Air Force emerged as the nation’s lead administrative body for the country’s overall reconnais-sance program and so likely would have decision-making power, or at least strong influence, on what the Navy would be able to do in space. When it came to COMINT (communications intelligence) and ELINT (electronic intelligence), all efforts were to be coordinated through the NSA. The day after the memorandum was issued was the first day of the administration of the nation’s new President, John F. Kennedy. 144 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

Kennedy’s appointee for Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, resigned his presidency of the Ford Motor Corporation and arrived at the Pentagon with a back-ground, mindset, and skill set that would change the way military programs, including ones like GRAB, would be carried out. Seat-of-the-pants approaches would no longer dominate. McNamara overhauled the administration of the Department of Defense’s many small and large elements, from stem to stern. He placed a heavy emphasis on cost-effectiveness for all programs. 39 

Seven weeks into his tenure, McNamara signed DoD Directive 5160.30 by which the Air Force again came through as a primary decision authority regarding whether space systems ultimately would move from planning and development phases toward completion and deployment. The mandate wielded a blow to the space technology development culture that the Navy had created and hoped to perpetuate. The Air Force approach generally was to call on the scientific community and to contract with industry to develop systems, while the Navy turned to its bureaus (such as BuAer and BuWeps) and used government laboratories as performers in addition to the con-tracted support it got from industry and academia. With the Air Force in the pilot’s seat, however, the Navy’s space programs were likely in for changes. Add to that the cost-mindedness that a former leader of the country’s automotive industry was bringing to Department of Defense decision making, and switches were set for high anxiety among NRL’s space cadre. 

Despite the success and praise the GRAB program had earned, the follow-on technology that Lorenzen, Mayo, Wilhelm, and their GRAB teammates now were de-veloping would likely be stifled in the new, more bureaucratic context that McNamara was bringing into the Department of Defense. Pivotal here was the practice of NRL’s satellite builders to conduct and manage their own R&D—doing most of it in-house with in-house talent—and then build their own satellites (again in a mostly in-house operation) based on that R&D. McNamara’s approach threatened to undermine this mode of operation because it decoupled R&D from technology acquisition. 

As it turned out, McNamara had not been briefed about GRAB. He knew nothing about it. To the Secretary of the Navy, John B. Connally, that knowledge gap actually opened an opportunity to convince McNamara that he needed to reconsider how he was thinking about the Air Force as the lead service for all Department of Defense space programs and about how systems were developed and acquired. Connally arranged for a briefing team to tell the GRAB story directly to McNamara in the SecDef ’s own office. The upshot was that the Secretary of Defense commended the program, but he still wanted accounting data as a basis for his own decisions about the program. This meant that Lorenzen and his GRAB team would have to conduct a rigorous cost analysis. 40 

Meanwhile, Rear Admiral Thomas Connolly, then with BuWeps (the Navy’s administrative support center for the GRAB program), got to work on the bigger challenge of convincing McNamara to reconsider the Department of Defense space 145 CHAPTER 9 — RAISING T H E P E RISCOPE: GRAB 1 AND 2 

directive. His suspicion was that McNamara had been moved by concerns about duplication, waste, and mismanagement without also considering the actual capa-bilities and payoff that had emerged from the ELINT program NRL had conceived of and led over the past three years. Rear Admiral Connolly was concerned that the subordination of the Navy’s role in space to that of the Air Force’s could hamper the Navy’s ability to develop the spaced-based technologies that would become important for national defense. So Rear Admiral Connolly drafted a confidential memorandum for the Secretary of the Navy that he hoped would ultimately help to get McNamara to reconsider the nation’s military space command protocols. 

Ironically, the GRAB program had remained viable partly because it was deeply black enough to glide along under almost everybody’s radar screen. Even amidst the top-level maneuverings, preparations for another GRAB launch were well under way. Wald and others focusing on data management, digitization, and computer analysis were taking significant steps in tackling the density problem. Others in the counter-measures group made upgrades to the collection huts, including taking care of habitability problems by adding air conditioning and sun shades. Lorenzen and Mayo assembled a 15-member launch team among their NRL colleagues with Dix from the Satellite Techniques Branch and Mayo from the countermeasures group as leaders. Meanwhile, for their part in moving toward automation and higher-volume analysis, NSA’s analysts and researchers were developing and testing algorithms and specialty computing equipment. 

The reality check on the program was that heretofore only one GRAB satellite had flown and had collected data only on 22 President-authorized occasions. There had been no new data since GRAB 1 stopped functioning. Meanwhile, the Strategic Air Command had urgent need of building all available and reliable ELINT data into its own tactical planning. There was a sense by many at the time that World War III could start at any moment and so vigilance and intelligence were of utmost impor-tance to national security. This spurred efforts to transfer to SAC more of the digitized data from GRAB 1, as well as emerging data analysis tools and techniques, including ones that Misner and Wald had been developing at NRL. Toward that end, Wald and Getchel developed a computational format that became the common one for digital tapes no matter where the ELINT analysis was being done. At the same time, more players, particularly from the Air Force, were requesting and receiving clearances to get inside the GRAB loop just as the program was about to take off again, literally. 

On June 29, 1961, atop a Thor Able Star rocket, a trio of satellites was launched into orbit. A threesome launch had never been done before and there was a problem. The primary payload, the Transit 4A navigation satellite, designed and built by the Applied Physics Laboratory, made it into its intended orbit. But the GRAB 2 pay-load, along with its SOLRAD 3 co-payload, failed to detach from the third satellite, a scientific platform dubbed Injun, which was designed by Professor James Van Allen of the University of Iowa to conduct measurements of the radiation belts named after 146 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

him and that were first discovered with instruments aboard Explorer 1, the country’s first satellite. The failure of GRAB 2 and Injun to detach was due to a mistake on the ground in the sequence of command signals sent to the satellites. Even so, and despite the inability to operate both satellites at the same time due to electromagnetic inter-ference, both satellites were able to carry out at least part of their respective missions. That was achieved by alternating the days on which they operated. GRAB 2 began collecting ELINT data over the Soviet Union on July 15, 1961. 41 

In short order, the new GRAB data was duplicated and couriered to NSA ana-lysts. Again, the sheer volume of data proved overwhelming, especially as related data from other new SIGINT assets also began pouring in to the same human resources. Top leadership at the NSA and Office of Naval Intelligence that had been involved in the GRAB program was undergoing changes, as also was the organization and com-mand structure within NSA. But the program itself and its intellectual and technical parents at NRL—among them Lorenzen, Mayo, Misner, and Wald—remained as constants. As the new director of ONI, Captain Donald Mac Showers took over, Lo-renzen, always looking ahead, handed him a plan for three heavier and more capable GRAB satellites for launch in 1962. 

The Strategic Air Command had managed to go further than any other player in converting GRAB data into operationally useful information and guidance. This was due, in large part, because of its focus on those ELINT signals for which it could determine an associated radar’s position, but only on the portion of these signals that also would be relevant to the country’s current SIOP—Single Integrated Operational Plan—for World War III. SAC’s approach almost certainly was manual and brute force using charted versions of the raw data from the magnetic tapes. Even so, SAC managed to develop at least a rough Soviet radar order of battle more quickly than NRL or NSA analysts did.   

> Space Triplet. With that spherical style of NRL’s
> early satellites, the twin payloads of GRAB 2 and
> SOLRAD 3 (housed in the same shell) are mated with the University of Iowa’s Injun satellite, which is mated to the Applied Physics Laboratory’s Transit 4A navigational satellite. The triplet was
> boosted into orbit on June 29, 1961. (NRL photo 60370.tif) 147 CHAPTER 9 — RAISING T H E P E RISCOPE: GRAB 1 AND 2

To render the incoming GRAB 2 data useful in a more timely fashion, NSA concluded that it should do the dubbing of the raw tapes instead of NRL. Lorenzen thought this could only work if NSA replicated the hardware and software the NRL team had been using and by making sure the links between manual analysis of data and machine processing was as well thought out at NSA as it was at NRL. All of this caused hand-wringing, the drafting of memoranda, and myriad debates in different circles. But all of that would be overshadowed by the most massive reorganization in the intelligence infrastructure to date. 

In the late summer of 1961, to consolidate the parallel efforts in satellite-based reconnaissance that had been taken to various degrees of planning and completion, Secretary of Defense McNamara drew up top secret plans for a National Reconnais-sance Program (NRP) that would be managed through a new intelligence agency called the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). The target startup date was mid-1962, less than a year after McNamara circulated the formal memorandum to the military service secretaries. Heading the office would be Richard Bissell, 42 a CIA dep-uty director for plans, and Dr. Joseph Charyk, an Air Force undersecretary. Though covert, the NRP would have unclassified designators. For example, the NRO head office would be identified as the Office of Missiles and Satellite Systems (SAFMS) and would reside within the Office of the Secretary of the Air Force. 43 

The Cold War threat driving these institutional creations was the discovery of radar systems near Lake Balkhash in Kazakhstan during the April 1960 U-2 photoreconnaissance flight, as well as other suspected construction sites for radar installations apparent in the photographs from the Corona film-return space photo-reconnaissance mission. The images, coupled with the ELINT data from GRAB and other SIGINT sources that tapped into the actual operating signals of Soviet radar systems, indicated that the Soviet Union was building up a defense system against the submarine-carried Polaris ballistic missiles and the country’s emerging cache of Atlas ICBMs (intercontinental ballistic missiles). “A crash program, similar to the Manhat-tan Project, was needed to detect, analyze, and counter signals from these radars and to find other ABM [anti-ballistic missile] sites in the Soviet Union,” wrote Potts, the NRO historian. That is where the NRP would come in, for both photoreconnaissance and ELINT. 44 

The emerging protocols, including a separation of ELINT collection and process-ing tasks into the control of NRO and NSA, respectively, ostensibly diminished NRL’s place in the very ELINT system its staff had invented and built into an important intelligence-gathering tool in the country’s tense standoff with the Soviet Union. With the improving portrait of the Soviet anti-ballistic and air defense radar systems, and with great concern about its extent, the urgency of more and better ELINT took a higher pitch among the nation’s defense leadership. 

One indicator of the ELINT program’s status by the nation’s top decision makers was that a Thor Able Star rocket that had been assigned for a September 29, 1961, 148 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

launch of another Transit satellite for support of the Polaris submarine fleet was diverted instead to launch an intelligence satellite. 45 Another indicator was that the previous Canes security system for the GRAB program was tightened yet more and renamed as the Hold control system. Meanwhile, the growth and reorganization with-in the nation’s intelligence infrastructure brought with it obfuscating office designa-tions—such as “composite support branch” and “fleet support section” at the Defense Intelligence Agency—that would add additional levels of camouflage. 46 

The official description of the Hold (formerly Canes) program clearly designated the GRAB innovators as continuing on as primary players. The Director of Naval Intelligence was assigned as the Project Director and given overall responsibility of the Navy program by President Kennedy. 47 

Even with all of this apparent prioritization of the GRAB program, and even though NSA at the time was claiming it had achieved a milestone in automated data processing, the growth of overall intelligence-gathering was creating procedural bottlenecks and shortages of mathematicians, programmers, and others with key skill sets. An internal report to the Director of Naval Intelligence also indicated that de-spite GRAB’s technical successes, the NSA, which had priority control over the data, had only managed to produce “two final intelligence product reports” from GRAB data and that there was little reason to believe the productivity would increase in the near future. As such, in the closing months of 1961, despite everything the NRL satellite builders had achieved, the option of closing down the GRAB program was on the table of top-level decision makers. 48 

As had become the standard practice, Lorenzen, Mayo, and their confidants at NRL formulated new ambitious plans for the program at the very time when its con-tinued existence was in question. Central among the new plans at NRL was a shift to a two-satellite configuration—what some called a “two-ball”—to improve the system’s ability to more precisely locate Soviet radars. This would significantly increase the tactical value of the data. 49 BuWeps was doing its part as a sponsor by moving the paperwork that would provide the program with $1.5 million, which was sufficient for the Countermeasures and Satellite Techniques Branches to build the components, systems, and overall satellites. Among the tasks for the NRL crew was to upgrade the ability of the GRAB receivers to cover more of the radio spectrum, a challenge that involved antenna design, power management, miniaturization, and other technical issues. 

Wald was set onto the problem of assuring the best way to track the orbital tra-jectory of ELINT satellites, since knowing the position of the spacecraft was crucially important for the task of precisely locating on the ground the source of an emitter, such as a search radar or anti-ballistic missile radar. In a report to the Technical Operations Group for Program C—as the Navy’s part of the National Reconnaissance Program came to be designated—Wald and two computer-savvy colleagues in the 149 CHAPTER 9 — RAISING T H E P E RISCOPE: GRAB 1 AND 2 

lab’s Minitrack and follow-on NAVSPASUR systems concluded that the latter orbital tracking system, of all U.S. space surveillance assets, was best suited for the job. 

At the same time, momentum was building to overcome what perhaps remained the hardest problem of all: getting the Department of Defense to procure a suitable launch vehicle. This was a good development in that in early December, 1961, there were signs coming in that GRAB 2’s days were numbered. Operators at the receiv-ing huts were reporting anomalous tracking and ELINT signals, indicators that the satellite was losing its health. The communication channel servicing the unclassified SOLRAD 3 mission failed entirely and the classified payload became unable to detect the higher frequency bands that it had been designed to listen in on. 

The launch vehicle problem was solved, in part by bundling more satellites onto one rocket than had ever been attempted before. For the next launch attempt, in Jan-uary 1962, five satellites were bundled into a cluster nicknamed “Buckshot.” NRL had three satellites in the group: a 9-pound object, dubbed SURCAL 1, that would help calibrate the NAVSPASUR system; a 60-pound satellite dubbed LOFTI 2A, which would receive very-low-frequency, water-penetrating signals in tests to see if these would also penetrate the ionosphere intact and become a new channel of communi-cation with submarines; and the 55-pound SOLRAD payload sharing the same shell with the next incarnation of a GRAB payload. Along with these satellites was Injun 2, another payload for studying the Van Allen radiation belts, and an Army communi-cations satellite. 

On the morning of January 24, 1962, a Thor Able Star booster lifted the cluster of satellites from the launchpad at Cape Canaveral, a brilliant plume trailing the soaring booster. But the second stage, after separating on schedule, exploded, sending the   

> Buckshot. Three portraits, including an artist’s rendition and a wooden model, of an ambitious and ill-fated attempt on January 24, 1962, by NRL, along with the Army, Navy, and Air Force, to launch five satellites with a single booster. The cluster was named Composite I, but the nickname Buckshot became its more familiar moniker. (NRL photos 60321.jpg, 60325.jpg, and 60327(2).jpg) 150 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE

entire five-satellite payload into the sea. 50 Three months later, on April 26—a day when NASA and the U.S.S.R. also launched missions into orbit—another attempted SOL-RAD/GRAB launch, this one from a launchpad on the west coast at the Naval Missile Facility at Point Arguello (later to be known as South Vandenberg), also ended in failure, plunging into the ocean within eyeshot of the launchpad. 51 

With those failures also went the name GRAB, but not NRL’s space-based ELINT project, which was renamed yet again to Dyno. NRL, along with BuWeps, the Navy’s sponsor for the follow-on ELINT program, established a launch schedule and budget through fiscal year 1964 involving two launches of two-satellite pairs per year. The re-naming became retroactive, which is why GRAB 1 and 2 were sometimes later referred to as Dyno 1 and 2, respectively. In practice and in time, GRAB became the primary name associated with this pathbreaking ELINT program. 

As plans for GRAB progressed, the analysis team at NSA was chugging along on the data backlog from GRAB 2 when they happened onto a mother lode from one of its collections. In a stroke of dumb luck, the satellite’s interception equipment hap-pened to be switched on to collection mode on August 6, 1961, when Russian cosmonaut Gherman Titov happened to be in orbit and happened to be experiencing problems while, in Potts’ words, “the world anxiously waited news.” 52 Apparently, the Soviets lit up much of their search radar equipment to help push toward a successful recovery of Titov (the second Soviet cosmonaut; Yuri Gagarin was the first cosmonaut and the first human in space). GRAB 2 was there to eavesdrop. These intercepts con-tributed to a new assessment of the overall payoff of GRAB by the Office of Naval In-telligence. According to Potts, the ONI assessment indicated that “one of the startling contributions of the program has been the discovery of a new radar system thought to be part of the new anti-ballistic missile complex of the Soviet Union.” 53 

That discovery had a direct bearing on the potential wartime effectiveness of Polaris missiles and had the effect of elevating NRL’s ELINT expertise to new heights. There now was anxious talk about how to maintain NRL’s “engineering excellence” and the possibility of incorporating upwards of 20 ELINT payloads in launches with scientific payloads from NRL’s space science group. BuWeps added funds from previ-ous allocations, providing the currency that both Votaw, and his staff in the Satellite Techniques Branch, and Mayo, along with his brethren in Countermeasures, required to move the program forward. 54 

However, launch failures were a problem. The April 26, 1962, launch had failed when a still-under-development Blue Scout rocket, an Air Force booster, lost attitude control and plunged into the ocean. A post-flight analysis revealed the failure was due to an incorrectly installed valve in a fuel line in the rocket’s third stage accompanied by an incorrect assumption by Air Force personnel that two devices—a red warning light and a gauge indicating that a hydrogen peroxide tank was empty—were themselves faulty. 55 151 CHAPTER 9 — RAISING T H E P E RISCOPE: GRAB 1 AND 2 

In a letter to BuWeps in response to its call for stepped-up ELINT launches, Claude Cleeton, head of NRL’s Applications Research Division, wrote that multiple failures of Thor Able Star rockets, bearing the SOLRAD and LOFTI satellites in their payload bays, had placed these programs in a precarious position and the Blue Scout failure only made the situation worse. “For the laboratory to build up enthusiastic support of a large effort on satellite development, the productivity of scientific infor-mation must be greatly improved,” Cleeton wrote, referring to the need for successful launches and missions that actually produced data. He added that the reliability of both the Blue Scout and Thor Able Star boosters, especially for multi-satellite launch-es, had to be improved. 56 

Rather than risking another Blue Scout launch in the near term, the plan was to back down from an accelerated launch schedule in order to wait for the availability of a Thor Able Star booster, which failed frequently enough but also had registered suc-cesses. Meanwhile, the Air Force’s Samos Project—primarily a photoreconnaissance program that would radio imagery data back to receiving stations on Earth rather than jettison canisters of film as in the Corona missions—was getting under way with satellites that also included ELINT capabilities. 

In addition, the Bay of Pigs debacle in Cuba back in the summer of 1961, one of the hottest episodes of the Cold War, had elicited shakeups and reassignments in the top echelons of intelligence organizations, including the National Reconnaissance Program, which had by then taken on oversight of NRL’s ELINT work. The CIA, which managed and orchestrated the secrecy protocols, renamed the GRAB follow-on program as Poppy and dubbed the new security control system as Byeman. The plan was for NRL to support four Poppy launches per year. Each Poppy mission would feature two satellites flying in a geometry and manner that would allow for improved geolocation of Soviet radar installations. The Assistant Secretary of the Navy for R&D, James Wakelin, was pushing “to expedite further coverage of the Soviet ABM system as well as other Soviet R&D and operational electronics,” according to a proposal that the Secretary of the Navy submitted to Secretary of Defense McNamara on May 21, 1962. The proposal called for attempted launches of Poppy pairs during each quarter of 1963 and 1964. 57 

For their part in the country’s early intelligence-gathering efforts from space, NRL’s satellite engineers and countermeasures experts pooled their skill sets to ferret out information about early-warning radars and other previously unknown radar sys-tems that could have had relevance in ballistic missile, air, and other national defense and military issues. Estimates by the Director of Central Intelligence of success of a U.S. bomber attack on the Soviet Union changed from the time before the first GRAB mission in June 1960 and after data from GRAB 1 and 2 had been analyzed. The early assessment stated that Soviet air defenses would probably lead to heavy U.S. losses, but that a large-scale attack by the U.S. probably still would be able to deliver many 152 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE 

high-yield nuclear weapons to Soviet targets. 58 The after-GRAB assessment remains classified, but whether the estimate of bomber survivability increased or decreased, the calculated change would have relied at least in part on GRAB data. 

In his official history of NRO’s Program C, Potts summed up the payoff of GRAB: “GRAB’s engineering legacy was on par with its intelligence results. Existing [elec-tronic countermeasures] technology was readily exportable to space applications. Feasibility of intelligence collection by satellite was demonstrated. A platform in outer space could collect as much as all the platforms in the field of view—at a fraction of their cost and at no risk to personnel. The output, initially overwhelming, stimulated invention of machine processing of digitized data using commercial computers. Relatively sophisticated space and ground equipment could be operated by soldiers, sailors, airmen, and civilian technicians. All elements of the community, agencies and departments could participate in collection, processing, and exploitation of the information derived. Intelligence could partner with science, without reducing effectiveness of either payload. Three years after transfer of NRL’s Vanguard team to NASA, DoN [Department of the Navy] has resurrected an in-house capability for quick response production of small satellites and ground equipment to meet multiple defense needs.” 59 

Between 1963 and 1969, the country invested each year in the space-based ELINT program as much as it did during the five year period between 1958, when GRAB was conceived of at a Howard Johnson’s in Pennsylvania, and 1963, the year in which the second Poppy launch took place. “By whatever name,” wrote Potts, “Tattle-tale, Canes, GRAB, GREB, SOLRAD, Hold, Dyno, Poppy—the project was a success and had only just begun.” 60   

> Team GRAB. Key contributors at NRL to the GRAB program worked within the Satellite Techniques Branch (top) and the Countermeasures Branch (bottom). (NRL photos, GRAB binder, all personnel names available)

153 CHAPTER 9 — RAISING T H E P E RISCOPE: GRAB 1 AND 2  

> 1

Ronald L. Potts, U.S. Navy/NRO Program C Electronic Intelligence Satellites (1957–1977) , LEO Systems Program Office, National Reconnaissance Office, September 3, 1988, declassified with redactions and approved for release from NRO on June 13, 2012, p. 37. 2 Reid Mayo, quoted from NRL-produced video, “GRAB—NRL’s Secret Success in Space,” released in 1998 when GRAB was declassified 3 Bruce Wald, draft of memoir shared with author. 4 Robert A. McDonald and Sharon K. Moreno, Raising the Periscope…GRAB and Poppy: Ameri-ca’s Early ELINT Satellites , (Chantilly, VA: Center for the Study of National Reconnaissance, National Reconnaissance Office, September 2005). 5 NRL’s Space Science Division (SSD) has earned itself a solid place of historical significance in the history of science and technology. X-ray and Lyman-alpha sensors on the first SOLRAD mission verified sounding rocket indications that shortwave radio fade-out was caused by solar X-ray emissions. From 1960 to 1976, NRL’s SOLRAD satellites were the first spacecraft to monitor an entire 11-year solar cycle. As the nation’s longest continuing series of satellite projects dedicated to a specific research program, SOLRAD satellites collected unprecedented data sets for statistical analysis, making it possible to monitor and compare transient events such as solar flares, and recording long-term changes in the whole sun’s radiative output. More-over, SSD researchers have contributed many instruments to NASA heliophysics spacecraft. For example, NRL’s observations in 1971 on the seventh of NASA’s Orbiting Solar Observatory (OSO) series discovered the existence of coronal mass ejections (CMEs), the science of which SSD built upon in later missions. For example, the SolWind payload (P78-1), launched in 1979, gathered data on 998 CMEs and established a direct connection between CMEs and interplan-etary shocks. And later, SSD’s contribution to the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory program verified that CMEs drive major space weather events and geomagnetic storms and also helped explain the relationship between flares and CMEs. There is so much to SSD’s story that it would take a book to convey. 6 Peter Wilhelm, interview with NRL Historian Leo Slater, August 29, 2009. 7 Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 29, 2009. 8 Peter Wilhelm, quoted from NRL-produced video, “GRAB—NRL’s Secret Success in Space,” released in 1998 when GRAB was declassified. 9 Peter Wilhelm, quoted from NRL-produced video, “GRAB—NRL’s Secret Success in Space,” released in 1998 when GRAB was declassified. 10 Charlie Price’s son, George Price, would later work for the lab. 11 Potts, U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 43. 12 Potts, p. 44. 13 “GRAB: Galactic Radiation and Background: First Reconnaissance Satellite,” pamphlet pre-pared by NRL (revised edition, April 2000). 14 Potts, U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 45. 15 Reid Mayo, in Beyond Expectations—Building an American National Reconnaissance Capa-bility, Recollections of the Pioneers and Founders of National Reconnaissance (Bethesda, MD: National Reconnaissance Office and the American Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 2002), p. 135. 16 Mayo in Beyond Expectations , p. 136. 17 Potts, U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 48. 18 Potts, pp. 49–50. 19 Peter Wilhelm, interview with author, February 16, 2012. 20 Potts, U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 49. 21 Mayo in Beyond Expectations , pp. 136–137. 22 Wald, memoir shared with author. 23 Potts, U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 51 24 Mayo in Beyond Expectations , p. 137. 154 NRL AND T H E SPACE AGE  

> 25

Potts, U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 52. 26 Potts, p. 53. 27 The Soviets began their space-based ELINT program in 1960, but did not succeed at placing ELINT satellites (several in the Tselina series) into orbit until 1967. See http://www.russians-paceweb.com/tselina.html; http://space.skyrocket.de/doc_sdat/tselina-o.htm; http://www. russianspaceweb.com/tselina.html. 28 W.A. McDougall, The Heavens and the Earth: A Political History of the Space Age (New York: Basic Books, 1985), pp. 257–261. 29 D.H. Gridley and B.L. Sarahan, “Design of the Naval Research Laboratory Computer,” Elec-trical Engineering 70, no. 2, (February 1951): 111, doi: 10.1109/EE.1951.6437257, http:// ieeex-plore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6437257&isnumber=6437242. 30 Wald, memoir shared with author. 31 Potts, U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 54. 32 Potts, p. 54. 33 Potts, p. 55. 34 Fred Weldon is referring here to the Strategic Air Command. 35 Potts, U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 56. 36 Potts, p. 58. 37 Potts, pp. 58–59. 38 Robert D. Mulcahy, Jr., ed., “Corona Star Catchers: Interviews with the Air Force Aerial Re-covery Flight Crews of the 6593d Test Squadron (Special), 1958–1972” (Chantilly, VA: Center for the Study of National Reconnaissance, National Reconnaissance Office, 2012), http://www. nro.gov/history/csnr/corona/StarCatchersWeb.pdf. 39 Potts, U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 62. 40 Potts, p. 64. 41 Potts, p. 68. 42 Richard Bissell played pivotal roles in the conception and management of the U-2 spy plane program in the 1950s and its follow-on reconnaissance aircraft program in the early 1960s that led to the SR-71 Blackbird. 43 Potts, U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 74. 44 Potts, p. 74. 45 Potts, p. 75. 46 Potts, p. 77. 47 Potts, pp. 76–77. 48 Potts, pp. 77–78. 49 Wald, memoir shared with author. 50 Potts, U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 80. 51 Potts, p. 82. 52 Potts, p. 81. 53 Potts, p. 81. 54 Potts, p. 82. 55 James Winkler, memoir shared with author, page 10. 56 Potts, U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 82. 57 Potts, p. 83. 58 Potts, p. 85. 59 Potts, pp. 85–86. 60 Potts, p. 86. 155 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

# DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

Little was known about how the establishment in September 1961 of the Nation-

al Reconnaissance Office would change the administration and execution of NRL’s 

activities in the Poppy program. What was clear was that the NRO’s focus would be 

on rockets and satellites, the hardware. Also clear was that the funding, budgeting, 

and programming roles that the Bureau of Weapons (BuWeps) had played in NRL’s 

ELINT satellite program would be taken over by the Office of Missiles and Satellite 

Systems within the Office of the Secretary of the Air Force (SAFMS). This was the 

NRO office, hidden within the organizational structure of the Air Force, which was at 

the top of a top-secret Navy program manned by Navy personnel. 

Even as the center of balance of the Navy’s program began to shift to a national 

context for oversight, Navy brass played the role of the hovering parent. “Project 

Poppy is entering a new phase of operations beginning in November [1962] when the 

first two-ball will be launched in orbit,” the Director of Naval Intelligence (DNI), Rear 

Admiral Vernon Lowrance, wrote to the head of the Naval Security Group in a letter, 

dated July 20, 1962, which outlined increased requirements for the project. “Two-

ball” was insider-speak for a two-satellite system that would be better than the single 

GRAB payloads at locating radar emitters in addition to determining their RF char-

acteristics. Wrote DNI Lowrance, “This will be the first launch for the Navy under the 

auspices of the National Reconnaissance Office and it is desired to maintain the same 

high degree of performance we have had in this program in the past.” 1

For one thing, each ground site now would require two receiving huts and ad-

ditional sets of trained personnel to operate them. The President’s Science Advisory 

Committee (PSAC) had examined improved capabilities that could come from the 

additional data of a two-satellite approach, combined with powerful new computers 

and machine processing techniques. Mathematics, algorithms, and programming 

were becoming as important as the hardware. 

In this same summer of 1962, the NRO took on a form that it would have for 

several decades. Its primary organizational compartments would become known as 

Programs A, B, C, and D, respectively. 2

Program A centered on Air Force programs in overhead reconnaissance, which 

included SIGINT components. The program would be managed out of the Air Force 

Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO). Program A also would have the 

cross-cutting responsibility of procuring the boosters to get all NRO satellites into 

orbit, regardless of which lettered program they were part of. 

# 10 156 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Program B subsumed aerial and satellite photoreconnaissance, such as the U-2 and 

Corona programs, respectively, which had been and would continue to be managed and 

sponsored by the CIA. 

Program C, under the direction of DNI Lowrance, was the continuation of the Na -

vy’s ELINT program known by code names Dyno (GRAB) and Poppy. 

Program D, managed by the Strategic Air Command (SAC), focused on aerial 

reconnaissance over adversaries’ territories but also subsumed SAC’s analysis of ELINT 

data, including that collected from NRL’s satellites, for determining flight plans for the 

nation’s fleet of strategic bombers. 

As was the case before NRL’s ELINT satellite work became part of the new NRO’s 

portfolio, DNI Lowrance set up a multi-agency Technical Operations Group (TOG). 

It included specialists in intelligence requirements, rockets and missiles, orbital issues, 

signal and data handling, field operations, and other technical areas that space-based 

ELINT entailed. For the Poppy program, NRL’s Howard Lorenzen retained his role as the 

technical director and primary champion on the TOG. And Reid Mayo, a TOG alter -

nate, remained a leading project engineer, especially with respect to the ground-based 

command, control, and data reception components of the overall system. As 

before, the National Security Agency (NSA) oversaw the handling, processing, interpre-

tation, and packaging of the data. The Naval Security Group oversaw the field station 

operations, most notably of the command and control huts. Among other military bod-

ies represented on the TOG were the Army Security Agency and the Air Force Security 

Service to help the Army and Air Force coordinate with the program. 

As all of this new infrastructure within the NRO was coming together in 1962, 

GRAB 2 already had stopped operating and any new ELINT satellite within Program 

C was months away at least. This meant that NRL would be unable to provide satellite 

ELINT data throughout an alarming development in the North Atlantic that would 

emerge as perhaps the most tense and dangerous episode through the Cold War. 

According to an NRO-released history of GRAB and Poppy, “in the summer and early 

fall of 1962, the U.S. intelligence community was gathering information on a military 

buildup in Cuba, by means of human intelligence derived from interviews of Cuban 

refugees,” analysis of shipping traffic by the Office of Naval Intelligence, photorecon-

naissance imagery in the CIA’s U-2 program (NRO Program B), and communications 

intercepts from spy ships operated by the Naval Security Group. 3

A U-2 overflight of Cuba on October 14 yielded photographic evidence that offen-

sive missile installations were being built. Follow-on high-flying U-2 flights, including 

one that was shot down, and even more perilous low-altitude reconnaissance missions, 

yielded more details about a Soviet military buildup in Cuba: medium to intermediate 

range SAMS (surface-to-air missiles), MIG-21 fighters, Ilyushin-28 bombers, missile 

guidance and target tracking radars, guided-missile patrol boats, and military person-

nel. Also detected were up to a dozen Soviet-bloc ships potentially carrying arms to-

ward the Caribbean Sea. The stage was being set for the infamous Cuban Missile Crisis. 4157 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

In the coming weeks, President Kennedy opted for an aggressive response in-

volving (1) a naval quarantine of Cuba to prevent any further deliveries of military 

equipment or missiles that could threaten the United States, (2) harassing Soviet attack 

submarines (which were carrying nuclear torpedoes) 5 in the northern Atlantic, and 

(3) preparing for a Marine amphibious assault on Cuba. All of the military services 

mobilized personnel and assets for a confrontation in Cuba, while the full strength of 

U.S. strategic forces, including nuclear-tipped ballistic missiles and submarine-carried 

Polaris missiles, were trained on Soviet cities and military installations. The brinkman-

ship suddenly eased on October 28 when Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed 

to withdraw the weapons he had amassed in Cuba in exchange for an assurance by 

President Kennedy that the U.S. would not invade Cuba and that the U.S. would lift the 

blockade. 

As the Cuban Missile Crisis came and went at the end of 1962, NRL’s Satellite 

Techniques Branch was amidst a busy and frustrating year. It began with the loss of the 

multi-satellite “Buckshot,” which included three NRL satellites, including what would 

now be known as GRAB 3. That loss was followed in late April by the failure of the Air 

Force’s Blue Scout booster, which took the last GRAB payload built, along with the 

SOLRAD 4 payload for measuring solar X-rays, into the Pacific Ocean instead of into 

orbit. 

Undaunted, the Satellite Techniques Branch was looking forward to future launch-

es and was continuing to develop new ways of doing things that would become part 

of NRL’s space engineering culture. Engineer Charlie Gorday, for one, was getting fed 

up with the existing practice of creating comedically long schematic charts of all of 

the “black boxes” and connectors of a payload’s electrical systems and then drawing in 

lines to represent all of the systems interconnections. So he developed a computerized 

alternative to represent these numerous electrical connections. James Winkler, a long-

time engineer and manager in payload electrical systems, recalled the procedure: 

“Charlie informed us that for each contact on each connector, an IBM card must 

be generated. The huge box of cards resulting were then fed into a computer that, us-

ing the special program involved, would produce the desired list. It sounded like a lot 

of work: first, the engineer or technician designing the [electrical] harness had to fill 

out many 80-column IBM sheets with the necessary data. Then a clerk would type in 

the data from the sheet into a cardpunch machine. Then the cards had to be checked 

(no ‘hanging chads’) and fed into the computer. There could be no mistakes at any of 

the steps along the way, but in spite of this and the sheer volume of work involved, 

we plunged into the effort and, lo and behold, it worked. Charlie’s system worked! We 

would never have to make those ridiculously long harness drawings again…For all our 

subsequent satellites and spacecraft, this approach was employed. Of course, with the 

advent of the personal computer, it became possible to type the data directly into the 

computer and then call for a printout from the same computer.” 6158 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Winkler recalls another example of innovation, this one by technician Joe Valsi, 

who was the STB’s foremost technician in electrical connections and wiring. Like 

many of his fellow technicians, Valsi had developed his top-notch skills at the Capitol 

Radio Engineering Institute (CREI) in Washington, DC. Valsi “had done a lot of 

research on the latest products available for our applications,” Winkler wrote in a 

memoir. “A major change that Joe introduced into our systems was the concept of 

crimp connections. There was a general opinion in the branch that crimp connections 

were not reliable enough for flight systems. Eventually Joe was able to demonstrate 

that the technology had improved and when proper quality control procedures were 

implemented, crimp connections would be more reliable than soldered connections.” 7

At the same time, to make sure that soldered connections on the printed wiring 

boards that went into the payloads were reliable, the STB began sending all of its 

assemblers to a soldering school, which the young NASA had established and had 

required all of its employees and contractor employees to attend. “Quality Assurance” 

(QA) was becoming a common term and a central practice throughout the still young 

space technology community. It was in 1963 that NRL began what would become a 

long-term contractual partnership with the high-tech QA firm Assurance Technology 

Corporation. 

Every innovation counted because with the two-satellite architecture, the new 

Poppy program would double just about everything: the weight of the payload that 

needed to get into orbit, the number of receiving huts on the ground, the number of 

personnel trained to operate the huts and handle the data. Each of the satellites also 

morphed into a stretched sphere of sorts by the addition of a 3.5-inch ring between 

the two hemispheres, which previously had formed the 20-inch spherical GRAB satel-

lites. Each assembled Poppy satellite now weighed in at 55 pounds. 8

Charlie Price, a master of logistics at NRL, including working with foreign 

authorities, took care of procuring the additional command and control huts and 

data-receiving (interrogation) huts that the Poppy program required. Price made sure 

that the two huts at each site, spaced 100 to 150 feet apart and linked with an inter- 

> Mock Poppy . The successor program to GRAB,
> known as Poppy, ran from 1962 to 1977. Shown
> here is a model of Poppy 2, the second of seven
> launches during the program. (NRL photo Poppy2.
> jpg) 159 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY

com, were upgraded with new receivers for the tracking signal; more capable ELINT 

data links; and a special 30-foot antenna to receive radio-based time signals that would 

help analysts of the data to localize detected radar emissions. 9 To improve the ability 

of hut operators to tune their receivers, each hut was equipped with the latest oscillo-

scopes. 

Meanwhile, mathematicians and programmers at NRL, under the guidance of Dr. 

Bruce Wald, supported NSA by streamlining the data processing protocols and adapt-

ing procedures for new, more powerful computers. Mayo turned to Don Christman for 

getting hold of additional recorders—including some of the first ones to be fully transis-

torized—from the electronic instruments firm Consolidated Electrodynamics. For his 

part, Lorenzen met with liaisons in London, Paris, and Frankfurt while also managing 

to make visits to hut sites overseas. New security measures precluded any hut operators 

from being married to foreign spouses, so some of those who worked on the GRAB 

program had to shift their services to more conventional (non-space-based) ELINT 

work. In NRL’s main administration building, Building 43, a windowless vault was built 

for ultrasecure meetings regarding Poppy. 

Out in California, at Vandenberg Air Force Base, Marty Votaw, head of STB, 

worked with partners from the Air Force and the Lockheed Missiles and Space Com-

pany to prepare the launch facilities, including a permanent NRL building, Building 

660, at Vandenberg’s Point Arguello. The first Poppy mission launched on December 13, 

1962, just a few weeks after DNI Lowrance had suggested it would go up. 10  Along with 

the Poppy hardware were two payloads associated with satellite surveillance, one that 

transmitted specific and known emissions to be picked up by the Naval Space Surveil-

lance System (NAVSPASUR) and one with a known spherical shape whose reflected 

signal from the space fence could be carefully analyzed. The first of these calibration 

payloads, SURCAL 2, proved to be more of a problem than a help because its emitter 

jammed the NAVSPASUR system’s receiving antenna for about 10 seconds on each pass 

until the payload burned up in the atmosphere three years later. 11 

A partly declassified NRO-produced history of the Poppy program indicates that 

the ELINT satellites performed well and remained healthy even as the Satellite Tech-

niques Branch was designing the next set of more capable Poppy satellites. Price teamed 

with Edgar Withrow and other hut experts to prepare additional interrogation huts 

for new, more eastern locations. These huts would extend coverage for the next pair of 

Poppy satellites beyond the first Poppy pair’s bias for the western and central regions of 

the Soviet Union. Withrow, along with a small army of technicians and engineers in 

other administrative units at NRL, took care of this expansion of the hut sites, as well as 

the acquisition and construction of antenna systems and other components. 12 

As had been the case for the GRAB program, the long period between harvesting 

the data from satellite receivers over Soviet territory and delivery of that data to end 

users emerged as a critical shortcoming of the ELINT program. To open up a channel 

for quicker response capability, the Naval Security Group authorized hut personnel to 160 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

“report electronically” any signals with novel pulse repetition frequencies (PRFs) or 

any other characteristics that seemed unusual. To help with that task, NRL devel-

oped additional in-hut equipment for analyzing recorded data and flagging anything 

unusual. 

On June 15, 1963, the next pair of Poppy satellites (Poppy 2), each weighing 85 

pounds, was placed in orbit from Vandenberg. These featured 50 percent more solar 

cell coverage, so there was more power available than before, up to 9 watts, depending 

on the satellite’s orientation with respect to the sun. Sharing the ride aboard the Thor 

Agena D booster were four additional NRL payloads: (1) SOLRAD 6, (2) a radia-

tion-counting payload named Dosimeter, (3) LOFTI 2B for the characterization of 

low-frequency radio communication from space to submarines, and (4) SURCAL 3 

for calibrating the Space Surveillance System. 13 

The implementation of “matrix management” helped NRL’s satellite builders to 

assemble so many payloads in parallel, Winkler noted. “This type of organization was 

based on establishing a project team with personnel provided by the usual hierarchi-

cal organization,” Winkler explained. “To implement this system we would assign an 

engineer as Spacecraft Manager and two technicians as Spacecraft Technical Manag-

ers. After completing their responsibilities at the subsystem level (design, develop-

ment, and test), the personnel would be involved with the integration and test at the 

system level. They would then proceed to the launch site and complete the pre-launch 

checkout of their satellite and assist in the launch and post launch operations.” In the 

matrix, some personnel would be able to work on several payloads at once, but under 

the supervision of different managers. 14 

In the end, the quintet of payloads launched on June 15, 1963 only lasted about 

six weeks in orbit. The Thor Agena D rocket that had taken this gaggle of payloads  

> Team Poppy . Members of the satellite and launch team for Poppy 2 and its four other NRL payloads pose for a group
> shot at Vandenberg Air Force Base. James Winkler is standing straight in the middle and Peter Wilhelm, with a flat-top
> haircut, is in the back on the right. (Source: Winkler binder)

161 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

into orbit failed to initiate a burn that would have taken the payloads into their 

intended circular trajectories. Instead, they ended up in an elliptical orbit that cycled 

them in as close as 95 miles, low enough that atmospheric drag quickly took hold and 

began to cause their orbits to decay. Though details remain hidden from public view, 

an NRO history of Poppy suggests that this second Poppy mission yielded a signifi-

cant piece of ELINT intelligence. 15 

As both secret and scientific satellites were becoming more commonplace in the 

early Space Age, the commercialization of space also was getting under way. Among 

the most visible developments was the creation of the commercial communication 

company COMSAT in 1962. It immediately drew upon the talent and players within 

the existing satellite community, including some of NRL’s ELINT satellite pioneers. 

Among them was Marty Votaw, the man perhaps most responsible for preserving 

any satellite skill set at all at NRL after the Vanguard team transferred to NASA in 

1958. COMSAT hired him away from NRL in 1963 as a project engineer for a then 

still-conceptual communications satellite program called Early Bird. 16 

In August 1963, Ed Dix, whom Peter Wilhelm later rated as “the best engineer -

ing teacher I ever had,” stepped into Votaw’s shoes as NRL’s chief satellite builder for 

NRO’s Program C and as primary liaison with the launch operation at Vandenberg 

Air Force Base. The Poppy program was growing at this time. The Countermeasures 

Branch had three major players devoted to the Poppy program and each of them had 

a team to supervise. Reid Mayo was a ground station engineer while playing the larg-

er role as the overall project engineer. Vince Rose was in charge of the payload. Edgar 

Withrow focused on the technical task of communicating with the payload from the 

ground. Under the supervision of Price were branch engineers who supported Mayo, 

Rose, and Withrow. Also kicking in here in specific tasks was NRL’s Engineering Ser-

vices Division, which was staffed with skilled machinists and technicians who could 

take any engineering idea and turn it into hardware.  

> STB Bosses . Marty Votaw (left) and
> Ed Dix, who succeeded Votaw in 1963
> to become the second head of NRL’s
> Satellite Techniques Branch, work on
> SOLRAD 3. The same spherical shell
> carried an unclassified payload for
> studying solar X-rays and a classified
> one, GRAB 2, for spying on Soviet
> electronic signals emanating primarily
> from radar systems. (NRL photo 60383.
> jpg) 162 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

At the time, the Satellite Techniques Branch consisted of 15 professional staff and 

25 technicians distributed among six sections focusing on systemsdesign (run by Pete 

Wilhelm), structures design (Robert Rovinski), telemetry systems (James Winkler), 

RF systems (Patrick Cudmore), power sources (Albert Canal), and ground instru -

mentation (Ralph Gran). Each of these sections and related skill sets would morph, 

expand, and evolve in the coming decades. During the early years of the Poppy pro -

gram, the STB had been gaining internal notoriety at the NRO for its cost-effective 

delivery of satellite systems and often was cited for leverage during ne- gotiations with 

contractors bidding with high prices for defense aerospace contracts. With Poppy 3 in 

testing phases and Poppy 4 already in the planning stages, the Poppy program seemed 

to be in a more stable operational phase than the NRL team had experienced before. 17 

January 11, 1964, was a good day for the program. Rather than experiencing 

another failure, the Douglas and Lockheed teams responsible for the Thor Agena D 

booster succeeded in getting the Poppy 3 pair into a nearly circular orbit 500 miles 

overhead from the launch pad at Point Arguello. The Poppy program had been devel-

oped with stand-alone classified payloads in mind, but like the old days of GRAB, one 

of these Poppy satellites hosted a SOLRAD payload, in this case SOLRAD 7A, which, 

in addition to its scientific mission, once again served as a public cover for the secret 

payload. 18 

The satellites featured an innovation—gravity gradient stabilization—that helped 

the spacecraft’s ELINT antennas to maintain a constant angle toward the Earth. 

NRL’s version of the technique, developed in collaboration with General Electric and 

managed by NRL mechanical engineer Robert Beal, centered on a deployable, weight-

tipped boom whose mass, which is gravitationally attracted to the Earth, enforces a 

particular spacecraft-to-planet aspect. Bill Collins, Winkler noted, was NRL’s boom 

expert and made sure the systems were reliable yet lightweight enough to be launch-

able. 19  Wilhelm added that NRL’s version of gravity gradient stabilization for orbiting 

payloads derived from a retractable so-called whip antenna that the Canadian subsid-

iary of the aircraft company de Havilland had designed for tank communications. 

“It was a prestressed beryllium-copper ribbon,” recalled Wilhelm. “Basically, if 

you uncoiled the thing and laid it down on the table, it would fold into a tube.” 

Wilhelm and his colleagues in the Satellite Techniques Branch first used metallic 

ribbon for making extendable and retractable antennas on their LOFTI 1 and LOFTI 

2 payloads—in 1961 and 1964, respectively—for investigating low-frequency commu-

nication with submerged submarines. 20  “It was a motor-driven beryllium copper tape 

that laid flat on a spool and as you turned the spool and ran the thing out, the beryl-

lium copper would form into a cylinder and would give you a structurally reasonably 

strong boom and you could send it out 40 or 50 feet with a mass on the end of it,” 

Wilhelm explained. 21  The mass would be attracted downward by Earth’s gravitation 

and thereby keep the payload oriented with its antennas facing downward. 163 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

“So we took that unit that originally had been a whip antenna and modified it 

into a structural boom for the gravity gradient stabilization,” Wilhelm said, noting 

that over time, that innovation, and modifications derived from it, became part of the 

design of some 40 satellites. 22  Because the gravity stabilization systems made sure, in 

Wilhelm’s words, that “we always were looking down at Earth, we could conserve on 

the numbers of antennas.” The GRAB payloads, which were not stabilized and spun as 

they orbited, had to have antennas all around them. In lieu of the extra antennas, Wil -

helm noted, NRL’s Poppy team “could pack more electronics into those satellites.” 23 

The Poppy 4 satellite set was under construction for a tentative launch date in 

November 1964. Adding to the challenge was that commercial transistors were be-

coming available for amplifying radio frequency signals. The shift promised that the 

satellite receivers made with these would be more sensitive and also capable of being 

more selective regarding the swaths of the radio frequency spectrum upon which they 

could eavesdrop. The changeover, therefore, could yield more intelligence about the 

Soviet Union’s radar order of battle. But it required that NRL’s engineering team make 

what to Lorenzen was a harrowing shift from tried-and-true vacuum tube electronics. 

“Lorenzen was a very old-fashioned guy and didn’t take to new-fangled things 

very easily,” Wilhelm recalled. “And we had a hell of a time convincing Howard that 

we ought to get away from the analog and move into the digital. And, you know, 

Howard—he looked at the number of transistors in these digital circuits, and he 

counted up the number of transistors compared to an analog [circuit], where there’s 

very few [parts], and by that simple logic, you know, the analog had to be more reli-

able. Well, turns out it wasn’t so true … And on one satellite, to mollify Howard, we 

actually flew both. And the digital worked just great, never failed, and so there was no 

looking back after that.” 24 

Every change in a satellite’s design or componentry, no matter how slight, entails 

more testing, integration, analyses, and, therefore, time. Even as Lorenzen’s Counter-

measures Branch and Dix’s Satellite Techniques Branch worked at their top speeds, 

the delivery date for the Poppy 4 satellites slipped to February 1965. The Office of Na -

val Intelligence (ONI) balked at the delay at first and wanted NRL to consider deliv -

ery earlier of a less capable satellite package, but Lorenzen convinced ONI leadership 

that the added capability the fully equipped satellites would deliver was worth the 

wait. As the NRL engineers assembled the satellites, Vince Rose’s knack for selecting 

and designing antennas and determining their precise placement was assuring that 

Poppy 4 would deliver what Lorenzen promised it would. 25 

In anticipation of the additional data handling and analysis challenges that the 

next sets of satellites would bring, Lorenzen managed to convince the Office of 

Naval Research to approve the hiring in March 1964 of two new personnel from the 

Pennsylvania firm HRB Singer, already well known by Lorenzen for its expertise in 

electronics for countermeasures technologies. One of them was Lee Hammarstrom, 164 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

then a young electrical engineer who had earned a strong reputation for his work in 

signals intelligence related both to Soviet surface-to-air missile defenses and anti-bal-

listic missile systems. 26  The other HRB hire was a contract technician, Army veteran 

James O’Connor, who would contribute for many years to NRL’s classified satellite 

programs. 27 

Hammarstrom found himself in a high-tech candy store of sorts. Among his new 

boss’s deputies was James Trexler. High on Trexler’s list was the design and implemen-

tation of a 600-foot antenna at Sugar Grove, West Virginia, as part of the overall quest 

to intercept Soviet signals, including ones from radars deep inside Soviet territory, as 

they reflected from the moon. Another manager above Hammarstrom, Mack Sheets, 

was leading a team that was developing high frequency direction finding (HF/DF) 

capabilities around the globe for tapping into HF signals from ships, aircraft, and sub-

marines deployed by the Soviet Union and other countries. And just about everyone 

in the branch was working on Poppy, which was proving to be far more successful at 

collecting electronic intelligence than the GRAB program had been. Even so, the Pop-

py program was badly in need of modernization in what were the early years of the 

microelectronics revolution. End users of Poppy data at the National Security Agency 

and elsewhere were complaining about the data quality, Hammarstrom recalled, add-

ing that Poppy “was not a system likely to survive” reviews by senior decision makers 

in the intelligence community. 28 

Hammarstrom would become a pivotal fix-it man for the Poppy system, partic-

ularly regarding the ground stations that were as near as Hybla Valley in suburban 

Virginia and as far away as the other side of the planet. A multi-site overseas trip was 

quite a trial by fire. “I went through Anchorage, Alaska, just after the 1964 earth-

quake, then spent days trapped in blizzard-like conditions on the Aleutian Island 

chain,” he recounted. “Later, I was trapped by a Class 4 typhoon that killed a number 

of people. To top this off, when I was travelling to one of the sites, we were ambushed 

by people from a Communist uprising; fortunately our guards drove them off.” 29 

The major recommendations Hammarstrom would bring back to Lorenzen were 

to (1) enact a “crash effort” to equip the stations with computer and other electronic  

> Fix-it Man . Lee Hammarstrom, shown
> here in 1983 (years after the Poppy
> program had run its course) with a globe
> depicting satellite orbits, played a variety
> of leadership roles at NRL, as well as with
> the NRO and other government bodies.
> He played behind-the-scenes roles in a
> host of technology development programs
> thematically connected by the task of
> moving and processing more bits of data
> more efficiently, more widely, and with
> more agility. (NRL photo P-2522(4).jpg) 165 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY

equipment that would enable trained personnel to locally vet the raw Poppy data so 

that further processing by SAC or NSA analysts would be more efficient and fruitful, 

and (2) undertake longer-term and larger-scale rethinking about the Poppy system’s 

overall architecture. 

The first recommendation derived from Hammarstrom’s direct observations 

of what he sometimes viewed as reprehensible conditions at the collections huts 

overseas. “The sites’ collections capabilities were degraded by local radio frequency 

noise from generators and equipment installed after the original 1960 deployments,” 

Hammarstrom recounted. When ordered to do so, operators at the huts would turn 

on receiving equipment, collect data on tapes, and then have the tapes sent to NSA by 

secure courier. “Months after it was collected, the people at NSA tried to analyze and 

process the data by hand or to digitize it,” Hammarstrom explained. “Since there were 

so many things that could go wrong—site noise interference, receivers being mis-

tuned, poor tracking, recorders in saturation—not many tapes were useful.” He was 

going to make it his mission to rectify these problems, and then some. 30 

The more ambitious recommendation to revamp Poppy’s entire architecture 

would get Hammarstrom used to a visionary level of thinking about technolo-

gy-based intelligence possibilities. More than that, he would later find himself in a 

position to turn audacious visions into realities, due in part to what amounted to a 

perfect consilience of projects in his early years at HRB Singer and elsewhere. Those 

experiences placed him in contact with a slew of individuals who would become pow-

erful decision makers within the defense and intelligence communities. With them, 

Hammarstrom would in the 1990s help to develop, for example, an intelligence-gath-

ering and distribution system known as the Global Information Grid. It amounted to 

a specialized big-pipe Internet—suitable for flowing massive amounts of encrypted 

and highly sensitive data—for the entire defense community, from the Secretary of 

the Navy to individual warfighters, no matter where they were on the ground or seas 

or in the sky. 31 

When Programs C’s Technical Operations Group 32  requested money from NRO 

to retool Poppy’s satellites and ground stations with digital technologies, the head of 

the NRO at the time, Dr. Brockway McMillan, rejected the request and asked instead 

for a feasibility study. It felt like a blow to most in the program, but to Wald, it was 

an opportunity. The study, he was sure, would lead to architectural improvements 

from stem to stern—from the harvesting of radar-revealing information in the raw 

intercepted data, to better early identifications of “signals of interest” at field stations, 

to streamlining the conversion of raw data into digital forms suitable for computer 

analysis at NSA and other intelligence venues. Wald eagerly took on the NRO request 

and within a month he had produced a dense, seven-page draft analysis for McMil-

lan. 33 

“The new architecture had to be changed so that the sites were not just collec-

tors and forwarders of data, as in the original architecture, but also were doing all 166 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

of the ground functions of high quality data capture, storage and processing, as well 

as dissemination, not only to NSA but other users,” explained Hammarstrom, who 

also performed an analysis at Lorenzen’s behest. 34  His findings regarding the satellites 

remain classified to this day. As for the ground stations, he concluded they needed 

higher-gain antennas and signal preamplifiers that could improve the quality of data 

harvested from the satellites; digitizers and buffering and storage components that 

could handle higher data rates without losing data or mixing up the sequence of its 

reception; and computers that could collect data in real time, quickly calculate satel-

lite orbits, process data with sophisticated algorithms, and support dissemination of 

the data. 

The conclusion of Wald’s analysis concurred, noting particularly that essential 

electronic equipment was not on hand and would not be available for some months. 

Not one to deny realities, Wald suggested that NRL and NSA immediately begin a 

joint development program for new technology that would help solve the chronic 

problem of rendering the torrential flow of raw Poppy-intercepted data into useful 

information quickly enough to be valuable for strategic and even tactical actions. In 

short, Wald was challenging himself and his NRL colleagues to leverage the emerging 

revolution in digital electronics to overhaul the entire data path, from spacecraft to 

ground station to end users. All of this emphasis on data would become an important 

driver of NRL’s space technology mission in the decades to come. 

The full package Wald and Hammarstrom were suggesting would have to wait for 

funding, but the analyses spelled out many technical advantages to digitization. 

And some of the milestones they identified in these proposals were ones that could be 

achieved stepwise even within existing budgetary constraints. Meanwhile, data from 

Poppy 3, the mission launched in January 1964, continued to justify the program: 

though much of its data was noisy and unusable, some of it enabled NSA analysts to 

identify the function and ability of radar installations that had been imaged via pho-

toreconnaissance assets. In the winter of 1964–1965, Poppy 3 pulled in a particularly 

rich set of intercepts whose details remain classified. 35 

On March 9, 1965, the Poppy 4 payloads—two sets of two—shared a ride atop 

a Thor Agena D rocket with three other NRL-made scientific satellites and an Army 

satellite for precisely determining specific points on the ground. This group of space-

craft comprised a world record launch of multiple payloads simultaneously. On NRL’s 

public list of satellite and payload launches, the Poppy payloads are listed cryptical-

ly as PL 142 (two satellites), GGSE 1, and GGSE 2. NRL’s other payloads included 

another in the SURCAL series, another “object identification” test satellite (this one a 

twelve-sided version called Dodecapole 1), and another in the SOLRAD series (SOL-

RAD 7B). Two of the Poppy satellites harbored “Gravity Gradient Space Experiments” 

(GGSEs), which featured retractable, mass-tipped booms that would help keep the 

spacecraft’s antenna pointing Earthward. Among the other innovations of this Poppy 

set were “micropound thrusters” that enabled ground controllers to trigger what 167 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

some called “mouse farts” 36  in order to alter the orbital velocity of the spacecraft with 

unprecedented precision in response to orbital changes due to, say, subtle atmospher-

ic drag. 37  The SURCAL 4 payload provided an orbiting reference for calibration of the 

NAVSPASUR system. The Dodecapole 1, with a dozen thin booms extending outward 

so to make the spacecraft look like an orbiting daddy longlegs, served a similar cali-

bration role. 

The transmitters of the Poppy 4 satellites had a problem resulting in lower-pow-

er signals, it turned out. “This required an immediate redesign and deployment of a 

higher performance antenna system” at the ground stations, Hammarstrom recalled. 

A good result that came of this, he continued, was a quicker upgrade than would have 

happened if the transmitters worked as originally expected. “This turned out to be a 

big advantage for Poppy when the President’s Scientific Advisory Committee put out 

its call for a quick response to solve an urgent national need,” Hammarstrom said, 

without elaborating on that need. 38 

Adding yet more potential to Poppy were NRL’s SURCAL series of satellites, the 

Dodecapoles, and other calibration aids that increased the precision with which the 

NAVSPASUR system could track the ELINT and other satellites. Key here, said 

Hammarstrom, was the need for orbit prediction to be accurate for several days into 

the future, a task made difficult by orbital changes due to drag in the thin atmosphere 

at 500 miles, as well as uncertainty in the amount of drag because of temperature 

fluctuations as the satellites cycled through sunlight and darkness. 

In keeping with its penchant for always moving forward, the NRL Poppy team 

submitted its plans for Poppy 5 just eight days after the Poppy 4 launch. The plans for 

this generation of Poppy included improving the solar array system to provide more 

power, increasing the satellites’ lifetimes, and opening up new design options for the 

overall payload. Meanwhile, Hammarstrom and others were making ground station 

upgrades that included latest-generation tape recorders and collection antennas that 

were steerable remotely by controllers inside permanent ground station buildings, 

which were major upgrades from the mobile huts. 

> Space Reference . Launched on March 9,
> 1965, Dodecapole 1 served as a reference
> target for calibrating the Navy’s Space
> Surveillance System (NAVSPASUR).
> Once in orbit, a mechanism involving
> twelve “trap doors” allowed metallic tapes
> to shoot out and form into 25-foot-long
> rods about 1/2 inch in diameter, resulting
> in a space target that was 50 feet across.
> (NRL photo 77112(14).jpg) 168 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

Serving as a reminder of the larger tidal motions in which NRL was floating, 

however, the Director of Central Intelligence at this time had convened a commit-

tee to evaluate the cost effectiveness of the nation’s overhead intelligence collection 

programs. Lorenzen was on the committee, but its very formation was a warning that 

past success did not guarantee future funding. Adding to this truism in the mid-1960s 

were internal reorganizations within NRO and the overall intelligence communities 

in which authority protocols and other elements of the ELINT infrastructure were in 

flux. 

As these changes were unfolding in the administrative stratosphere, the Poppy 

engineers at NRL just kept solving problems and improving their ELINT systems. 

Price and his colleagues, for example, took on the task of replacing receiving anten -

nas at ground stations that could only track in the azimuth—that is, the angle of the 

satellite from the observation point with respect to a reference direction such as true 

north—to arrays of antennas 39  that could track both the satellite’s azimuth and its 

specific elevation. This made it possible to keep the antennas trained on the satel-

lite for the spacecraft’s entire pass. These would help in the pointing and steering of 

Withrow’s new transmitting interrogation antennas and associated electronics that 

would be installed in phases at ground stations over the next few years. Working to 

improve the command receiving antennas on the satellite was a team of engineers 

from NRL and HRB Singer, the firm where Hammarstrom had worked before moving 

to NRL. 40 

Meanwhile, Wald, along with Lorenzen and Mayo, met on October 18, 1965, with 

NSA cohorts responsible for converting Poppy data into usable products such as tech-

nical intelligence and electronic orders of battle. Digitizing the data in the field was a 

major topic of discussion. Until the digital approach could be fully certified, however, 

the program undertook a provisional parallel approach using new digital techniques 

in tandem with the previous analog procedures developed during the GRAB era a few  

> Pioneer Memory . Built by the contractor
> Spacetac Inc. at the request of NRL’s
> Robert (Bob) Eisenhauer, this unit
> represents the first solid-state memory
> unit to fly in space, in 1965, as part of
> NRL’s Poppy ELINT program. (NRL photo
> P-2346B.jpg)

169 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

years earlier. This assurance phase was necessary, in part, because shifting entirely to 

digital techniques would entail a then huge step of fitting each field site with state-of-

the-art computers, which involved hefty logistics and maintenance support as well as 

more money. 

Along with Wald, Hammarstrom was envisioning the added power and scope 

that a digital makeover could offer the country’s intelligence community. Also on 

board for this shift was newly hired NRL talent, Fred Hellrich, a freshly minted elec-

trical engineering graduate student from Penn State who happened to have a specialty 

in ionospheric research, the area that steered NRL into the space business in the first 

place. In November 1965, Hellrich took his first trip overseas with Mayo to a field 

station as part of a team installing new receivers and digital equipment. 

As the Poppy engineers continuously improved components and systems, they 

began to realize how their orbiting ELINT assets could become valuable to Navy and 

Army commanders in the field by characterizing and monitoring smaller and even 

mobile radars and other relevant targets beaming out electronic emissions. At the 

same time, however, it seemed that Lorenzen was losing some of the contacts and 

clout he had among higher-echelon decision makers in the Navy and beyond. As or-

ganizational structures changed within the government, commanders and managers 

with less familiarity with the highly classified ELINT systems came into positions of 

influence and authority. Of most concern to Lorenzen was a set of cost-effectiveness 

metrics these decision makers were using to rank the value of various assets, includ-

ing Poppy, in determining the Soviets’ electronic order of battle. 

“Lorenzen viewed most of the effectiveness metrics as suboptimizations,” ac-

cording to NRO historian Ronald Potts. “It seemed to him the less a system could do, 

the higher it would score.” Also of concern to Lorenzen was the way that imagined 

projections of the capabilities of future systems, regardless of what their precursors 

actually had accomplished, were playing into the rankings. This managerial practice,  

> Poppy Makers . In a side entrance of Building 209 on NRL’s campus is a model of electronic intelligence satellite
> Poppy 3. The Poppy series was partially declassified in 2005. Shown here in 2006 are several of the program’s
> participants. Left photo (left to right): Bob Eisenhauer, Fred Hellrich, Vincent Rose, and Pete Wilhelm. Right photo
> (left to right): Ed Becke, Jim Barnes, and Vincent Rose. (NRL photos DG7Q9837.jpg and DG7Q9849.jpg) 170 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

he worried, could adversely affect the space-based ELINT programs that he and his 

NRL colleagues had been working on and relentlessly improving since 1958. 41 

The nation’s overall electronic warfare context continued to get more complicated 

and so did the portfolio of ELINT payloads from Poppy and other NRO satellites. All 

of this only multiplied the amount of data that was feeding into the 240 or so NSA 

engineers and analysts in an office of “Special Projects” 42  at the agency. Analysts there, 

and some at SAC, had to accommodate different data formats, calibration protocols, 

orbital characteristics, and details of ground collection procedures, among other 

things. “The task was rather like painting a landscape while seated on a moving train,” 

is how Potts described it. 43  Amidst this complexity, Lorenzen and other champions 

of Poppy in Program C’s Technical Operations Group would do their best to shift the 

logic underlying cost-effectiveness assessment to include what they considered to be 

among the most important parameters for comparison—actual performance gains 

of Poppy compared to other programs. Among the improvements were (1) on-orbit 

lifetimes, (2) larger geographic access, (3) expanded RF coverage, and (4) better iden-

tification of signals of interest (SOIs). 44 

As the high-level assessment and comparison of the nation’s overhead ELINT 

systems was unfolding through the summer of 1966, Lorenzen’s increasingly vocal 

input strained some relations that previously had been cordial. And there was a cost 

to this brashness. Funding for follow-on satellite blocks after Poppy 5, which was 

slated for launch in the winter, was drastically reduced. The program no longer had 

a strong advocate in the Office of Naval Intelligence, which had been a champion for 

the program’s cause in the overall military and national contexts. 45 

Partly as a morale boost to offset the apparent demotion in the larger intelligence 

community, and partly because the electronic countermeasure needs due to the Viet-

nam War were ramping up, NRL’s Commanding Officer, Captain Thomas Owen, and 

the Director of Research, Dr. Robert Page, elevated the Countermeasures Branch on 

September 12, 1966, to a major laboratory division—the Electronic Warfare Division. 

Among its branches was one run by Jim Trexler that centered, among other things, on 

space-based communications. Bob Misner, who with Roger Easton had developed the 

Minitrack system, headed the Division’s new Intercept and Signal Processing Branch, 

whose engineers and technicians worked on recording and processing development 

associated with HF/DF (high frequency direction finding). Mack Sheets, another 

creative RF engineer at NRL, ran the Emitter Location Branch, which would develop 

direction finding systems for ships and aircraft. In charge of developing new electron-

ic countermeasures (ECM) and for countering enemy ECM systems was Lynwood 

Cosby in the Defensive Electronic Warfare Branch. Mayo continued heading satel-

lite-based projects, though his effort and team were hidden within Trexler’s branch 

and never identified in lab directories, let alone publicly. 46 

The Satellite Techniques Branch (Code 5170 at the time) was undergoing its 

own contortions. As had Votaw before him in 1963, Dix left his post as head of the 171 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

Branch in 1965 to take a job at COMSAT, the commercial satellite communications 

firm headquartered nearby in Washington. Filling the sudden leadership gap for the 

Branch was Peter Wilhelm, who was only seven years into what would become a 

lifelong career at NRL. He reported directly to Dr. William (Bill) Faust, Superinten-

dent of the Applications Research Division. When Wilhelm took over, the six-section 

branch had grown to a staff of 54. The section names were as follows: Satellite Systems 

Integration Section, Ground Instrumentation Section, Satellite Structures Design 

Section, Electro-Optics Section, Satellite Telemetry Systems Section, and Satellite RF 

Systems Section. 

In late 1965, the U.S. Intelligence Board (USIB) put a call out for more intelli-

gence on Soviet ABM/AES (anti-ballistic missile/anti-earth satellite) systems 47  known 

as Galosh and Gammon. The USIB identified these systems as top targets for ELINT, 

and Poppy had been a primary means of identifying and characterizing them. For 

information about certain emission parameters associated with these systems, Poppy 

was the only means that NRO had. For Lorenzen, this was a moment in which NRL 

might regain some of the high ground that it had recently lost in the upper echelons 

of the decision-making labyrinth. 

He managed to get the attention of the technical director of SAFSS—the Office of 

Space Systems, Office of the Secretary of the Air Force—which, like SAFMS, was  

> NRL at a Glance . In 1965, Peter Wilhelm took over the helm of the Satellite Techniques Branch, which resided on
> the organizational charts (a 1966 version shown here) within the Applications Research Division of the Electronics
> Directorate. (NRL Code Directories 1933-2010-231) 172 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

the unclassified name for a high-level NRO office. 48  In December 1966, in response 

to a technology challenge posed by the President’s Science Advisory Committee, 49 

Lorenzen and Mayo went to SAFSS, classified charts in hand, to make a pitch for how 

to make Poppy more responsive to emerging intelligence needs. “This was a huge 

challenge because the new mission meant that four satellites and four payload and 

antenna systems would have to be designed, developed, integrated and launched in 

time,” which was designated as mid-year 1967, Hammarstrom noted. 50  Unsure at first 

how their 10-minute entreaty went, Lorenzen and Mayo quickly found out: just as 

they were preparing to leave, their SAFSS liaison ushered them into the office of the 

Director of the NRO, Alexander Flax, interrupted a meeting that was in progress, and 

recommended that the director hear out Lorenzen that very minute. 

By delaying the next ELINT launch by seven weeks, Lorenzen argued, NRL 

would be able to deliver a package of components that would enhance anti-ballistic 

missile signal detection at several Soviet sites, including the missile testing complex in 

Saryshagan. The plan entailed some upgrades at field stations, including the instal -

lation of powerful new computers in a foreign location that some insiders would 

defiantly object to. Flax gave him a tentative green light that very day. 51 

Now with wind at his back, Lorenzen mobilized Program C’s Technical Op-

erations Group to work out the logistics for acquiring and installing the computer 

equipment—designed specially by HRB Singer—that it would take to push the digital 

frontier forward in ways that would enable him to deliver what he promised to Flax. 

The computer was key, for example, to quickly vet the quality of raw data from the 

Poppy satellites; a lot of time and resources had been spent in the past on flawed tapes 

and data, up to half of which had proven unusable. 52  And computer techniques would 

enable the quick identification and characterization of radar signals of interest, allow-

ing for more leisurely analysis of the rest of the data. 

In an unpublished memoir, Hammarstrom listed the engineering changes that his 

countermeasures colleagues and Wilhelm’s Satellite Techniques Branch would have to 

pull off. Everything in the satellites seemed to be affected: the electrical systems and 

wiring, thermal control, magnetic and dynamic balances (due to new or redesigned 

components), antenna configuration, mechanical and launch systems. “The fact that 

Wilhelm’s effort was successful gives direct proof that he probably is the world’s top 

satellite designer,” Hammarstrom stated. 53 

Lorenzen received word on December 21, 1966, that the plan had been official-

ly approved at the highest levels. On the same day, another ELINT asset, perhaps a 

Poppy satellite still in orbit, had acquired a crucial intercept, whose details remain 

classified. It was a shot in the arm for the cause of ELINT in general. Within months, 

Hellrich and Hammarstrom were able to mastermind and orchestrate—through the 

highest prioritization code (dubbed brickbat 01) in the Navy’s supply system—an 

innovative, tailor-designed upgrade of the computers processing Poppy data. 54 173 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

Hellrich had been keeping up with media reports and professional literature 

about the advent of mini-computers and realized that these new types of computers, 

with suitable modifications, could boost the ability of suitably trained technicians at 

Poppy ground stations to quickly gather digitized data while also opening the way to, 

in the words of one declassified description of Hellrich’s accomplishments, “near-real-

time identification and geo-location of high priority intercepts.” 55 

Hammarstrom added that a crucial computer feature the Poppy team needed for 

the ground stations—the ability to execute “real-time interrupts”—was rarely avail-

able in existing hardware. “In that era, most computers were designed to do ‘batch 

processing’ where the computer would start a job/batch, and continue until that job/ 

batch finished,” Hammarstrom explained. Interrupting one computational job to 

make time for another was not possible. For upgrading Poppy’s capabilities, machines 

capable of real-time interrupts were crucial, he continued, “so that data could be 

captured coming into the computer and not lost because the computer was doing 

another function.” 56 

In quick succession, Hellrich determined the performance requirements of the 

mini-computers on the market, contracted with System Engineering Laboratory (a 

general-purpose computer maker in Ft. Lauderdale at the time) to supply the speci-

fied machines (SEL 810A), 57  and then oversaw the installation and integration, in May 

1967, of the first one of these in a Poppy ground station in Europe. For the program-

ming side, Hellrich turned to HRB Singer, as well as to a mathematician at Penn State, 

Dr. Robert E. Daniels. The Penn State scholar had written most of the Fortran code 

for the SEL 810A, but he was still working out the details for the Poppy version in 

May 1967 during his flight to the ground station where the computer was installed. 58 

“This ushered in the first near-real-time digital processing of ELINT data with 

its accompanying orders of magnitude improvement in timeliness and accuracy—a 

true revolution in national reconnaissance collection, analysis and reporting,” 59  Potts 

wrote. An award citation Hellrich received many years after the Poppy program had 

> Data Cruncher . Key to increasing the useful information that could be eked from the ELINT data harvested
> from Poppy satellites was the acquisition of state-of-the-art computers, including the SEL 810A computer. 174 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

ended added that “this new technology allowed for the transmission and collection 

of compressed data, dramatically reducing the time required to process from weeks 

to minutes.” This was a time frame, the citation indicated, which enabled the Poppy 

system to become useful even to “the tactical user,” in addition to those looking at 

U.S. defense on a strategic level. 60 

The development and implementation of these new computer systems turned 

Hellrich into a global traveler. Recalled Hellrich, “I essentially brought the comput-

erized techniques to the processing of the data. I went around to the ground stations 

… I can remember those first several years, right after I got my clearance … I was 

overseas over six months out of the year.” 61 

In this same end-year time frame of 1966, top-level representatives in the ELINT 

community, including Lorenzen, began meeting to plan out the nation’s next-gener-

ation ELINT architecture, including the next blocks of Poppy satellites. For its part, 

NRL was proposing to move at an accelerated schedule compared to the past. “The 

committee recognized that Poppy had the potential to do a better job at location 

than anything else flying, and that Lorenzen was keen on identifying new capabilities 

that might be incorporated with Poppy 7—still in the conceptual stage,” according to 

Potts. 62  NSA also expressed plans to add 100 people to its K-4/SP office in which the 

ELINT system processing and analysis was done. 

These were encouraging developments for the NRL ELINT masters. But ongoing 

analyses of the types of radar intercepts the U.S. would like to make on a regular basis, 

in addition to ELINT assets on various drawing boards, were adding uncertainty to 

the picture. Even though Poppy had a track record and was almost certain to offer 

ever better ELINT capabilities, it was no longer clear it would be better than new 

systems others in the ELINT community were proposing. 63 

Specifics of maneuverings and decision making during the rest of the 1960s 

regarding ELINT for tracking ABM/AES systems remain mostly secret, though Poppy 

5 already was set for a launch in 1967 and Poppy 6 and 7 had entered an accelerated 

planning phase. 64  With its usual bravado, the NRL ELINT satellite team was at full 

throttle, a pace that was made a little easier with an influx of money for the ABM/AES 

problem from the Air Force Space Systems Division. 

The sense of urgency due to the ABM/AES problem quickened all aspects of the 

Poppy program. George Price, the son of Charlie Price, whose work had centered 

on the collection and interrogation huts, began working for NRL and applied his 

electrical engineering expertise to the classified program. The second-generation 

Price worked closely with HRB Singer partners to work up the engineering models 

of solid-state receiver electronics designed and built at NRL into production models. 

HRB also worked Wald’s design of an Analog to Digital Data System (A/DDS) into 

production models. Others in Mayo’s group were working on data-recording systems. 

Amidst all this work on the data handling side, no one was forgetting about the 

satellites. Poppy 5’s quartet (two sets of two) made it into orbit atop a Thor Agena D 175 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

that roared into orbit from the Vandenberg launchpad on May 31, 1967. This time, in 

a role that presaged his future, Wilhelm was chief designer of the 12-sided satellites, 

which were 27 inches across, lined with solar arrays, and weighed between 162 and 

222 pounds. 65  Bob Beal, the head mechanical engineer in the program, and extend -

able boom expert Bill Collins, among others, had taken on the stabilization task by 

developing an experimental system that could work in three axes, not just the one 

pointing toward Earth as previous gravity-gradient systems had done. 

The results were good enough that the follow-on satellite blocks, beginning with 

Poppy 6, would include a boom with a damper mechanism that could calm pitch and 

roll motions, and an innovative motor-driven flywheel to control yaw. For the latter, 

electrical engineer George Flach of the Satellite Techniques Branch drew on lessons 

learned from a yaw-control system designed for NASA’s Nimbus meteorological satel-

lites. 

Once Poppy 5 became operational, its data provided guidance for changes to the 

design and capabilities of Poppy 6. Both the sheer amount of data this block of Poppy 

satellites brought in day in and day out, and the spectral range of its RF coverage, 

was astonishing to the ELINT community. 66  “The fact that Poppy produced valuable 

intelligence so quickly after launch was particularly important and helped continue 

support from [NRO Director] Flax,” Hammarstrom recalled. 67 

The abundance of data posed the danger of becoming a liability, again. “Turn 

down the gain,” the phrase from NSA analysts that had evoked laughter and even 

pride in the early days of GRAB, now indicated a more serious issue as NSA was 

unable to keep up with the data flow despite its 24/7 operation. Data from only about 

half of the satellite passes over the Soviet Union were getting processed. The backlog, 

particularly of tapes with analog data that needed to be digitized and then processed, 

sometimes was shortened by a quick and dirty technique: degaussing entire blocks 

of tape, that is, wiping the tapes clean of the data that had been collected, rather than 

leaving the tapes in a processing and analysis queue. 68 

In his never-ending quest to keep top national leadership in favor of Poppy by 

showing them firsthand how it worked and what it could do, Lorenzen brought Dr. 

Louis Tordella, Deputy Director of the National Security Agency, to a primary ground 

station where 116 personnel conducted collection and analysis operations on both 

conventionally acquired ELINT and that obtained via Poppy, which was sometimes 

referred to by another code name: Siss Zulu. 

In the operations room, Tordella could see little red lights from the “cherry 

picker,” an electronic box that could flag what presumably were signals of interest. 69 

He could see how backup systems would kick in when a digital recorder went on the 

blink until engineers could isolate and replace, say, its faulty diodes. He could see 

analysts pouring over stacks of paper from the line printer and annotating them with 

computations and arrows connecting signals that seemed to suggest something more 

together than either signal did in isolation. 176 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

The meeting had the hoped-for effect on Tordella. But the love for Poppy was wan-

ing in other sectors of the defense and intelligence communities, which were question-

ing just how all of this time-consuming and tedious effort had been contributing to the 

discovery and characterization of radars associated with the primary strategic concern 

at the time—Soviet ABM systems. 70  A hint of how labor-intensive it was to eke payoff 

from Poppy data was that it took 700 work-hours of signal isolation, orbital calculation, 

and data analysis to characterize one “signal of interest,” which had been retrieved at a 

ground station that still had relatively rudimentary data analysis and processing equip-

ment. It would take more upgrades and lot of money to address that limitation. 71 

Just before that reality check, yet another reorganization took place at the top of 

the U.S. intelligence infrastructure with the creation within the U.S. Intelligence Board 

of a SIGINT Overhead Reconnaissance Subcommittee (SORS). Once again, Lorenzen 

and Poppy’s champions at NRL and NSA had to bring up to speed new players with 

authority over Poppy. They held a briefing at NRL for the new SORS on December 13, 

1967, and did a repeat for the top NRO office associated with Program C. 72  Had these 

briefings taken place just a little later, the Poppy champions would have been able to 

boast of their project’s coup of recording signals for the first time from a Soviet ABM 

radar system that was at the top of the nation’s ELINT priorities. 73 

As the Soviet Union was designing an ever-evolving set of radar systems in its 

land-based military operations during the 1960s, it also was building a fleet of frigates, 

destroyers, nuclear submarines with ballistic missiles, and other naval instruments 

of war. A mandate by the national intelligence community was to identify and track 

technology changes occurring in the Soviet Union, including the migration of existing 

or new radar and other RF-based systems to the sea. As such, the national mission for 

ELINT, including the Poppy program, began to include reconnaissance of sea-based 

systems. 

In 1966, the Navy’s bureaus, including the Bureau of Weapons that had been the 

primary financial overseer of NRL’s Poppy program, became part of a large-scale 

reorganization with the bureau system being restructured into commands. Naval Air 

Systems Command subsumed exploratory space technology work, mainly at NRL, in a 

space systems division. Amidst this large structural change, the Deputy Chief of Naval 

Operations, Vice Admiral Thomas Connolly, called for a review of the Navy’s overall 

space activities. Out of this would come some middle-burner tasking for overseas Siss 

Zulu ground station sites to begin exploring their abilities to use Poppy data as a win-

dow on emitters on Soviet ships. This was to be done so long as it did not interfere with 

the primary national priority that focused on strategic radars, such as ones associated 

with ABM systems. 74 

In September 1967, a two-week-long review of the Navy’s space programs and 

plans unfolded at NRL, hosted by Captain Jim Matheson, who had taken over as NRL’s 

Commanding Officer just a few days before the launch of Poppy 5. Among the topics 

were navigation, ocean surveillance of both acoustic and overhead sorts, meteorology 177 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

and oceanographic applications, all sensor-based military reconnaissance, commu-

nications, and fleet security. During the review, Bill Faust, superintendent of NRL’s 

Space Applications Division, represented NRL and briefed the gathering about 

NRL’s multifaceted space portfolio, including (1) space technology experiments, (2) 

space-based science work such as the SOLRAD series to measure solar radiation, (3) 

calibration of the NAVSPASUR system for keeping track of anything flying in space 

over the United States, (4) a new experimental navigation system known as Timation 

(the name derives from “time transfer and navigation,” which would become the basis 

for the Global Positioning System), and (5) high frequency propagation studies to 

calibrate HF/DF technologies. 75 

The unsurprising conclusion of the review was that space was destined to become 

a hugely important venue for the Navy. But this meant the Navy would have to work 

things out with the Air Force, which since 1961 had been assigned, according to an 

official directive at that time by Secretary of Defense McNamara, the responsibility for 

the development and acquisition of the nation’s overall military space program, which 

included the Navy’s component. 76  Only mentioned in the most widely distributed form 

of the official report that came out of the program review was the task of space-based 

ocean surveillance. The report noted, for example, a doubling of Soviet naval presence 

in the Mediterranean in 1967. 77 

There also was a highly classified portion of the report by which Rear Admiral 

William Leonard, Director of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ’s Office of Defense Research 

and Engineering (DR&E), learned about the Poppy program. A former commander 

of a carrier division, Leonard was a quick convert to the potential of Poppy satellites 

for tracking Soviet naval vessels. Key to his optimism in that regard was a briefing he 

received about an NRL navigation satellite, Timation 1 (see next chapter), which was 

launched in 1967 and that, in Hammarstrom’s words, “had demonstrated its potential 

to provide locations on moving platforms, boats and planes.” 78  Leonard subsequently 

relayed the following entreaty to Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) Thomas Moorer: 

“Request the conduct of tests by the NRO to evaluate satellite use for passive detec-

tion, classification, and localization of ships at sea.” 79 

Soon after, wartime events in Vietnam and the Pacific Rim reinforced the rec-

ommendation. On January 23, 1968, for one, North Korean naval forces attacked and 

captured the SIGINT ship USS  Pueblo . Members of the captured crew, including 

some who previously had worked at Poppy field stations, were brutalized. 80  These and 

other less publicly known losses during in-air and on-sea SIGINT operations high-

lighted the sense of urgency on the part of the intelligence community to rely more 

heavily on less risky space platforms for collecting SIGINT, of which ELINT was a 

pivotal component. 81 

In the same time period, tidal shifts yet again were occurring in the top echelons 

of military and intelligence decision makers. Secretary of Defense McNamara, for one, 

resigned at the end of February 1968 even as the SIGINT community was amidst 178 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

a review that he had commissioned. It was the sort of managerial and administrative 

shift that required the Navy’s champions of NRL’s satellite programs to make sure they 

communicated their support up the authority chain as well as down to the engineer-

ing trenches, such as in NRL’s Countermeasures and Satellite Techniques Branches, 

where the new national technical means of intelligence gathering were conceived of 

and realized. 

Toward that end, Lorenzen met at the Pentagon on April 3 with CNO Moorer, 

a former commander of the Seventh Fleet. 82  The discussion focused on the topic of 

geolocation. Could satellite-based ELINT locate radars on ships the way it did land-

based radar systems embedded in concrete, the CNO asked? He pointed out to Mayo 

and Lorenzen that the White House was concerned about the number of days it took 

to receive usable photoreconnaissance. Could ELINT provide the information on ship 

location and movement faster by tapping into electronic emissions? 83 

The NRL duo was unable to lay out right then for the CNO all that it would take, 

but the prospect of shifting at least some of Poppy’s attention toward ocean surveil-

lance had instantly become a high priority. At the end of the meeting, Moorer called 

for a monthly briefing memo on Poppy, quarterly progress reports, and for a personal 

visit to NRL so that he could see the Poppy satellite team in action for himself. 

The Moorer meeting revved up momentum on the Poppy program. As a start, 

NRL and NSA collaborated on examining signals of interest (SOIs) that Poppy recent-

ly had intercepted from shipborne emitters and conducted an engineering evaluation 

of what it would take to leverage those intercepts into an ability to locate ships at sea. 

The potential here was for entirely new and more comprehensive awareness of naval 

activity in the maritime domain. 84 

Mayo knew the task would require a full buy-in from the crews at the ground 

stations, and his frequent warm and responsive attention over the years to the needs 

of these crews would pave the way for that. His visits to the ground stations provided 

for the crews a sense of linkage all the way to the CNO’s office or the Director of the 

NSA. At the same time, Mayo made it clear he was there to take care of them. “Mr. 

Mayo would listen and act on their needs for equipment or technical information or 

logistics support or even a water cooler,” noted Potts. 85 

On a trip to one ground station, Mayo learned that the crew there had identified 

an SOI from a Soviet ship 11 days after the Moorer briefing. More than that, a petty 

officer at the site had used the SEL 810A—the computer that Hellrich had procured 

for upgrading data analysis at field stations—to eke out a specific ship location from 

the signal data. It was a proof of principle of more rapid identification of SOIs, but the 

engineering evaluation of using Poppy for full-blown ocean surveillance remained 

inconclusive amidst more pressing electronic countermeasures (ECM) demands on 

Lorenzen and his staff that came with the prosecution of the war in Vietnam. NRL’s 

Electronic Warfare Division, for example, had been fitting the refurbished USS  New 

Jersey  with “repeater jammers” and other ECM equipment to thwart attacks 179 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

by guided missiles and even suicide missions by North Vietnamese in fast attack 

vessels. 86 

On July 29, 1968, Lorenzen hosted the Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Dr. Robert 

Frosch, at NRL for a briefing on the lab’s major technology trajectories, among them, 

moon relay communications, high frequency direction finding, tactical electronic 

countermeasures, and, of course, satellite projects. The briefing included a 30-minute 

segment inside a secure briefing vault so that Frosch could be brought up to speed on 

the classified satellite programs. There, Mayo described the first localization success -

es by Poppy satellites of shipborne emitters. Also at the meeting, Wilhelm briefed 

Frosch and Dr. Alan Berman, who in 1967 had assumed the role of NRL’s Director 

of Research, on specific technical developments, among them more capable onboard 

memory components and improvements in stabilization, attitude sensing, and thrust -

ing, all of which would improve the localization ability of NRL’s follow-on ELINT 

satellites. 87 

As the summer progressed, tensions rose as the Soviet Union’s Red Army was 

conducting maneuvers along its borders. 88  At the same time, the Soviets were adding 

modernized vessels to their naval fleet. With new software, experience, and training, 

it was becoming possible to locate ships at sea by way of electronic intercepts in hours 

rather than days, though there still was a noticeable trade-off between speed and the 

precision of the localization. Use of the NAVSPASUR system to trace out the trajec-

tory, or ephemeris, of the satellites at the time a Poppy intercept of radar signals was 

made was helping the cause, but that process could take days. 

Even in the absence of an up-chain buy-in to ocean surveillance, Captain Lloyd 

W. Moffett, who reported for duty in late 1967 to the Naval Intelligence Command, 

became a major and vocal champion of developing naval space assets for gathering, 

interpreting, processing, and distributing tactically relevant information as efficiently, 

swiftly, and actionably as possible. 89  There was work to be done along these lines; still 

in the Poppy data-handling protocol at the time, for one, were sneaker-clad seamen 

running message pouches between buildings. It would take four years before Poppy 

processing would become automated enough to routinely beat out procedures that 

included humans in the loop. 90 

On August 16, 1968, a high-level analysis of the national ELINT program, known 

as the Eaton Report, was delivered to Richard Helms, the new Director of Central 

Intelligence. The report noted that the national-mission emphasis on strategic 

anti-ballistic missile and anti-earth-satellite (ABM/AES) systems left tactical electron-

ic warfare for the armed services at a dangerously low capability level. At the same 

time, Secretary of Defense Paul Nitze had raised the profile of the NRO, including 

NRL’s ELINT program within it, with the secretaries of the military services under 

his wing. The Eaton Report—in addition to briefings by Lorenzen and Moffett to the 

Secretary of the Navy (Paul Ignatius) and the Vice CNO (Bernard Carey)—rekindled 

interest of top Navy brass to bolster its ocean surveillance capabilities. Rear Admiral 180 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Frederick J. Harlfinger, II, the new Assistant CNO and Moffett’s replacement as Poppy 

program head, had been a submariner and had extensive experience in the intelligence 

channels. He was well aware of Poppy’s ELINT roles. 91 

Within the context of top-level decision making in the Navy, the hunger for tactical 

applications of Poppy was intensifying. And on September 22, 1968, Poppy made an 

unprecedented intercept that demonstrated a boost in the system’s ability to locate ships 

as sea. 92 

The growing ability of the Poppy system to detect, classify, and geolocate radar 

signals, which was the key for the system for tactical purposes, was coming to the 

attention of top Navy leadership in a series of briefings. “For these discussions, a simple 

world map, a commonplace feature on walls of executive offices of that era, was the 

only prop, and there was no script,” Potts wrote. “Tracks were drawn with a finger or 

pointer, ships and radars and parameters were identified verbally, missile and ABM 

sites and test centers were pointed to and their associated systems named.” The upshot 

was that Captain Ralph Cook, commander of the Naval Security Group, which oversaw 

the Navy’s use of ELINT, asked at the end of 1968 for “a system concept to exploit the 

system for Navy support.” 93  This was an enormous shift for NRL’s ELINT satellite cadre 

in that it expanded its thinking from strategic intelligence gathering, which had time 

frames more in terms of weeks and months, to tactical intelligence gathering (a type 

of SMO, or Support for Military Operations) 94  for which daily and hourly updates are 

what field commanders need. 

When potential new capabilities get boiled down from countless meetings and 

briefing to three-page memoranda for top-echelon decision makers, as was the case 

in late November 1968, things are getting serious. Due to the importance of accurate 

ephemeris data for the precise reporting of at-sea ship locations, the NAVSPASUR sys-

tem, the nation’s premier system for tracking satellites, became an even more important 

part of the overall Poppy program. This, in turn, upped the prioritization of digitizing 

facilities. 95  And this, in turn, trickled down to Charlie Price, the NRL facilities go-to guy, 

who needed to take care of a thousand details, including such minutiae as improving the 

air conditioning at the collection sites to prevent stoppages due to overheating recorders 

and other equipment. For his part, Mayo was authorized to hire more employees for his 

overall responsibilities in payload and “ground segment” development. 96 

In lieu of enough NRL staff proficient in all aspects of the expanding program, 

Mayo and other Poppy principals relied heavily on the contractor HRB Singer, based in 

State College, Pennsylvania, to handle hardware and software issues and even R&D for 

ground systems and for overseas assignments. The growing team of mathematicians, 

algorithm developers, and program developers got busy nicking off the hours, minutes, 

and seconds it took to go from the detection of a signal by a Poppy payload to a local-

ization of that emission 97  on the ground or sea. 98 

Discussion about the great potential of ocean surveillance for national security 

and military tactical applications was breaking out into civilian sectors too, includ-181 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

ing among them the President’s Science Advisory Committee. This provided another 

forum for assessing and perhaps pushing for what some circles called the “Program 

749” concept, which is to say at-sea localization by way of SIGINT (including ELINT). 

“Radar would detect iron on water,” Potts wrote. “ELINT would determine whether it 

was friend or foe.” The technology was in hand to put such a system in place. Tougher 

was getting the money to make it so. 99 

During the second week of 1969, Poppy veteran Captain Lloyd Moffett gave CNO 

Moorer a full briefing about how the Navy’s ELINT capabilities could be used against 

the growing Soviet naval threat. Rear Admiral Harlfinger, the Assistant CNO charged 

with liaising for the CNO on naval space projects, assembled an Executive Tactical 

Operations Group (Ex-TOG) to drill into the questions of just how Poppy could play in 

the growing ocean surveillance task and how to make future systems as capable along 

these lines as possible. 100 

Interest at the top of the Navy now could hardly have been higher. Lorenzen and 

Mayo, the Ex-TOG’s only civilian members, joined two Captains and seven Rear 

Admirals. The elements were in place for taking Poppy into a new era of tactical ocean 

surveillance. But that would only happen if Poppy’s designers and champions could 

convince the U.S. Intelligence Board (USIB) that ocean surveillance, which seemed 

like it was within a tactical context, was in fact at least as valuable as a strategic ELINT 

capability that focused on Soviet radars for stopping land- and submarine-launched 

nuclear missiles and strategic bombers. 101 

In January 1969, Richard M. Nixon had assumed the Presidency of the United 

States and expressed his intent on ending the Vietnam War. The war had squeezed 

funding for many programs in the Department of Defense and so budget offices, 

including NRO’s, were looking for places to cut; Program C was on the table. There was 

some concern by critical insiders that Program C existed largely to appease the Navy 

and so might not be justifiable from a budgetary perspective, especially when the Air 

Force had new ELINT capabilities in the pipeline that could overlap with Navy assets. 102 

The budget axe would have fallen on Poppy had the National Reconnaissance 

Program’s (NRP) budget officer not been given the opportunity to witness firsthand, in 

Potts’ words, “a live pass as sailors commanded the satellites, tracked downlink signals, 

collected data, and made log entries of SOIs detected on-line.” The officer “then saw 

a watch analyst dissect a technical SOI in the off line analysis room, while the analog 

chief, Ronnie Brooks, 103  explained the [REDACTED] patterns on dual beam oscillo-

scopes, and functions of the test oscillators, audio spectrum analyzer, oscillograph, 

brush recorder, and special stop watches. In the computer room he witnessed suc-

cessful post-pass digital process for [REDACTED] and listened, above the line printer 

clatter, to explanations of each step by the leading digital analyst, Petty Officer James M. 

Arnold.” It didn’t stop there. Maintenance, logistics, equipment upgrades, and all ques-

tions were answered. For the time being anyway, NRL’s Poppy program was deemed as 

nonexpendable. 104 182 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

March 19, 1969, was a big day for Program C and therefore for NRL’s space tech-

nologists. At CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, Captain Moffett (head of Naval 

Intelligence Command), Lieutenant Commander Ron Potts (NSA and future histori-

an of Program C), and NRL’s Mayo and Hammarstrom, briefed the SIGINT Overhead 

Reconnaissance Subcommittee (SORS) of the USIB on the Navy part (Program C) of 

the NRP. Part of the challenge for the Navy program was that its claim that it would 

monitor Soviet naval activities, even on the scale of single ships, was ambitious. 

Moreover, its actual value depended on technical details, among them the speed of 

reporting and the location accuracy the Poppy data would be able to deliver. It was 

clear, for one thing, that existing data flow and processing abilities for Program C 

would not be sufficient for the timely delivery of global-scale ocean surveillance data. 

The Poppy team would have to nail those and other specifics down if they were ever 

going to get a chance to pitch the program’s value to the full USIB. 

It was a time of peril for the NRL satellite builders. To SORS members, the pro-

posal for ocean surveillance appeared to be a Navy-specific value that was diverting 

Program C from its national tasking. Yet the Navy wanted the national intelligence 

infrastructure, most notably USIB, to view ocean surveillance as a nationally valuable 

means. 

In his weekly meeting with SORS, Captain Moffett could see that this view was 

going to be a tough sell to the subcommittee and that more solid documentation 

could help the cause. 105  With input from Mayo regarding technical feasibility and 

costs, ELINT representatives from NSA and the Naval Security Group prepared a 

detailed report titled “The Development of an Ocean Surveillance Capability.” 106 

Even before the report was in its final form, the Poppy team’s argument to think 

of ocean surveillance as a national capability got a helpful nod from a separate NSA 

progress report regarding the ELINT program’s primary and original mission to 

keep track of strategic Soviet radars: “A great deal of the success achieved against the 

Soviet ABM effort can be attributed to the collection and processing efforts of Poppy. 

The success of the Poppy vehicles in detecting those signals can in turn be directly 

attributed to the [REDACTED] capability designed into the system from its incep-

tion and the demonstrated capability that [REDACTED] intercept does give a high 

probably of intercept of new emitters in the R&D testing phase. Stated in the most 

direct terms, all of the ABM signals detected by SIGINT satellites were detected first 

by Poppy.” 107  This placed Poppy in a favorable light for the proposed new mission of 

ocean surveillance. 

On April 8, 1969, NRL rolled out the red carpet for a blue ribbon gathering of 

Rear Admirals and other Navy leaders to solidify confidence and Navy support of the 

Poppy program. Civilian research director, Dr. Alan Berman, welcomed the distin-

guished group to the lab; Mayo, Wilhelm, and a few others orchestrated the tour of 

hardware. On display were the four fully assembled satellites that constituted Poppy 6, 

which would be the second-to-last block of the program, as well as five other NRL 183 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

satellites slated for a record nine-payload launch in September. The finale of the tour 

was a real-time relay of signals from Poppy satellites overhead to remind those on the 

tour of the electronic intelligence that the program was detecting and downlinking 

several times every day to multiple collection sites. 108 

The next day, Wilhelm gave Colonel Lew Allen and other influential program 

managers from the NRO a VIP tour of the satellite technology facilities and captured 

Allen’s attention with some of the satellites’ technical innovations, such as the gravity 

stabilization technique. Later in the day, Mayo briefed eight members of the NRO 

Programs A (Air Force) and B (CIA) on Poppy’s ELINT results and ability to track 

ships. For his part, Lorenzen was in Europe at the time bringing major commands 

there up to speed on Poppy capabilities. 109 

April brought yet more briefings and more opportunities for visitors with top 

security clearances to hear, in real time, “the voice of Poppy,” that is, the chirps of 

intercepted radar pulses. And it brought the Navy’s next big play in its quest to lever-

age the work NRL’s satellite team had been doing for the defense tasks of the coming 

years: the Commander of the Naval Security Group (CNSG), Rear Admiral Ralph 

Cook, recommended an entirely new satellite system, based on Poppy technology, 

dedicated to the new oceanic task. More briefings, this time for the likes of the Under 

Secretary of the Navy (John Warner) and the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for R&D 

(Robert Frosch). And more live demos. Momentum within the Navy was swinging in 

the direction of getting an ocean surveillance satellite system going, even if that meant 

tasking National Reconnaissance Program assets such as Poppy to do so. 110 

In the summer of 1969, in a sign that the Navy was slowly winning the hearts and 

minds of the nation’s intelligence leadership, the Poppy program received authoriza-

tion to experimentally deploy ELINT assets for a two-week period to intercept Soviet 

seaborne signals and relay them to the Commander-in-Chief of the European Com -

mand (CINCEUR, General Andrew Goodpaster). It was the first time that SORS, and 

therefore USIB, has issued a one-off task of ocean surveillance of Soviet ships. 111 

In September 1969, five months after CNSG Cook had submitted the proposal for 

using Poppy technology to develop a tactical ocean surveillance system, he received 

a letter from Assistant CNO Harlfinger directing him and thereby NRL to move 

forward with the ocean surveillance task. Everyone in the program knew that at the 

heart of any progress was the handling and processing of data, and the continued mi-

gration from analog to digital formats throughout the data flow. And the NRL team 

was delivering. An example of the latest and greatest components entering the system 

was a 1.5-megabyte “moveable head disk” the size of a washing machine from which 

signal analysis programs and other software tools could be accessed more efficient-

ly. With this constantly upgrading system, Poppy had been acquiring more emitter 

reports from Soviet ships, bolstering Cook’s and others’ confidence that the system 

indeed could be used for ocean surveillance. 112 184 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

On September 30, 1969, with a Thor Agena D booster, the Poppy 6 satellite 

cluster was placed into orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Each member satellite 

included three-axis stabilization equipment and microthrusters for fine attitude and 

station-keeping adjustments. The checkout phase in the early orbits indicated all was 

well, but there were challenges too: in early October, the final stage of the Agena D 

booster apparently exploded in its orbit, scattering space debris that could endanger 

the Poppy satellites; and there were new and more powerful computers at NSA into 

which the data flow needed to be assimilated. 113 

In his relentless quest to keep NRL in the forefront of national ELINT, Lorenzen 

made sure to meet with the new NSA director, Vice Admiral Noel Gayler, to register 

concern about how Poppy data tapes were being handled after NSA personnel ac-

quired them and about the difficulties the NRL team was having in procuring copies 

of the tapes and other data products that would help guide their development of 

better ocean-surveillance capabilities. What was needed, insiders agreed, was a more 

integrated process that could reduce processing redundancy between field and central 

sites. Toward that end, Fred Hellrich became NRL’s point man on the first joint task 

with NSA to focus on issues of processing and automation in the data system. 

Meanwhile, other enormous issues for NRL’s satellite technology group were on 

the horizon, mostly notably the Air Force’s decision to phase out the Thor Agena D 

booster to make way for the more powerful, next-generation Titan III, which would 

become NRO’s workhorse ferry to orbit. 114  That booster shift was serious news to the 

NRL team, especially to Pete Wilhelm. He knew that it meant a major redesign of the 

satellites then in the planning and building phases. 115 

In December 1969, the authority chain for the emerging ocean surveillance 

system was falling into place. Commanders and intelligence leaders with U.S. Navy 

operations in Europe were briefed on the new Poppy capabilities and tasks. The CNO 

and other officials were signing and endorsing a “final requirements letter,” which 

was part of the officialdom required before Poppy would become a bona fide ocean 

surveillance system that the U.S. Navy could put to use for tactical purposes. Poppy 6, 

meanwhile, was delivering novel intercepts of Soviet seaborne emitters. 116 

Amidst all of the technical, institutional, bureaucratic, and other obstacles that 

had made a pathway to ocean surveillance of Soviet warships so difficult to get into 

place, the engineers, technicians, and mathematicians who knew how to create and 

assemble the pieces had been busy doing so. By early 1970, much of the capability was 

in hand and Lorenzen convened a meeting with some three dozen ELINT managers 

associated with NRL, NSG, and NSA to hammer out protocols for exchanging “infor-

mation on technology, techniques and high-priority targets.” At this meeting, Mayo, 

Wilhelm, Rose, and Hammarstrom spoke about, respectively, the program history, 

spacecraft hardware and satellite techniques, ELINT payloads, and data processing. 117 

The oversight seemed endless to the NRLers. On February 11, 1970, an ELINT 

Research, Development, Technology and Engineering coordinating group with 185 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

multi-agency representation reviewed NRLs ELINT capabilities. Among those 

present was Edwin Speakman of the Army Security Group, the Army’s counterpart to 

the NSG. Twenty years earlier, he had been head of NRL’s countermeasures group (in 

NRL’s Radio Division) and so was Lorenzen’s supervisor at that time. “It had been a 

reunion of old friends and pioneers in ELINT,” Potts wrote. 118 

Soon afterward, the SIGINT Overhead Reconnaissance Subcommittee of the 

USIB approved a proposal for the execution of quick tasking of requests for Poppy 

satellites and other overhead assets submitted by top Navy managers in the European 

and Atlantic fleets. The goal was to provide Navy commanders with timely ELINT 

data on Soviet warships in their jurisdictions. Interest was rebuilding within top-ech-

elon military and intelligence offices, especially the Naval Security Group, for ocean 

surveillance. Part of the thinking called for additional Poppy receiving stations devot-

ed to the new task so that Poppy’s traditional national task, which focused on Soviet 

ABM/AES threats, would remain unhindered. 

Then came what seemed to be a roadblock. When USIB issued its new ELINT 

requirements document in May 1970, there was no sign of ocean surveillance in its 

32 pages. 119  The report did stress, among other things, the continued need for Poppy 

to harvest scientific and technical intelligence measurements and to conduct its tradi-

tional role of eavesdropping on ABM radar systems. 

At the same time, there were others in high places who wanted to see the Poppy 

system exploited for ocean surveillance. Among them was the Secretary of the Navy, 

John Chafee, who let the Deputy Secretary of Defense, David Packard (who had 

influence in the NRO and could get the President’s ear), know about this vision in a 

memorandum, dated July 11, 1970, with the subject line: “Use of POPPY Elint System 

for Ocean Surveillance.” Given the growing threat from Soviet naval vessels, Cha-

fee wrote, “the Navy must be able to locate, identify and track all Soviet naval units, 

especially all missile delivery platforms and threats to our seaborne strategic de -

terrent forces … The threat posed by the Soviet Navy is of such significance today 

that surveil- lance of these type of platforms must now be recognized as a national 

requirement, and the use of national overhead reconnaissance assets should be uti -

lized, where ca- pable, to respond to this requirement.” 120  In an administrative move 

that would enable the Navy to get “more aggressive in space,” Hammarstrom noted, 

Packard managed in 1970 to rescind the 1961 policy that designated the Air Force as 

the service in charge of military space development and systems acquisition. 121 

In this same time frame, Hammarstrom noted, Captain Moffett developed a set 

of requirements for modernizing the data flow that became known by insiders as the 

“Moffett Index.” “They were defined in a complex set of performance, timeliness, and 

dissemination” metrics, Hammarstrom recounted. “The matrix not only included 

satellite challenges, but also ground station, processing and dissemination challeng-

es.” 122  It was a set of specific, quantified guidelines that mobilized all the lead players 

to redefine and redesign what would be the last set of Poppy payloads, though the in-186 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

novations that emerged from this work would find extensive applications in follow-on 

payloads and systems. Among these was the Multiple Satellite Dispenser (MSD), 

designed under the leadership of Wilhelm, which could ferry satellites attached to it 

to individual orbital injection locations, and ground station redesigns orchestrated by 

Hellrich that featured next-generation computers along with software customized by 

in-house experts. 123 

Greatly boosting the argument to move forward in the way Moffett envisioned 

was the Poppy team’s ability to augment the system with additional analysis centers 

dedicated for ocean surveillance co-located with existing ground sites. That way, the 

overall program could conduct the ocean surveillance as tactical support for opera-

tional commanders without interfering with the original top-priority task of monitor-

ing Soviet ABM systems. Chafee’s memorandum included specifics about personnel, 

costs, and other logistical details without which such proposals normally would die 

on the vine. The Naval Security Group, working with NRL’s Charlie Price and others, 

would be responsible for getting the new receiving facilities on line and for training 

personnel to run them. NRL would be in charge of filling the facilities with analysis 

equipment and the software to run it. 124 

In this 1970 time frame, top-tier decision makers in intelligence and defense 

circles began embracing ocean surveillance as a national intelligence objective just as 

monitoring Soviet ABM radars always had been. On September 11, Deputy Secretary 

of Defense Packard approved a Poppy augmentation, mostly by way of computer and 

analysis upgrades, for achieving the required new ocean surveillance capability. It was 

a welcome vote of confidence for the Poppy program. 125 

The Director of NRO at the time, Dr. John L. McLucas, summed up the Poppy 

augmentation decisions in an October 7, 1970, memorandum for the Secretary of the 

Navy. The bottom line was that ocean surveillance of Soviet ships was imperative and 

that modest interim steps, in the form of the installation of new computers and a new 

analysis facility, should begin promptly. The memorandum reiterated NSA’s role as 

“the agency responsible for processing and analysis of overhead ELINT data” and gave 

NRL (within the auspices of NRO’s Program C) the tasks of developing, acquiring, 

and installing the equipment required to make the entire system ready for ocean sur-

veillance. 126  Not even 10 days after the memorandum was issued, the first Poppy aug-

mentation meeting was held at the Pentagon. Helping out was an old hand, Ed Dix, a 

former head of the Satellite Techniques Branch at NRL who had moved to COMSAT, 

but now was back in the national ELINT picture as a consultant for Program C’s lead-

ership. A renewed sense of cooperation and an arrival at new agreements on such key 

issues as computer configurations appeared to be in hand … sort of. 127 

The buildup for Poppy 7, most notably construction of the satellites at NRL, was 

running into cost overruns. Wilhelm had to make a request to NRO for more funds. 

Ironically, the success of the NASA Apollo moon missions, which increased demand 

for space hardware, had run up prices on many key satellite components. Also adding 187 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

to Wilhelm’s concerns was a malfunction, a stuck relay switch, earlier in the Poppy 

program that resulted in an expensive failure analysis by his Satellite Techniques 

Branch, the addition of costly “precautionary redundancies” to avoid a repeat of the 

failure, and a chronic anxiety that the same failure nonetheless could happen again. 

Adding yet more costs were the technology additions it would take to meet the new 

ocean surveillance task. 128 

As always, extra funding requests like these were harrowing because higher level 

decision makers at, say, the NRO, were less vested in any particular system, such as 

Poppy, than they were in the overall intelligence capability. If an organization other 

than NRL could fulfill the overhead ocean surveillance requirement in ways that 

decision makers at NRO, USIB, and other top-level bodies deemed better or more 

economical, then that suitor could get the contract. 

As the NRO examined more deeply which of the “national technical means” at 

hand might help the cause of tracking Soviet naval vessels, the Navy was rearranging 

its top managerial tiers associated with overhead intelligence tools. Taking the helm 

of the Poppy program for the Navy was Captain Robert (Bob) Geiger, a former Navy 

pilot with a master’s degree in aeronautical engineering from MIT. Geiger previ-

ously had worked in the Air Force’s Office of Space Systems, the name for an NRO 

office that oversaw the nation’s overhead intelligence assets. CNO Admiral Elmo 

R. Zumwalt, Jr., saw in Geiger just what the Navy space program needed and took 

steps to create a new managerial infrastructure within the Naval Material Command 

(NAVMAT). 129 

This should have been good news for the satellite team at NRL as they continued 

preparing for the launch of Poppy 7, scheduled for late 1971. But the cost overruns 

that Wilhelm had identified and for which the lab requested additional funding had 

earned the entire Poppy program a probationary status. A tough start for Geiger, to be 

sure. One cost saving move was to cut an R&D payload that the NRL team had pro-

posed for the launch. As part of the probation conditions, Captain Geiger was tasked  

> Poppy 7 . Hanging in the exhibits room in NRL’s
> Bldg. 222, this model of Poppy 7 depicts the final
> spacecraft in the successor program to the U.S.’s
> first ELINT satellite program, GRAB (Galactic
> Radiation and Background). Conceived of and
> developed by NRL, Poppy expanded into a multi-
> agency system in 1962 with the establishment of
> the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) just
> before the first Poppy payload was launched.
> Poppy spacecraft detected both land-based
> and later sea-based radar emitters. The Poppy
> program was partially declassified in 2005. (NRL
> photo WFD_0932.jpg) 188 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

with sending detailed status reports to the Deputy Director of NRO on a monthly ba -

sis. The heat went to the top at NRL—to the Commanding Officer Captain Earl Sapp 

and the civilian Director of Research Alan Berman. That catalyzed an internal version 

of the oversight and accountability reporting that the NRO was requesting of NRL’s 

Program C team. It was bureaucratic detail on top of bureaucratic detail. 130 

NRL’s secret satellite program, now 13 years old since its 1958 conception by 

Mayo in a Howard Johnson’s restaurant, had become larger than the rest of the lab’s 

electronic warfare effort. To accommodate that fact, Berman enacted major orga -

nizational changes at the lab. He collected those non-space branches working on 

electronic warfare problems into a new Tactical Electronic Warfare (TEW) Division. 

The new division’s focus was on the defense of aircraft, surface ships, and submarines. 

Lyn Cosby, long the lab’s primary engineer on electronic countermeasures equipment 

for aircraft, took over as head of TEW. Berman also christened a new Space Systems 

Division, which subsumed most of the lab’s space technology programs, among them 

data systems and navigation systems. Within this division was Wilhelm’s Satellite 

Techniques Branch, which supported all the other Division branches. Heading up this 

new division was Howard Lorenzen, who moved from his former job as head of the 

Electronic Warfare Division (now TEW). 131  Adding to the shuffle was a new Commu-

nications Science Division, with two of its branches run by GRAB and Poppy veterans 

Bob Misner and Mack Sheets. Bruce Wald, who had been playing key roles in the 

digitization, computerization, and automation of the ELINT systems, would become 

this division’s superintendent in 1972. 

Amidst all of this organizational and managerial change, Poppy satellites were 

orbiting the planet and listening in on the electromagnetic cacophony over the denied 

areas of the Soviet Union, as well as over the world’s oceans where Soviet warships 

cruised. A testament to the program’s technical successes was that the NRO’s Program 

B, which centered on photoreconnaissance, was tasked, at least on a few occasions, 

to confirm the interpretation of ELINT signals of interest, rather than the other way 

around. 132 

They did not know it then, but at the time, the staff in NRL’s Satellite Techniques 

Branch was building what became the last block of Poppy satellites, Poppy 7. The 

project looked like it would become unavoidably too expensive for NRL to continue 

when the Air Force decided to switch to a Martin Marietta Titan III booster, which 

generated 10G’s of thrust rather than the previous booster’s 4.5G’s. This uptick in 

mechanical force required sturdier satellites, which entailed a lot of expensive reengi-

neering. There was no way around that, but to the financial analysts in the loop, the 

Poppy satellites suddenly looked way more expensive than they had been. 133 

The NRL team was working at top speed to get Poppy 7 ready for a December 

launch and for its new ocean surveillance roles. Hammarstrom and Hellrich were 

respectively working on the software and hardware side of the automated data pro-

cessing system. George Price was the lead on new data extraction equipment. After 189 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY 

components were tested and validated, the NRL Poppy team integrated them into 

working subsystems, which they then tested and validated repeatedly. These subsys-

tems, in turn, were then integrated into the satellite, a system of systems, in the cav-

ernous workspaces of NRL’s Building A59. Field stations also were being primed for 

the December launch. Looming all the while was a huge cost problem that could put 

an end to NRL’s ELINT satellite run after the next launch. But Poppy was not done 

yet. 

At last, on December 14, 1971, the last block of Poppy satellites was placed in 

orbit. As always, Mayo and Rose were at Vandenberg Air Force Base for prelaunch 

preparation and to witness the launch. Mayo then rushed off to a ground station to 

oversee the initial reception of signals from the satellites. 

Only a few months later, the NRO and Navy made an enormous decision that 

would mark the beginning of the end of Poppy and the beginning of one or more 

follow-on programs that remain classified. The new architecture of Program C’s 

ELINT collection was laid out in a weeklong gathering at the Naval Security Group’s 

headquarters in Washington, DC, of representatives from all technical, managerial, 

operational, and other components of the Poppy program. Interestingly, high on the 

agenda was the same “density problem,” which was apparent in the very first glimpse 

of the GRAB 1 intercepts that Lorenzen, Mayo, and their colleagues heard in 1960 in 

a small collection hut in Hawaii. “Competing objectives for a system whose collection 

capability continued to dwarf its processing capability were revealed in briefings and 

discussion throughout the week,” according to one observer. Chipping away at that 

issue was a data handling system—known as PAPS, for Programming Automatic Pro-

cessing System—designed with leadership by Hammarstrom, Hellrich, and computer 

and software engineering colleagues at HRB Singer. 134 

In May 1972, the United States and the Soviet Union signed SALT, the Strategic 

Arms Limitation Treaty, a nuclear weapons agreement that would provide a new role 

for overhead ELINT as a means of monitoring treaty compliance. Mayo was called on 

to specify Poppy’s strengths and weaknesses for particular treaty compliance mon-

itoring measurements. Poppy 7, which was launched six months before the signing 

of SALT, would operate for another five years and would incorporate data processing 

upgrades along the way. But the actual intelligence data the program harvested and 

the specific ways the nation used it for strategic and tactical planning and actions, or 

for treaty monitoring purposes, remains classified. 

Nearly 15 years after the launch of the first Poppy satellites, NRL’s second ELINT 

program—after GRAB—was officially closed down. The director of NRO, Dr. Hans 

Mark, penned the program’s epitaph: “The termination of the Poppy program effec -

tive 30 September 1977 closes a long and distinguished chapter in the history of over -

head reconnaissance, a chapter that began under Navy auspices even before the NRO 

was established.” 135  Just in case their many bosses changed their minds about the end 

of program, the NRL team continued to maintain power and other functions 190 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

on the satellites that would enable them to revive their ELINT platforms to service. 

But at a time that remains classified, Wilhelm and his team did command Poppy 7’s 

four satellites to shut off, one by one. Not until 2005 was the Poppy program partially 

declassified and not until 2012 did the NRO release a heavily redacted official history 

of Program C. 

1 Ronald L. Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C Electronic Intelligence Satellites (1958–1977) , LEO 

Systems Program Office, National Reconnaissance Office, September 3, 1998, declassified with 

redactions and approved for release from NRO on June 13, 2012, p. 90. 

2 Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 90–91. 

3 Potts, p. 93. 

⁴ Potts, p. 93. 

⁵ W. Craig Reed,  Red November  (New York: Harper Collins, 2010). 

⁶ James Winkler memoir, pp. 13–14. 

⁷ Winkler, memoir shared with author, pp. 13–14. 

⁸ Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 94. 

⁹ Potts, p. 96.  

> 10

Potts, pp. 94–97.  

> 11

Richard D. Easton and Eric F. Frazier,  GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smart Phones 

(Potomac Books, 2013), p. 49.  

> 12

Easton and Frazier,  GPS Declassified , p. 100.  

> 13

NRL launch manifest; Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 98.  

> 14

Winkler memoir, p. 20.  

> 15

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 98.  

> 16

COMSAT oral history project, Martin Votaw, http://www.comara.org/legacy/oralhistory/ 

Martin_Votaw.pdf.  

> 17

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 100.  

> 18

Potts, p. 102.  

> 19

Winkler memoir, p. 20.  

> 20

Patrick W. Binning and Jay W. Middour, “A Brief History of NRL’s Early Firsts in Spaceflight,” 

Advances in Astronautical Sciences  129 (2008): 1233–1250.  

> 21

Peter Wilhelm, interview with TV crew and author at NRL, “GPS Day 2,” February 15, 2012.  

> 22

Peter Wilhelm, interview with David van Keuren, November 19, 1987; L.A. Gebhard,  Evo-

lution of Naval Radio-Electronics and Contributions of the Naval Research Laboratory , NRL 

Report 8300, 1979, p. 115.  

> 23

Peter Wilhelm, interview with NRL Historian Leo Slater, August 29, 2009.  

> 24

Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 29, 2009.  

> 25

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 103–106.  

> 26

Lee Hammarstrom, draft of memoir shared with author, November 2013.  

> 27

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 104.  

> 28

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 29

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 30

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 31

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 32

The Poppy TOG participating agencies included the CIA, NSA, NRO, Office of Naval Intelli -

gence, Naval Security Group, Army Security Agency, and Air Force Security Service.  

> 33

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 106.  

> 34

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 35

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 106–107.  

> 36

Chris Dwyer, personal communication.  

> 37

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 111. 191 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY  

> 38

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 39

The antennas were manufactured to NRL’s specifications by the company Scientific-Atlanta.  

> 40

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 113.  

> 41

Potts, p. 116.  

> 42

This Special Projects Office was designated as K-4/SP.  

> 43

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 116–117.  

> 44

Potts, p. 117.  

> 45

Potts, p. 117.  

> 46

Potts, p. 118.  

> 47

Anti-earth-satellite systems would now be called anti-satellite systems.  

> 48

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 119.  

> 49

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 50

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 51

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 119.  

> 52

These details are specified in a candidacy document for Fred Hellrich (given to the author by 

Hellrich) for inclusion among the National Reconnaissance Office’s “Pioneers,” a select group of 

contributors that NRO considers as standouts in the organization’s history.  

> 53

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 54

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 123.  

> 55

Hellrich candidacy document (see endnote 52).  

> 56

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 57

Fred Hellrich ran into a snag at first. Even though money became available to upgrade a pri-

mary ground station with new computer capabilities, there was not a single suitable computer 

in U.S. production that was not already called for. While reading a trade magazine, however, 

Hellrich found mention of one general purpose machine that could work for his purposes, the 

SEL 810A, built by Systems Engineering Laboratory in Plantation, Florida. He then managed to 

convince its buyer to let NRL have it and then take delivery of an equivalent machine that SEL 

would have available six months later. The SEL computer worked on 16-bit words and offered 

16 kilobytes of memory. It included a teletype interface, card reader and punch, magnetic tape 

transports, among other peripherals. Hellrich integrated tape drives made by another company, 

Ampex. It could interface with the A/DDS that Wald had designed.  

> 58

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 130.  

> 59

Potts, p. 130.  

> 60

Potts, p. 130.  

> 61

Fred Hellrich, interview with author, May 16, 2012.  

> 62

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 124.  

> 63

Potts, pp. 124–126.  

> 64

Potts, p. 129.  

> 65

Potts, p. 131.  

> 66

Potts, pp. 132–133.  

> 67

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 68

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 132–133.  

> 69

Potts, pp. 133–134.  

> 70

Potts, p. 134.  

> 71

Potts, p. 136.  

> 72

Office of Space Systems, Office of the Secretary of the Air Force, headed by Russell Berg.  

> 73

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 135.  

> 74

Potts, pp. 139–140.  

> 75

Potts, pp. 140–141.  

> 76

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 77

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 140–141.  

> 78

Hammarstrom memoir. 192 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE  

> 79

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 141–142.  

> 80

A week later, Vietcong and North Vietnamese forces executed what become known as the Tet 

Offensive, attacking 100 cities in South Vietnam.  

> 81

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 142.  

> 82

Potts, p. 143.  

> 83

Potts, p. 143.  

> 84

Potts, pp. 143–144.  

> 85

Potts, p. 144.  

> 86

Potts, pp. 144–145.  

> 87

Potts, p. 146.  

> 88

Potts, p. 146.  

> 89

Lee Hammarstrom interview (Moffett Matrix), February 22, 2012; Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO 

Program C , p. 143.  

> 90

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 146–147.  

> 91

Potts, pp. 147–148.  

> 92

Potts, pp. 150–151.  

> 93

Potts, p. 152.  

> 94

Chris Dwyer, personal communication, February 13, 2012.  

> 95

Program C’s Technical Operations Group, with participants from a host of military, intelli-

gence and other government bodies, set the priorities.  

> 96

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 152–153.  

> 97

In intelligence parlance, EMLOC refers to Emitter Location.  

> 98

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 153.  

> 99

Potts, pp. 153–154.  

> 100

Potts, p. 154.  

> 101

Potts, pp. 157–159.  

> 102

Potts, pp. 159–160.  

> 103

Ronnie Brooks’ rank was Chief Petty Officer.  

> 104

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C . The symbol [REDACTED] indicates places in the Potts 

history that are blacked out to maintain secrecy of still classified details.  

> 105

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 161–162.  

> 106

Potts, p. 163.  

> 107

Potts, pp. 163–164.  

> 108

Potts, pp. 164–165.  

> 109

Potts, pp. 165–166.  

> 110

Potts, p. 167.  

> 111

Potts, pp. 168–169.  

> 112

Potts, p. 174.  

> 113

Potts, pp. 174–175.  

> 114

Potts, pp. 176–177.  

> 115

Lee Hammarstrom would be tasked with working out the technical fix. His solutions proved 

ahead of their time, but later were implemented by the NRO and NSA in follow-on systems 

once the technology caught up to his vision.  

> 116

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 178–179.  

> 117

Potts, pp. 180–181.  

> 118

Potts, p. 181.  

> 119

Potts, p. 187.  

> 120

Potts, pp. 188–189.  

> 121

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 122

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 123

Hammarstrom memoir.  

> 124

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 190. 193 CHAPTER 10 — DOUBLING DOWN: POPPY  

> 125

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 195–196. Despite the vote of confidence, Mayo wor-

ried that NRL actually was getting shut out of the game it had begun. None of the original part-

ners in NSA from the early days of GRAB, for one, were part of the Poppy team anymore. To 

Mayo, this absence of personal rapport in the day-to-day management of the program would 

likely diminish the system’s value.  

> 126

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 198.  

> 127

Potts, p. 199.  

> 128

Potts, p. 199.  

> 129

Potts, p. 200.  

> 130

Potts, p. 202.  

> 131

Potts, pp. 205–206.  

> 132

Potts, p. 207.  

> 133

Potts, p. 208.  

> 134

Potts, p. 216.  

> 135

Potts, p. 220. WHERE AND WHEN, EVERYWHERE AND 

# ALWAYS: THE GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM 

The Thor Able Star rocket that carried both GRAB 1 and SOLRAD 1 into orbit 

within the same shiny spherical shell on June 22, 1960, helped the U.S. space program 

score several firsts. SOLRAD 1 was NRL’s first rocket-based scientific payload since 

almost all of the lab’s space science pioneers transferred to NASA in late 1958. GRAB 

1 was NRL’s, the nation’s, and the world’s first orbiting spy payload. 

There was yet another groundbreaking payload on that June 22 flight. It was not 

an NRL payload, but in its navigation function, it would presage one of the most 

consequential technology developments and achievements the NRL’s space technolo -

gists and satellite engineers would pull off. Inside the fairings of the rocket’s topmost 

stage, sharing the space with the GRAB 1/SOLRAD 1 sphere, was yet another space 

pioneer, namely, Transit 2A, a groundbreaking navigation satellite built for the Navy 

by the Johns Hopkins University’s Applied Physics Laboratory (APL). It would evolve 

into a technology that would become part of everyday life for hundreds of millions of 

people around the world. 

Transit 2A was the world’s first navigation satellite to successfully reach orbit. 

Two prior attempts failed to make it there. Its primary purpose was to enable weap -

ons officers in charge of submarine-launched Polaris missiles to determine, within 

minutes, their positions at sea within about a fifth of a mile. 1 The Transit program 

was also known for a time by the secrecy-preserving moniker Program 435, and also 

by the more straightforward name, Navy Navigation Satellite System, along with the 

acronym NAVSAT. 2 The Transit satellites did in fact provide submarines with the ca -

pability of determining their locations in about 20 minutes when the satellites were in 

view of the submarine’s location. The geolocation technique in Transit resided in the 

Doppler shift phenomenon, familiarly experienced as a high-to-low pitch transition 

like the familiar one heard as a whistle-blasting train approaches and then recedes. 

After a series of experimental launches, Transit became the world’s first operational 

satellite-based navigation system in support of the Navy’s Polaris program. The first 

positional fix by a Polaris submarine using the Transit system took place in January 

1964. 

No sooner had a few Transit satellites become operational than did Roger Easton, 

an NRL engineer who had developed the tracking systems for the Viking and Van -

guard programs, come up with the concept for what became known as the Timation 

# 11 196 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

program (derived from the words time and navigation). Easton, whose work would 

earn him a place among the titans of NRL’s long and storied history, started working 

at the laboratory in the middle of World War II as a junior physicist in the Radio 

Division’s Radio Communication Security Branch. His first project centered on a 

blind-approach, radar-assisted landing system for aircraft. It was a project with roots 

stretching to Dr. Ernst Krause, the man who brought V-2 rockets into NRL’s research 

portfolio. 3 In the 1950s, as Milt Rosen was building up NRL’s Viking rocket sonde 

program and getting ready to segue into the Vanguard program to put a satellite into 

orbit as part of the United States’ role in the International Geophysical Year (IGY), 

Easton became a part of the effort. He developed components and systems that 

eventually would become the Minitrack system for tracking the orbit of Vanguard 

satellites. 4

As Easton applied his engineering creativity to this never-before-done satel -

lite-tracking task, he conjectured that the unprecedented precision of atomic clocks, 

which had been invented in the 1950s, could open up a novel and elegant approach to 

the task at hand. The technological challenges of the Vanguard program had much to 

do with Easton’s subsequent awakening to the power of extremely precise clocks and 

their potential to usher navigational technologies into a new era. The design of the 

Van guard satellite included then novel and innovative solar cells, but this also meant 

the orbiting transmitter would emit signals with a power of only a small fraction of a 

watt—far lower than a transmitter hooked into the power grid or a heavy battery. 

Imagine looking up from the ground to look at a thousandth-of-a-watt light bulb 

situated a few hundred miles up and you get the idea. 

To compensate for the dimness of the transmission, the Minitrack design, which 

was primarily the work of Easton and his boss John T. Mengel, called for an array 

of very large antennas on the ground. With a large enough area, an antenna would 

be able to gather enough signal power to feed into amplifiers that could reconstitute 

the original emission from orbit. Several antennas in the array could then be used to 

determine the angle of arrival of these weak signals so that the position of the satellite, 

and subsequently the satellite’s orbit, could be determined. The first such array of 

antennas was built at Blossom Point, Maryland, in 1956 in a remote, forested spit of 

land about 40 miles south of Washington, DC, in the Chesapeake Bay watershed of 

Maryland, which was then a tobacco-growing region of the state. 

The Federal Communications Commission had authorized NRL’s Vanguard 

program to use the IGY-designated frequency of 108 megahertz (MHz) for satellite 

transmissions. As such, before the Minitrack antenna could accurately determine the 

satellite’s position and orbit, it had to be calibrated to receive signals at that frequency. 

“Calibrating such a large antenna is an issue unto itself,” noted Pete Wilhelm with his 

usual understatement. 5

With their signature resourcefulness and connections in the radio world, the 

NRL satellite tracking team located an FM radio station that was shutting down in 197 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS 

North Carolina. The team bought the station’s transmitter, which they had deter -

mined was tunable to the top of the FM band where the crucial 108 MHz frequency 

resided, and moved it to Ft. Monmouth, New Jersey, where the Army already had a 

large, steerable parabolic receiving antenna that could pick up these signals. Accord -

ing to the team’s calculations, the station’s new antenna/transmitter combination was 

powerful enough to reflect and receive 108 MHz signals even from the moon, let 

alone from an artificial satellite only hundreds of miles away. 

To carry out moon-dependent calibrations of the receiving antenna at Blossom 

Point, Wilhelm explained, Easton and the tracking team at NRL “had to swing this 

big antenna [at Fort Monmouth] ... at the moon and bounce the 108 megahertz signal 

off the moon,” and as the signal bounced from the moon to the receivers in New 

Jersey and Maryland, the NRL team would be able to get a calibration. 

That was the plan. But then something dramatic diverted their attention. Like 

the rest of the world, the NRL engineers were stunned on October 4, 1957, when the 

Soviet Union successfully launched Sputnik. That achievement had stolen the Van -

guard team’s hope of becoming the first in the world to put a satellite of any kind into 

orbit, but it suddenly created a great opportunity in the calibration task. “It remains 

unclear who got the idea first,” Wilhelm said, “but someone on the tracking team 

realized they might be able to capitalize on Sputnik by using it, instead of the moon, 

for bouncing calibration signals from the Ft. Monmouth transmitter to the Blossom 

Point station.” 

“We had the Army direct their antenna’’ so that reflections of the antenna’s emis -

sions would bounce down toward the receiving antenna in Blossom Point, Easton 

recalled. “Success was swift,” said Easton. “When the satellite went over, we got the 

reflected signal at Blossom Point. What’s more, the signal coming in, now that it was 

reflecting from an object only hundreds of miles away rather than the quarter-mil -

lion-mile distance from the moon, was relatively strong.” This moment of radio play 

with Sputnik gave Easton an idea, a very big one as it turned out. “It was the start of 

the Space Surveillance System,” he recounted later. 6 The system became known as 

NAVSPASUR (Naval Space Surveillance). 

Whereas the Minitrack system was designed to passively receive emissions from 

a satellite that was sending out radio signals, the detection and tracking system that 

Easton now had in mind was active. Transmitters on the ground would send fan-

shaped probing beams upward into space and receivers would pick up reflections of 

those signals from anything that happened to be flying through the beam. In Feb -

ruary 1958, just weeks before NRL would rejoice in the first successful launch of a 

Vanguard satellite, Easton prepared a proposal for the Advanced Research Projects 

Agency (now known as DARPA where the first D stands for the word Defense). The 

then newly formed ARPA was charged with developing technologies that could be 

important for the Cold War with the Soviet Union. ARPA had approved NRL’s plan 

for the radar system by June, and within weeks, construction engineers were building 198 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

what would become known informally as “the fence.” “The speed with which people 

reacted in those days was incredible,” said Wilhelm. 7

The launch of Sputnik meant that more satellites would be placed into orbit, 

whether by friend or foe, and there was no reason that all would follow Sputnik’s lead 

in sending out a radio signal to broadcast their presence. An active detection system 

like the one Easton had in mind would detect any object, publicly announced or not, 

that was passing through the electromagnetic fence defined by the system’s transmit -

ters. 

The plan called for a central large transmitter and two smaller transmitters cut -

ting east-west across the southern United States and a series of receiving sites along 

the same great circle east-west line to detect the reflected signals. The receiving sites 

would then fix the angle of arrival of the reflected signals so that the position of the 

satellite reflecting the signals could be triangulated. Ultimately, the system included 

three transmitter sites and six receiver sites. The Ft. Monmouth transmitter was disas -

sembled and shipped from its New Jersey location to Jordan Lake, Alabama, to serve 

as part of the system. Another transmitter was set up near Gila River, Arizona. The 

central transmitter site, at Lake Kickapoo, near Wichita Falls, Texas, wielded overall 

the highest power at about 1 megawatt and was the largest, with a length of 11,760 

feet. Installation teams built receivers in Fort Stewart, Georgia; Hawkinsville, Georgia; 

Silver Lake, Mississippi; Red River, Arkansas; Elephant Butte, New Mexico; and San 

Diego, California. 

If anything flew through NAVSPASUR’s electromagnetic fence, the NRL trackers 

would know about it. By the time the first and more eastern portion of the system was 

up and running in the summer of 1958, there were just a few satellites in orbit. A few  

> NAVSPASUR . With its string of transmitters and receivers, the Naval Space Surveillance System (NAVSPASUR)
> amounted to a radar detection system that would notice any spacecraft passing through it. NRL developed
> NAVSPASUR out of its Minitrack system for Project Vanguard. Only a few years later, NRL handed the operation of
> NAVSPASUR over to the Naval Weapons Laboratory in Dahlgren, Virginia. (AFG-110623-027, http://www.peterson.
> af.mil/news/story. asp?id=123261326) 199 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS

pioneering spacecraft, including the first two Sputniks, already had fallen back into 

the atmosphere and burned up. 8 But the orbital lanes were slated to get much busier, 

both with working satellites and with a growing roster of ancillary radar-reflecting 

objects, including rocket booster bodies that had made it into an orbital trajectory, 

as well as clamps, panels, and other rocket parts that had blown up into many pieces. 

This orbiting debris, along with satellites that remained in orbit after they stopped 

working, eventually would amount to, after a half-century’s worth of accumulation, 

a growing halo of “space junk.” Today, this halo has become a massive problem that 

NRL, NASA, the European Space Agency, and other organizations recognize as a risk 

to the future of working in space. 

Space junk was not a major concern in the early 1960s, however. Just as with the 

Vanguard program’s Minitrack transmitters and receivers, the ones for the NAVSPA -

SUR system needed to be calibrated. When Easton checked in with his colleague 

and friend Marty Votaw (who at the time was helping orchestrate both the scien -

tific SOLRAD payloads and the classified GRAB payloads) to get that task going, 

Votaw pointed to Peter Wilhelm, whom Votaw had hired in December 1959. The 

NAVSPASUR calibration task would involve building a series of satellites, including 

four spacecraft dubbed SURCAL 1 through SURCAL 4 (SURCAL was derived from 

“Surveillance Calibration”). These included transmitters, first ones that emitted at 108 

MHz, and then ones that emitted at double that frequency, 216.98 MHz. This change 

would enable the NAVSPASUR system to detect smaller objects. The NRL Satellite 

Techniques Branch, in cooperation with the NRL space surveillance team, designed 

and launched another series of payloads of specific shapes and sizes with descriptive 

names like Calsphere and Dodecapole. These helped NAVSPASUR operators discern 

more details about how orbiting objects reflected signals from the system’s transmit -

ters. 

By the time Wilhelm had taken the helm of the Satellite Techniques Branch 

in 1965, Easton and his group were already working on a straightforward way of 

upgrading the NAVSPASUR system from primarily a detection system into one that 

could determine the orbital trajectories of objects in space from data acquired in a 

single pass rather than several. All it would take, he calculated, was a second line of 

transmitters and receivers, that is, a second fence several hundred miles south of the 

main fence. 

As Wilhelm recalled it, “Roger realized that, you know, if [there] were two fences 

that were displaced north-south from each other, so [that a satellite] goes through the 

first fence and then the second fence only a few minutes later, then now I’ve got a ve -

locity measurement and I’ve got enough [data] on one piercing of the [double] fence 

to determine an orbit, in theory.” And so Easton proposed building a second fence at 

Raymondville, Texas, almost 480 miles south of Lake Kickapoo. 9 The second fence 

consisted of a transmitter site and a receiver site east of the transmitter site. This sec -

ond fence would also demonstrate a new technique, which would reduce the number 200 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

of stations needed to fix the position of the satellite penetrating the fence. In addition, 

the design included ranging signals so that this second fence could determine the 

range to the object as well as its velocity. 

It was an engineering vision in which the solution to one problem, say, detecting 

any object and its orbit passing over the United States, entailed solving other prob -

lems. Those exercises then catalyzed engineers’ imaginations in entirely new direc -

tions, in Easton’s case toward the conceptual basis of the Global Positioning System, 

known more often now as GPS. A pillar of that conceptual foundation was the use of 

atomic clocks. 

To carry out the necessary calculations for determining the location of satellites 

from the radio echoes the double fence would receive, the timing of the emissions 

and receptions would have to be precisely measured. Doing that, Easton knew, 

would require clocks in the system that could be synchronized within nanoseconds 

of each other. “That’s when Easton had one of those Aha! moments that changes the 

world,” recalled Wilhelm, “Roger gets the idea: Jeez, if I put a clock in the satellite, 

then I can not only synchronize my two clocks on the ground [in the receivers of the 

double fence] with the one in space, but I could determine the orbit of the satellite.” 

With a transmitter in the satellite synchronized sufficiently with the receiver on the 

ground, the range between the two can be accurately measured passively, that is, with 

no transmissions from the receiving sites. “That’s how he gets this idea that putting 

atomic clocks in satellites is the way to [use passive ranging to] solve the navigation 

problem, and that’s how you get to the GPS concept.” 10 

The basic geolocation/navigation procedure goes like this: By synchronizing the 

clock in the satellite with the clock in a receiver on the ground, and then sending a 

time-tagged signal from the satellite, the time it takes for the signal to travel to the 

receiver can be precisely determined. Because the signal travels at the speed of light, 

that time measurement, even though it is but a tiny fraction of a second, accurately 

and almost instantly reveals the distance between the satellite and the ground receiv -

er. 

That is just part of the task to determine a location on the ground from a space-

based transmitter. By combining the now-known distance to the satellite with the 

satellite’s orbital location (which can be determined because of tracking systems like 

NAVSPASUR) when the spacecraft sent the signal, it becomes possible to draw “a 

sphere of equal range” centered on the satellite. This sphere demarcates all possible lo -

cations that are a specific distance from the satellite, but only those points that inter -

sect with the planet are the ones that could coincide with something on the surface. 

The intersection of two or more such spheres with the planet would indicate with in -

creasing precision the receiver’s location on the surface (or with at least three spheres, 

the location of airborne receivers). If the satellite’s location in space and the duration 

of the signal’s trip from the orbiting transmitter to the receiver were known perfectly, 

and if the Earth also was a perfect sphere, then the calculated sphere would intersect 201 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS 

with the planet in one place that was exactly the location of the receiver. Since perfect 

knowledge of these factors is not possible, however, it is necessary for the system to 

feature multiple satellites. By drawing spheres around several signal-sending satellites 

at different locations in space, their multiple intersection points enable the accurate 

mathematical determination of a receiver’s three-dimensional location. Three satel -

lites provide positions and four satellites can provide time and position, which is what 

GPS does. 

This was a train of thought that required pushing clock technologies to new levels 

of accuracy and, quite literally, to new heights. In particular, it required that all of 

the transmitters and receivers have clocks with unprecedented synchronization since 

even an uncertainty of one-thousandth of a second between the time of transmission 

to reception of a ranging tone would add an uncertainty in the measured range to the 

satellite of about 200 miles. 11  This meant that Easton and NRL were going to get into 

the leading edge of precision clock technology. 

The first experiments with atomic clocks entailed tedious and time-consuming 

car transportation of a portable, battery-operated atomic clock for the hundred miles 

or so between the space surveillance transmitter and receiver pair in south Texas so 

that the pair’s clocks would be synchronized. “We had standards [that is, standard 

atomic clocks] at the transmitter and the receiver and [used] a traveling clock in 

between them,” noted Easton. “We used to carry cesium beam standards from the 

transmitter to the receiver to synchronize them.” 12  It was a lot of driving that Easton 

knew he could stop doing if only he could put a good stable clock into orbit. Then he 

would be able to synchronize both the transmitter and the receiver from the single 

clock in the satellite. 

That could solve the clock-synchronization task. “Then came the idea of a rang -

ing signal from the satellite synchronized to a ground station,” Easton noted, “adding 

that would be ‘ideal for navigation’.” 13 

Therein lay one of the primary conceptual and technical bases for “passive rang -

ing” and a system of enormous military and civilian significance that would become 

famous around the world as GPS. “What passive ranging means,” explained Wil -

helm, “is you have clocks that are so stable that in effect they are synchronized with 

each other, even though there is no physical connection. They are just that good of a 

clock.” 14  NRL had clock development and timing systems in its research portfolio for 

many years as part of its work for the U.S. Naval Observatory (USNO), which always 

has relied on accurate timing technology for timekeeping, for developing its star 

charts, and for other navigational tools and techniques whose reliability was limited 

by clock accuracy. Easton could see that the better the clocks, the more any surveil -

lance, tracking, navigation, and location finding system could do. A raison d’être for 

him became, therefore, the development of ever more accurate clocks that could be 

made satellite-worthy. Wilhelm became a fast convert to this view and then brought 

to bear everything he could by way of his own ingenuity, connections, and authority 202 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

to transform Easton’s idea of passive ranging from satellites into a real capability for 

the Navy and the nation. It would be his Satellite Techniques Branch that would build 

satellites carrying the clock-bearing payloads. 15 

“If you want to know your location to a foot, you need to measure time to one 

thousand millionth of a second, or a nanosecond. That’s how fast the speed of light 

is,” Wilhelm explained. “So to measure and to navigate to high precision, it’s all about 

timing. That’s where it starts and that’s where it ends.” 16 

Wilhelm couldn’t tell Easton about the classified ELINT payloads that he, Loren -

zen, Mayo, and their teams were working on at the time, but he could help Easton 

secure what essentially would be a free ride into orbit for testing high-accuracy 

clocks. There was room, Wilhelm knew, on the “aft rack” of the framework on which 

the next set of Poppy surveillance satellites would be launched on May 31, 1967. The 

passive ranging satellite carrying a modified commercial crystal oscillator would be 

called Timation, for “time navigation.” That particular launch also had several other 

satellites slated to be aboard. In fact, it had a record number of payloads for a single 

launch: seven. 

The best space-ready clocks at the time were not atomic clocks. They would have 

to be based on top-quality quartz crystals (whose crystalline oscillations are akin to 

a superfast pendulum) that were kept in a temperature-controlled oven so that their 

crystal structure, and thereby the crystals’ vibrational frequencies, wouldn’t change, 

at least not much. The NRL team contracted with the Long Island-based company 

Frequency Electronics Incorporated (FEI) to modify a land-based production unit 

for space use. It was about the size of shoebox that was occupied mostly by a pair of 

temperature-controlling ovens. 17 

The heart of the these clocks were crystals of quartz mined from the earth, cut 

into small disks, and then connected to electronic oscillating circuits that set this 

crystal “tuning fork” going. The problem with them is that the vibration frequencies 

of the crystals change over time because the crystals are affected by temperature, pres -

sure, contamination, and exposure to radiation, among other influences. All of these, 

in effect, change the note that the quartz tuning fork generates.  

> Timation 1 . One of the pioneering space tests that led to the Global
> Positioning System was the NRL spacecraft Timation 1, which was launched
> on May 31, 1967. Timation 1 tested the concept of sending radio signals from
> super accurate spaceborne clocks to receivers on the ground as an efficient
> means of synchronizing clocks throughout the space-based navigation
> system. Shown here is an artist’s depiction of Timation 1 in orbit with a gravity
> stabilization boom deployed. (NRL photo 69862.jpg and TIMATION 1) 203 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS

Even so, the FEI clocks appeared to be remarkably stable in Timation 1, but that 

apparent success was later determined to include a good measure of dumb luck. It 

turns out that the expected natural drift in the crystal’s vibrational frequency was 

almost perfectly compensated by radiation damage that shifted the crystal’s frequen -

cy almost the exact amount in the direction opposite to the natural drift. It was a 

fortuitous result. With an initial eye on improving the quartz clock’s stability yet more 

for Timation 2, the NRL team asked its partners at FEI to redesign the clock for space 

and to reduce its natural drift. No one knew at the time that this “fix” would effective -

ly unmask the frequency shift due to space-based radiation damage of the crystal. As 

a result, the “better” clock that went into orbit aboard Timation 2 on September 20, 

1969, actually performed poorly compared to the one in Timation 1. 18 

If he could have, Easton would have started out using atomic clocks based not on 

crystals but on atoms in the gaseous state, such as gaseous atoms of the alkali metal 

cesium. He knew these would produce a more stable frequency, and with that, even 

more precise clocks. Rather than using crystal vibrations as the timing reference, the 

vibrations of atomic clocks derive from the almost inviolable vibrations in atomic 

spectra. Magnetic fields, temperature shifts, and a few other things can, in fact, alter 

these frequencies, but shielding and temperature control systems can handle those 

issues. Most important, perhaps, is that the high radiation conditions in orbit do not 

change an atom’s vibrational frequency and so atomic clocks do not “age” and drift 

the way quartz oscillators inexorably do. 

Atomic clocks had been around since the mid-1950s when researchers proposed 

the idea that an atom’s supremely high-frequency oscillation could serve as the basis 

for ultra-accurate clocks. But initially these clocks were appliance-sized gizmos, 

weighing hundreds of pounds. Even the commercially available cesium clocks of the 

time would take a major miniaturization feat to get them small, light, and rugged 

enough for space duty. So quartz oscillators had to be the way to start. 

For the first test of the concept intended for Timation 1, one of Easton’s col -

leagues, Matt Maloof, installed a small transmitter that could send out ranging signals 

controlled by the Timation 1 crystal clock’s output and then put the clock in the back 

seat of his convertible. He then drove along what was then the new Interstate 295 next 

to NRL before the highway was even officially opened. A receiver set up in a building 

near the gate of the lab, and equipped with another quartz clock that had been syn -

chronized with the clock in the convertible, picked up the transmissions. 

“So this guy [Maloof] with his convertible goes up on 295 and comes driving 

down past the lab and they were measuring the range between him and the laborato -

ry and plotting his position as he went,” recalled Wilhelm. “Because of that setup, you 

were able to determine at every instant of time as the car moved past the lab exactly 

what his range was to an incredible accuracy.” 19  This was a time when the Wilson 

Bridge that crossed from the southwest quadrant of the District of Columbia into 

Virginia was brand new and just opening up. 204 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

With savvy, Easton made sure that representatives from the Navy’s Bureau of 

Weapons were present at the highway demo. Almost on the spot, they wrote a check 

for $35,000, the most they were authorized to pay out, to keep development going. 20 

“They took [the Timation idea], and we started this billion dollar project on $35,000,” 

Easton noted. 21  The successor to the Bureau of Weapons, the Naval Air Systems Com -

mand, subsequently would continue funding the project in later years, particularly 

when it came to atomic clock development. 22 

That initial injection of cash from the Bureau of Weapons was enough to move 

forward with the option of carrying out the first satellite test of the Timation concept 

by placing the quartz-clock-carrying Timation 1 on the Agena launch vehicle’s aft 

rack in the forthcoming Poppy launch. 23  The low cost and afterthought quality of 

the project would come with limitations. There wasn’t much space on the aft rack, 

for one, and that meant there was not much room for power-generating solar arrays. 

As such, the transmitter on Timation 1 would only be operable several hours a day 

before the arrays would have to be devoted to recharging the batteries. 

The need for this sort of compromise for future experiments was short lived. 

Easton was sure he was onto something huge with this passive ranging and he knew 

that it was going to evolve into an expensive and important national commitment. 

Cognizant of the politics this would entail, he arranged for a high-profile demonstra -

tion of the concept for top-tier Pentagon decision makers, who eventually would be 

the ones authorizing the many millions of dollars it would take to deploy an opera -

tional space-based, global navigation, geolocation, and time-transferring system. 

In a show of his support for NRL’s navigation satellite project, a representative of the 

Navy’s Bureau of Weapons, Chester Kleczek, suggested that a live demonstration take 

place near the Pentagon in a location offering an unfettered “view” of the satellite as it 

began its 13-minute pass traced across the bowl of the sky. The location he suggested 

was near the Lincoln Memorial on the east bank of the Potomac River by a stone me -

morial for John Ericsson, a prolific Civil War era inventor, builder of the Monitor (an 

ironclad gun boat), and the screw propeller, which stands as one of the most import -

ant advances in the history of naval propulsion. 24 

To prep for the demo, scheduled for October 25, 1967 (just a few months after 

Timation l’s launch), Easton’s NRL colleague James Buisson traveled from NRL to the 

Naval Weapons Laboratory in Dahlgren, Virginia, where technicians working with 

TRANET (which stands for Transit Network), a Doppler-based tracking system, had 

been tracking Timation 1. Buisson picked up magnetic tapes containing a full record 

of Timation l’s orbit, or ephemeris, which was classified at the time. Then, together 

with Space Applications Branch colleague Howard deVezin, they converted the data 

into input suitable for a computer program that could predict the range and azimuth 

of the Timation payload as it made a pass over the demo site on the National Mall. 25 

On the day prior to the demo, another colleague, Thomas McCaskill, took the 

next step by converting the computed outputs into a range-intercept chart, several 205 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS 

copies of which the Timation team would lay out in front of the VIPs at the demo 

site. Even though this “range-intercept, line-of-position method” was not part of the 

operational concept, it was a savvy prop for the demo because some of the invitees, 

among them high-level Navy officers, would be familiar with this celestial navigation 

technique from their own at-sea duties with the Fleet. 

October 25, a Wednesday, was a brisk autumn day. A contingent of NRL engineers 

in three unassuming vehicles-a gray pickup with the NRL logo in the lead, followed 

by a Ford coupe and a Pontiac sedan-made their way from the lab to the Ericsson 

Memorial. With Easton supervising the team, Buisson and McCaskill, and other 

colleagues Don Lynch, Al Bartholomew, and Alick Frank, all got to work unloading 

and setting up the equipment. On top of a plywood sheet set onto two saw horses went 

the steerable Yagi antenna that would pick up Timation’s signals, receiver electronics, a 

portable cesium atomic clock, a chart paper recorder, a couple of marine batteries, and 

a DC-to-AC converter. The satellite would approach from the southwest and sweep 

across to the northeast. 26 

Soon after they set up the gear, two cars with Navy and Department of Defense 

(DoD) identification marks parked near the memorial. A half-dozen VIPs from 

the Naval Air Systems Command (NAVAIR), the Office of the Director of Defense 

Research and Engineering (DDR&E), and the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations 

(OPNAV) emerged from their vehicles. Easton escorted them to the makeshift table 

now burdened with a full-service receiving setup. Kleczek was there too, anxious to see 

how well his suggested demo venue would turn out. 

Easton explained what was going to unfold during the demonstration as one of 

his colleagues taped a range-intercept chart to the table and passed a few more charts 

around for easy reference. On the charts, lines splaying out radially like spokes from 

hubs were segmented with tick marks corresponding to specific times, which corre -

sponded to the distance (time multiplied by the speed of light equals distance) to the 

satellite. The stage was set. 

On cue, Timation 1 soared above the horizon and began its pass over the demon -

stration site. Pens on the chart recorder jumped into action, indicating that the receiv -

er had begun picking up signals from the satellite. Timation 1 quickly cycled through 

the sequence of tones, or frequencies, whose time of travel between the satellite and 

the receiver was the all-important parameter to be measured and plotted in order to 

determine the distance to the satellite. Each of the tones, which increased in frequency, 

produced another datum that reduced the overall uncertainty in the ultimate range 

measurement. With each range measurement, the VIPs could draw another line of 

position on the range-intercept charts. The intersections of these lines enabled the par -

ticipants to track how the navigational fix on their own ground location became better 

defined with each additional signal received from Timation 1. 

The demonstration hit the mark, as evidenced by the subsequent Pentagon-level 

decision to fund the satellite navigation project that Easton had first envisioned three 206 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

years earlier. The October 25 demo would be just the first of many that Easton ran, 

including one for a dozen Navy captains at NRL in Building 53 where Easton had his 

office and labs and that would become one of the nation’s premier testing and certifi -

cation grounds for the DoD’s highest-precision atomic clocks. For that demo, Easton 

shunted live satellite data into the demonstration room where the captains then could 

determine their own geolocations. 

To show the system’s versatility and potential value to all the nation’s military 

services, Easton orchestrated more tests-from boats, land vehicles, and aircraft. 

Time-transfer tests using the satellite’s clock to synchronize clocks on the ground 

with an accuracy better than one microsecond were undertaken with the U.S. Naval 

Observatory in 1967. Five months later, tests were done with the National Bureau 

of Standards (now known as the National Institute of Standards and Technology) at 

its facility in Fort Collins, Colorado. 27  The orbit determination group at Dahlgren, 

Virginia, at the Naval Weapons Laboratory, produced the orbital positions of Tima -

tion in preparation for these navigation and time-transfer demonstrations. To expand 

the types of experiments and tests that were possible, the Timation team set up fixed 

ground receiving stations and a portable receiver which could run for 8 hours on 

marine storage batteries. Among other equipment, ground stations included a cesium 

atomic clock, data recorder, and processors for comparing the phase differences 

between received signals (important for precision range calculations) and reference 

signals. 28 

The entire system of clocks in the Timation 1 network ultimately was anchored 

to the DoD Master Clock on Massachusetts Ave., NW, in Washington, DC, on the 

grounds of the USNO (United States Naval Observatory). The initial setting of 

Timation l’s quartz clock entailed lugging a portable atomic clock to USNO, setting 

it in synchrony with the master clock, then carting the newly synchronized portable 

atomic clock to Blossom Point, Maryland, where the ground station’s own cesium 

clock was then synchronized using the portable relay. Via telemetry, that standard 

time then was used to set the quartz clock on the Timation satellite.   

> Chart Art. In a key demonstration of the Timation
> concept, high-level observers were able to use a
> familiar navigation charting technique to convert
> data from a satellite passing overhead into a
> determination of their own location on the National
> Mall in Washington, DC. An example of such a chart is
> shown here. (Chart Record, scanned from page 61 of
> Whitlock and McCaskell, “NRL GPS Bibliography.”)

207 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS 

It all paved the way for Timation 2, launched along with the Poppy 6 payload on 

September 30, 1969, just two months after the triumphant Apollo 11 landing of the 

first humans on the moon. These satellites were boosted along with an unprecedented 

group of seven other satellites aboard a Thorad Agena D booster (so-named because 

its Thor stage featured an extended fuel tank and strap-on boosters), which finessed 

the payloads into a 500-mile polar orbit. The quartz crystal clock oscillator featured 

four ovens to provide more precise temperature control and longer-duration stabil -

ity. The quartz crystal operated at 5 MHz, supporting the transmission of ranging 

frequencies of up to 1 MHz. That opened the way to a clock precision of 30 nano -

seconds, which would result in a geolocation accuracy of tens of meters. 29  The Naval 

Weapons Laboratory 30  in Dahlgren again provided orbit-determination services by 

tracking Timation 2 via Doppler measurements with its TRANET system (Transit 

Network, developed for global geodetic determinations). 

Also weighing in here was the Princeton, New Jersey-based RCA Astro-Electron -

ics Division, which NRL contracted to develop Timation receivers and study archi -

tectural options for the overall Timation system. Among the latter were investigations 

into the relationship of, on the one hand, the types and capabilities of the orbiting 

clocks and, on the other hand, the satellite constellations that would make for practi -

cal, global coverage. 31 

Compared to its predecessor, Timation 2 was a bit bigger and had more power 

available for its components, including a transmitter that sent an extended pattern of 

range tones on two carrier frequencies of 150 MHz and 400 MHz. This was a techni -

cal requirement for reducing uncertainties that resulted from ionospheric refractive 

effects (variations of the signals’ phases) as well as for improving the system’s geolo -

cation accuracy. “We got fixes of about fifty meters RMS [root mean square],” Easton 

said, referring to the distance between an actual location of a receiver on the ground 

and the one determined by the Timation system. 32  Another successful experiment 

with Timation 2 demonstrated a time-transfer from the nation’s premier standard 

clock at the USNO to another of the world’s primary time standards at the Royal 

Observatory in London’s Greenwich district. 

“We were able to synchronize the two master control stations in London and 

Washington to incredible accuracy, fractions of a microsecond,” said Wilhelm. “That  

> Timation 2 . Though not very pretty, the Timation 2
> satellite was part of the important process of testing the
> performance of highly accurate quartz clocks for a space-
> based navigation system that would become known as
> GPS. Timation 2 was launched into orbit on September 30,
> 1969. (NRL photo D-250.jpg) 208 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

was the first time satellites had been used to do this [passive] time transfer” between 

different nations’ master clocks. As impressive as that was, Easton could tell that he 

would need to fly even better clocks if his vision of satellite navigation was to become 

as valuable of a technical asset as he had hoped. “We got a lot of data and we could 

tell that the quartz oscillator wasn’t working too well, and we ought to get something 

better,” he said. 33 

Easton needed better clocks. However, they were only part of the system that 

would depend on a constellation of dozens of satellites. The satellites would be ar -

ranged in an orbital pattern such that anybody anywhere on the planet with a suitable 

receiver and enough calculating power would be able to determine their location with 

unprecedented precision. Accuracy was to be attained from ranging signals from at 

least four satellites. 

The pieces were coming into place for a system that would satisfy the Joint Chiefs 

of Staff (JCS) navigation requirements first laid out in 1968. 34  These requirements 

called for worldwide, continuous, three-dimensional position determination with 

an accuracy of 50 feet, or about one hundredth of a nautical mile, with passive user 

equipment. As Wilhelm recalled it, “the [JCS] study said, okay, these are the require -

ments that we want your navigation system to be able to meet, and it was ... for all 

military users-aircraft, ships, ground troops, trucks, tanks, whatever, anywhere on 

the surface of the Earth. And when you look at those requirements, it drives you to 

where we’re at today.” 35  If the system were only for naval vessels, which are at sea level, 

it would only need to determine a ship’s longitude and latitude, a two-dimensional 

problem. But the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Wilhelm stressed, “said ‘no, we want 3D’ and 

that’s what drives you to the numbers of satellites that we are talking about here, 24 or 

28 satellites, something on that order.” 36 

It was clear that this emerging technology, if it were to serve the needs of all mil -

itary users, would be complex and expensive and that every effort should be taken to 

get it right and in an affordable way. To strive toward that goal, the DoD set up, in the 

1968/1969 time frame, the DoD Navigation Satellite Executive Steering Group, or the 

NAVSEG. 37  The system that was to result from the studies sponsored by the NAVSEG 

was to be known as the Defense Navigation Satellite System (DNSS). Because aircraft 

posed the most demanding navigation problem, parameters for those became the 

driving framework for the system studies by the NAVSEG as it examined the various 

proposals and options on the table, including the primary Air Force contender known 

as 621B. 

The Air Force’s 621B proposal had the same goal as NRL’s Timation approach, but 

there were significant differences. Easton got a good bead on that program in 1968 at 

a meeting at the U.S. Naval Observatory where NRL and the Air Force both presented 

classified papers on their respective proposed systems. 38 

For one thing, the Air Force proposed using satellites in geosynchronous orbit, 

which is to say high-flying satellites that orbit at an altitude of about 22,000 miles and 209 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS 

in complete synchrony with the rotating Earth below. This way, the satellites stayed 

over the same spot on the ground continuously. For a particular quadrant of the plan -

et, there would be one satellite over the equator in a geosynchronous orbit and three 

others associated with it in orbits that were tilted (inclined) with respect to the first 

one and highly elliptical rather than circular. “If you did a trace of the [overhead mo -

tion of the] four satellites on the ground, it looks like three figure eights crossing over 

where the center satellite is. So we called that the eggbeater configuration,” Wilhelm 

explained. 

The engineering of the system left the Navy uneasy. The configuration, for one, 

would leave Earth’s poles poorly served, yet the country’s nuclear missile submarines 

were routinely patrolling in these regions and were among the military assets most 

in need of a navigation satellite system. So from a Navy standpoint, the Air Force 

proposal was “totally unacceptable,” according to Wilhelm. 39 

Also problematic, according to the NRL contenders, was the eccentricity of the 

satellites in the 621B proposal. Maintaining satellites in those orbits, as the sun and 

moon tugged on the spacecraft to differing degrees day by day, would require relent -

less on- the-fly corrections, which would take a lot of propulsion engineering and pro -

pellant, thereby reducing each satellite’s lifetime. Yet another drawback, as the NRLers 

saw it, was that the loss of any one satellite in any of the four-satellite configurations 

would take away the capability of determining locations in three dimensions in that 

quadrant of the planet. Without redundancy in the system, there would be a great 

risk of losing important aspects of the navigational system at any moment, including 

during wartime when the country could least afford the loss. 

The list of drawbacks, as Easton, Wilhelm, and the Navy saw it, was yet longer. If 

the 621B concept were to cover the entire planet, two of the four four-satellite config -

urations would require ground stations to be placed outside of U.S. territory, which 

meant it would be hard to protect them. The Air Force system also called for trans -

mission of time data and signals from a ground station underneath each constellation 

because the satellites themselves would not carry atomic clock time standards the 

way the Navy program would. A related drawback the NRL team raised was that the 

highly elliptical orbits would impose a relativistic effect on the time signals that would 

require constantly updated mathematical corrections to be built into the processing 

part of the system. 40 

So here was a case of two military services proposing their own respective ver -

sions of the most ambitious navigation system the world had ever seen. The country 

did not need and could not afford two such systems, so the Navy and the Air Force 

were going to have to figure something out and the point of the NAVSEG was to help 

these rivals do just that. 

Easton was the NRL representative on NAVSEG, which met periodically from 

1968 until 1972 to work out differences into what in the end would be a single 

navigation system. “We would go and each one would tell what they were going to 210 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

do, and the other ones would throw stones at it,” Easton said. 41  Consequently, Easton 

and others in the loop executed numerous calculations and ran many simulations to 

determine the best heights, trajectories, inclinations, and other orbital parameters for 

a constellation of satellites to provide the coverage needed. 

“The initial design that they [NRL] came up with was [a constellation of] satel -

lites in about 7,500 nautical mile circular [polar] orbits, which were high enough to 

be in the line of sight from a large area on the planet,” Wilhelm recalled. 42  “Twen -

ty-seven satellites in eight-hour orbits, arranged in three planes, would provide global 

all-the-time coverage. The team realized [they] needed to avoid elliptical orbits, in 

which the satellite would travel at a height that would vary during each orbit, because 

those changes include varying velocities and passage through different gravitational 

fields, all of which affect the clocks in accordance with the theory of relativity. This 

was one of the few technologies ever devised for which relativity was a real factor, 

not just a theoretical one.” 43  In their quest to optimize the system architecture and 

after numerous simulations, Easton and his team finally proposed a constellation of 

satellites in three inclined orbits to provide the best coverage for users anywhere in 

the world. 

It would not be an easy feat getting dozens of satellites into orbits 7,500 miles 

overhead, let alone at an affordable price. The initial proposal was to use a large 

booster and put multiple satellites in each orbit plane at the same time. So deploying 

a full navigation satellite system was clearly going to be an expensive proposition. 

The NAVSEG attempted to resolve the different technical concepts but could not 

come up with a clear direction regarding the best system concept to implement. The 

NAVSEG finally proposed a demonstration project that would implement enough of 

the competing concept technologies to generate sufficient data for guiding its recom -

mendation regarding which concept to green-light for full development. In April of 

1972, Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., the DoD Director of Defense Research and Engineering 

(DDR&E), formalized the task of selecting the optimum system by circulating to the 

Military Departments the draft Development Concept Paper (DCP) Number 121 

titled “The Defense Navigation Satellite Program Demonstration Program (DNSDP).” 

To consolidate its space projects, the Navy recast sponsorship for NRL’s Timation 

and other satellite initiatives with other Navy Space projects by disestablishing the 

Astronautics Division of the Naval Air Systems Command and moving the projects 

it oversaw into a newly formed Navy Space Projects Office, designated as PM-16. 44 

This office became the programmatic home of all Navy space projects. At the same 

time, the Navy continued support for the Timation option for the DNSS by calling 

for the development of experimental satellites to prove out the technology required 

for the system. To comply, Easton and his satellite navigation team at NRL developed 

a demonstration plan consisting of four experimental satellites. The first step was to 

begin designing and fabricating what the team referred to as Timation 3A, but which 

when completed and launched in 1974 was renamed Navigation Technology Satellite 

One (NTS-1) to reflect its inclusion in the newly formed GPS program. 211 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS 

In a move in April 1973 that greatly concerned the NRL pioneers in space-based 

navigation and their partners within the Department of the Navy, the Deputy Secre -

tary of Defense sent out a memorandum designating the Air Force as the executive 

service overseeing the DNSDP. The Air Force was charged to proceed with devel -

opment of a plan that would demonstrate the capability to meet the needs of all the 

military services, not just the Air Force’s, but that did not put the Navy at ease. A Joint 

Program Office (JPO) was set up at the Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organi -

zation (SAMSO) to orchestrate the collaboration among the stakeholders-primarily 

the Air Force, Navy, Army, and Marine Corps-to spell out a plan for the DNSDP. 

Originally the system was to be named the Defense Navigation Satellite System, but it 

ultimately would be designated as the Navigation Satellite Timing and Ranging Glob -

al Positioning System, or NAVSTAR GPS for short. 45  The first JPO program director 

was Colonel Bradford W. Parkinson of the Air Force, who earned a Ph.D. in aero -

nautics and astronautics from Stanford University in 1966 and who would work on 

the satellite navigation task with representatives from the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, 

Coast Guard, Defense Mapping Agency, Air Logistics Command, and NATO. 

Colonel Parkinson was directed to develop the demonstration program as a joint 

development effort. The demonstration was to include the path to the final system 

design, which the DoD would approve before the program would proceed with full-

scale development, according to a historical account by Parkinson himself, along with 

coauthors that included NRL atomic-clock and GPS expert Ron Beard. 46  Credit for 

the name that stuck for the system, NAVSTAR Global Positioning System, goes in 

part to General Hank Stehling, who was Director of Space for the Air Force Deputy 

Chief of Staff for R&D. Because the system’s concept went beyond mere navigation, 

he suggested that the term “global positioning system” more fully encompassed the 

planned deliverable. 

The NAVSTAR part of the moniker (that is, Navigation Satellite Timing and 

Ranging) came from John Walsh, a Deputy Director for DDR&E who was part of the 

decision-making infrastructure regarding budgets for strategic systems, including 

satellite-based global positioning schemes. During one of the many budgeting discus -

sions associated with the NAVSTAR GPS program, Walsh suggested to Colonel Brent 

Brentnall, the Department of Defense representative for the program, that NAVSTAR 

had a nice ring to it. “Col. Brentnall passed this along as a good idea to Dr. Parkinson, 

noting that if Mr. Walsh were to name [the program] he would undoubtedly feel more 

protective towards it. Dr. Parkinson seized the opportunity,” according to the histor -

ical account by Parkinson, Beard, and their coauthors. Joining NRL in 1971, Beard 

(who just previously had been the Timation program manager for the sponsor at 

NAVAIR) would become a primary NRL representative and advocate in many of the 

technical, policy, and programmatic meetings that would take place over the decades 

it would to take for GPS to become a fully operational system. In time, he would 

oversee the GPS Joint Clock Development Program and the still-continuing role of 212 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

NRL in the maintenance and monitoring of the Global Positioning System’s network 

of atomic clocks. 47  NAVSTAR Global Positioning System became the official name, 

though most would later drop the acronym and shorten “Global Positioning System” 

to its acronym, GPS. 

Despite agreement on a name for the future navigation satellite system, there was 

no agreement about just what aspects of the dueling Navy and Air Force proposals the 

system would embody. To move toward agreement about those specifications, about 

the time Colonel Parkinson was scheduled to give a briefing on the evolving Develop -

ment Concept Paper to the new DDR&E, Parkinson called a meeting over Labor Day 

weekend in 1973. This meeting later would be viewed by some as a pivotal moment 

in the history of the GPS technology. About a dozen military and civilian members 

of the Joint Program Office met on the fifth floor of the Pentagon. 48  That was not 

the only pivotal meeting convened that weekend, according to Roger Easton’s son, 

Richard, who published a history of GPS in 2013. 49  According to recollections of his 

father, Richard Easton writes that Roger Easton and Captain David Holmes (retired), 

who years earlier had been an influential liaison with the Advanced Research Projects 

Agency (ARPA) and helped fund the lab to develop the NAVSPASUR system, met at 

the Spring Hill Motel at Bailey’s Crossroads, Virginia, with Parkinson and other Air 

Force representatives. 50  It is this motel meeting that Beard argues was most influential 

in determining the ultimate framework for GPS. 

Arriving at an agreement about a system for the nation took seemingly endless 

hours of discussion, but the upshot was this, Wilhelm recounts: “A suggestion was 

made to [Parkinson], ‘why don’t you just take the Navy system and you guys [that is, 

the Air Force] manage it, but we’ll go with the Navy approach, the Navy clocks in the 

satellites, the Navy high circular orbits, and we’ll fly both [the Navy and Air Force] 

ranging systems.’” 51  

> GPS Champion . A member of the NRL team
> that developed space-worthy atomic clocks, as
> well as the overall architecture of what became
> known as the Global Positioning System, Ron
> Beard is shown here at his desk in the Aerospace
> Systems Branch (Code 7969) in 1984. (NRL photo
> 81070(8).jpg) 213 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS

And that, essentially, is how it went down. 52  Colonel Parkinson proceeded to 

revise the draft development concept paper for the extensive series of briefings at 

the Pentagon necessary to inform tri-service and Department of Defense leadership 

about the plan that would be presented in late December 1973 to the Defense Systems 

Acquisition Review Council (DSARC). The council did not take long to approve a 

demonstration of the system concept. 53 

The approval memorandum stressed that NRL was to play a key navigation tech -

nology role and develop the all-important clocks for the system. Cesium-based stan -

dards looked like the best candidates for the operational system. The DCP called for 

the building of additional technology satellites, including the NRL-designed Timation 

3A (or NTS-1) and two additional NRL satellites, which were to be known as NTS-

2 and NTS-3. In December 1973, the DSARC green-lighted the Global Positioning 

System by approving, in addition to the NTS-1 satellite, a demonstration constellation 

of NTS-2 and three Air Force developed satellites in 12-hour inclined orbits, which 

was essentially the demonstration configuration NRL had been pushing for. 54 

In the discussions and coordination leading up to the finally presented DCP, 

“Roger had laid out the grand plan, but how do you implement it” was the question, 

Wilhelm said. 55  It fell on Wilhelm’s shoulders to answer that question. The cost issue 

was being forced also because the Thor Agena family of boosters that NRL relied on 

for launching the two Timation satellites were being discontinued, entailing a likely 

move to Titan boosters. This was an expensive booster, potentially adding a consid -

erable cost to the concept demonstration and jeopardizing the approval of the GPS 

program. 

This is where Wilhelm came in with his engineering creativity that would earn 

him, in time, a prestigious collection of technical and public service awards from the 

government. Rather than using either a Titan or Thor Agena booster, he identified 

a dirt-cheap alternative. He knew unused Atlas F boosters, which were designed for 

delivering ICBMs to enemy targets, were available since they were now being super -

seded by Boeing’s next-generation Minuteman boosters. The Atlas F was becoming 

obsolete for delivering nuclear bombs for a good reason. It was a liquid-fueled rocket 

that ran on kerosene mixing and burning with liquid oxygen. The fuel had to be load -

ed in the missile’s silo under cryogenic conditions only when the rocket needed to be 

launched. If that moment came, the fueling process would have to be carried out, the 

rocket then would have to be elevated to the surface, and then the engine would have 

to be ignited to send it and its nuclear warhead on its awful way. It all took time. “That 

time duration was of concern because, after all, you think you’re under attack so the 

other guy has already launched and they are coming at you and you want to make 

sure you can get [yours] off,” Wilhelm explained. The Minuteman ICBMs relied on 

solid fuel motors and could sit there ready to be launched within minutes of an order 

to do so. “All you need to do is hit the button and she’s gone,” said Wilhelm. 56 214 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Wilhelm was impressed by the weight the Atlas F boosters could carry aloft and 

by their guidance systems. Combine those features with the low cost that came with 

their surplus status, and they looked to Wilhelm like an ideal way for NRL and the 

taxpayer to continue developing what he could see could become a revolutionary new 

means for military navigation and, as it would turn out, much more than that. 

His calculations indicated that these missiles could take a reasonably sized 

payload to a 100-mile altitude. Furthermore, he concluded, by adding a controllable 

upper stage to the Atlas F, the upper stage would then be able to insert payloads into 

much higher circular orbits. This would help Easton and his colleagues demonstrate 

that the Timation concept worked and could be deployed far more affordably than 

with a Titan launch. 57  With the approval of the GPS concept demonstration plan, 

Wilhelm and NRL got the green light to pitch the plan for future payload designs and 

launches. 

Wilhelm worked with the Space Test Program office within the DoD that was go -

ing to fund the launch of the technology satellites as part of the DoD program to put 

experiments into space for investigating navigation satellite concepts. Collaboratively 

they designed the NTS-1 launch system that took a surplus Atlas booster and topped 

it with a solid-propellant rocket stage that took the satellite up to the 7,500 nautical 

mile orbit as planned. 

FEI again built a pair of quartz oscillators especially for the NTS-1 satellite as the 

primary timing devices. But for the first time, rubidium-vapor atomic clocks small 

enough and with a design that would be compatible with a satellite became available. 

Easton’s clock development team bought a half-dozen of these from the Munich, Ger -

many firm Efratom, and ran tests that confirmed the clocks could be space qualified. 

So at a point later in a satellite development program than is normal for major chang -

es, the NTS-1 team decided to include as an experiment a pair of rubidium clocks 

along with FEI’s quartz oscillators. This required Easton and his fellow clock special -

ists to modify the Efratom models for the rigors of launch, so they could be remotely 

operated, and so they would work with the rest of the satellite’s electronics. 58  “We just 

picked up [six] that the Germans [Efratom] had developed,” Easton recounts. “We put 

lead around [a pair of] them so they wouldn’t be affected too much by radiation and 

flew them. They were significantly better than the quartz crystals that we had flown 

previously.” 59 

In addition to hosting the first tests of atomic clocks in space, the overall plan for 

NTS-1 that came out of deliberations of the NAVSEG was to host a transmitter sys -

tem that was part of the Air Force 621B test program at White Sands, New Mexico. As 

opposed to Easton’s so-called side tone ranging (STR) signal, the 621B approach was 

to use a ranging signal protocol known as pseudo random noise (PRN). NRL would 

provide the antenna, power, and telemetry components and the Air Force would 

provide the transmitter. Also on board NTS-1, on the bottom of the satellite, would 

be an array of laser retroreflectors as part of the NASA program that was developing a 215 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS 

laser-based tracking and ranging network for studying the dynamics of Earth’s crust. 

To eke out yet more experimental value from the satellite, the NRL team built radia -

tion dosimeters for measuring the radiation environment during NTS-1’s operation. 

The scientific payload also included a variety of solar arrays of different designs and 

different makers for a comparison study. The pieces for the next-generation naviga -

tion system were coming together. 

Even as preparation for the first on-orbit test of the rubidium clocks was moving 

forward, the NRL clock team was already busy developing what was presumed would 

be an even better atomic clock based on the element cesium. A cesium standard was 

considered to be about 10 times more accurate than the rubidium standards, based 

on comparisons between the two. The NRL engineers also were well aware that more 

stable and accurate clocks were needed in the higher orbits selected for the satellites 

in the GPS concept since the satellites would be out of view longer from U.S. based 

ground stations used to update the clock. This enabled each satellite in the constella -

tion to have a larger view of the Earth. That, in turn, meant the entire system would 

require fewer satellites in orbit for global coverage. As such, the NRL team, as it 

thought forward to NTS-2 and the demonstration constellation that it was to be a part     

> NTS-1/Timation 3. The third test satellite built during the developmental phase of the Global
> Positioning System (GPS) was known at NRL as Timation 3, but was renamed as NTS-1 as the
> participants in the program grew well beyond NRL. Shown here is a model of the satellite that was
> on display in a mini-museum in NRL’s Building 222, and a retroflector array that flew on NTS-1 to test
> optical tracking abilities. (NRL photos 77112(30).tif and 77328(3).jpg)
> Atomic Clock. Pivotal both to orbital tracking and
> to a system like the Global Positioning System are
> superlatively accurate atomic clocks. Shown here is
> a cesium-based atomic clock during a testing phase
> at NRL. Such clocks would gain or lose only 1
> second in 3 million years. (NRL photo 78336(1).jpg) 216 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

of, considered the problem of the satellites flying at 11,000 miles rather than 7,500. It 

was a move that had its compromises. 

For one thing, it would take a larger booster to take a payload to the higher 

altitude. Wilhelm’s proposal was to take the surplus Atlas boosters and top those with 

a more capable and lower cost solid-propellant rocket stage that could take a substan -

tial payload all the way to the 11,000 nautical mile orbit. The result would be an on-

the-cheap booster (which featured a novel tandem configuration of two solid rocket 

motors) for the high-flying navigation satellites. 60  The Atlas F itself couldn’t go as high 

as the satellites needed to get, but it would reach its highest point, its apogee, under 

a precise guidance system. The idea then was to build an upper stage that combined 

additional boosting power with a technique known as spin stabilization, by which a 

well-balanced object set spinning would maintain a trajectory it was initially set on. 

The company selected to build the upper stage for NTS-2 was Fairchild, a com -

pany that Wernher von Braun (of V-2 and then NASA fame) would join in 1972 as 

vice president, in collaboration with a small Virginia rocket company called Atlantic 

Research. Their solution was in the form of a manifold that looked like four noz -

zle-bottomed, gas-emitting bottles and a lot of plumbing, all of which was designed 

and machined so precisely that as gas vented from the bottles, it generated just the 

right spinning momentum to stabilize the satellite along the path that the guided 

Atlas rocket had initiated. Getting the navigation satellites into the orbit that Easton 

and his colleagues calculated as the best one would require the tandem, two-rocket 

configuration on the spin-stabilized stage. 61 

First things first though, and that meant NTS-1. On July 14, 1974, NTS-1, which 

NRL continued to name as Timation 3A for a while in its own list of launches, 

became the first satellite to go into orbit from the SLC-3 West launch pad at Van -

denberg Air Force Base, which was the one Wilhelm had convinced the National 

Reconnaissance Program (the sponsor of the Poppy ELINT program) to renovate so 

that it could accommodate Atlas F liquid-fueled boosters. 62  It was also the one used 

for NTS-2, which would launch on June 23, 1977, the same year the Poppy program 

would come to an official close. It would also launch the next 12 Rockwell-built Block 

1 GPS satellites. 

Launching Atlas boosters was no small commitment. The cryogenic liquid fuel 

required that, prior to launch time, liquid oxygen had to be continually pumped into 

a tank to replace the oxygen as it evaporated. The filling technique was not perfect 

and liquid oxygen spilled down into a concrete basin underneath the launch stand 

known for good reasons as the flame bucket. Some kerosene would drip too, but a 

lesser amount. “If you have a nice cold night and a long countdown, you can drop a 

lot of kerosene with [the] gelled oxygen and it can coat the flame bucket,” Wilhelm 

noted, 63  “and that’s what happened ... on the second launch [at the modified pad at 

Vandenberg]. The launch after NTS-1 was an RCA weather satellite and it didn’t go 

well. The flame bucket’s contents ignited and blew the rocket and its satellite into bits. 217 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS 

It was the most spectacular failure I had seen,” Wilhelm says. “And the fact that our 

[first] launch had roughened the surface of the concrete, there were now a lot of pits 

in there from the hot flame and everything so there was a place for the stuff to puddle 

up.” 

It was a powerful and expensive lesson. After that, the flame bucket was resur -

faced into a smoother condition that would not harbor dripping fuel and a “water del -

uge” was installed that would wash any spilled fuel down conduits and into collection 

containers before it could accumulate underneath the rocket. 64 

Meanwhile, NTS-1 was orbiting the planet. The experiments conducted with this 

mission provided crucial data on the performance of the rubidium clocks. For exam -

ple, the mission tested the transfer of navigation and time data between the satellite 

and the NRL system’s ground components, and those exercises helped open the way 

for the subsequent mission, NTS-2, which would prove to be the first satellite to fly in 

the 12-hour GPS orbit and to transmit the GPS signals. 

A memorandum following the approval of the first phase of GPS development 

from the Director of Defense Research and Engineering was circulated in late 1974 65 

specifying a parallel development of cesium clocks by NRL. NRL was to develop both 

a primary cesium clock and a second version from an alternate source so that the 

supply of production models could be assured for the larger numbers of GPS satel -

lites that would come on line in the years ahead. Moreover, the memorandum also 

provided the guidance that if both versions proved to work well and reliably enough, 

then both the cesium clocks would be tested on NTS-2 and one would become the 

clock of choice for the GPS system after the first planned block of six GPS satellites 

that Rockwell International would deliver. To push the clock technology even further, 

NRL was later tasked with developing hydrogen masers, that is, hydrogen-based 

atomic clocks that were even more stable than cesium clocks. The first idea was that 

these were to find duty in the ground segment of the GPS system and if successful the 

NRL clockmeisters would subsequently design lighter, miniaturized versions for use 

in space. The overall development schedule even had an experimental maser flying on 

the NTS-3 mission. 

“NTS-3 never happened,” Wilhelm noted, 66  but maser development by both 

NRL and contract researchers did build some momentum. For example, Easton’s 

group managed two industrial hydrogen maser R&D teams, one at Hughes Research 

Labs and one at RCA, with the charge of trying to build and validate experimental 

space-capable hydrogen masers. Beard pointed out that during the operational de -

ployment of GPS, a hydrogen maser actually was designed and built for GPS satel -

lites. Even so, no maser has yet to be deployed in the system. Remnants of the maser 

research reside at NRL in Building 53 where there is a veritable atomic clock museum 

with specimens of each generation of atomic clock that was under consideration or 

development for the Timation and NTS satellites. 

On June 23, 1977, NTS-2, the last satellite in the GPS program that NRL engi -218 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

neers would build, made it into orbit atop an Atlas F from Vandenberg Air Force 

Base. It would test about every major component that Rockwell International would 

use in its demonstration GPS satellite. The NTS-2 test bed also would validate the 

JCS-required three-dimensional accuracy of less than 60 feet with aircraft flying over 

a calibrated test range. 67 

On board NTS-2 were the world’s first two cesium clock prototypes built under 

the guidance of, and for, NRL by Massachusetts-based Frequency and Time Systems 

Inc., to fly in space. These clocks performed extremely well, achieving a time error of 

about 20 nanoseconds per day. Additionally, the NTS-2 satellite hosted both NRL’s 

and the Air Force’s ranging signals, that is, side tone ranging and pseudo random 

noise (PRN) ranging, respectively. The latter included a specially built PRN signal sys -

tem designed and built by Rockwell International and supplied to NRL for inclusion 

in NTS-2 that was called the pseudo random noise signal assembly, or PRNSA. 68 

The NRL-developed side tone ranging technique worked by emitting a sequence 

of radio frequencies that step up from low frequencies to higher ones. Measuring the 

phase shift in each satellite-emitted frequency with a carrier frequency and precisely 

comparing them to reference frequencies generated by an oscillator in the receiver 

determined the range to the satellite. This passive ranging technique was the prima -

ry means of determining the receiver’s location. The Air Force’s ranging approach, 

PRN, was transmitted as a modulated digital code written in zeros and ones on a 

single frequency. This code was compared with an identical code in the receiver and 

the difference measured the range between the satellite and the receiver. The code 

was also a unique sequence that distinguished each satellite so that a receiver would 

readily know which signals were coming from which satellite. This meant that a single 

frequency from each satellite could be used for the ranging as opposed to the multiple 

frequencies that the Navy’s side tone technique required. The digital approach was 

selected and in time it is what would enable such high degrees of miniaturization that 

hand-held and even chip-sized GPS receivers would become possible.  

> Timation 4 . Launched on June 23, 1977,
> Navigation Technology Satellite 2 (NTS-2), known
> also at NRL as Timation 4, was the fourth satellite in
> NRL’s Timation series. (NRL photo 78337.tif) 219 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS

In addition to providing a test bed for the two ranging signal systems, NTS-2 

hosted other experimental technologies. Again, there were retroreflectors for optical 

based tracking. There were new solar array designs for testing. It featured a pointing 

and drive mechanism that would become part of the demonstration satellites Rock -

well International was building. There were newly designed nickel-hydrogen batteries 

for storing power harvested by the solar arrays with a deeper depth of discharge than 

was possible with the conventional nickel cadmium batteries. Moreover, NTS-2 tested 

the software and command systems of the GPS ground segment, which provided the 

tracking, command, and control functions being developed to operate the demon -

stration constellation of satellites. 

After the four experimental satellites (Timation 1 and 2, and NTS-1 and NTS-2), 

NRL no longer had a role in building the satellites as the NAVSTAR GPS demonstra -

tion constellation built by Rockwell was incrementally increased from 6 to 11. Not 

until the mid-1990s was the 24-satellite configuration declared operational. During 

the nearly 25-year stretch in which the GPS system was developed, delivered, and de -

ployed, the Transit system was also operated by the Navy. The Naval Space Command 

maintained the system in an operational status until Transit was retired for naviga -

tional purposes at the end of 1996. 69 

The first three Rockwell-built GPS satellites went up in 1978, each carrying three 

rubidium clocks. The fourth satellite to go up was the first to also include an engi -

neering development model of a cesium clock, which NRL had provided to Rockwell 

for integration into the satellite. As it turned out, all of the clocks in this initial block 

of satellites proved to be problematic. The cesium clock that flew on NAVSTAR 4, 

for one, lasted all of 12 hours, a failure attributed in a subsequent analysis to a faulty 

power supply. 70  This led to a top-level reexamination of the program’s space-qualified 

atomic clocks at a meeting of the Defense Systems Acquisition Review Council, which 

was convened to approve operational deployment of the system. As a result of the 

subsequent approval, NRL was directed to discontinue working on NTS-3, which was 

then under construction, and to focus on clock development for the GPS Program. 

A lasting consequence of that direction was the initiation of the NRL Space Clock 

Development Program. Beard and his colleagues in the Space Applications Branch 

(renamed Advanced Space Precision Navigation and Timing Branch) would develop 

hydrogen maser clocks, refine the cesium clocks in use in the satellites, investigate 

rubidium clock systems, and continue to evaluate, analyze, and test the performance 

of the overall system’s clocks. 71 

Around the same time as the launch of the first GPS satellites, various prototypes 

of user equipment for the overall system user segment were shipped to Yuma Proving 

Ground in Arizona for preliminary testing. Among these was a five-channel receiver 

built by Texas Instruments and a jam-resistant version designed by Rockwell Col -

lins. 72  In ongoing discussions, Colonel Parkinson and several colleagues convinced 

the Department of Defense to transfer $60 million from the Transit program to the 220 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Air Force for the purpose of funding two more GPS satellites. The argument for the 

shift was that the extra GPS satellites would provide an ability to track Trident mis -

siles during test firings, a capability that was included in plans for an upgrade of the 

Transit system. Had the plan to increase Transit’s tracking capabilities gone through, 

it could have derailed the work-in-progress NAVSTAR GPS. 73 

The final system design that emerged out of inter-service NAVSEG deliberations 

and was incorporated into the GPS program consisted of 24 satellites arranged in 

three rings of eight satellites each. The final configuration subsequently approved for 

operational deployment, due to a shift of launch site from Vandenberg in California 

to Cape Canaveral in Florida, would morph the arrangement into six sets of four sat -

ellites at a 55-degree inclination rather than the 63-degree inclination in the original 

plan. At Cape Canaveral, any inclination over 55 degrees would include flying over 

land, which posed an unacceptable safety risk. 74 

As with all satellite projects that NRL’s space technology cadre worked on since 

the late 1950s, the Timation and NTS satellites brought out a stream of innovations in 

satellite design and construction. Al Bartholomew (Roger Easton’s deputy), for exam -

ple, pushed forward the temperature control system for the quartz crystal clocks on 

the Timation 2 and NTS-1 satellites by making use of newly available thermo-electric 

devices (TEDs), which would get hotter or cooler on one side depending on which di -

rection the electric current was running through it. “It held the temperature to a mil -

li-degree,” Wilhelm said, meaning that the temperature on the crystal in its thermally 

isolated chambers fluctuated no more than one-thousandth of a degree Celsius. 75 

In his memoir of his years as an NRL space technology engineer who began in 

1960, James Winkler recounted that this thermal control innovation was based on 

“Peltier effect junctions” sandwiched between semiconductor plates to form a TED 

module. About 10 of these were then stacked between a pair of aluminum plates 

about the size of big index cards. The modules were extremely fragile, so one of the 

team members, electrical engineer Jim O’Hara, devised a cushion that was flexible 

and could absorb shocks even as it also served as a thermal conductor. The clock 

housing was mounted atop this thermal control assembly. “Pete [Wilhelm] had de -

signed a feedback circuit, based on a complementary differential amplifier that would 

drive current through the TEDs,” Winkler explained. He ran a model of the unit 

through thermal-vacuum testing, one of the primary tests for proving space worthi -

ness of components and systems. “I was amazed at how well the fragile TEDs stood 

up to the test program,” which included rigorous vibration tests, and proved them -

selves in orbit aboard NTS-1. Wrote Winkler, “This turned out to be a good applica -

tion of a unique device and is illustrative of the innovative design capabilities of this 

organization.” 76 

Meanwhile, the entire satellite’s temperature needed its own means of stabili -

zation. That took a combination of passive controls, such as vaned structures for 

passively radiating heat, as well as active means for fine tuning the spacecraft’s tem -221 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS 

perature. Keeping the satellites pointing down was pivotal too. To achieve this attitude 

control passively for the Timation satellites, the NRL team turned to the gravity 

gradient stabilization tactic as the means of keeping it pointed in the right direction. 

In applying this gravity gradient to satellite stabilization, the idea is to include an ex -

tendable boom with a mass at the end that is some distance away from the mass of the 

satellite. “There is a different gravitational attraction on those two masses,” Wilhelm 

explained. “And what that results in is the satellite would tend to align that boom with 

the radial vector to the center of the Earth.” As is often the case, a solution begets a 

problem. The technique required a way, using magnets it turned out, to dampen the 

pendulum motion that sets in initially as the satellite assumes the general direction 

along the vertical gravity attraction of the planet. 77 

It was not a perfect technology. A head-shaking illustration of this unfolded with 

the 1967 launch of Timation 1 along with four other satellites, all associated with 

the Poppy ELINT program and all of which were equipped with the gravity gradient 

stabilization systems. 78  There is an equal chance that a satellite with its boom out will 

orient either in the desired direction or upside down. That is why the system that 

Wilhelm and his coworkers at NRL deployed included the capability of retracting the 

boom and then reeling it out again to initiate motions that can flip the satellite over. 

As it happened in the 1967 launch, all five of the gravity gradient stabilized satellites 

initially oriented upside down, an occurrence that had only a 1/32 chance of happen -

ing. Wilhelm noted later that the NRL team managed to reorient them all in the prop -

er direction. 

There were other challenges in spacecraft stabilization at higher altitudes. The 

Timation 1 and 2 satellites both went into low Earth orbits where the gravitation -

al effects are stronger than in the higher orbits where the NTS-1, NTS-2, and all 

subsequent GPS-related satellites would go. It was not known how well the oscil -

lation-tamping magnets on the gravity-gradient booms would work at the higher 

orbits. What the NRL satellite builders did know is that they would have to use much 

stronger magnets to dampen the oscillations. That made them worry about whether 

metal surfaces elsewhere in the satellite would disrupt the magnet’s ability to do its 

intended job. 79 

Their worries were justified. Sensors on NTS-1 indicated that it was wobbly, 

even though the directional antennas it used managed to send out emissions of high 

enough quality to be used to prove the navigation functions. In the more capable op -

erational systems that were to come, this wobbling could threaten the overall system’s 

reliability and performance and so this wobbling flaw catalyzed innovation. For NTS-

2, the magnet-based damping system for quelling the wobbles in gravity gradient 

booms was taken out of the design and replaced with a more capable stabilization sys -

tem that was to be used in the Rockwell designed satellites. This stabilization system 

relied primarily on reaction wheels, or known otherwise as momentum wheels. NRL 

electrical engineer George Flach had experience with these wheels in the classified 222 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Poppy satellites. 80 

These spinning devices resist a tilting of the spacecraft with respect to the center 

of the planet and their rate of spin could be sped up or slowed in ways that would 

correct the satellite’s attitude. There is a problem with this type of stabilization. Speed -

ing up and slowing down the wheels elicits a momentum disturbance in the satellite 

that needs to be corrected. The most direct way to do so is to use thrusters. However, 

the use of thrusters alters the orbit of the satellite slightly and so can foist motion 

problems onto the platform as well. The NRL team opted to combine reaction wheels 

with the gravity gradient technique to open the way to thruster-free stabilization. It 

took a lot of innovation to make these work, but it was worth it, Wilhelm pointed out, 

because it reduced the vulnerability to inducing unintentional trajectory changes, a 

result that would be disastrous for navigational systems in which the satellites’ tra -

jectories had to be precisely tracked and predicted. 81  “Every time you fire a thruster, 

you screw up your tracking system for quite a while,” Wilhelm explained. “And we 

had had plenty of experience with that.” The stabilization technique the NRL engi -

neers recommended was to stop using any thrusters once the satellite made it into its 

final orbit and then to turn stabilization and attitude control over to gravity gradient 

booms and reaction wheels. 82 

When the GPS satellite technology was transitioned completely to Rockwell, 

these lessons learned and many others developed by the many engineers involved 

helped Rockwell hone the system. As blocks of satellites started to make it into orbit 

beginning in the late 1970s, the expertise NRL had developed in the atomic clock are -

na evolved into a dedicated program of technology development for the GPS system, 

as well as a center with techniques and protocols for evaluating the performance of 

on-orbit clocks. 

As this book was being researched and written, the Space Clock Development 

Program, which Ronald Beard was overseeing in the Space Applications Branch at 

NRL, continued this role by monitoring the performance of all the clocks flying in 

GPS satellites. This group provides this performance data to the operators of the GPS 

system and alerts the Air Force about specific clocks in the constellation when these 

begin to show their age with reduced performance or upsets, a situation that could 

indicate the active clocks in the GPS satellites would need to be switched to one of 

the other clocks in standby. The motto of the Global Positioning Systems Director -

ate headquartered at what is now the Los Angeles Air Force Base is displayed on a 

GPS-themed coffee cup in Beard’s office, reminding him of what the system he helps 

maintain and improve is all about: “Any Time, Any Place, Right Time, Right Place.” 

After the first block of GPS satellites were built, subsequent blocks began hosting 

additional payloads, among them sensors for detecting nuclear explosions. That, in 

itself, rendered the satellites too complex and too heavy for the thrifty Atlas boosters 

that Wilhelm had pushed for during the demonstration phase of GPS. 83  The NASA 

Space Shuttle originally had been designated as the launch vehicle that would carry 223 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS 

the operational (Block II) satellites into orbit, but the disastrous loss of Challenger in 

early 1986 demanded an alternative plan. It would be the bigger and more expensive 

Delta II that became the ferry for taking GPS satellites into orbit. It was the shift to 

the Space Shuttle and ultimately Delta IIs that moved the launches to Cape Canaveral, 

Florida. That change entailed the safety-driven shift to an orbital inclination no more 

than 55 degrees. 

Even though the full GPS constellation would not be in place until 1993, the Gulf 

War in 1990–1991, also known as Operation Desert Storm, provided one of the earli -

est and most influential publicly revealed military applications of the system. 

In a theater of battle where one dune looks like the next, the great sweep of 

armored forces across the trackless desert was possible only because of GPS instru -

ments on tanks, artillery, and logistics vehicles. In press conferences, General Arnold 

Schwarzkopf was famously enthusiastic about the pinpoint accuracy achieved by 

America’s newest, GPS-assisted smart weapons. The offensive opened with GPS-guid -

ed cruise missiles launched from Navy ships hundreds of miles away in the Persian 

Gulf directly into Iraqi air defenses and installations, among other military assets. 84 

From there forward, GPS has been present in the military in myriad ways every 

day. One of the more suspenseful uses of GPS took place on June 6, 1995. At 2:08 in 

the morning, American F-16 pilot Captain Scott F. O’Grady, who had been downed 

four days earlier over Serb-controlled territory during a no-fly-zone operation, finally 

risked radio communication with his comrades as he hid from Serbian forces. Using a 

GPS receiver hidden inside his life vest, O’Grady was able to determine his own longi -

tude, latitude, and altitude (although he was on the ground) to within a few hundred 

feet. With that intelligence, a Tactical Recovery of Aircraft Personnel team of the 24th 

Marine Expeditionary Unit was able to extract O’Grady from behind enemy lines a 

mere four hours after F-16 flyers first picked up their comrade’s distress call. 85 

Lucky for O’Grady, his adversaries were not jamming the GPS signals that saved 

his life. From the early phases of GPS, even during the Labor Day meeting at the 

Pentagon back in 1973, everyone involved in the program had been concerned about 

electronic jamming, spoofing, and other tactics that enemies could deploy to deny the 

U.S. and its allies use of GPS technology. Because of GPS’s weak signals, jamming is 

fairly easy, notes Wilhelm, adding by way of example that it was a problem in Afghan -

istan. 86 

Although it is possible to thwart a would-be jammer by increasing the transmis -

sion power of the satellites, the jammer, working more conveniently with ground-

based electronic countermeasures, always can counter that boost in signal power 

with yet more jamming power, or get in closer to the receivers he is hoping to jam. 

As often has been the case with military developments that would be valuable to 

both services, the Air Force and the Navy have come up with differing approaches to 

reducing vulnerability to jamming, according to Wilhelm. 224 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

In the next phase of the program called GPS 3, Wilhelm noted in 2014, the Air 

Force was looking toward a system with higher transmission power, and other modi -

fications that would decrease the vulnerability of the signals. One advance centers on 

changes in the content and modulation of the signals. As an interim solution to the 

signal-vulnerability problem in the period before GPS 3 is fully implemented, NRL 

pursued another option: High Integrity GPS (HIGPS). This project aimed to exploit a 

constellation of an already on-orbit communication satellite system, called Iridium. 

As communication satellites, these were designed with high-power transmit -

ters and were in low-altitude orbits. Because they were closer to the receivers on the 

ground, the signal from these satellites can be higher power than those from GPS 

satellites. By using these satellites to transmit synchronizing information about the 

GPS clocks and signal-acquisition data to receivers, it becomes possible to augment 

the weaker GPS signals with this information from the higher power Iridium signals. 

“It’s a system that is already up there,” noted Wilhelm. “You don’t need to put 

up any more satellites.” In the field, ground stations of an HIGPS would be capable 

of receiving downlinks from both GPS and Iridium satellites. These data and cor -

rections for any clock-based differences in the system would then be transmitted 

back up through the Iridium satellites as a communication message to the users’ 

GPS receivers. NRL has taken the first steps with laboratory demonstrations indicat -

ing that soldiers with receivers rendered HIGPS-ready with hardware and software 

plug-ins would effectively hear HIGPS signals as though they were a thousand times 

more intense than from a GPS only. 87  In 2014, the Office of the Director of Defense 

Research and Engineering (DDR&E), which resides within the Office of the Secretary 

of Defense, was evaluating the options for a jam-resistant GPS upgrade and analyzing 

the budgetary consequences of each. 88 

Just before Christmas in 2018, the Air Force did take a step toward a GPS up -

grade with the successful launch of the first satellite of the block with higher power 

transmitters designated GPS 3. If this block of satellites performs as planned as it 

becomes integrated into the full constellation of GPS satellites in the coming years, 

the upgraded GPS system will deliver three times more accurate time and position 

information and more powerful and less-jammable signals. 

While GPS’s most sophisticated abilities remain within the military domain, 

its publicly available features have been put to use in all kinds of ways. When the 

Department of Defense opened GPS technology for commercial development, an 

army of innovators got going and a commercial industry was born. The most visible 

early result of this was GPS-based navigation systems in fleets of cars and trucks, an 

innovation founded on the marriage of GPS with maps, geographical information 

systems (GIS technology), and route calculation programs. Trucking companies track 

their fleets and plan routes using GPS, as do sea-based shipping companies. Pilots, 

cartographers, city planners, wilderness hikers, construction engineers, road build -

ers, telecommunications companies, and automobile makers are among the millions 225 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS 

who rely on GPS for what they do or in devices that help them sell their wares. Two 

decades after the capability was first envisioned, estimates of the numbers of military 

and civilian users worldwide of GPS would soar into the many tens of millions. 89 

Remarked Wilhelm: “When you think about the fact that the [GPS receiver in 

your car] can not only tell you where you are, but it has figured out the most efficient 

route … and as you get near the corner it warns you okay, you’re going to turn in 

about 400 feet ... that’s a pretty powerful app there.” 90 

Cell phone technology, most notably the miniaturization of electronic and radio 

frequency components, also was pivotal for hand-held GPS technology. The addition 

of GPS functions to cell phones opened up a world of geolocation-based applications 

that have become among the most popular features of smart phones. 

Although the Global Positioning System’s most familiar missions are navigation 

and geolocation, its mission as a versatile orbiting time standard for ultraprecise 

synchronization of clocks in communications, intelligence, cryptological, and other 

systems is just as vital in the commercial world as it is in defense and security circles. 

As indicated earlier, this mission goes by names such as “time transfer” and “time dis -

semination.” For example, to build anti-jamming capability in communications and 

other systems by, say, rapidly hopping between frequencies or condensing informa -

tion in quick signal bursts, requires precision timing between emitters and receivers. 

In the arena of ocean surveillance, precision timing is essential for pinpointing 

the location of, say, ocean-going electromagnetic emissions. GPS’s time dissemination 

mission is central to much of the civilian infrastructure as well. The precise synchro -

nization of clocks in widely spaced components of power grids, cell phone systems, 

and the Internet is what makes it possible to manage, respectively, the instant-to-in -

stant flow of electricity, the tower-to-tower handoffs of millions of specific cell phone 

conversations, and the distribution and reassembling of vast numbers of data packets 

that underlie the working of the Internet. 

“GPS is considered the primary means of time dissemination, because of its abil -

ity to serve passive users, its continuous worldwide coverage, its built-in survivability, 

its accuracy, and its simultaneous position solution that is often needed by precisely 

timed systems,” Beard and several colleagues wrote in a review of GPS clock technol -

ogy. 91 

Even in 1992, well before GPS became such a widespread motif of the technolog -

ical landscape, the National Aeronautic Association (NAA) recognized the principals 

of the GPS development team-NRL, the U.S. Air Force, Aerospace Corporation, 

Rockwell International Corporation, and IBM Federal Systems Company-by award -

ing them its 1992 Robert J. Collier Trophy. This award is presented annually, in NAA’s 

words, “for the greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in America, with 

respect to improving the performance, efficiency, or safety of air or space vehicles, the 

value of which has been thoroughly demonstrated by actual use during the preceding 

year.” 92  The NAA cited the GPS team for “the most significant development for safe 226 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

and efficient navigation and surveillance of air and spacecraft since the introduction 

of radio navigation 50 years ago.” NRL’s copy of the Collier Trophy has been located 

for maximum visibility in the lobby of Building 43, the main administrative building 

where the lab’s leadership has its offices. 

Roger Easton received many accolades for his seminal role in the origin, engi -

neering, and implementation of the GPS program. In 2005, for one, he was honored 

by President George W. Bush with the 2004 National Medal of Technology. The cita -

tion states that Easton received the medal for “his invention of the Minitrack satellite 

tracking system used to track Vanguard satellites and determine orbits; his develop -

ment of the Naval Space Surveillance System …; his invention of a ‘Navigation System 

Using Satellites and Passive Ranging Techniques’ and his subsequent development of 

Time Navigation and Navigation Technology Satellites that formed the technologi -

cal basis for modern GPS.” 93  In 2010, Easton, who retired from NRL in 1980 just as 

the first operational GPS satellites were making it into orbit, was inducted into the 

National Inventors Hall of Fame. 94  He died in 2014.   

> The Collier Trophy. Along with partners in the Air Force, Rockwell International
> Corporation, Aerospace Corporation, and IBM, NRL shared the glory on May 4,
> 1993, of receiving the Collier Trophy, among the most prestigious accolades in the
> aerospace community, for its pioneering role in the conception and development work
> that led to the world- changing Global Positioning System (GPS). Shown are Captain
> Paul Gaffney, NRL’s Commanding Officer; Roger Easton, with the Collier trophy;
> Dr. Timothy Coffey, NRL’s Director of Research; Pete Wilhelm, Director of NRL’s
> Naval Center for Space Technology; and Rear Admiral William Miller, Chief of Naval
> Research. The trophy resides in a display case in the lobby of Building 43 on NRL’s
> campus. (NRL photo 93-000087(25).jpg)

227 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS 

> GPS Pioneer . Roger Easton, one of NRL’s most
> celebrated engineers for his role in the invention
> of what became known across the world as the
> Global Positioning System, shares remarks at
> his induction into the National Inventors Hall of
> Fame. The citation noted Patent No.
> 3,789,409, associated with the Timation Satellite
> Navigation System, a precursor to GPS.
> (NRL photos ND2_2287.jpg and 25-13r_GPS_
> USPat_3789409_2320x3408)

1 Bradford W. Parkinson, Thomas Stansell, Ronald Beard, and Konstantine Gromov, “A History 

of Satellite Navigation,”  Navigation  42, no. 1 (Spring 1995): 109–164. 

2 Applied Research Laboratory, The Pennsylvania State University (ed.) , From the Sea to the 

Stars: A Chronicle of the U.S. Navy's Space and Space-related Activities , 1944–2009  (revised and 

updated edition, 2010), p. 42. 

3 Roger Easton, oral history conducted by David van Keuren, March 8, 1996. 

4 Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, p. 22. 

5 Peter Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012. 

6 Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, p. 35. 

7 Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012. 

8 Tina Thomson (ed.), Space Log, 1957–1987 (Redondo Beach, CA: TRW, 1988). 

9 Peter Wilhelm, oral history conducted by NRL Historian Leo Slater, August 7, 2009.  

> 10

Wilhelm, oral history, August 7, 2009.  

> 11

Light traveling at 186,000 miles per second travels 186 miles in one thousandth of a second.  

> 12

Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, p. 56.  

> 13

Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, p. 56.  

> 14

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, p. 14.  

> 15

Ronald Beard, personal communication, April 2014.  

> 16

Peter Wilhelm, oral history about GPS history, February 14, 2012, p. 68.  

> 17

C.A. Bartholomew, “Quartz Crystal Oscillator Development for Timation” NRL Report 7478 

(Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, October 25, 1972).  

> 18

Robert L. Whitlock and Thomas B. McCaskill,“NRL GPS Bibliography: An Annotated 

Bibliography of the Origin and Development of the Global Positioning System at the Naval 

Research Laboratory,” NRL/MR/1001-09-8988 (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 

June 3, 2009), pp. 9 and 84. 228 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE  

> 19

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, pp. 17–18.  

> 20

Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, p. 58.  

> 21

Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, p. 60.  

> 22

Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, p. 66.  

> 23

Wilhelm, oral history, August 7, 2009.  

> 24

http://www.nps.gov/joer/historyculture/index.htm.  

> 25

T.B. McCaskill and R.R. Whitlock, “40th Anniversary of Historic NRL Navigation Demon -

stration,”  Labstracts , Naval Research Laboratory, pp. 4–7.  

> 26

McCaskill and Whitlock, “40th Anniversary.”  

> 27

McCaskill and Whitlock, “40th Anniversary.”  

> 28

McCaskill and Whitlock, “40th Anniversary.”  

> 29

Ronald Beard, personal communication, April 2014.  

> 30

The Naval Weapons Laboratory was renamed in 1974 as the Naval Surface Weapons Center 

and in around 1990 as the Naval Surface Warfare Center.  

> 31

Parkinson et al., “A History of Satellite Navigation,” p. 125.  

> 32

Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, p. 77.  

> 33

Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, p. 77.  

> 34

Ronald Beard, personal communication, April 2014.  

> 35

Wilhelm, oral history, February 14, 2012, p. 69.  

> 36

Wilhelm, oral history, February 14, 2012, p. 71.  

> 37

Parkinson et al., "A History of Satellite Navigation,” p. 126.  

> 38

Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, pp. 83–84.  

> 39

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, pp. 39–40.  

> 40

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, pp. 40–42.  

> 41

Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, p 87.  

> 42

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, p. 43.  

> 43

Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, p. 85.  

> 44

Parkinson et al., “A History of Satellite Navigation,” p. 126.  

> 45

From the Sea to the Stars , p. 90.  

> 46

Parkinson et al., “A History of Satellite Navigation,” p. 136.  

> 47

Ronald Beard, interview with author, March 12, 2012.  

> 48

Parkinson et al., “A History of Satellite Navigation,” pp. 136–137.  

> 49

Richard Easton,  GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to Smartphones  (Potomac Books, 2013), 

pp. 65–70.  

> 50

Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, pp. 71–72, 89.  

> 51

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, p. 43.  

> 52

From the Sea to the Stars , p. 91. A footnote points out that there remains some controversy on 

whether NRL or the Air Force deserves more credit for the overall design of the GPS system.  

> 53

Parkinson et al., “A History of Satellite Navigation,” p. 137.  

> 54

From the Sea to the Stars , pp. 90–92; Ronald Beard, personal communication, April 2014.  

> 55

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, p. 24.  

> 56

Lee Hammarstrom, draft of memoir shared with author, November 2013.  

> 57

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, p. 25.  

> 58

R.L. Beard, J. Murray, and J.D. White, “GPS Clock Technology and the Navy PTTI Programs 

at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory,” in Proceedings of the 18th Annual Precise Time and 

Time Interval (PTTI) Applications and Planning Meeting, 2–4 December 1986, Washington, 

DC, 1987.  

> 59

Roger Easton, oral history, 1996, p. 104; Ronald Beard pointed out in a manuscript review 

that the number of Efratom units NRL purchased was six, rather than the two Easton reported 

during the oral interview.  

> 60

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, pp. 30–31.  

> 61

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, pp. 26–27. 229 CHAPTER 11 — WHERE AND WHEN, E VERYWHERE AND ALWAYS: GPS  

> 62

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, p. 25.  

> 63

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, p. 30.  

> 64

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, p. 31.  

> 65

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, p. 32.  

> 66

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, pp. 32–34.  

> 67

Parkinson et al., “A History of Satellite Navigation,” p. 130.  

> 68

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, p. 56.  

> 69

From the Sea to the Stars,  p. 121.  

> 70

Natarajan D. Bhaskar et al., “A Historical Review of Atomic Frequency Standards Used in 

Space Systems,” Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE International Frequency Control Symposium, 

pp. 24–32.  

> 71

Parkinson et al., “A History of Satellite Navigation,” p. 134.  

> 72

Parkinson et al., pp. 138–139.  

> 73

Parkinson et al., p. 139.  

> 74

Parkinson et al., pp. 141–143.  

> 75

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, p. 49.  

> 76

James Winkler, private memoir shared with author, 2012.  

> 77

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, p. 50.  

> 78

The same launch included yet two more NRL-built satellites, these for calibrating the 

NAVSPASUR system.  

> 79

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, pp. 50–53.  

> 80

George Flach, interview with Art Collier, January 29, 2009.  

> 81

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, pp. 53–54.  

> 82

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, pp. 53–54.  

> 83

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, pp. 53–54.  

> 84

D. Bundy, ‘‘Time, Navigation, and Global Positioning: NRL’s Research Aids Desert Storm 

Operations,”  Labstracts , Naval Research Laboratory, September 23, 1991, pp. 1, 4, 5.  

> 85

See, for example, William Menner, “The Navy's Tactical Aircraft Strike Planning Process,” 

Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, vol. 18, no. 1 (1997).  

> 86

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, pp. 62–63.  

> 87

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, pp. 63–65.  

> 88

Chris Dwyer, personal communication, 2013.  

> 89

See, for example, http://www.numberof.net/number-of-gps-users and http://www.fos.org/ 

spp/military/program/nav/transit.htm.  

> 90

Wilhelm, oral history, February 13, 2012, p. 41.  

> 91

Beard et al., “GPS Clock Technology,” 1987, pp. 46–47.  

> 92

http://naa.aero/html/awards/index.cfm?cmsid=57.  

> 93

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2005/president-announces-roger-easton-recip -

ient-of-national-medal-of-technology.  

> 94

http://www.invent.org/hall_of_fame/410.html. CUTTING THE CORD AND THE BIRTH OF THE 

# NAVAL CENTER FOR SPACE TECHNOLOGY 

As the NRL master builders of ELINT satellites were assembling what would be 

the last block of Poppy satellites, which were the centerpieces of the National Recon-

naissance Office’s (NRO) Program C, while also working on the test phase satellites 

of the future Global Positioning System (GPS), they were unwittingly on their final 

stretch as the satellite production house that they had been since the days of Project 

Vanguard at the very beginning of the Space Age. 

Unlike NRO’s three other lettered reconnaissance programs (A, B, and D), 

Program C had only one component to it and that was Poppy, the follow-on series of 

satellites to those in the GRAB program. The program fell within the Navy Space 

Projects Office (also designated PME 106) of the Naval Electronic Systems Command 

(NAVALEX), part of the Naval Material Command (NAVMAT). “They managed 

it, they executed it, and they developed the technology” for the GRAB and Poppy 

missions, said Tom Betterton, referring to the NRL satellite team under the leadership 

of Pete Wilhelm. 1 In 1979, Betterton took over as manager of PME 106-5, NAVALEX’s 

Special Projects Office 2 within the Navy Space Projects Office. 

“I got a call from Rear Admiral Bob Geiger,” in the late-1974 or early-1975 time 

frame, said Betterton, recounting how he eventually ended up working with NRL’s 

ELINT satellite makers. He had a background in aeronautics and astronautics and so 

had gotten onto Navy leadership’s radar screen as a candidate for space-related jobs. 

“Geiger said, ‘Would you like to come to the Navy Space Projects Office,’” which the 

Rear Admiral had been heading. When Betterton met with Geiger to hear about the 

job, he was ushered into a broom closet in the building where the interview unfolded. 

“Literally in a closet,” Betterton stressed. At that point, he did not yet have the securi-

ty clearances required to enter the SPO, the Special Projects Office, which was located 

behind cypher lock doors. 3

“Welcome to the Navy Space Projects Office,” Geiger said to Betterton in the 

cramped closet. “You would really like it,” Geiger reassured Betterton. 

“What are we doing?” asked Betterton. 

“Well, we can’t tell you,” said Geiger. “But you will really enjoy it.” 

It was a classic Catch-22. Without having the proper clearances, Geiger couldn’t 

tell Betterton much about the program he was supposed to join. But without taking 

the job, Betterton wouldn’t get the clearances. “At that point in time, this was deep 

# 12 232 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

black,” Betterton noted. “The existence of NRO was not acknowledged, not admitted, 

nobody even mentioned it, nobody wore uniforms.” 

There was change afoot in the management of NRO programs. The first four 

directors of Program C, from 1962 to 1971, had all been the Directors of Naval Intelli-

gence. It was a reflection of just how much in Navy control the program was. Up until 

that point, there was no NRO-anchored SPO; the program was Navy managed, Navy 

executed, and Navy made. But when Betterton joined Program C, the NRO was on its 

way to taking on a different point of view. Rather than being a Navy satellite program 

(whose roots preceded by three years the establishment of the NRO in 1961) that 

happened to be housed within the NRO context, Program C was to become an NRO 

program that happened to have been a Navy-anchored initiative. 

“NRL essentially was a sole source provider to Program C,” said Betterton, by 

which he meant the lab—having invented and continuously improved the GRAB and 

Poppy spacecraft over the years—was the only organization that Program C could rely 

on to affordably build additional one-of-a-kind ELINT satellites. 4 But after Betterton 

took over as SPO director in 1979, he also was tasked by his NRO bosses to change 

things in the program and to make decisions based on business parameters, not just 

technical ones. For example, if an aerospace contractor could build perfectly capable 

satellites for Program C instead of NRL, then the NRO should shift the satellite-craft-

ing work away from NRL to the contractor. 

This was a drastic move. The formation in 1974 of the SPO was, from NRL’s point 

of view, foisted upon the lab, said Betterton. NRL treasured its get-it-done culture, 

and when the SPO came its way, the lab’s satellite cadre was getting it done for Poppy 

and the next GPS satellite, also known as the first Navigation Technology Satellite 

(NTS-1). “They would not be fans of any additional management layers,” Betterton 

observed. 

Yet that managerial layer non grata is just where Betterton had landed. The SPO 

director at the time explained to Betterton that his job would be to manage the tech-

nology development for, in Betterton’s words, “the space segment, the hardware,” that 

> NRO Boss . Rear Admiral Tom Betterton,
> shown here in 1988, was head of the
> Special Projects Office, a component of the
> Navy Space Projects Office, from 1979 to
> 1986 . (NRL photo Betterton1988.1.jpg) 233 CHAPTER 12 — CUTTING THE CORD AND THE BIRTH OF THE NCST

NRL had been developing and building for Poppy. The SPO Director added, “That 

is what you will be doing, but let me tell you, those sons of bitches at NRL, they can’t 

be managed.” Upon establishing the SPO, it didn’t take long for the friction to begin 

and build. “After a couple of months, there were personality conflicts galore—from 

the original establishment of the SPO—to the point where [SPO and NRL personnel] 

would not talk to each other, even if there happened to be an occasional social func-

tion,” Betterton recalled much later, referring to what he heard from others about the 

environment he was entering. 5

After Betterton took the baton as SPO director, he managed to break through 

the little local cold war by, in part, making a phone call to Pete Wilhelm. Wilhelm 

was in charge of the Satellite Techniques Branch, which was soon to be designated as 

the Spacecraft Technology Center (Code 7040) where he would report directly to the 

Associate Director of Research for Space Science and Technology, Dr. Herbert Rabin. 

Betterton introduced himself to Wilhelm and offered to come over to his office to 

meet and talk about the program they now were partnering on. There was silence on 

the other end, Betterton said. “You are going to come to my office?” Betterton recalled 

Wilhelm asking with incredulity. Such a visit apparently had never happened since 

the SPO’s establishment several years earlier. With the ice now broken, Wilhelm and 

his space technology comrades no longer necessarily looked upon the SPO as the 

enemy, said Betterton. 

But Betterton had some bad news to deliver. An upper-level NRO decision had 

been made that NRL would henceforth no longer be involved in the production of 

satellites for Program C as they had been since Poppy’s predecessor program, GRAB, 

had begun in the late 1950s. Betterton’s orders were to transition the technology 

invented at NRL to industry for production. It was a huge blow to NRL, Betterton 

noted, because it meant “if there was going to be any production, or any follow-on 

satellites to the Poppy series, or any evolution of this technology, it basically would be 

vested in industry.” 6

But it was fated to be so. “That was an interesting time to try and meld a philos-

ophy and way of doing business—which was deeply rooted in NRL and Pete’s guys— 

with the industry assuming responsibility for bringing this technology to fruition 

and making it work operationally,” Betterton said. “We all learned a lot in the initial 

transition,” which unfolded in the late 1970s and early 1980s. One hard lesson was 

that transitioning a technology that already had been developed and proven by one 

group of innovators to another group is akin to forcefully removing someone’s child 

from its original household and bringing it to someone else’s house to grow up. The 

better way to go, both Betterton and the NRL satellite builders learned from the pains 

of that first transition, was to have both parties of the transition work together from 

the beginning in a kind of co-parenting context. A primary practice from then on was 

for the NRL experts to design a prototype payload and to work with industry partners 

who would move from the prototype to production satellites. 7234 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

This was a time in the 1970s when the Soviet Union’s naval forces were evolving 

a “blue water” threat, replete with anti-ship missiles and submarines with ICBMs. “So 

the Navy was quite interested in ship tracking, what we call today Maritime Domain 

Awareness,” Betterton explained. Photoreconnaissance was limited in this context 

to mostly ports where, say, submarines would be docked and visible. “How do you 

know where the bad guys are and what their capabilities are in the open ocean” was 

the more important and challenging question to answer, Betterton noted, adding that 

“this is where SIGINT may have come into play.” The difference from the GRAB and 

Poppy era, however, was that the primary concern for the Navy shifted from the stra-

tegic national intelligence perspective—with specific targets that included the Soviet 

anti-missile and anti-aircraft radar systems—to the support of military operations. 

The focus became, in Betterton’s words, “the tactical applications of space capability.” 8

For the NRL space technologists, it was a shift of conceptual emphasis that would 

bring with it a massive realignment of its research and development portfolio. Intelli-

gence-gathering satellites remained in the picture, says Betterton, but Wilhelm’s cadre 

had to begin to recognize “that the manipulation of the data that is collected into in-

formation, and the distribution of it, and the use of it, and the putting of it together, is 

much more important” than the satellites themselves. It was this recognition that led 

one of the contractors that Betterton had worked with as he managed Program C to 

wryly refer to the satellites as “orbiting peripherals.” 9 Perhaps even more jarring and 

novel to the NRL space technology cadre was that it took them out of the context of 

being a single-source provider as it had been during the prior two decades for NRO’s 

Program C. And because NRL was a so-called “working capital funded lab” at which 

work is done primarily for sponsors who want the work to be done enough that they 

are willing to pay for it out of their own budgets, this shift made the NRL space cadre 

vulnerable to a loss of funding to competitors. 10 

This new context meant, Betterton said rather colorfully, that “this good old 

daddy rabbit SPO [that is, NRO] that was sending you guys a lot of money every 

year is no longer there.” 11  The NRL/NRO connection would never go away, not by a 

long shot, but it changed dramatically as the Poppy program was fading in the 1970s. 

Rather than building hardware, Betterton observed, the lab’s “involvement with the 

NRO at that point in time became really more of a support role” with specific tasks 

including assistance in setting requirements for new systems, in acquiring them in 

good and working shape from contractors, and in developing some high-risk technol-

ogy components and systems. Henceforth, beginning in the late 1980s, some of the 

satellite wizards under Wilhelm’s wing at NRL would be detailed intermittently to the 

NRO where they would review bids and proposals from industrial contractors and 

help NRO make sure contractors delivered on their promises. Many long-time staff 

in NRL’s Code 8000, which was designated the locus of the Navy’s space technology 

expertise in 1986, have done tours (sometimes years-long details) at NRO headquar-

ters at some point in their careers, helping the NRO make good decisions as it carries 235 CHAPTER 12 — CUTTING THE CORD AND THE BIRTH OF THE NCST 

out its own responsibility of overseeing the nation’s space-based intelligence assets 

and capabilities. “This was quite a change from the 70s, and 80s, even before that, 

when [NRL was] actually building, launching, and operating technologies,” Betterton 

observed. 

In the same years that the Poppy program was winding down, the long-standing 

collaboration between NRL’s space scientists and the lab’s space technology engineers 

continued to be productive. Ever since June 1960, when the GRAB 1 pioneering 

ELINT payload shared a spherical shell with the SOLRAD 1 scientific payload for 

measuring solar radiation, the two groups at NRL had been closely allied. Various 

combinations of scientists and engineers worked together on a series of SOLRAD 

payloads, ending with SOLRAD 11, which also was known as SOLRAD Hi because 

of the unprecedented altitude of its pair of satellites after a launch on March 14, 1976. 

There were many successes, and some failures, along the way. The scientific payoffs 

centered on the characterization and monitoring of X-rays and ultraviolet radiation 

from the sun, the way this radiation interacted with the atmosphere (most notably the 

ionosphere), and how those interactions affected both militarily relevant capabilities 

such as long-distance, high-frequency communication, and civilian space program 

concerns such as radiation exposure by NASA’s astronauts. 

Barring the failure of a launch vehicle to ferry the payloads to orbit, as was the 

case for SOLRAD 2 (November 30, 1960), SOLRAD 4A (January 24, 1962), and SOL-

RAD 4B (April 26, 1962), virtually nothing could stop NRL’s space technology team 

from solving whatever problem might crop up. Mechanical engineer James Winkler 

recalled a harrowing example with SOLRAD 10 in the summer of 1971 involving the 

malfunction during a prelaunch test of a pyrotechnic device for releasing the satellite’s 

quartet of solar cell paddles after the spacecraft separated from the booster. 12  “I had 

written a procedure to check out the satellite configuration prior to mounting it on 

the Scout vehicle,” Winkler recalled, referring to the booster. “We had not had time to 

run this procedure back at the lab,” he continued, adding that he and the SOLRAD 10 

spacecraft manager, Jim O’Haro, then agreed to run the test in the field at the launch 

site at Wallops Island, Virginia. Just hours before they were slated to transport the 

payload to the launch pad so that it could be installed in the rocket, the two inserted 

the “turn-on-plug” that Winkler’s procedure called for. That is when the unthinkable 

happened. “The pyro-technic device fired and released the four paddles which had 

been configured for the flight!” said Winkler. 

With no time for denial over what just had happened, Winkler quickly diagnosed 

the problem. “I had forgotten to call for depressing the separation switches [into the 

off position] in the procedure,” he recounted. At first, he figured a colleague, Bob 

Beal, would have brought some spare ordnance devices, but it turns out he had not. 

So Beal called another NRL colleague, Skip Shepherd, who was president of a private 

flying club that Winkler and several others were a part of, and asked him to fly down 

from NRL in Washington, DC, to Wallops Island with replacement devices. “An hour 236 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

or two later, he made a beautiful landing on the beach, not far from our building,” said 

Winkler. “By that time, everyone had gone to dinner—except me. Skip and I took the 

devices and wired them up to the [payload] harness … we met our scheduled mating 

time with the [launch vehicle].” 

In the following years, Winkler was a part of the team—led by Ernest Peterkin, a 

retired naval officer (Captain) who served as NRL’s overall Project Manager for the 

mission—that was working on SOLRAD 11, the last mission in the 16-year-long solar 

science series. It featured two instrument-laden satellites that would be placed in high 

orbits of 65,000 nautical miles and arranged on opposite sides of the planet. It 

was one of the largest and most complex missions the lab had ever worked on. “It took 

two months to completely test the satellites, build up the SOLRAD Transfer System 

(STS), integrate the STS on the launch vehicle and finally launch” with a Titan IIIC 

booster, said Winkler, SOLRAD 11’s Spacecraft Project Manager. The STS, for which 

Beal worked out the initial design, included two puck-shaped satellites along with an 

apogee kick motor (AKM) and a perigee kick motor (PKM), which were the solid pro-

pellant rockets that would usher the satellites into their respective high-altitude orbits. 

Winkler and the rest of the NRL team had to work with several partner organiza-

tions, including Lincoln Laboratories, which was supplying a pair of communications 

satellites (powered by small radio-isotope-fueled power generators); TRW Corpora-

tion, which was responsible for the structure that would support all the payloads; and 

the Air Force Space Test Program, whose managers were in charge of overall integra-

tion of the satellite and booster and the launch itself. Each satellite hosted 25 exper-

iments, most of them designed and prepared by NRL’s own space scientists under 

the supervision of Robert Kreplin and Dr. Donald Horan and with pivotal help from 

computer specialist Albert J. Martin, who, Winkler noted, “designed all the software 

for processing the experimental data as well as the software to establish the orbit and 

track the satellites.” 13  

> Problem Solver . Mechanical engineer
> James Winkler conducts tests on the
> SOLRAD 9 payload prior to its launch in
> March 1969. (NRL photo Jim Winkler Solrad
> IX 001)

237 CHAPTER 12 — CUTTING THE CORD AND THE BIRTH OF THE NCST 

The experiments ranged widely and included measuring electromagnetic and 

charged particle emissions from the sun, Earth’s own auroral and stellar X-ray emis-

sions, extreme ultraviolet emissions, X-ray and charged particle emissions from both 

terrestrial and interplanetary sources, and highly energetic gamma-ray bursts. 14  NRL’s 

space scientists became leaders in the study of these phenomena. 

The launch on March 15, 1976, was a huge success and Winkler was among a small 

NRL team that left the Cape Canaveral launch site via Learjet so they could be at the 

primary ground station in Blossom Point, Maryland, where they then could control the 

operation of the SOLRAD 11 payloads after they separated from the booster. A lengthy 

series of procedures, including telemetry-based health checks on the spacecraft, 

deployment of the solar cell panels, activation of reaction wheels and other systems 

to make sure the satellites would have the right attitude and its solar radiation sensors 

would be pointing at the sun, went flawlessly. Same went for the “big maneuver” in the 

evening—the firing of the perigee kick motor to usher the stacked 5-foot pucks to an 

elliptical orbit with high and low points at 65,000 and 19,296 nautical miles, respective-

ly. A week later, the team executed the next big maneuver—activating the apogee kick 

motor to circularize the satellites’ orbit at 65,000 nautical miles. 

It would take another complex sequence of procedures to separate the satellites 

and position them on opposite sides of the world, but it all went on with hardly a 

bump. SOLRAD 11B transmitted experimental data until the end of 1976 and its sister, 

SOLRAD 11A, continued on sporadically until the following July. 

The lab’s space technology engineers and space scientists would never work to-

gether quite as closely, or at least not as consistently, after the SOLRAD series ended. 

During the several years of the SOLRAD 11 mission, different but sometimes over-

lapping constellations of NRL’s space technology contingent were working to prepare 

NTS-2 (the fourth satellite in the initial phase of the GPS technology development) 

and helping push forward then-classified technologies in the GRAB and Poppy lineage, 

such as the Multiple Satellite Dispenser (MSD), with industry partners that were build-

ing the satellites associated with these programs.  

> Solrad Hi . Artist’s rendition of the two-payload
> SOLRAD 11 mission at a point when the perigee
> kick motor is firing to bring the payloads to a
> higher orbit. Also known as SOLRAD Hi, the
> payloads were finessed into positions in high
> orbits on opposite sides of the planet where
> they measured solar radiation. (Source: Solrad
> XI STS PKM Firing (77311(2).jpg)) 238 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

Captain Art Collier, who in 1986 succeeded Betterton as the SPO director, point-

ed out that a key role NRL’s satellite engineers played in this regard was “to develop 

and then transition to the industrial partners new, high risk payloads for follow-on 

satellites. One such subsystem was deemed so high risk by the contractor that we (the 

SPO) could not negotiate an affordable contract to develop it. The lab successfully 

developed the capability with the contractor looking over their shoulders, at a reason-

able cost, and smoothly transitioned it.” 15 

For the country and for the NRO, these surely were important roles for NRL’s 

space technology experts to play. From an institutional psychology perspective, how-

ever, merely playing a support role for the NRO, as important as that was for national 

security, would not suffice for the NRL satellite builders, not unless they were willing 

to abandon the Space Age culture whose very formation they had been such a central 

part of. The risk for this pioneering space technology team of losing its place in the 

satellite-building game only intensified as both the SOLRAD series and the NTS-2 

missions were coming to a close. “Most of those guys still wanted to build hardware,” 

Betterton pointed out. And it was to everyone’s benefit if they did at least some of 

that. “If they didn’t continue to build hardware, their value as technical advisors and 

overseers would diminish over time,” Collier added. 16 

To stay in the game the way they wanted to, Wilhelm and his space technology 

staff either (1) needed to hook up with new sponsors who needed the kinds of 

satellites and satellite technology they always had designed, built, and operated, or (2) 

needed to embrace the double-edged quip that the satellites had become “orbiting pe-

ripherals” as an enormous opportunity to remake themselves. If the satellites merely 

were at an edge of an overall system that collected, processed, packaged, distributed,  

> Orange Team . The SOLRAD Hi launch team, sporting orange jackets, pose together in March 1976 at the launch site
> at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NRL photo 78035(62).jpg) 239 CHAPTER 12 — CUTTING THE CORD AND THE BIRTH OF THE NCST

interpreted, and acted on intelligence data and information, then the NRL satellite 

team could become go-to guys for all of that too. 

Wilhelm and his top lieutenants—Bob Eisenhauer, Bob Beal, and Lee Hammar-

strom—would lead the team down both pathways. 

Most emblematic of the remaking of NRL’s space technology operation once it 

handed off its satellite building practice to industry partners was its emergence in 

1986 from its place within the Space Systems Division (Code 7700) into its very own 

triple-zero code—8000—known in words as the Naval Center for Space Technology 

(NCST). In part, this reflected a trend of scientific organization, particularly in Ac-

ademe, to expand from traditional “stovepiped” departments into “centers of excel-

lence” that brought together a diversity of backgrounds, departmental affiliations, 

skills sets, and know-how for doing multidisciplinary research or solving complex 

technology challenges. With its assemblage of rocketry, fuel chemistry, advanced 

materials, sensor design, electronics, orbital analysis, tracking systems, command and 

control, communications, data handling and processing, and systems engineering and 

integration, to name some of its aspects, space technology always had been a pursuit 

anchored in just about every science and technology humanity had yet devised and 

mastered. And so, consolidating NRL’s space technology expertise into a Naval Center 

for Space Technology made sense. At the same time, the lab had already been assem-

bling whatever skills it needed for any particular space technology mission or task, so 

shifting all that under NCST felt to many like little more than a name change. 

As Betterton saw it from his role both as the head of NRO Program C, which had 

been managing NRL’s role in Poppy and follow-on ELINT systems, and his other job 

as Assistant Commander for Space Technology in the Space and Naval Warfare Sys-

tems Command (SPAWAR), the formation of NCST helped prevent a diffusion and 

evaporation of the hard-won space technology skill set at NRL even as tidal forces at 

higher levels of the military and government might have otherwise caused the disin-

tegration of this national asset. 

“My thought was to get a structure that looked at the technology interest, the 

science, any space involvement of the Navy—which by definition was going to be 

relatively small and not real well funded” any more, said Betterton. “And if [that 

structure] were also to continue to play a role in the NRO, what you wanted was a 

structure that had a critical mass that allowed personnel growth and allowed a select 

number of people to make a career in quote ‘Navy space.’” 17 

Central to realizing that context was the formation of the NCST. It was decades 

in the making and presaged by a series of organizational changes beginning in 1971 

when NRL’s Director of Research, Dr. Alan Berman, moved Pete Wilhelm, and the 

two-dozen or so engineers then in his Satellite Techniques Branch, into the Space 

Systems Division of the Space Science and Technology Directorate. That placed the 

lab’s locus of space engineering under the direct supervision of Howard Lorenzen, the 

hard-charging countermeasures legend who had ushered NRL into the space-based 240 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

intelligence trajectory. 18  Two years later, the 15-year-old Satellite Techniques Branch 

morphed into the Spacecraft Technology Center (Code 7040), NRL’s all-pur- pose 

hub for satellite technology with Wilhelm at its head and reporting to Herb Rabin, 

who became Associate Director of Research for the Space Science and Tech- nology 

Division. Also created in the 1973 shifts was the vaguely named Advanced Projects 

Office (Code 7030) with Reid Mayo at the helm, the vaguely named Systems Devel -

opment Section headed by Fred Hellrich, and the vaguely named Advanced Concepts 

Section (Code 7033) with Lee Hammerstrom as top manager. 

There were additional administrative and organizational changes in 1978, 1980, 

and 1984, all of which brought more and more responsibility under Wilhelm. 19  All 

these shifts expanded the scope of the lab’s space technology portfolio and increased 

the number of people working on it. “What the lab was trying to drive toward was 

basically to get all of the space work into one organization,” said Wilhelm. 20  And there 

were even bigger changes afoot. 

Upper echelon planning by Defense and Navy Department officials, including 

the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of the Navy, were calling in early 1984 for 

a “Naval Space Technology Center,” whose mission, according to one document from 

the Chief of Naval Research (CNR), would be “maintaining a space technology base 

and assisting in the acquisition of space systems used by the Navy.” This was part of  

> NRL in 1986 . For a short period in 1986, the Naval Space Technology Center, NSTC, transiently designated what
> would become the Naval Center for Space Technology, NCST. (NRL photo NRL Code Directories 1933-2010-319.pdf) 241 CHAPTER 12 — CUTTING THE CORD AND THE BIRTH OF THE NCST

an overall Navy Space Policy document that was signed by the Secretary of Defense 

on February 6, 1984. 21 

Remarkable to Wilhelm and his leadership team was that the policy did not 

specify that the Naval Space Technology Center (NSTC) would be located at NRL, 

but that it would be established at “one of the Naval Laboratories or Centers.” 22  NRL 

surely was the lead candidate—at least the lab denizens thought so—but there was no 

guarantee it would become the Center’s home. The new Navy Space Policy stressed 

the importance of future space systems for tactical naval operations. A set of guide-

lines for the establishment and operation of the NSTC 23  specified that it would: 

• Provide expert advice to upper echelon Naval leaders’ offices, including the Naval 

Space Command, Chief of Naval Research, and the directors of classified, Navy-

based space programs and projects. 

• Conduct basic and applied research related to uses of space systems in support of 

naval missions. 

• Support Navy acquisition or monitoring of space systems. 

• Maintain current knowledge of space systems technology and programs conducted 

by other services or agencies. 

Additionally, the guidelines specified the Center would include 100 or more 

personnel with collective skill sets in active and passive space sensors, satellite com-

munications, spacecraft design, navigation, ocean surveillance, associated ground-

based facilities and data processing, and tactical use of space assets for on-ground war 

operations. 24 

In line with the way NRL funded its research and development, the guidelines 

stated that the Center would be “industrially funded to support space systems ac-

quisition and operation or to conduct research in response to tasking by the Naval 

Material Command and/or other defense agencies.” A portion of funding for basic 

and applied research, in the several millions of dollars range, would come directly 

from the Navy in federal research funding categories known as 6.1 and 6.2. According 

to the guidelines, “The purpose of the direct funding is to allow the NSTC director to 

pursue innovative and creative research related to uses of space in naval missions and 

to provide short term responses to technical or programmatic issues.” 25 

Then came the bases by which the Chief of Naval Research would make the site 

selection for NSTC: 

• Scope of space-related activities and facilities; 

• Quality and extent of personnel, facilities, and programs which the host proposes 

to assign to the NSTC; 

• NSTC/host understanding of and commitment to uses of space in support of naval 

missions; and 

• Other criteria recommended by NSTC OG [Oversight Group] members. 242 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

A series of intense, high-level meetings followed over the course of a year to 

deliberate on just where the new Center should reside. Although NRL clearly was the 

best candidate for hosting NSTC in that it essentially had been playing the specified 

roles for years, politics has a knack for bringing forth results that don’t necessarily 

make sense. Wilhelm speculated that there may have been other organizations vying 

for the assignment, but said he was never able to confirm that. Remarked Wilhelm, “I 

never thought there were any serious contenders.” 26  Behind the scenes, Dr. Timothy 

Coffey, a plasma physicist who became the lab’s civilian Director of Research in 1982, 

worked with Wilhelm to secure support for NRL from the Secretary of the Navy, Dr. 

John Lehman. It was no surprise that NRL was, in fact, chosen as the designee, an 

action made official in a letter dated March 8, 1985, from the Office of Naval Research 

to Captain James P. O’Donovan, the Commanding Officer of NRL at the time. 

“The consensus of these deliberations was that the Naval Research Laboratory 

(NRL) is the most appropriate host for the NSTC,” the letter stated, adding that NRL 

already was officially known for its “Navy-wide leadership in the development of 

space systems for the Navy and has amassed a fine record of accomplishment in this 

regard.” 27 

In preparation to take on this higher-profile role in the future of Navy space 

activities and operations, NRL leadership folded the lab’s Aerospace Systems Division 

into the Space Systems Division as a way to retain coveted and limited Senior Execu-

tive Service leadership slots. It took another year (until October 1, 1986) to complete 

the process of establishing the new space technology center. That is when the Space 

Systems and Technology Division was renamed the Naval Center for Space Tech-

nology and was assigned the administrative code 8000. 28  Wilhelm, who assumed the 

directorship of NCST, points out the name is a permutation of the name in the Navy 

Space Policy documentation—the Naval Space Technology Center—because any 

Navy entity that ends with the word Center traditionally had a higher-echelon status 

in the Navy than would be appropriate for NRL’s role in space technology. So NSTC 

became NCST. 29 

On October 1, 1986, the Naval Center for Space Technology officially started op-

erating under this new name. Second to NCST director Pete Wilhelm was Associate 

Director Fred Hellrich, who had become adept, during years of work in NRL’s space 

technology programs including Poppy, at key managerial functions and at communi-

> NCST logo. 243 CHAPTER 12 — CUTTING THE CORD AND THE BIRTH OF THE NCST

cating up and down the authority chain. NCST’s initial organizational structure fea-

tured three Departments, 8100, 8200, and 8300. These codes designated, respectively, 

the Space Systems Development Department (SSDD) under Superintendent Robert 

Eisenhauer; the Spacecraft Engineering Department (SED) under Superintendent 

Robert (Bob) Beal; and the Space Systems Technology Department (SSTD) under 

Superintendent Lee Hammarstrom. 

The establishment of NCST consolidated and reinforced NRL’s role as the Navy’s 

primary space technology laboratory. For his part, Betterton wanted to build on this 

momentum by taking steps to preserve for NRL as much influence as possible in 

space technology development for intelligence gathering purposes, even though the 

lab no longer was building operational satellites (as opposed to prototypes). Toward 

that end, he envisioned that Wilhelm, the director of NCST, would also be designated 

as the Chief Systems Engineer for what essentially was the follow-on classified work 

that NRL would do for the NRO as well as other Navy-related space programs. 

“This would have given the director of NCST a seat at the table with the director 

of the NRO,” said Betterton. “It would have given him another seat within SPAWAR,” 

a command-level component of the Navy, which had responsibility for the unclassi-

fied space acquisition programs like the Fleet Satellite Communications System (FLT-

SATCOM). 30  And, Betterton continued, “it seemed like a good way to tie everything 

together … and try to create some sort of critical involvement of resources, people 

and money for whatever the Navy’s interest [in space] was going to be.” This vision 

never came to be, however. “We made some baby steps and then it fell apart,” Better -

ton said, pointing to an inability of obtaining a sign-off from top leaders in the several 

Navy commands and the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations (OPNAV), which 

would have been required to weigh in with positive votes. 31 

The reality on the ground was that NRL’s space technology organization would 

be more on its own than it had been since it began building up from its roots when 

Ernst Krause secured the lab’s upper atmosphere researchers access to captured V-2 

rockets. True, the space technology team gained status with the establishment of 

NCST at NRL, but that came with a cost. Until then, much of the money that ran 

the space technology program at NRL came from NRO. But now, NRL’s role in NRO 

work would focus on initial technology and prototype development, and acquisition 

and technical oversight, but the actual satellite-building phase would be transitioned 

to industry. NCST would have to find new sources of funding to keep it going. 

A 2005 analysis by the National Academy of Sciences of what space capabilities 

the Navy likely would need in the future assessed NRL’s past status in the arena of 

space technology development this way: 

“Through the early 1980s, NRL’s largest effort was in support of the develop-

ment of classified prototype surveillance satellites. These developments indeed were 

successful, to the degree that the sponsoring agency (NRO) decided to go into serial 

production of such satellites. Since NRL was a research laboratory and not a manu-244 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

facturing facility, the production of the next generation of satellites was transferred to 

an industrial organization. This transfer left many members of the NRL staff without 

sponsor support and necessitated a rather traumatic drawdown in the number of 

NRL personnel available to manage the development, acquisition, and launch of full 

satellite systems.” 32 

So, just as the Navy was raising NRL’s status for space technology, the laboratory’s 

traditional role in meeting the Navy’s needs in space was undergoing radical change.  

> 1

Thomas Betterton, interview with author, July 18, 2012.  

> 2

Applied Research Laboratory, The Pennsylvania State University (ed.),  From the Sea to the 

Stars: A Chronicle of the U.S. Navy’s Space and Space-related Activities, 1944–2009  (revised and 

updated edition, 2010), https://www.history.navy.mil/ p. 201; Art Collier, interview with author, 

April 22, 2012, and January 29, 2013.  

> 3

Betterton, interview with author, July 18, 2012.  

> 4

Betterton, interview with author, July 18, 2012; Art Collier, personal correspondence.  

> 5

Betterton, interview with author, July 18, 2012.  

> 6

Betterton, interview with author, July 18, 2012.  

> 7

Chris Dwyer, interview with author, February 9, 2012.  

> 8

Betterton, interview with author, July 18, 2012.  

> 9

Betterton, interview with author, July 18, 2012; Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author, 

April 9, 2013.  

> 10

Dwyer, interview with author, February 9, 2012.  

> 11

Betterton, interview with author, July 18, 2012.  

> 12

James Winkler, unpublished memoir shared with author, 2012, p. 44.  

> 13

Winkler, 2012, pp. 48–49.  

> 14

http://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/heasarc/missions/solrad11.html.  

> 15

Art Collier, personal correspondence, 2013.  

> 16

Art Collier, personal correspondence, 2013.  

> 17

Betterton, interview with author, July 18, 2012.  

> 18

Peter Wilhelm, interview with David van Keuren, November 19, 1987.  

> 19

http://ncst-www.nrl.navy.mil/NCSTOrigin/NCSTOrigin.html.  

> 20

Wilhelm, interview with David van Keuren, November 19, 1987.  

> 21

From the Sea to the Stars , pp. 114–116.  

> 22

Memorandum for the Chief of Naval Research, Deputy Chief of Naval Material (Technolo-

gy), signed by Melvyn R. Paisley, February 29, 1984.  

> 23

Naval Space Technology Center: Guidelines for Establishment and Operation, 13 February 

1984, provided to author by Peter Wilhelm and now in Naval Research Laboratory’s History 

Office. The document was attached to a Memorandum for the Chief of Naval Research and the 

Deputy Chief of Naval Material (Technology) and signed by Melvyn R. Paisley, who was at the 

time the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Engineering and Systems). The memoran-

dum is dated 29 February 1984 and has the designator 7906-18:JNH:mvf.  

> 24

Naval Space Technology Center: Guidelines for Establishment and Operation.  

> 25

Naval Space Technology Center: Guidelines for Establishment and Operation.  

> 26

Peter Wilhelm, email to author, September 4, 2013; Peter Wilhelm, interview with David van 

Keuren, November 19, 1987.  

> 27

Memorandum from Chief of Naval Research to Commanding Officer of the Naval Research 

Laboratory, dated March 8, 1985.  

> 28

From the Sea to the Stars , p. 110. 245 CHAPTER 12 — CUTTING THE CORD AND THE BIRTH OF THE NCST  

> 29

Peter Wilhelm, interview with author, February 16, 2012; Peter Wilhelm, interview with 

David van Keuren, November 19, 1987.  

> 30

Art Collier, personal correspondence, 2013.  

> 31

Betterton, interview with author, July 18, 2012.  

> 32

National Research Council,  Navy’s Needs in Space for Providing Future Capabilities , (Washing -

ton, DC: The National Academies Press, 2005), p. 157. THE CHANGING NEIGHBORHOOD 

It was during these major transitional years in the mid-1980s for NRL’s space 

technology program when John Schaub, a freshly minted double major in mechan-

ical engineering and physics from the Georgia Institute of Technology, joined the 

Mechanical Systems Branch (7734) of the Space Systems Division (7700), which was 

in the hands of Bob Beal. This was in early 1985, a year prior to the formation of the 

Naval Center for Space Technology (NCST). Schaub’s experience symbolized the new 

direction that satellite building would take at NRL. 

“I airdropped into a beehive of activity,” recalls Schaub, who by 1998 was Asso-

ciate Superintendent of the Spacecraft Engineering Department (SED), then one of 

three major divisions in the NCST. In particular, Schaub was assigned to work on 

a separation system that would eject a cluster of satellites from the cargo bay of a 

NASA Space Shuttle. 1 The satellites were installed on what then was called the Shuttle 

Launch Dispenser, or SLD, a variation of NRL’s Multiple Satellite Dispenser (MSD), 

which Pete Wilhelm and his fellow engineers designed so that it would integrate with 

the Atlas F booster system. The MSD first flew in April 1976 as the country was rev-

ving up for its Bicentennial celebration. 

Schaub could not have known it when he started, but one year later he would be 

negotiating two major transitions at NRL that would become emblematic of the lab’s 

future in space technology. On January 28, 1986, Schaub, the nation, and the world 

were stunned when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded on a cold winter morning 73 

seconds after liftoff. An investigation panel, including famed physicist Dr. Richard 

Feynman of the California Institute of Technology, later determined that unusual-

ly cold temperatures at the Florida launch site had rendered brittle a large rubber 

O-ring, essentially a gasket, in one of the shuttle’s solid rocket boosters, allowing hot 

gas to escape and ignite the liquid fuel of the main engine. 

For the NRL team, the disaster had direct and dramatic consequences. The 

shuttle fleet suddenly went entirely offline for an indefinite period of time. Yet the 

national requirement for the space systems that the shuttle was supposed to help 

install in orbit continued unabated and with no less of a sense of urgency. The only 

other practical means of access to orbit were Titan rockets manufactured by the Mar-

tin Marietta Company. NRL had contracted with a precursor of the firm, the Glen L. 

Martin Company, in the 1950s to build the Viking rockets that kept NRL in the space 

business after the V-2 supply ran out and the boosters for the Vanguard project. 2

# 13 248 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

The sudden shift of boosters required Wilhelm’s engineers at NCST to redesign 

the Shuttle Launch Dispenser for its new perch atop a Titan rocket. The SLD became 

the TLD, the Titan Launch Dispenser. 3 It was an engineering and design challenge, 

but it was one that unfolded within a cultural shift as well, the one centered on NRL 

handing its previous satellite-building and production role off to contractors. “We 

had the transition contractor here at NRL for the first build/launch,” Schaub said, 

referring without specifics to an aerospace company. “The goal was for them to tran-

sition the resulting engineering into their production environment and to produce 

more of these units back at their plant.” 4

To increase the chances of success, the company had a role in the TLD project 

from day one. The industry partner “would provide a transition team, which would 

participate in the initial design and development phase, production phase, inte-

gration, test and launch, and post-launch phases,” recalled satellite engineer James 

Winkler, then head of the Program Development Office in NCST’s Space Systems 

Development Department. 5

NCST had pulled off such an effective transition, Schaub said, that “you almost 

put yourself out of a job. The follow-on programs were being done completely by 

contractors,” Schaub noted, adding that NCST has kept an important hand in the 

game by “advising our government customer in helping them troubleshoot and 

solve problems.” 6 To Captain Art Collier, who succeeded Betterton in 1986 as Special 

Projects Office Director (by which time the office had been designated as SPAWAR 

004-5 within the Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command), “the partnership 

with industry in this manner is a wonderful example of how to most effectively use a 

government laboratory to transition high risk programs.” 7

For his part on the SLD project before the Challenger disaster, Schaub was set in 

front of a drafting board with mechanical pencils, the design tools that preceded 

computer-aided design (CAD) programs. He was given the task of designing a dozen 

spring-operated separation cartridges that would enable the multiple-satellite-bear-

ing SLD to deploy from a canister in the shuttle’s cargo bay and begin the process 

of shuttling and depositing the satellites to the specific orbits that Wilhelm’s orbital 

experts had calculated to be the best ones. 8 This would be followed by lots and lots, 

and lots and lots, of testing. 

“One properly designed test is better than a slew of analyses,” Schaub stressed, 

referring to calculation-based analyses. “We have a reputation for wanting to build 

more engineering models and prototypes as early as possible in the program for 

testing.” On paper, this approach appears to cost more. “But I guarantee you,” Schaub 

said, “that if you take this approach, when you have your whole team up and running, 

then you are not going to lose as much schedule time to unanticipated issues. That 

culture has been ingrained in me from the very first day here … Build the hardware. 

Test the hardware. Do the analyses too, because you have to, but trust the hardware. 

Because you don’t get a second chance.” 249 CHAPTER 13 —THECHANGINGNEIGHBORHOOD 

Designing and building the Titan Launch Dispenser was an enormous job, liter -

ally. “The TLD spacecraft was the largest structure the NCST had ever built,” Winkler 

said, adding that it was designed to fit in the 14-foot-diameter volume of the Titan IV 

fairing. Winkler was in charge of the complex electrical harness, with a dozen Medusa 

heads of wiring, which orchestrated connections throughout the spacecraft. 9

Even before Schaub saw the first launch carrying the TLD bearing the satellite-

separation mechanism he helped design, he witnessed the launch of another satel -

lite. As much as anything else, this launch symbolized NCST’s shift away from its 

former heavy dependence on NRO to work with other sponsors. In this case, a new 

deep-pocketed sponsor that helped fill the gap was the Strategic Defense Initiative 

Organization, SDIO, whose mission then had become known in popular parlance as 

“Star Wars.” This was the vision developed by President Ronald Reagan and part -

ners at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and elsewhere. Reagan’s stated 

aim was to remove the specter of nuclear annihilation by assembling a multi-tiered, 

ultra-high-tech set of detectors, trackers, and interceptors that would amount to a 

national-scale shield against a nuclear attack. The Soviet Union might still have had 

thousands of nuclear weapons directed at New York, Washington, Chicago, San Fran-

cisco, and many other U.S. targets, but the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), Reagan 

dreamed, would one day take their actual threat away. 

The Laser Atmospheric Compensation Experiment, or LACE, was an early 

experimental component of the SDI. 10  It was not supposed to be a large-scale project 

for NRL’s satellite technology team, but the Challenger explosion changed that. The 

original plan for LACE, devised soon after the White House announced the SDI in 

March 1983, was to modify a NASA satellite that already had been in orbit. Original-

ly, a space shuttle was to retrieve the spacecraft and bring it back down to the surface 

where it could be modified into an SDI platform for learning how best to shoot laser  

> Future Director . Shown in his office in late 2004, John Schaub became
> superintendent of NCST’s Spacecraft Engineering Department (8200) in
> 2006, and had served as acting superintendent prior to that. In 2016, he
> succeeded Peter Wilhelm to become the second director of the Naval
> Center for Space Technology. (NRL photo DG7P4069.jpg) 250 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

beams through the turbulent atmosphere without dissipating their power. That was 

just one requirement if lasers would one day be able to take out incoming, nuke-laden 

ballistic missiles. The plan called for the Shuttle to retrieve a low-profile, bus-sized, 

12-sided orbiting framework—the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF). Like 

paintings in a gallery, swatches of different kinds of materials had been attached to 

the LDEF’s panels where for years they had been passively undergoing endurance and 

performance tests in space’s low-pressure, low-gravity, high-radiation environment. 11 

“The plan was to bring the LDEF back, and then we were going to modify it by 

putting two very long booms on it, sticking out, and then a target board on the bot -

tom,” Schaub explained. “And then scientists from MIT Lincoln Laboratories [a 

federally funded laboratory with a focus on national security and a technical base that 

includes optical sciences and technologies] were going to do atmospheric compen-

sation experiments with lasers to try to see if you could actually compensate for the 

distortion of the beam as it goes through the atmosphere.” 12 

To Bob Beal, who was head of all the mechanical work under Wilhelm, the task 

was a distraction that would take away available resources from his primary concern, 

which then was still the Shuttle Launch Dispenser. 13  But Beal’s boss, that is, Wilhelm, 

knew it was in the organization’s best interest to nurture new sponsors like the SDIO. 

Dr. Donald Horan, who would assume managerial roles on a number of high-profile 

missions at NCST, took on the role as the Chief Scientist and Director of Operations 

on the project. 14 

From a cultural point of view, a new task with a new sponsor was a challenge for 

the space technology staff. “We were being asked to work for two customers at one 

time and the organization was not set up to do that,” Schaub said, though NRL’s space 

technologists had been in a similar position during the Poppy days when they were 

working on both an ELINT program and the GPS system. 

And then Challenger blew up. And that meant LDEF was not coming back any 

time soon to Earth where engineers at NRL and elsewhere had plans to modify it for 

the Laser Atmospheric Compensation Experiment. Despite the shutdown of the shut-

tle program for an indefinite period of time, SDIO still wanted to move forward with 

atmospheric compensation experiments. To do that now, though, would require an 

entirely new satellite. “I suddenly went from being a mechanical engineer working on 

an experiment to being a lead mechanical subsystems manager on the LACE space-

craft,” Schaub said. A new sense of urgency infiltrated the space technology group and 

a lot more money from the new sponsor came with it. By its end in 1993, the program 

would take nine years and cost nearly $130 million. 15 

For those in the trenches and now dealing with two major projects at once, these 

seemingly enormous managerial, structural, and administrative changes would not be 

at the center of their attention. Said Schaub: “We had jobs to do. We had missions to 

accomplish.” 16 251 CHAPTER 13 — THE CHANGING NEIGHBORHOOD 

For the rest of the decade and, for some, into the early 1990s, Horan, Schaub, 

and a few dozen NCST colleagues worked day and often night shifts on hundreds 

of technical and engineering details for the LACE spacecraft. “By 1987, the simple, 

spaceborne target had evolved into three separate sensor arrays with a total of 210 

sensors capable of characterizing ground-based laser beams with continuous-wave 

or pulsed emission in the visible, UV, and IR bands,” Horan explained. “Also, SDIO 

began discussing the addition to LACE of an instrument to take video images of 

rocket plumes by their UV emission.” 17  And that became the add-on experiment 

known as Ultraviolet Plume Instrument (UVPI). 

The fundamental principle of the primary experiment, the atmosphere compen-

sation tests, involved first measuring and characterizing the distortions the atmo-

sphere would impose at any given moment upon a spaceward laser beam, and then 

compensate for, or nullify, the distortions. The technology for achieving that end is 

known as “adaptive optics,” in which precisely controlled mirrors and lenses in the 

ground system deliberately pre-distort the upgoing laser beam such that the specific 

distorting effects of the atmosphere would essentially refocus the beam rather than 

distort it. This is, in a way, a case where two wrongs make a right. 

LACE launched on Valentine’s Day in 1990. “Everybody thought that it was ap -

propriate that a satellite called LACE was launched on St. Valentine’s Day,” observed 

Horan. 18  Schaub was at the launch at Cape Canaveral, Florida; his wife was not with 

him, he pointed out. In fact, he noted, uncertainties in the launch schedule actually 

led to changes in the couple’s wedding planning. “You throw yourself into these proj-

ects and put everything else second,” Schaub observed, affirming a prioritization that 

characterized his space technology predecessors at NRL since the V-2 days in the  

> Big Blue . The NCST-built spacecraft for the SDI-sponsored Laser Atmospheric
> Compensation Experiment undergoes tests in the enormous vacuum and
> temperature chamber known as Big Blue. (NRL photo 82441(R-29)3.tif) 252 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

late 1940s. Remarked Schaub, “You have to have the right partner for that to happen, 

and if you don’t take care of business at home, you can lose what you have there.” 

He knew this had happened before to oversubscribed colleagues at NRL and other 

venues in the satellite-making culture. Schaub made it part of his own managerial 

mindset to keep this tension in mind both for himself and for those who would work 

for him. 19 

In the initial days and weeks after the LACE launch, he and colleagues spent 

many hours at the Blossom Point ground station in southern Maryland checking the 

spacecraft’s systems, which included, among other superlatives, the longest retractable 

booms that had ever flown in space. When outstretched in opposite directions—one 

in the direction of motion and one in the trailing direction—the two booms spanned 

a football field. On the end of the forward-facing boom was an arrangement of 252 

cornercube retroreflectors. These were optical elements designed and placed such 

that they would send any laser beam essentially straight back in the direction from 

whence it came. 

There also were other sensor arrays on the spacecraft, designed and built for 

NRL by Instrumentation Technology Engineering, Inc., a small company in nearby 

Silver Spring, Maryland. The 85-element, silicon-based Visible Sensor Array on the 

Earth-facing side of the spacecraft was designed to measure laser emissions from the 

Short Wavelength Adaptive Techniques (SWAT) program’s argon ion laser located in 

Maui, Hawaii. The 85-element Pulsed Sensor Array (each sensor was housed with a 

Visible Sensor element) was suitable for testing high-power, pulsed excimer and free 

electron lasers. Finally, with a 40-element Infrared Sensor Array, LACE operators 

could measure laser blasts from the Low Power Chemical Laser (LPCL) located at 

White Sands, New Mexico. 20 

Before these were going anywhere near orbit, they had to be tested and retested 

for space worthiness in a thermal vacuum chamber, noted Christopher Dwyer, an 

electrical engineer who has been at the lab since 1985. This task fell onto his shoul-

ders even though he had no expertise in the area. It was part of the NRL culture for 

managers to task their engineers with jobs and then to have confidence that the job 

would get done. “So I educated myself a little bit on optical components, like lasers 

and optical benches, to give myself at least a vague idea of how we might do that,” 

Dwyer recalled. “I pretty much decided at that point that I was in over my head, so I 

picked up the NRL phone book and looked for who in the Optical Sciences Division 

might be able to help me with this.” The expertise for designing and carrying out the 

tests for the optical elements in fact was right there on campus, which is so often the 

case at NRL and is one of the lab’s most valuable traits to its scientists and engineers 

and, Dwyer would say, to the country. As a result of that blind call, he noted, he and 

his new coworkers in the lab’s optics division got the job done. “That job was an 

example of what makes this place, the lab, such an interesting and neat place to work,” 

Dwyer noted. The backstory of each satellite project is rife with these sorts of collab-253 CHAPTER 13 —THECHANGINGNEIGHBORHOOD 

orations without which the spacecraft would never make it to the launch pad the way 

LACE did, Dwyer pointed out. 

Another one of those collaborations for LACE centered on the clocks that kept 

track of everything—when signals were arriving or leaving this or that component of 

the system, exactly when optical elements needed to be adjusted and then adjusted 

again, etc. “You needed to synchronize everything so that everything happens at the 

right time,” Dwyer said. “So in this satellite was a [master] clock that would put out a 

signal, and from that signal, timing across the satellite would be set. But you needed 

to get that [master] timing signal to the various boxes on the satellite that needed it. 

And pretty much every box needs the signal. So I built the box that interfaced with 

this clock and it distributed the timing signal to the other parts of the spacecraft that 

needed it.” 21 

The booms were yet another challenge. The huge gangly booms required finesse 

on the part of those who operated the spacecraft. Move the leading boom out, for ex-

ample, and the length of trailing boom also would have to be adjusted to maintain the 

spacecraft’s overall moment of inertia. Failure to do that would set the spacecraft into 

a rocking motion. It was related to the problems that earlier NRL engineers, including 

Wilhelm, encountered with boom-based gravitational gradient stabilization systems. 

And even before the booms were integrated into the spacecraft as it was being built 

in the high bay of Building A59, they underwent extensive testing. “Just testing that 

boom on the ground was interesting,” Schaub recalled, “because it could not support 

its weight in one G,” that is, under normal surface gravity. The solution for the testing 

phase, by the Able Engineering Company, an aerospace contracting firm in Goleta, 

California, that specialized in deployable structures, was to float the booms in 

a 150-foot-long pool of water with the help of the equivalent of foam floaties that par-

ents strap onto their babies on summertime pool days. Said Schaub: “We paid these 

poor workers to work 24 hours a day for weeks doing lifecycle testing and I remember 

putting up a case of Budweiser as a reward for when they were finished.” 22 

Once LACE was in orbit, the several-week phase of engineering, evaluation, and 

calibration (EE&C) at Blossom Point was a crucial process too. “We don’t give the 

satellite over to the experimenters until we have a chance to make sure we are com-

fortable with everything,” Schaub explained. Once the SDIO-sponsored spacecraft, 

including all its subsystems, such as booms, sensors, and communications systems, 

checked out, a large collaboration involving scientists and engineers at NCST, Lincoln 

Laboratories, the Air Force, and other government and academic institutions around 

the country was able to do experiments using LACE. 

As the satellite passed over the laser site at the Air Force Maui Optical Station 

(AMOS) on the Pacific island of Maui, for example, operators there shot laser beams 

up and measured the properties of the reflected beam to develop a model of mo-

ment-to-moment atmospheric distortion. Using that model, the system then instantly 

sent commands to control deformable mirror and optical elements, which then pre-254 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

shaped upwardly going laser pulses to compensate for the just-measured atmospheric 

distortions. The various sensors on the spacecraft made measurements of the laser 

blasts to help the researchers determine how well the beams were focused and how 

much optical power ended up reaching the spacecraft. In an operational system in 

space, “fighting mirrors” would reflect lethal laser energy—protected from dissipation 

due to atmospheric distortion using the LACE-developed atmospheric compensation 

techniques—at ballistic missiles targeted at the United States or allied nations. 23 

For the younger contingent of NCST engineers who were put on the task, the 

LACE project became a bonding exercise. “We were this young energetic inexpe-

rienced team and we were off on our own,” Schaub recalled fondly in an interview. 

“We had great success and we are proud of that.” 24  The LACE project, the first major 

NCST project that was funded by the SDIO, came to a close in 1993. The spacecraft 

remained stable enough after that, Horan noted, so that its retroreflectors could pas-

sively support ground-based laser communications and tracking tests. The spacecraft 

reentered Earth’s atmosphere in May 2000. 25 

Even before LACE became front and center in NRL’s space technology portfolio 

at the behest of the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization, lasers became the heart 

of a more grassroots effort within NCST to develop laser-based technologies as alter-

native means of communications and satellite ranging. 

Radio frequency (RF) signals have been elemental to NRL since the lab opened 

its doors in 1923 with almost nothing but radio engineers on the original technical 

staff. And RF has been part and parcel of every space-bound payload the lab has 

launched since Vanguard 1 became humanity’s fourth-ever satellite, on St. Patrick’s 

Day in 1958. RF was the basis of NRL’s Minitrack system associated with the Van-

> LACE Team . The management team for LACE included, from left to right, Dan Penn,
> Bill Adkins, Bob Palma (LACE program manager), Paul Regeon, John Schaub,
> and Dr. Don Horan. At LACE leadership meetings, managers began wearing white
> Stetson hats, a symbol of the cinema hero in Westerns, to signify the managers’
> responsibilities to protect their team members from “evil” external forces over which
> they had little or no control. 255 CHAPTER 13 —THECHANGINGNEIGHBORHOOD

guard program, the basis of the multi-satellite-tracking NAVSPASUR system Mini-

track evolved into, and the basis of much of the tracking of orbiting objects since the 

advent of the Space Age. 

But RF has not been the only game in town for this purpose, at least not since 

1964 when a team of engineers at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Green-

belt, Maryland, demonstrated it was possible to use the then recently invented laser 

technology as an alternative to RF techniques for determining the range to orbiting 

satellites. The basic principle of laser ranging is to accurately measure the time it takes 

for laser pulses to make a round trip from a ground-based laser to a satellite passing 

overhead and then back down to a sensitive laser light detector near the emitter. 

“Compared to the 50 or more meter accuracy of the microwave radars of the peri-

od, the 2 to 3 meters accuracy of the early experiments of this period represented a 

quantum leap in capability for precise orbit determination,” according to a chronicle 

of NASA’s first 30 years in the business of satellite laser ranging (SLR). 26 

Nearly a half-century later, NRL and the Naval Center for Space Technology built 

a laser ranging capability of its own—known as the Optical Test Facility (OTF)—at 

the lab’s 158-acre Midway Research Center (MRC) in Stafford, Virginia, 27  near the 

Marine Corps Base at Quantico. The MRC’s primary role is to develop scientific 

techniques for evaluating the performance of satellite missions. For its part in this 

broad endeavor, the OTF relies on optical techniques for improving the tools and 

techniques that different satellite programs rely on for monitoring the ephemerides 

(orbital trajectories) of their respective spacecraft. At the OTF are a neodymium-YAG 

laser and a one-meter telescope customized by NCST specialists. The telescope has a 

unique combination of slewing speed and pointing accuracy, noted Dr. Linda Thom -

as, senior research engineer in the Electro-Optics Technology Section (Code 8123) of 

NCST’s Advanced Systems Technology Branch (8120). Said Thomas: “The telescope 

can slew 25 degrees per second. Watching the telescope move is one of the most beau-

tiful things. It is an engineering marvel.” 28 

That facility emerged from years of climbing up a learning curve of using laser 

light for both laser ranging and laser communication. “The project we were working 

on at first was fairly low-powered laser communications for space-to-space commu-

nications” between spacecraft, recalled electrical engineer Anne Reed, who joined the 

fledgling effort in 1985 as a co-op student. Besides Reed and one other co-op student, 

the tiny section at the time included only the section head and one engineer. 29 

“We were doing fundamental research investigating how to control laser diodes 

and deal with bit error rates,” explained Reed, who rose to section head in 2002 and 

left the lab in 2008, at which time she handed the reins to colleague and electrical en -

gineer Dr. Bill Scharpf. “Some of the work we did was in-house, some was with space 

contractors, looking at systems they were developing, and some was doing testing for 

systems that were being jointly government/contractor developed.” 30 256 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Laser communications would always remain important in the section’s research 

portfolio, but an outside sponsor asked the group to look into satellite laser ranging, 

with an eye on achieving more accurate position measurements of satellites that were 

of interest to that organization. One of the first steps was to visit several NASA 

laser-ranging research sites, Reed recalled. With lessons learned from those visits, the 

section, led by Dr. Charmaine Gilbreath at the time, procured a laser system and built 

a timing system—in what then was Building 58 at the front of NRL’s campus and now 

is a grass field—for comparing the emission and reception times of laser pulses. For 

the first experiments with the equipment, they took the system down to the Malabar 

Air Force site in Palm Bay, Florida. 

“We went down and did several laser ranging campaigns against satellites of 

interest to our sponsor,” Reed said. The team also did experiments as part of a project 

called Red Tigress for another sponsor. “We were doing ranging off of rocket plumes” 

with the objective of developing new ways to identify and track enemy missiles. Each 

campaign, all of them in the late 1980s and early 1990s during the early years of the 

Strategic Defense Initiative, involved a close-knit group working all night and much 

of the day for multiple weeks. 

After these campaigns were completed, Reed recalled, “we brought our equip-

ment back here to NRL. In classic NRL style, we were not only the engineers but also 

the ‘moving company’ so we drove the equipment back ourselves.” In the truck, Reed 

recalled, was a laser the size of a dining room table, racks of timing equipment and 

other electronic components, atomic clocks, and sundry other research necessities. 

And, because these campaigns were done in Florida, there also were boogie boards 

and other beach accouterments to bring back home. 

The sponsor supported a second set of tests in collaboration with the Air Force 

Research Laboratory at Kirtland Air Force Base in New Mexico, the location of the 

Starfire Optical Range, which included a 3.5-meter telescope. The tests were of the 

same sort as the ones in Florida. But with the larger telescope in the circuit, lower lev-

els of light returning from laser-tagged spacecraft would be detectable. And the NRL 

team’s laser-timing system would be able to connect the dots between the emission of 

laser pulses and the detection of reflected photons. 

The optics team also wanted to become productive members of the larger 

laser-ranging research community, including the collaborative International Laser 

Ranging Service (ILRS), so they set their sights on developing a laser ranging system 

whose data would pass muster with NASA and the other ILRS members. Among oth-

er advantages, being part of this larger community would give the NRL team access 

to more orbiting “targets” to work with, as well as a huge global cache of laser ranging 

data that would help in the cause of determining orbital trajectories with ever more 

precision. 

To realize these ambitions, the team needed its own optical facility and Gilbreath 

managed to convince laboratory leadership that buying a one-meter telescope for 257 CHAPTER 13 —THECHANGINGNEIGHBORHOOD 

harvesting reflected photons would be a good use of the lab’s capital funds devoted to 

building up facilities and basic capabilities. Together with the laser and timing 

systems the team already had built, the section now was on its way to having an entire 

laser ranging system, replete with a photon-catching telescope like the other ILRS 

players. Soon after scoring this administrative win, Gilbreath took on new respon-

sibilities outside of NCST. As Reed took the baton for the section, she recruited the 

support of several other sponsors to accumulate enough money to get the entire fa-

cility built. The telescope was based in part on the design of a NASA instrument and it 

featured customizations orchestrated mostly by the late Mark Davis, the go-to man for 

all things that no one else knew how to do. 

“The different characteristic that was most important to us was the ability to move 

around very quickly so that we could range to multiple satellites in a short period of 

time,” Reed explained. “Take some shots. Take some shots. Take some shots. I want to 

look at this one. I want to look at that one. I want to come back to this one. That was 

not an important requirement to anyone else at the same level as it was important to 

us. Mark spent a lot of time early in the new millennium working with the supplier 

and getting something delivered that would meet our needs.” After several years of 

development and fabrication, the telescope was finally delivered to the MRC site in the 

summer of 2002. 

Among the various projects the optical team contributed to in the first decade of 

the 21st century was the Atmospheric Neutral Density Experiment (ANDE), a brain-

child of NRL colleague Andrew Nicholas of the lab’s Space Science Division. For their 

part, the optical team used their laser-tracking facility at MRC to help track ANDE’s 

pair of laser-retroreflector-bearing microsatellites. The two microsatellites, which 

were the same size but of different masses, slowly separated after being deployed 

together, thereby providing researchers with a framework for measuring subtle spatial 

and temporal variations in drag due to geomagnetic interactions in low Earth orbit. 

The first ANDE mission was in 2006 and ANDE-2 was three years later. 31 

In another mission in 2009, the Charged Aerosol Release Experiment (CARE), 

the team contributed, with many collaborators including Dr. Paul Bernhardt of NRL’s 

> Space Twins . Consisting of twin spheres
> named Castor and Pollux, the ANDE-
> 2 mission is shown here shortly after
> deployment from Space Shuttle Endeavour
> on July 30, 2009. (Credit: NASA) 258 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

Plasma Physics Division, to the study of the formation and evolution of high-altitude 

noctilucent clouds that normally can only be seen when illuminated underneath by 

the setting sun. In this mission, the optics team deployed laser tracking of aluminum 

oxide dust released by the rocket’s fourth stage into the upper atmosphere (at an alti-

tude of about 175 miles) where it formed artificial noctilucent clouds for subsequent 

measurement and tracking. 32  In the following years, the team worked on another 

project, SpinSat, which astronauts aboard the International Space Station deployed 

into orbit on November 28, 2014. SpinSat’s primary mission is to demonstrate new 

thruster technology, but it also bears retroreflector arrays optimized to help ground-

based laser trackers determine the attitude of spacecraft as it moves in their orbits. 33 

Amidst all this laser ranging work, laser communications remained on the 

team’s radar screen too. The section was growing in both personnel and resources, 

so in 1999, the group built the smaller but mobile TRTEL, short for “transportable 

telescope.” The first experiments with this instrument, with its commercial 16-inch 

Meade telescope inside, were in New Jersey at the Lakehurst Naval Station, next to 

Ft. Dix. “We were right on the site of where the Hindenburg crashed in 1937,” Reed 

noted. 34 

These were air-to-ground experiments using a rented blimp painted with a huge 

Tommy Hilfiger advertisement. The long-term goal here was to develop systems 

for over-the-horizon laser communication in which a blimp, plane, or some other 

airborne surveillance platform could pass back massive amounts of data to receivers 

anywhere in the platform’s line of sight. At the same time, these experiments applied 

to potential applications in space. “We are a space center, so we always think about 

going back to try a system we are testing on the ground or air for space purposes,” 

Reed said. 

The most ambitious vision the team pursued was known as Revolutionary Imag-

ing Technology (RIT). It brought together the disciplines of optical communications, 

imaging, and laser ranging. The basic idea was to eventually launch and precisely 

arrange in space multiple telescopes that together, by way of sophisticated data and 

communications linkages, would behave like one huge telescope for doing high-reso-

lution imaging from space. Astronomers have developed similar systems for directly 

imaging celestial objects from the ground. 

The Tommy Hilfiger blimp experiments, as well as similar blimp experiments at 

NASA’s Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, California, provided preliminary data 

and lessons regarding the role of laser communications in this concept. “The first step 

was to put up a single small aperture [for harvesting photons], and cover it up with a 

mask with holes in it so that it would emulate a perfectly synchronized interferome-

ter,” Reed explained. In short, each hole of the mask modeled one satellite of a cluster 

and all of the holes together modeled the entire cluster. “It is a first step that allowed 

us to collect imagery from what an actual interferometer would be like without hav -

ing to worry about the mechanics of the separate elements moving around relative to 259 CHAPTER 13 —THECHANGINGNEIGHBORHOOD 

each other,” Reed continued. 35  A key challenge in the system would be managing the 

vast amount of data involved both in the imaging and in the metrology systems. 

“You would have many optical telescopes sitting up in space. The data would have 

to come down. The satellites would have to communicate. So you need laser ranging 

and laser communication between all of those to know exactly where every element 

is in the array with respect to each other and with respect to the ground. Additionally, 

the necessary active control of each of those elements will significantly increase the 

complexity,” Reed pointed out. With their collective eye on space, the team rent-

ed a high-altitude balloon for another round of experiments. The optics packages 

were flown up to 100,000 feet out of Holloman Air Force Base in Alamogordo, New 

Mexico—near the White Sands Missile Range where early NRL researchers launched 

instrument-laden V-2s to do atmospheric science. “We flew that experiment a month 

after 9/11, in October 2001,” Reed noted. 

“The laser-based imaging piece is a spiral development,” added Thomas. “You 

show the capability. And each step indicates the next step. You go from blimps to a 

high-altitude balloon, and then potentially convince the sponsor that you would be 

able to fly something like this in space.” 36  As sometimes happens at the leading edges 

of R&D, this particular technology-development spiral, RIT, ended at NRL when the 

sponsor, as Scharpf recalled it, “decided to go another way.” 

Common to several of the Advanced Systems Technology Branch’s laser-based 

projects are those retroreflectors, which are gorgeously machined shapes with reflec-

tive surfaces affixed to aircraft or spacecraft such as LACE. As on LACE, retroreflectors 

are deployed in arrays and are designed to direct photons from incoming laser pulses 

to receivers on the ground, in the air, or in space. 

Among the higher-profile retroreflectors are those placed on the moon and on 

two satellites of the Global Positioning System. “A lot of the laser ranging that NASA 

and the international community does is for geodetic purposes to understand how the 

Earth is changing,” remarked Thomas. Changing sea levels and motions of tectonic 

plates are among the geodetic measures of interest to this community. The GPS sys-

tem, with its many satellites in a perpetual cycle of replacement and upgrades, offered 

a versatile opportunity for geodetic laser ranging. In 1993, NRL’s Ron Beard, long-time 

head of the Space Applications Branch, along with Dr. Carroll Alley, a physicist at the 

University of Maryland who was among the principal players in getting retroreflec-

tor arrays on the moon during the Apollo era, and NASA representatives, convinced 

the Air Force of the value of placing retroreflectors on GPS satellites. “The satellites 

are broadcasting where they are and what time it is, and their job is for improving 

positioning,” Thomas explained. “So, in addition to RF monitoring through the GPS 

receiver network on the ground, if you add a component of satellite laser ranging, you 

improve the quality of analysis of the whole geodetic structure of the planet.” 37 

In what amounted to a final-hour integration into GPS satellites launched in Au -

gust 1993, and March 1994, respectively, Air Force managers of the system did include 260 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

retroreflector arrays, which NRL procured from the Moscow-based Institute for Pre -

cision Instrument Engineering (IPIE), Thomas noted. The Office of Naval Research 

sponsored the program with the primary goal of improving the ability to monitor the 

behavior of atomic clocks aboard the satellites. 

But there were other stakeholders, among them the Department of Transporta-

tion and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Thomas 

noted. They were “concerned about improving the quality of the terrestrial reference 

frame,” she added, since this is the basis of geodetic products ranging from ice level 

variation maps to monitoring of tectonic plate motion to tests of general relativity and 

determination of subtle gravitational variation on a planetary scale. On the wish list 

for NASA, for example, were such capabilities as monitoring sea level rise to millime-

ter differences and annual rates of change of one tenth of a millimeter (0.1 mm). In 

2012, Thomas pointed out, “we got agreement that some of the GPS Block III vehicles 

will be able to host laser retroreflector array payloads,” with the first ones slated for 

launch in 2019. She noted that key to this inclusion was the ability of the NCST optics 

group to serve as an honest broker for communication between stakeholders. “NASA 

and the Air Force did not understand each other’s needs,” she said, “so you needed 

someone like us to come in who could talk the language of both sides.” 38 

Laser ranging is the most prevalent application for retroreflectors, but this 

innovative team at NRL developed a method to use them for laser communications 

too. In this application, the retroreflectors must behave like an on/off switch with a 

rapid switching rate that effectively digitizes laser light reflecting from them. These 

are known as modulating retroreflectors. The team worked with colleagues in NRL’s 

Optical Sciences Division—most notably Dr. William Rabinovich who with Gilbreath 

and several partners ended up as co-owners (with NRL) of the patent for the modu-

lating retroreflector technology—to develop electrically controllable components that 

work like superfast shutters (in the 2 to 10 megabit-per-second rates) on the retrore-

flectors. 39 

“This work opened us up to some new sponsors,” including the Office of Naval 

Research (ONR), with program managers who had an interest in investigating laser 

communication in maritime settings. This was one of the drivers for setting up an op-

tical communications testing station at the NRL facility known as the Chesapeake Bay 

Detachment (CBD) in Chesapeake Beach, Maryland, with modulating retroreflectors 

set up on Tilghman Island, which is about 16 kilometers across bay waters from the 

laser-equipped CBD. 40 

“There was a lot of work being done in laser communication at the time,” Thomas 

said. “It was around 2000 when you had the tech bubble. You had a lot of compa-

nies that had new ideas and new components for fiber communications.” Key here 

were developments in solid-state lasers, optical fibers, and other components that 

worked well with longer wavelengths than were possible to use before, including 

1,550 nanometers (nm), for which the atmosphere is particularly transparent. More -261 CHAPTER 13 — THE CHANGING NEIGHBORHOOD 

over, Thomas said, the 1,550 nm signal provides a safety benefit for the eyes, as the 

signal at this wavelength is absorbed by the eye fluid rather than the retina. With the 

CBD and Tilghman Island facilities, Thomas and her colleagues knew they were in a 

position to conduct a variety of experiments for characterizing the opportunities and 

limitations of laser communication in maritime settings. 

Reed described a scenario to concretize the Navy’s interest in maritime laser 

communication. “Let’s say you had a carrier group that was receiving and managing 

many kinds of data, and so if they wanted to push high amounts of data back and 

forth between the ships in the group, it could be done with laser communications 

techniques,” Reed said, noting the laser system’s relative immunity to interception or 

countermeasures compared to the more broadly cast RF signals. To move forward 

with laser communications in this context would require understanding how laser 

light behaves in different maritime conditions. “We had never rigorously explored 

that before,” Reed said. “So that is where the interest by the Navy in research of laser 

comms over water comes from.” 42 

As their experiments showed, laser light propagates pretty well in the maritime 

environment. Unlike the ground, which heats up and cools down on a daily cycle, 

large bodies of water do not readily produce thermal gradients in the overlying air 

through which the laser light propagates. A result is fewer aberrations in the light 

passing over the water. “You do see weird phenomena, like inversions and ducting, 

where you have your optical beam splitting in multiple beams,” Thomas said with 

interest and also as a cautionary tale. “So we learned all of these things while doing 

this applied research for ONR.” 

> Laser Comms . NCST engineers and partners
> conducted laser communications experiments using
> hardware such as the Dual Mode Optical Interrogator
> and a test bed with facilities at the Chesapeake
> Bay Detachment (CBD) and at Tilghman Island, 16
> kilometers across the Chesapeake Bay from CBD. 41 262 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

This work led the team to realize that it would be useful to have what became 

known as a Dual Mode Optical Interrogator (DMOI), which depended on engineer-

ing work in the 2005 to 2012 time frame by a Hawaii-based company, NovaSol. 43  With 

guidance from NRL’s Rabinovich, the company’s engineers developed laser commu-

nications terminals that had two modes. The primary mode sends a laser beam to a 

remote unit that uses a modulator to “write” data, say from a video camera, into the 

returning beam. In the second mode, two interrogator units up to 50 kilometers apart 

communicate with each other at gigabits-per-second data rates. As NovaSol puts it on 

its web site, “The object of this program is to develop a low powered optical laser link 

intended for a family of high bandwidth ‘last mile’ communication systems between 

ships, planes, and ground units.” 44  The company delivered an “alpha unit” in 2004. 

Two years later, Thomas and her colleagues installed a prototype laser comms 

unit on a Navy ship for testing during the Trident Warrior 2006 at-sea technology 

demonstration exercise, which unfolded between San Diego and Honolulu. “People 

had said you can’t communicate over water, because the seas would be too rough for 

pointing and tracking systems, so we were classified as a high risk experiment,” 

Thomas said. “At the end, we were rated in the top 3 of 103 experiments during the 

whole Trident Warrior exercise.” 45  Despite this success, Thomas lamented, and despite 

stated needs by the Marine Corps of “line of sight” communication to augment the 

standard RF-based equipment, NCST’s laser comms system was yet to be picked up 

for development into operational units for the Navy. Even so, the optics team within 

NCST continued working on fundamental studies of laser communication in the 

maritime environment, hedging that it will indeed play into a future Navy capability. 

“Where we are now,” said Thomas in 2014, “is that we have systems and we have 

transition agreements with the Marine Corps … It has been a long road and a lot of re-

search has gone into it. This is the first time in our optical comms area where we have 

a system that is really intended to be a prototype for something that could be fielded 

in quantity in a few years.” The system in question, which includes tactical masts 

to extend line-of-sight distances, is for ground-to-ground communication, even in 

mountainous terrain, and unlike RF systems, is jam resistant. 

“Our strength in NCST is our systems perspective, really understanding the needs 

of future users,” Reed said. “We have an excellent perspective, because of the kinds of 

programs that come into NCST and because of the kinds of sponsors that NCST grew 

up with, and because of the interactions back and forth. I was fortunate to work on a 

lot of different kinds of programs at different levels of development. Then, in 2003, I 

went off and worked at the NRO for several years. I sat over there and saw what the 

real problems were. So when I came back to the lab, I was not guessing how NRL’s 

technology could be used there. We have a lot of interactions like that, not just with 

NRO, but also with NOAA, DARPA, USAF and other organizations. We have tempo -

rarily detailed people away to these places, and they came back with a better under -

standing of what the needs are.” 263 CHAPTER 13 — THE CHANGING NEIGHBORHOOD 

The same systems perspective pays dividends in-house as well. “Probably, a piece 

of everything going on at NCST is going on in collaboration with someone elsewhere 

at the lab, but each group brings a different kind of expertise there,” Reed observed, 

and within NCST are many engineers who understand how all of the pieces need to 

come together into a space system. 

By way of example, Reed pointed to the Tether Physics and Survivability Exper-

iment (TiPS), which was launched and deployed in 1996. The payload featured two 

ends attached by a tether, creating a flexible orbiting dumbbell of sorts (the system is 

described in more detail later). The leaders on the project, experts in RF and mechan-

ical engineering, couldn’t “figure out a way to differentiate between the two ends,” 

Reed said. But NCST always has had a diverse range of skill sets in house, including 

optical engineering. “Just sitting around having a discussion, we knew that if we put 

different surface coatings on the two ends and used two different laser wavelengths 

that, boom!, they wouldn’t look anything alike to our laser ranging system. It is a sim-

ple and elegant solution, but if you don’t have the mechanical engineers and optical 

engineers having lunch over the table together, you probably are not going to solve 

the problem as quickly or as elegantly.” 

Before the millennium gave out, NCST would take on another SDIO-sponsored 

project that would have an even higher profile than the LACE mission. Because 

NRL’s satellite engineering budget always had been in the minor leagues compared to 

NASA’s, NRL’s satellite engineers never really had the option of adopting the bigger, 

more expensive trend in spacecraft design and production. So when Daniel Goldin, 

Administrator of NASA for nearly a decade beginning in 1992, publicly announced 

that his civilian space agency was taking on a new philosophy of “faster, better, cheap-

er,” there was a familiar ring to it at NRL. 46 

Emblematic of this design philosophy was the successful 1994 launch of the Deep 

Space Program Science Experiment (DSPSE), more familiarly known as Clemen-

tine. 47  Like LACE, the mission was funded under the auspices of the Strategic Defense 

Initiative Organization and that entity’s subsequent incarnation as the Ballistic Missile 

Defense Organization (BMDO). 48  Its purpose was to test whether an assemblage of 

new lightweight sensors, imaging technologies, and other components could enable a 

spacecraft to home in on distant targets. As an experienced satellite engineering facili-

ty within the military establishment and with a track record for successful, on-budget 

launches, NCST became a go-to organization for the SDIO. 

“Clementine originated in a bar on I Street in Washington, DC, in September 

1989,” recalled Dr. Stuart Nozette, Clementine’s Deputy Mission Director at BMDO, 

who years later would make headlines for a very different role he chose to play. In his 

leadership capacity at BMDO, however, he recalled that he “was talking to Dr. Pete 

Worden (working at that time at the White House National Space Council) and Geoff 

Tudor (then a Congressional staffer). We were discussing NASA’s approach to the 

Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) over drinks, when Clementine emerged as a way to 264 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

flight-qualify recently developed technology and, at the same time, demonstrate to the 

civilian community the great strides made by the Department of Defense and 

SDIO in lower cost advanced space technology. I outlined the concept on a handy bar 

napkin and suggested the name as a way to discuss the concept.” 49  NCST would play a 

central role. 

The execution and payoff of the DSPSE mission would become celebrated in the 

annals of the U.S. space program. On January 25, 1994, a mere 22 months after Lieu -

tenant Colonel Pedro L. Rustan, a mission manager with SDIO, asked NRL to come up 

with the details for DSPSE, Clementine was on its way on a mission with both military 

and scientific goals. 50  The military goal was to see how well an inexpen- sive, quickly 

engineered spacecraft might use new generations of sensors, commu- nications tech -

nologies, and other equipment to zero in on and observe space-based 

objects. The long-term roster of objects included warhead-bearing ballistic missiles 

and other elements of an all-out Soviet attack. In this test run with the Clementine  

> Clementine Double . A model of the Clementine
> spacecraft hangs in NRL’s Building A59 as a trophy
> and reminder of the mission’s enormous scientific and
> technological successes. (NRL photo B58Z8959.jpg)
> On-Napkin Concept . The concept for the Clementine
> mission to the moon and a nearby asteroid,
> Geographos, began during a discussion in September
> 1989 in a bar in Washington, DC, during which Dr.
> Stuart Nozette sketched the idea out on a napkin.
> (NRL photo 94-000182.tif) 265 CHAPTER 13 — THE CHANGING NEIGHBORHOOD

mission, however, the objects included the moon, the Earth, and an asteroid called 

Geographos. 

The scientific payoff would be the most detailed study of the moon up to that 

time, including a comprehensive mapping using nearly a dozen electromagnetic 

bands. Rustan and his leadership team, including Project Manager Paul Regeon and 

Project Scientist Dr. Donald Horan of NRL, and Project Manager Dr. Lyn Pleasance 

of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), knew that the resulting data 

would comprise an enormous database about the moon’s topography, geology, miner-

alogy, and geophysics. If all went well after that, the mission also would score the first 

ever rendezvous with a near-Earth asteroid. “The DSPSE spacecraft will come within 

120 kilometers of Geographos as it passes the asteroid,” Regeon predicted. 51 

Besides BMDO, NRL, and LLNL, the Clementine team included NASA (for its 

Deep Space Network for satellite tracking), the Air Force (largely for carrying out 

the launch), the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (for the asteroid encounter), and nearly 

50 private companies. The first overview paper about the mission, which appeared in 

Science  magazine at the end of 1994, featured 35 authors with 20 distinct affiliations. 52 

NRL began receiving funding to build Clementine in March 1992. And on 

December 30, 1993, the satellite was shipped to the Vandenberg Air Force Base in 

California. There, a team of engineers placed Clementine aboard a Titan II rocket. On 

January 25, 1994, the rocket soared into space. Within three months, Clementine al-

ready had completed an unprecedented mapping of the moon, including its dark side. 

That done, mission control engineers fired thrusters on Clementine so that it would 

leave lunar orbit and head off to fly by Geographos. Unfortunately, a software glitch 

caused the spacecraft to quickly consume virtually all of its thruster fuel. In addition 

to setting the spacecraft into a dizzying spin, the loss of the thruster function wiped 

away any chance of achieving the second goal of the mission—to intercept Geogra-

phos on August 31, 1994, and map the asteroid’s surface. 53  Although hopes spiked in 

February 1995 when engineers were able to reestablish contact with the spacecraft 

and communicate with onboard computers, they were dashed again when it became 

clear the spacecraft would not respond or function well enough to salvage the asteroid 

mission. 54 

Disappointing as that was, the Clementine mission became an instant classic of 

the Space Age. The mission was widely acclaimed in the media as a breakthrough 

demonstration of how space projects would be done in the future.  Popular Science 

magazine ranked it as one of its top 100 achievements in science and technology 

for 1994. 55  A year after the moon data started pouring into NRL’s makeshift mission 

control center in an unassuming rented brick building in Alexandria, Virginia— 

known by the Clementine team as “the bat cave” because it was so thick with dust and 

cobwebs when a real estate agent first showed it to them 56 —even President Bill 

Clinton went on record about the mission’s success. “The relatively inexpensive, 

rapidly-built spacecraft constituted a major revolution in spacecraft management and 266 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

design; it also contributed significantly to lunar studies by photographing 1.8 million 

images of the surface of the moon,” the President said. 57 

According to Regeon, the program manager at NRL for Clementine, and col-

leagues who worked on the mission with him, the multispectral imaging data of the 

moon, which opened a new window on this natural satellite’s chemical composition, 

stands out as the mission’s most important orb-wide data. However, radar data from 

what was designated as “the Clementine Bistatic Radar Experiment” in the  Science 

paper that described it revealed the most surprising result. 58 

Dr. Gene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geological Survey and the overall leader of Clem -

entine’s science team had a hunch that the moon’s poles, which appeared to have some 

regions that might be in permanent darkness, could harbor ancient water ice. 

With that impetus, Nozette devised “a bistatic radio frequency (RF) experiment to 

use the spacecraft transmitter to ‘peek’ into the dark areas of the moon,” recalled Dr. 

Paul Spudis of the Houston-based Lunar and Planetary Institute and a member of 

the Clementine team. 59  Of most interest to the eight Clementine team members who 

worked on this experiment, including NRL’s Dr. Christopher L. Lichtenberg, then the 

head of NCST’s RF Active Systems Section and an expert in radar data analysis, was 

the Aitken Basin at the moon’s south pole. After all, it is the deepest known basin in 

the solar system, bottoming out at a depth some eight times that of the Grand Canyon. 

The transmitted radar signals, which echoed back from the massive basin to 

Earth-based receivers of the NASA Deep Space Network, did not exhibit the char-

acteristics of solid rock, as most would have expected. Instead, the Clementine data 

confirmed Shoemaker’s hunch by indicating this sun-shielded basin likely contained 

ice. It was an exciting finding because the presence of lunar water of any kind opens 

the possibility that the moon may have harbored life at one time. Moreover, if water 

is available on the moon, the futuristic vision of building manned bases on the moon  

> Moon Mapping . With multispectral imaging, the Clementine mission was able to map out compositional variations in
> the lunar surface with unprecedented detail. (NRL photo 95-000063.tif) 267 CHAPTER 13 — THE CHANGING NEIGHBORHOOD

and of converting the water into fuel for more far-flung expeditions becomes that 

much more realistic. 

The planetary science community received additional evidence of the presence 

of water on the moon in 1998. Measurements of the moon’s surface by instruments 

on the Lunar Prospector, which NASA launched on January 6, 1998, confirmed the 

presence of ice not only in the Aitken Basin where Clementine first had found signs 

of water, but also in craters on the moon’s north pole. And since then, additional 

missions have heaped on evidence that the moon’s poles bear stores of frozen water. 

Evidence in the form of the spectral signal for water’s hydroxyl groups (oxygen-hy-

drogen units) was harvested in 2009 by NASA’s Lunar Crater and Observation Satel-

lite (LCROSS), which was deliberately crashed into the Cabeus crater near the moon’s 

south pole to create a plume that could be instrumentally analyzed. 60 

In one of the more bizarre side notes of NRL’s history in space technology and its 

involvement with Clementine, Stuart Nozette would end up making headlines such 

as this one in the  New York Times : “The Scientist Who Mistook Himself for a Spy.” 61 

Several years after playing a lead role in the Clementine mission and being named as 

the lead author on some of the seminal scientific papers that came out of the mission, 

Nozette was convicted of selling government secrets to a person he believed to be an 

Israeli intelligence officer but was later revealed to be part of an FBI sting operation. 

He was sentenced in March 2012 to 13 years in prison. 62 

Even though NRO no longer was the primary funder for NCST as it had been in 

the 1960s, 1970s, and part of the 1980s, the NRL space technology cadre had man-

aged, with new sponsors—including the very NASA that NRL’s early space technol-

ogy pioneers had helped to establish—to keep busy in the 1990s building a lot of 

hardware. But nothing was certain. With the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, 

the sense of urgency of the SDI/BMDO vision to protect Americans against a Soviet 

nuclear attack dwindled. Cooperation between the former Cold War adversaries was 

more the order of the day. At that time, the Russians were slated to provide a key 

component for the International Space Station: a tow-truck-like service module to 

intermittently reboost the station to higher orbits to compensate for the station’s slow, 

relentless descent into lower orbits. 

The service module, which would dock onto the station, also was supposed to 

execute large attitude maneuvers in case, for example, it looked like the station was 

on a collision course with a chunk of space debris. But Russia began to fall behind 

schedule; month-by-month in the mid-1990s, concerns were growing that Russia 

would not come through with their module in time for a needed orbital boost. And 

during a propulsion conference at which staff from NCST’s Spacecraft Engineering 

Department (SED) got talking with some NASA cohorts, an idea for a Plan B that 

could circumvent the Russian booster was hatched. 

“It was the ‘Save the Space Station Mission,’” mused SED mechanical systems en-

gineer Aaron Chilbert, though the official name for the fuel-heavy booster was Inter-268 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

im Control Module (ICM). 63  In 1997, NASA authorized NCST to repurpose its Titan 

Launch Dispenser (TLD) to keep the International Space Station from prematurely 

reentering the atmosphere in what surely would be a spectacular fiery death throe. 

As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, the TLD itself derived from a booster 

module—the Shuttle Launch Dispenser (SLD)—that NCST had previously designed 

for use in the Space Shuttle program. So the Multiple Satellite Dispenser programs 

begat the SLD, which begat the TLD, which begat the ICM. 

It was a challenging, fast-turnaround mission, but within the realm of the doable 

for the seasoned NCST satellite engineers. It had its cinematic moments too. “At one 

time, we had the head of NASA, Daniel Goldin, here with the head of the Russian 

Space Agency, both doing a kind of post Cold War showdown” around this booster 

episode, Chilbert recalled. NCST leadership was asked by Goldin to give his Russian 

counterpart a tour of the facilities, including the cavernous A59 where many a clas-

sified program had unfolded, and some were still. “We had to put some stuff away so 

the Russian guys couldn’t see what else we were doing,” Chilbert recounted. Referring 

to the backup service module, he added, “You could almost hear our guys saying ‘My 

hardware is almost ready; what are you guys going to deliver.’ It was a surreal mo-

ment.” 64 

It also was quite a real moment of technocratic politicking. “I understood that the 

main reason that Goldin and the Russians came over to the lab was because the Rus-

sians didn’t believe that the U.S. had existing hardware that could replace their service 

module,” said Art Collier, whose previous role as the Special Projects Office (SPAWAR 

004-5) director from 1986 to 1990 65  placed him in the loop on the technology un-

derlying the ICM. “They wanted the U.S. to provide them with additional funding to 

accelerate their development.” 66  The U.S., rather than taking the step of preparing a 

backup service module, would have preferred the Russian engineers to come through 

in time with the service module they had promised for the ISS program. But if it was 

going to be Plan B, the Russians would have to help the NCST team design the back-  

> Space Tug. When there had been some question of whether Russia would come through with a promised
> propulsion unit to intermittently re-boost the International Space Station to higher orbits to compensate for its
> slow but steady descent, NCST was tasked to build what amounted to Plan B—the Interim Control Module
> (ICM), shown here in one of the high bays of Building A59. Shown at work on the ICM’s complex plumbing are
> (from left to right): Brian Whalen; a NASA tech (squatting); Scott Chappie; John Gambert; Mike Roe; and Paul
> Stencil. (NRL photos B58Z3821 (1).jpg and B58Z3177.jpg) 269 CHAPTER 13 — THE CHANGING NEIGHBORHOOD

up so that it would work with Russian hardware on the International Space Station. 

The ICM project became a high priority. Recalled Collier, “We got to work with 

the astronauts in getting things ready for the Shuttle,” which would carry the ICM to 

the Space Station. Additionally, there was a team of Russian engineers integrated into 

the lab work force to oversee the design of the docking mechanism that would have to 

mate with the Russian-provided docking port on the Space Station. All the while, the 

Russians’ colleagues back home were still at work on the original service module. We 

“were pretty much within a year of delivery when NASA finally said, ‘Alright you can 

stand down. Put it in storage. The Russians have delivered their Service Module.’” 67 

The nearly completed ICM was destined to become like a curio in a natural his-

tory museum; it was designed, built, never launched, and instead took up residence 

in its own plexiglass display case in A59. The cancellation of the ICM took a toll on 

the department’s head at the time, mechanical engineer H. Edward Senasack, and his 

ICM team. Senasack joined the lab in 1970 after earning a mechanical engineering 

degree from the University of Maryland, but he had long been aware of NRL because 

his father worked in the lab in the supply services division. “If you want to work at 

the Naval Research Laboratory, you should work for Pete Wilhelm,” Senasack recalled 

his father telling him, and he managed to follow that advice. 68  The ICM cancellation 

came as a blow. “[Ed Senasack] had 200 people working on the ICM and suddenly 

NASA called up and said ‘we’re done,’” recounted Schaub, who would succeed Sena-

sack as head of the Spacecraft Engineering Department and then later, in 2016, would 

succeed Pete Wilhelm to become director of the Naval Center for Space Technology. 69 

“It is hard when you have to tell someone they no longer have a job and he struggled 

with that.” 70 

Schaub’s professional trajectory in the 1990s also reflected how the relationship 

between NRL and the National Reconnaissance Office had evolved. During the last 

years of the millennium, from 1994 to 1998, Schaub was detailed out to the NRO in 

Chantilly, Virginia, where he would bring NRL’s and NCST’s institutional knowledge 

into the sophisticated business of specifying requirements for new classified satellite 

systems and then oversee contractors and others who would be charged in designing, 

building, and delivering the hardware. Many NCST engineers, including Aaron Chil-

bert and Chris Dwyer, would do stints at NRO headquarters where they would serve 

as advisors, consultants, and contract and acquisition managers. 

The NRO-NRL relationship, once dominated by the former Program C’s ELINT 

satellite programs, GRAB and Poppy, extended in the 1990s beyond the detailing of 

lab personnel to NRO headquarters. Although contractors were by then building the 

production models of NRO’s satellites, NRL and NCST got into the game of building 

smaller spacecraft under NRO sponsorship to investigate specific new technologies 

and concepts. One of these—a purely experimental mission—was the Tether Physics 

and Survivability (TiPS) experiment, which was deployed from a Titan IV booster on 

June 20, 1996. The charge of the nearly two dozen NCST engineers and support per-270 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

sonnel assigned to the mission was to design, build, and deploy a small satellite with 

two parts coupled with a tether in order to investigate how tethered systems behave 

in orbit and how long they can survive. TiPS lasted 14 years. Also on the minds of 

TiPS planners was the possibility that such a system, if deployed with an electrically 

conductive tether, could generate power for a spacecraft with the current induced in 

the tether as it swept through Earth’s magnetic field. 

Several hours after the TiPS satellite separated from a host vehicle, a braided teth-

er (made of Spectra 1000 fiber, a polyethylene fiber said to be stronger than steel, over 

acrylic yarn) 71  connecting its two end masses, dubbed Ralph and Norton after the 

comedic pair of the 1950 TV series “The Honeymooners,” unreeled a length of about 

2.5 miles (4 kilometers). 72  James Winkler, who designed the electrical harness for 

managing power distribution to all the system’s components, credits TiPS Program 

Manager Bill Purdy with coming up with the comedic monikers. 73 

The 83-pound Ralph contained all the electronic components, among them a 

NASA-supplied telemetry system and temperature sensors, as well as a spool bear-

ing 12 pounds of string-thick tether. A globally distributed network of laser-based 

tracking stations, including one at NCST’s own Midway Research Center in Virginia, 

provided sub-meter-resolution tracking and range data for Ralph and Norton (the 

latter weighed in at about 23 pounds), as well as measurements of a pendulum-like 

motion (libration) about the center of mass. 

“Tethered systems are a new and relatively untested space technology,” remarked 

Robert Towsley, TiPS Systems Engineer at NRL, at the time of the deployment. How 

well do tethers unreel from their spools? Once deployed, how well do they remain 

intact? What kinds of motions do they exhibit? These were among the basic questions 

that Towsley and the TiPS team, and their NRO sponsor, had in mind. “From a sur-

vivability aspect, TiPS’ tether is susceptible to space debris damage,” noted Shannon 

Coffey, Mission Operations Manager for TiPS for NCST. “The tether, roughly 2 mm 

[millimeters] in diameter, can be severed by a particle as small as 1-mm travelling at a 

relative velocity of 14 km/s [kilometers per second] (31,318 mph),” added Purdy. 74 

As the reel unwound like fishing line, Ralph and Norton separated at a relative 

velocity of approximately 5.1 meters per second (16.7 feet per second). The passive 

> Tether Tests . With its two components tethered
> together, TiPS—depicted here in the mission’s
> logo—tested the behavior and survivability of
> structures that could be designed to generate power
> as the tether moved through electrically charged
> regions of orbital space.

271 CHAPTER 13 — THE CHANGING NEIGHBORHOOD 

deployment scheme depended on a mechanical system, including spring cartridges, 

to unreel enough tether and to generate enough separation between Ralph and Nor-

ton that the gravity gradient phenomenon, which NRL’s space technology engineers 

had been exploiting for orientating their spacecraft since the 1960s, could do the rest. 

“The initial separation energy was designed to deploy about 2 km of the tether, at 

which time gravity gradient forces assisted to unwind the remainder,” according to an 

NRL-issued description. 75 

Retroreflectors on the exterior surfaces of both Ralph and Norton enabled the 

TiPS team to conduct long-term passive monitoring of the tethered system using the 

global satellite laser ranging network. 76  They were able to distinguish between the 

two end masses by cleverly coating the retroreflectors of Ralph to reflect only one of 

the two transmitted laser wavelengths, while the uncoated retroreflectors on Norton 

reflected both wavelengths. 

Towsley noted that the data from TiPS would help “to verify and improve un-

derstanding of the physics of tethered systems in space as well as the mathematical 

models” developed to describe them, and provide information for engineering and 

development of future tether systems. 77  Tether-based systems indeed have remained 

part of the thinking and portfolio of NCST. In the 2010 time frame, for one, Pete Wil-

helm, then still the NCST director, and others at NCST were developing an ambitious 

scheme using tether-based systems to help clean up the vast amount of space debris 

that has built up in low Earth orbit since the early days of the Space Age. The idea is 

> Midway Research Center . The three 18.2-meter-diameter tracking
> antennas at NCST’s Midway Research Center, located in Stafford County,
> Virginia (and with associated tracking facilities in Palo Alto, Guam, and
> elsewhere), can transmit precision test and standardization signals to
> on-orbit satellites for such jobs as performance validation and verification,
> calibration, and anomaly identification and resolution. MRC also hosts an
> Optical Test Facility, built several years after this 1997 photo, for developing
> optical communications techniques and ground-to-air laser-based tracking
> capabilities. (NRL photo 98-000006(16).jpg) 272 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

that spacecraft with robotic arms and others means of grappling space debris would 

be on the ends of conductive tethers that would generate electrical power as they 

moved within the ionosphere and other electrically charged areas of the low Earth 

orbit. This electrical power, in turn, would enable the system to maneuver to and 

grab onto different pieces of space junk and then usher each one to a much higher 

“parking” or “graveyard” orbit where the debris would be out of harm’s way of useful 

satellites in lower orbits. 78 

The launch of TiPS in 1996 occurred smack in the middle of Schaub’s detail at 

NRO headquarters where he became involved with NRO Launch 8 (NROL-8), which 

included another tether experiment. The mission was the first of only a few satellites 

that NRO has ever announced to the public; Schaub even ran an NRO press confer-

ence, a rarity, to tell reporters about the project. Known rather vaguely as Space Tech-

nology Experiment, or STEx, the spacecraft, which was launched from Vandenberg 

Air Force Base on October 3, 1998, carried about 20 technology experiments, two of 

which were built and delivered by NRL. 79  Lockheed Martin was the prime contrac-

tor in overall charge of producing the satellite. This placed Schaub in a funny situa-

tion. “I am an NRL detailee out at NRO and then NRL became a supplier of mine,” 

said Schaub. “So I had to walk that fine line. I had to make sure that NRL produced 

things that they were responsible for.” 80 

One of the NRL experiments on the STEx mission, the Electric Propulsion 

Demonstration Module (EPDM), featured a device that generated electrically charged 

ions, which were then shot out of a nozzle to produce small but sustained and highly 

controllable propulsion. In space, tiny amounts of thrust maintained over a long peri -

od of time ultimately can generate spacecraft speeds that exceed what can be obtained 

with enormous but short-lived thrusts from traditional solid or liquid fueled rocket 

engines. 

The other NRL experiment aboard STEx was the Advanced Tether Experiment 

(ATEx), a follow-on to the TiPS payload. ATEx consisted of a box-shaped compart-

ment hosting a reel of carbon-fiber-reinforced plastic ribbon attached on its free end 

to a gold-foil-wrapped panel with corner reflectors for high-precision, laser-based 

tracking. Once the assemblage was deployed in orbit, the ribbon was supposed to un-

furl more than 6,000 meters. But Murphy’s Law managed to intervene: only 18 min-

utes after the tether began unfurling, the mission ended suddenly in failure when the 

tethered pair was unexpectedly jettisoned from the STEx spacecraft. 81  Only 22 meters 

of the ribbon had been deployed. To protect the overall STEx platform and the many 

other payloads it carried, ATEx was designed with an automatic jettisoning mecha-

nism that would be triggered if the tether began to stray from its expected departure 

angle. A subsequent analysis by a trio of engineers in NCST’s Spacecraft Engineering 

Department (SED) determined that excessive tether slack triggered a sensor reading 

exceeding an “out of bounds” limit, which amounted to an unacceptable risk to the 

overall STEx mission. “This sensor then produced the jettison command,” concluded 273 CHAPTER 13 —THECHANGINGNEIGHBORHOOD 

SED engineers Stephen Gates, Stephen Koss, and Michael Zedd. 82  It was a disappoint-

ing, show-stopping result for the experiment, though Wilhelm and his many NCST 

colleagues view failure in the course of new space technology developments as a 

success of sorts that can help steer engineers toward more reliable technology down 

the line. 

Schaub returned to NRL in 1998 as Associate Superintendent of NCST’s Space-

craft Engineering Department. That was just in time for him to help manage the lab’s 

role with Windsat, an ocean surface monitoring satellite project, which was funded 

by the Navy and was in deep trouble. Windsat was a proof-of-concept mission for a 

capability that would be of great tactical and operational importance to the surface 

Navy. 

At the time of Schaub’s return, NCST and the Spacecraft Engineering Department 

were, in Schaub’s words, “in deep dung.” The Windsat program, which was developed 

under the auspices of the Department of Defense-wide Space Test Program, was over 

budget and behind schedule. There was a lot of external sponsor pressure coming in 

that was felt all the way up to the office of NRL’s Director of Research, Dr. Timothy 

Coffey, to make things right. 83  Recalled Schaub: “With a finger in my chest, I was told, 

‘You have the most program management experience of anybody here; your job is to 

clean up this mess.’” 

“The issue, when you are developing something for the first time, is that it some-

times is more challenging than you originally envisioned,” Schaub noted. “But your 

customer community is not used to operating in that environment. They expect you 

to be experts and to be able to predict at all times what it is going to take to design 

and build [the spacecraft], and to be on schedule and on budget.” 

It took two years, major changes in managerial tactics, and a huge team effort at 

NCST, but the ship was righted. “Windsat was a near death experience for us,” Schaub  

> Ion Thrust . NCST engineers prepared this
> Electric Propulsion Demonstration Module
> (EPDM) for testing on an NRO technology-testing
> platform known as Space Technology Experiment
> (STEx). Referred to as a Hall-effect thruster,
> it works by ionizing the propellant and then
> accelerating the ions to create thrust. (NRL photo
> EPDM.tif)

274 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

said. “It was a nightmare that turned into a huge success,” added Senasack, who was 

Schaub’s immediate boss before Schaub took over the supervisory role at the SED. 84 

The technical aspects of the mission were formidable. But in some ways, these were 

the easier challenges of the mission to tackle. It was the subtler successes of improv-

ing communications and relationships among the stakeholders in the Department of 

Defense, Navy, and NCST that also enabled Windsat to enter its orbital perch. 

From a technical standpoint, Windsat was a proof-of-concept project to demon-

strate the ability to measure ocean-surface wind speed and direction—the “wind vec-

tor” in more technical parlance—with spaceborne passive microwave remote sensing. 

“The global ocean-surface wind vector is essential information for short-term weath-

er forecasts and warnings, nowcasting and climatology and oceanography studies in 

both the civilian and military communities,” wrote NRL antenna engineer Wendy 

Lippincott, NRL colleague Dr. Peter Gaiser of the lab’s Remote Sensing Division, and 

several contractor partners. 85 

Wilhelm points to an additional important application, one that he said came to 

his attention as he was hosting a tour of NCST facilities for a Vice Admiral who had 

a say in NCST’s future funding. “In a previous job, he’d been in charge of the cruise 

missiles that the Navy launches,” Wilhelm noted. The tour included a stop at a model 

of the Windsat spacecraft in Building A59. Wilhelm recalls the Vice Admiral saying, 

“That wind-speed direction data, you know, over the path that my missiles have got 

to fly, is absolutely essential. Got to have that.” When he saw the model, Wilhelm 

recalled, he said, “‘Man, that’s good stuff.’” 86 

The science underlying Windsat emerged from more than 30 years of basic in-

vestigation in NRL’s Remote Sensing Division in collaboration with other government  

> Windsat Win . A saga between its conception,
> launch, and unexpectedly long and successful
> operation, Windsat provided data about
> conditions at the sea surface with a spatial and
> temporal resolution that is sufficient for real-time
> naval operations. (NRL photo B58Z9072.jpg) 275 CHAPTER 13 —THECHANGINGNEIGHBORHOOD

agencies and universities into how wind conditions at the ocean surface influence the 

ocean’s natural microwave emissions, which are induced by the wind-water interac-

tion. 87  Weak as the wind signals were, NCST engineers and their partners worked 

through challenges to measure those emissions with a passive space-based sensor 

called a microwave radiometer. 

“You talk about a difficult instrument to build,” Wilhelm quipped. “The Windsat 

is probably the most difficult of anything I’ve ever heard of in the RF domain.” 88 

That’s because the spacecraft’s radiometer would have to detect and accurately 

measure the wavelengths and intensities of extremely weak microwave signals ema-

nating from the ocean surface and do so with a resolution fine enough to have opera-

tional and tactical value. Moreover, the instrument had to make these measurements 

while viewing a pixel of the ocean for only a few milliseconds as the satellite flies over, 

yet still be capable of characterizing subtle amplitude and polarization features of 

the microwave emissions. Simulation and engineering studies showed this could be 

achieved with 11 “feed horns” of different sizes that could pick up specific key ranges 

of microwave radiation, and a main dish reflector to shunt emissions from below into 

the feed horns. All of this and more technical capability had to be packaged within 

stringent size and weight constraints. Also, any reflections and interfering emissions 

from the spacecraft itself had to be minimized, lest the raw data be too confusing for 

the algorithms and raw-data-to-wind-speed models (that Gaiser and his colleagues 

developed) to make any sense of. 

Regardless of these challenges, Wilhelm said, “we’ve done it, it works, and 

nobody else can say that.” 89  Working with Gaiser and other remote sensing special-

ists at NRL were many NCST space technology engineers with expertise in antenna 

design, electrical engineering, and a wide range of other skill sets. Lippincott, an RF 

engineer with NCST, for example, was tasked with overseeing the antenna modeling 

that would help zero in on the actual design to implement for the spacecraft. “It is a 

complicated system that requires modeling antennas that are going to look down to 

the Earth and measure the ocean surface, so it involves very complicated equations,” 

she noted. 90  “They told me I was going to do this and I was like, ‘You want me to 

what?’ At first, I did not understand it all, but I plugged away at it and it worked out. I 

was the one who had to tell them where to place everything.” 

By collecting emission data and running it through well-validated models linking 

microwave emissions to the wind conditions that elicit them, Gaiser and his col-

leagues, led by Mike Bettenhausen, managed to hone methods for extracting wind 

vector data—direction and speed—from the microwave data with the necessary spa-

tial and temporal resolution. Gaiser became the Principal Investigator for the Wind -

sat spaceborne polarimetric microwave radiometer demonstration project, which is 

to say, the technical heart of Windsat. He worked closely with partners including Lip-

pincott, Program Manager David Spencer, and other NCST engineers who designed, 

built, and tested the spacecraft in preparation for its 2003 launch. 91 276 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Once data started coming in from Windsat, others realized that wind vectors 

were just one geophysical feature that the spacecraft could monitor. “The same 

microwave channels that you needed to come up with wind vector data would give 

you some other products that have become really important to the Army and Marine 

Corps,” Schaub pointed out. One example is the ability to measure the amount of 

moisture in soil, an indicator of how well, for example, tanks and other military 

vehicles will fare in a particular real or potential military zone. “If you were planning 

a mission and you really wanted to know if you are going to get your vehicles stuck in 

mud, this would be important data at your fingertips.” 

Windsat was a primary payload aboard the Air Force Coriolis satellite, and it was 

sponsored jointly by the Department of Defense Space Test Program (STP) and the 

Navy (SPAWAR Command). It was supposed to have lasted only three years after its 

January 2003 deployment. Instead it has remained in orbit, where, noted Schaub, in 

addition to serving the Navy, it has been providing operational data to the National 

Hurricane Center, the National Typhoon Warning Center, and others. 92 

Crucial to the solution to pulling the Windsat program out from the budgetary 

and scheduling muck it had entered in the years before it was launched was to es-

tablish better and more frequent lines of communication between the NCST satel-

lite-builders and its partners and sponsors within the Department of Defense, Navy, 

and other members of the National Polar Orbiting Environmental Sensor System 

(NPOESS) Integrated Program Office, which oversaw the mission. Noted Schaub: “It 

takes two things to communicate: someone on the transmitter and someone on the 

receiver. We had to fix both sides. We initiated monthly program reviews. When they 

didn’t attend, we sent them PowerPoint slides in which one would say ‘unless we hear 

from you, this is how we are going to proceed.’ We turned that program around and 

were able to successfully manage expectations.” 93 

Also important was for the NCST team to appreciate that their business of satel-

lite engineering and satellite building, with its inherent delays and budget surprises, 

does not jibe well with the budgetary cycles and other administrative constraints 

of customers who are not themselves in the business of space technology but seek 

satellite-based capabilities. “If you are in some fiscal year, and in the first few months 

you develop major setbacks in a program, and you suddenly tell your customer you 

need 5 million dollars more this year to stay on schedule, unless your customer is just 

rolling in dough, which he usually is not, that is a major problem,” Schaub explained. 

“That is what happened with Windsat.” In the early decades of space technology at 

NRL, when NRO was the primary sponsor, money was less of an issue. 

“We designed Windsat for a one-year life, with a three-year goal, and right now 

we are in its tenth year of successful operation,” Schaub said with a sense of triumph 

in an interview in 2012. “It is still healthy and, knock on wood, it is still performing 

today.” 94  As of 2018, Windsat was still in operation. 

As has always been the case, the space technology business remains precarious, 

even after successes like Windsat. At NRL and NCST, tidal forces from upper eche-277 CHAPTER 13 —THECHANGINGNEIGHBORHOOD 

lons in the Navy, Department of Defense, and other government bodies always have 

been at work and they can just as soon give as well as take. 

A case in point was the planned follow-on to Windsat, which was part of the 

NPOESS program and jointly run by its partners by way of the NPOESS Integrated 

Program Office. “As a result of our success on Windsat, we were eventually given the 

job of flying MIS—the Microwave Imager Sounder,” noted Schaub. “We were basically 

asked by the NPOESS program office to make an operational version of Windsat— 

add some additional capability—and transition that to industry so that they could 

build it in the future.” 

But things had gone badly with the Air Force’s contract with Boeing for the Coni-

cal Microwave Imager Sounder (CMIS), whose requirements were similar to those of 

Windsat and for which Windsat was meant to serve as a “risk reduction” payload. 95 

Much to the NRL participants’ chagrin, Schaub noted, the Integrated Program Office 

over- seeing the CMIS collaboration had not adopted some hard lessons learned 

regarding the transitioning of government-driven space projects to industry partners. 

Congress decided to cut the country’s losses on the NPOESS program and directed 

that the CMIS contract be canceled. 

It was a blow to the NPOESS program, but one of the leaders for the Defense De-

partment’s part of the program at the time, Colonel Susan K. Mashiko (later a Major 

General and Deputy Director of NRO), was unwilling to let the project go entirely. 

She knew about NCST’s capabilities and asked the lab to give it another go. Schaub 

and his team estimated that they could deliver a launchable CMIS-equivalent payload 

for under the $250 million already spent. After all, the team had learned important 

technical and managerial lessons with Windsat. It took some guts, but Colonel Ma-

shiko pushed hard to give the job to NCST and slightly renamed the payload as the 

Microwave Imager Sounder (MIS). 

The NPOESS Integrated Program Office initiated the MIS sensor project at NRL 

in July 2008. In 2009, the lab—with primary participation from the Remote Sensing 

Division and NCST’s Spacecraft Engineering Department—successfully passed the 

major milestone of the System Requirements and Design Review. 96  And in early April 

2010, the team passed the IPO’s next milestone, the Preliminary Design Review. 97  In 

2010, the NPOESS program was canceled, but the MIS instrument was slated to fly on 

the follow-on program, the Defense Weather Satellite System (DWSS). However, 

the task to deliver MIS was fated for a premature ending when on December 31, 2011, 

President Barack Obama signed the 2012 Defense Authorization Bill that zeroed 

out funding for DWSS, 98  an action that thereby shelved MIS … almost literally. The 

payload ended up sitting idle in Building A59, though NCST was funded to remain in 

the loop so that it could help the Air Force develop requirements and reduce risk for 

its space-based microwave sensor needs in the future. 99 

“Cancellation is an occupational hazard” in the satellite business, noted Schaub. 

In NCST’s Spacecraft Engineering Department alone, there are 150 civilian employ-278 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

ees working with at least another 100 experts in contracting firms. It is a managerial 

challenge to keep such a workforce motivated and to prevent them from getting 

discouraged when programs get canceled, as they do, even after large, highly skilled 

teams have spent years and even hundreds of millions of dollars or more. “I lose sleep 

over this,” said Schaub. 100 

This is why NCST’s push to diversify its sponsor base, beginning in the 1970s 

when NRO was moving toward contractors to build its operational satellites, had 

been so crucial for NCST’s long-term viability and competence in building satellites. 

In the mid-2000s, as Windsat was getting its first years under its belt, the Air Force 

and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) needed a contingent 

of NCST payload-builders to construct what was unceremoniously dubbed the Upper 

Stage. It was a sophisticated propulsion system for precisely transferring a set of small 

satellites into their own individual geosynchronous orbits from an initial geosynchro-

nous trajectory achieved with the main booster vehicle. The Upper Stage, also known 

as the NRL Precision Orbital Transfer Vehicle, 101  was akin to the MSD, or Multiple 

Satellite Dispenser, which Wilhelm had originally designed for placing satellites 

initially clustered on a single framework into specific orbits. As such, the Upper Stage 

was a satellite unto itself, replete with its own ability for autonomous operations and 

so with its own processing, software, and communications systems. 102  Its role in the 

DARPA-sponsored mission was to deposit several classified satellites of a program 

dubbed MiTEx into specific orbits. The government revealed very little about the 

mission, which gave reporters a license to speculate or to find sources that would. 103 

The NCST Upper Stage team got started on the project in late 2003. Within two 

years, the team had completed design, analysis, and integration phases, as well as 

preliminary tests. Those included mission simulations and compatibility exercises 

with ground station facilities—in particular, NRL’s Blossom Point and the Air Force’s 

Satellite Control Network (AFSCN)—for command, control, and telemetry. Vibra-

tion, thermal, acoustic, and other tests to ensure flight worthiness followed with 

good results, enabling the NCST team to ship the vehicle and supporting ground and 

mechanical equipment by truck to Cape Canaveral by December 2005. 

There, another battery of tests proved the health of the Upper Stage, but due to a 

delay in the readiness of the Delta II launch vehicle, that forward momentum had to 

be cut off for a time, with the Upper Stage going back into its shipping container and 

stored on-site. NCST participants described some of the final preparations for the 

Upper Stage (U/S) this way: 

“NRL propulsion engineers, working with CCAFS [Cape Canaveral Air Force 

Station] contractor personnel, precisely loaded the mono methyl hydrazine (MMH) 

and nitrogen tetroxide (NTO) hypergolic propellants into the U/S fuel tanks. Follow-

ing fueling, the small satellites were installed by NRL engineers and technicians on 

the top deck of the U/S. The integrated stack, known as the Space Vehicle (SV), was 

… installed on the Delta II third stage, which had been spin balanced separately. A 279 CHAPTER 13 —THECHANGINGNEIGHBORHOOD 

large modular protective canister was installed around the integrated third stage and 

SV. Very early one morning two weeks before launch, this canister was slowly towed 

to Launch Complex 17A and hoisted on top of the rest of the Delta II rocket. The pro-

tective canister was removed, and final preparations of the SV were performed. These 

preparations included removing covers from sensitive surfaces, installing arming 

plugs, and performing pre-launch functional tests.” 104 

On June 21, 2006, the rocket finally launched and inserted the satellite-laden 

vehicle into a preliminary geosynchronous orbit. Evidence of success came through to 

the Blossom Point (BP) ground station in Maryland by way of signals initially picked 

up by the AFSCN’s Diego Garcia Remote Tracking Station in the central Indian 

Ocean. From that point, NCST staff at BP undertook all command and control for 

the mission, though tracking and telemetry data were collected at both BP and the 

AFSCN facilities. With NCST-developed orbit determination software, which was 

important for planning maneuvers and pointing ground antenna, it took four days 

of operations for the Upper Stage to insert its MiTEx satellite payloads into predeter-

mined geosynchronous orbits. 

The mission proved out a roster of new technologies, including new catalyst-

based thrusters, lightweight all-titanium propellant tanks, and a low-cost, high-per -

formance star tracker for attitude control. “This experimentation and these tech -

nologies enable such missions as autonomous maneuvering, transfer of secondary 

payloads, and orbit plane changes,” the NCST engineering team concluded in a 

summation they wrote up for NRL’s annual review in 2007. 105 

Despite NCST’s successes at diversifying its sponsor base for building payloads, 

and not just prototypes to help industry contractors build the real birds, the sat-

ellite-building activity at NCST has been on a steady decline since the end of the  

> Orbital Delivery . On June 21, 2006, the multi-payload mission, MiTEx, along with an NCST-built orbit-delivery
> system known as the Upper Stage, rockets toward orbit. Meanwhile, mission operations engineers at NCST’s
> ground station in Blossom Point, Maryland, monitor the mission during the “main burn” phase. (NRL photos
> 8P584673.jpg and DSC_0032.jpg) 280 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

Poppy program in 1977. This shows up with stark clarity on NCST’s list of satellite 

and payload launches, which is dense with almost annual launches—many of them 

multiple-payload launches—between 1960 and 1977. Of the three declared payloads 

prepared for launch in the 1980s, one failed and two made it into orbit (where they 

would end up opening an important new business in ground-deployed technologies 

for NCST). Thereafter, the frequency of launches with NCST payloads settled into one 

every few years. Most of these have been squarely in the category of technology tests 

and validations, rather than full-blown operational payloads. The most recent full 

payload that NCST engineers built, tested, and launched was Tacsat-4, an experimen-

tal communications satellite supported by the Office of Naval Research that made it 

into orbit from a launch pad in Kodiak, Alaska, on September 27, 2011. 

The trend toward fewer full-payload projects has been unfolding ever since 

NRO’s Program C manager, Rear Admiral Tom Betterton, sounded the alarm to then 

NCST director Pete Wilhelm and his space technology engineers that they were going 

to have to find new sponsors for their R&D work as the NRO shifted its SIGINT sat-

ellite production from NRL to aerospace contractors. It has been a theme and source 

of institutional angst, and also a catalyst for change and innovation, for NCST and 

NRL leadership ever since. Dr. John Montgomery, an NRL veteran with a wry sense 

of humor who earned his top-notch engineering reputation in the arena of electronic 

warfare before he succeeded Dr. Timothy Coffey in 2002 to become the lab’s Direc-

tor of Research until his retirement in 2016, was reminded of the precariousness of 

the satellite business with the Microwave Imaging Sounder cancellation in 2010. He 

reiterated to Wilhelm, Schaub, Dwyer, and the entire NCST staff that they needed to 

redouble their efforts to identify and secure sponsors and projects that would extend 

NCST’s decades-long history of contribution to the U.S. space program. 

“We are one of the very few places left within the government where we have all 

of the skills, knowledge, and abilities within the civil service to design, build, and test 

spacecraft and instruments,” says Schaub. 106 

NCST still has “unparalleled capability in the full spectrum in space stuff, from 

the orbiting peripherals [satellites] on through the information and distribution and 

utilization and analysis of information,” reiterated Rear Admiral Betterton in an inter-

view. 107  But they don’t have a dedicated sponsor any more like NRL’s first generations 

of space technologists, he continued. NCST engineers now have to be more entre-

preneurial, more in the loop on how their skill sets and know-how can help other 

agencies throughout the government apply space assets to their purposes, and more 

capable of forging the connections and sponsorships that it always has taken at NRL 

to get a single ounce of hardware into space. 

It has become an imperative to work for more than one customer at a time, which 

means managing many large and small programs at a time, and diversifying the work 

portfolio to degrees that the elders of NRL’s space technology lineage could not have 281 CHAPTER 13 — THE CHANGING NEIGHBORHOOD 

imagined in their own primes. When Betterton started to let out the news that NRO 

would no longer be there as it had been in the past, some within the NRL space cadre 

got over their denial quickly and viewed the imminent change as a great opportunity 

to think of satellites and payloads merely as the highest flying parts of what the term 

“space technology” denoted. In this new context, satellites were indeed the “orbiting 

peripherals” of much larger, complex, and technologically diversified systems with 

subsystems and components that would have places on the sea, land, and air all over 

the planet. As the NCST engineers saw it in the 1990s, it was time to make sure that 

the national satellite assets above could be used to discern in near-real-time the 

expanding range of threats below, and provide useful data and usable systems to the 

warfighters, the national defense community, and civilian emergency responders who 

could do something about those threats.  

> 1

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 2

A short history on the firm’s website specifies that the Martin Marietta Corporation formed in 

1961 when American-Marietta merged with the Glenn L. Martin Company to become “a leader 

in aerospace, cement, aggregates, electronics and chemicals”; http://www.martinmarietta.com/ 

Corporate/history.asp.  

> 3

Peter Wilhelm, interview with author, May 17, 2013.  

> 4

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012; see also James Winkler, unpublished 

memoir shared with author, 2012, p. 79.  

> 5

James Winkler, memoir, p. 74.  

> 6

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 7

Art Collier, personal correspondence with author, April 22, 2012, and January 29, 2013.  

> 8

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 9

James Winkler, memoir, p. 79.  

> 10

“LACE,” Naval Research Laboratory Publication 199-8105, October 1991.  

> 11

http://setas-www.larc.nasa.gov/LDEF/.  

> 12

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 13

James Winkler, memoir, p. 73.  

> 14

http://ncst-www.nrl.navy.mil/HomePage/LACE/LACE.html.  

> 15

D.E. Horan, R.E. Perram, and R.E. Palma, “The NRL Lace Program Final Report,” NRL Re-

port NRL/FR/8121-93-9565, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC, August 27, 1993.  

> 16

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 17

http://ncst-www.nrl.navy.mil/HomePage/LACE/LACE.html.  

> 18

Don Horan, “NRL’s LACE satellite re-enters atmosphere,” in  Labstracts , Naval Research Labo-

ratory, September 11, 2000.  

> 19

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 20

Horan et al., “The NRL Lace Program Final Report,” pp. E-1, 5–6.  

> 21

Chris Dwyer, interview with author, February 9, 2012.  

> 22

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 23

Chris Dwyer, personal communication, February 13, 2012.  

> 24

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 25

Horan,  Labstracts , September 11, 2000.  

> 26

John J. Degnan, “Thirty Years of Satellite Laser Ranging,” presented at the Ninth International 

Workshop on Laser Ranging Instrumentation, held November 7–11, 1994, in Canberra, Aus-

tralia, accessed at http://ilrs.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/ilrw09_vol1.pdf. 282 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE  

> 27

Michael J. Vilcheck et al., “Overview of the NCST’s New Optical Research Facility,” IEEE 

Aerospace Conference (2001), http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/AERO.2001.931379.  

> 28

Phone interview with Linda Thomas, September 20, 2013.  

> 29

Interview with Anne Reed and Linda Thomas, June 4, 2014.  

> 30

Interview with Anne Reed and Linda Thomas, June 4, 2014.  

> 31

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2005/project-ande-assembly-and-testing-near-

scompletion-at-nrl-for-fall-delivery-to-nasa and http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releas-

es/2009/nrls-ande2-launches-aboard-sts127.  

> 32

See, for example, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/wallops/CARE.html.  

> 33

NRL Press Release, “Space Station Astronauts Launch SpinSat; NRL Starts Getting Data,” 

January 12, 2015, http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2015/space-station-astronauts-

launch-spinsat-nrl-starts-getting-data#sthash.d7QVDa4Z.dpuf; NRL Press Release, “With 

SpinSat Mission, NRL Will Spin Small Satellite in Space with New Thruster Technology,” http:// 

www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2014/with-spinsat-mission-nrl-will-spin-small- satel -

lite-in-space-with-new-thruster-technology#sthash.ptln0Iqe.dpuf.  

> 34

Interview with Anne Reed and Linda Thomas, June 4, 2014.  

> 35

Interview with Anne Reed and Linda Thomas, June 4, 2014.  

> 36

Interview with Anne Reed and Linda Thomas, June 4, 2014.  

> 37

See Interview of Dr. Carroll O. Alley by Joan Bromberg on May 19, 2006, Niels Bohr Library 

and Archives, American Institute of Physics, College Park, MD, http://www.aip.org/history/ 

ohilist/30249.html.  

> 38

Interview with Anne Reed and Linda Thomas, June 4, 2014.  

> 39

Peter G. Goetz et al., “Modulating Retro-reflector Lasercom Systems at the Naval Research 

Laboratory,” presented at the 2010 Military Communications Conference in San Jose, CA 

(Oct. 31–Nov. 3, 2010); G.C. Gilbreath, S.R. Bowman, W.S. Rabinovich, C.H. Merk, and H.E. 

Senasack, “Modulating Retroreflector Using Multiple Quantum Well Technology,” U.S. Patent 

No. 6,154,299, awarded November 2000. See more at http://www.nrl.navy.mil/research/nrl-re-

view/2003/space-research/creamer/#sthash.tk2yEg6p.dpuf.  

> 40

Christopher I. Moore et al., “Overview of NRL’s Maritime Laser Communication Test Facili-

ty,”  Proc. of SPIE  5892; Linda M. Wasiczko et al., “Characterization of the Marine Atmo- sphere 

for Free-Space Optical Communication,”  Proc. of SPIE  6215, 621501 (2006).  

> 41

Both images are from Moore et al.,  Proc. of SPIE  5892.  

> 42

For a description of the interest in laser communications by the Office of Naval Research, see 

Linda M. Thomas, Christopher I. Moore, and William Rabinovich, “The ONR Enabling Capa -

bility on High Bandwidth Lasercom,”  Proc. of SPIE  7685, Atmospheric Propagation VII, 76850I 

(May 04, 2010), doi:10.1117/12.850893.  

> 43

Nova-Sol company web page: http://www.nova-sol.com/capabilities/optical-communica-

tions/dual-mode-optical-interrogator-dmoi.  

> 44

Nova-Sol company web page.  

> 45

Interview with Anne Reed and Linda Thomas, June 4, 2014.  

> 46

Much of the material on Clementine is adapted somewhat from coverage of the program in 

my previous institutional history of NRL: Ivan Amato,  Pushing the Horizon: Seventy-Five Years 

of High Stakes Research and Technology at the Naval Research Laboratory  (Washington, DC: 

Naval Research Laboratory, 1998). See especially pp. 205–208.  

> 47

Material on Clementine came largely from two collections of papers—one technical and the 

other consisting of newspaper and magazine reports on the project—supplied to me by Paul 

Regeon. I also relied on a special issue of  Science  magazine (December 16, 1994; see note 52) in 

which much of the mission’s scientific results was reported. In June 1994, NRL also published a 

beautiful small volume,  A Clementine Collection  (see note 49), which includes useful informa-

tion and anecdotes.  

> 48

BMDO, in turn, was renamed in 2002 as the Missile Defense Agency.  

> 49

A Clementine Collection , Naval Research Laboratory, NRL/PU/1230--94-261 June 1994 (re-

printed March 1999), p. 6. 283 CHAPTER 13 —THECHANGINGNEIGHBORHOOD  

> 50

http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/nmc/masterCatalog.do?sc=1994-004A.  

> 51

Linda Greenway, “NRL develops spacecraft for cooperative deep space program,” in  Lab-

stracts , Naval Research Laboratory, August 16, 1993.  

> 52

Stewart Nozette et al., “The Clementine Mission to the Moon: Scientific Overview,”  Science ,

266, no. 5192 (December 16, 1994), 1835–1839, doi: 10.1126/science.266.5192.1835.  

> 53

Nozette et al.,  Science . 

> 54

Linda Greenway, “Clementine—Not lost and gone forever,” in  Labstracts , Naval Research 

Laboratory, April 24, 1995.  

> 55

“Seventh Annual Best of What’s New: The Year’s 100 Greatest Achievements in Science and 

Technology,”  Popular Science , Dec. 1994, pp. 49 ff.; http://www.nrl.navy.mil/clementine2/histo-

ry.php.  

> 56

A Clementine Collection , p. 22.  

> 57

William J. Clinton, “Report on Aeronautics and Space for Fiscal Year 1994,” Congressional 

Record (Senate), p. S7388, May 24, 1995.  

> 58

Stewart Nozette, C.L. Lichtenberg, P. Spudis, R. Bonner, W. Ort, E. Malaret, M. Robinson, 

and E.M. Shoemaker, “The Clementine Bistatic Radar Experiment,”  Science  274, no. 5292 (No -

vember 29, 1996), 1495–1498.  

> 59

Paul Spudis, “Clementine—The Legacy, Twenty Years Later,” AirSpaceMag.com, January 

21, 2014, accessed April 2014 at http://www.airspacemag.com/daily-planet/clementine-lega -

cy-twenty-years-180949523/.  

> 60

http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/ice/ice_moon.html.  

> 61

Robert Mackay, “The Scientist Who Mistook Himself for a Spy,”  New York Times , October 21, 

2009.  

> 62

Associated Press, “Scientist Gets 13 Years in Spying Case,” March 22, 2012.  

> 63

Aaron Chilbert, interview with author, February 21, 2012.  

> 64

Aaron Chilbert, interview with author, February 21, 2012.  

> 65

Art Collier, personal correspondence, April 22, 2012.  

> 66

Art Collier, personal correspondence, April 22, 2012.  

> 67

Art Collier, personal correspondence, April 22, 2012.  

> 68

Edward Senasack, interview with author, May 8, 2013.  

> 69

James Winkler, memoir, p. 35.  

> 70

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 71

http://www.nro.gov/news/press/1996/1996-08.pdf.  

> 72

NRL Press Release, “Small Tether Satellite Deployed by NRL,” June 20, 1996; http://www.nrl. 

navy.mil/media/news-releases/1996/small-tether-satellite-deployed-by-nrl.  

> 73

James Winkler, memoir, p. 91.  

> 74

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/1996/small-tether-satellite-deployed-by-nrl.  

> 75

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/1996/small-tether-satellite-deployed-by-nrl.  

> 76

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/1996/small-tether-satellite-deployed-by-nrl.  

> 77

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/1996/small-tether-satellite-deployed-by-nrl.  

> 78

Peter Wilhelm, interview with author, February 16, 2012.  

> 79

http://www.nro.gov/news/press/1998/1998-09.pdf.  

> 80

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 81

http://web.archive.org/web/20070614150720/http://projects.nrl.navy.mil/atex/ATEx.html.  

> 82

Stephen S. Gates, Stephen M. Koss, and Michael F. Zedd, “Advanced Tether Experi -

ment Deployment Failure,”  Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets  38, no. 1 (2001): 60–68, doi: 

10.2514/2.3655.  

> 83

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 84

Edward Senasack, interview with author, May 8, 2013.  

> 85

Wendy Lippincott et al., “Antenna Design, Modeling, and Testing on the WindSat Satellite 

Wind Direction Measurement System,” NRL/MR/8120—02-8613 (Washington, DC: Naval 

Research Laboratory, March 29, 2002), p. 2.  

> 86

Peter Wilhelm, interview with NRL Historian Leo Slater, August 7, 2009. 284 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE  

> 87

K.M. St. Germain, G.A. Poe, and P.W. Gaiser, “Polarimetric emission model of the sea at mi -

crowave frequencies and comparison with measurements,”  Progress in Electromagnetic Research 

37 (2002), 2–32.  

> 88

Peter Wilhelm, interview with Leo Slater, August 7, 2009.  

> 89

Peter Wilhelm, interview with Leo Slater, August 7, 2009.  

> 90

Wendy Lippincott, interview with author, May 1, 2012.  

> 91

P.W. Gaiser et al., “The WindSat Spaceborne Polarimetric Microwave Radiometer: Sensor 

Description and Early Orbit Performance,”  IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote 

Sens- ing , vol. 42, no. 11, November 2004, available at http://www.nrl.navy.mil/WindSat/pdfs/ 

TGRS04_Wind- Sat_Gaiser.pdf.  

> 92

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 93

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 94

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 95

P.W. Gaiser, “WindSat — Remote Sensing of Ocean Surface Winds,”  2004 NRL Review , avail-

able at http://www.nrl.navy.mil/research/nrl-review/2004/featured-research/gaiser/.  

> 96

Daniel Parry, “NRL successfully completes first major development milestone on the 

NPOESS Microwave Imager/Sounder program,”  Labstracts , Naval Research Laboratory, Sep-

tember 14, 2009, p. 3.  

> 97

NRL News Release, “NRL’s Microwave Imager/Sounder Passes Major Program Milestone,” 

July 15, 2010, http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2010/nrls-microwave-imager-

sounder-passes-major-program-milestone.  

> 98

Marcia Smith, “President Signs Bill Terminating DWSS,” spacepolicyonline.com, January 1, 

2012, http://www.spacepolicyonline.com/news/president-signs-bill-terminating-dwss.  

> 99

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 100

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 101

M.S. Johnson et al., “NRL Precision Orbital Transfer Vehicle,”  2007 NRL Review , Naval 

Research Laboratory, Washington DC, pp. 232–235, available at http://www.nrl.navy.mil/ con -

tent_images/07Space_Johnson.pdf.  

> 102

Johnson et al., “NRL Precision Orbital Transfer Vehicle.”  

> 103

See, for example, R. Caron, “Mysterious microsatellites in GEO: is MiTEx a possible anti-sat-

ellite capability demonstration?” The Space Review, July 31, 2006, http://www.thespacereview. 

com/article/670/1.  

> 104

Johnson et al., “NRL Precision Orbital Transfer Vehicle.”  

> 105

Johnson et al., “NRL Precision Orbital Transfer Vehicle.”  

> 106

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 107

Tom Betterton, interview with author, July 18, 2012. OCEAN SURVEILLANCE, EVERYWHERE 

# AND ALWAYS 

Entirely classified until 2005 when the program’s name and some of its story were 

declassified by the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), Poppy evolved from its 

initial role in 1962 of finding, identifying, and characterizing fixed, strategic radar 

systems in the U.S.S.R. to also listening in on the electromagnetic signals emanating 

from mobile Soviet vessels at sea. 1 Beginning with its EOSAT program in the 1980s, 

the Soviet Union was doing the same thing. 

As chronicled in Chapter Ten, the roots of Poppy’s sea-vessel-directed intelli-

gence roles date back to late 1967 when William N. Leonard (a World War II naval 

flying ace and commander of a carrier division who would retire in 1971 as a Rear 

Admiral), the Director of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ’s Office of Defense Research and 

Engineering, requested a study that included an assessment of the Poppy program’s 

ability for “passive detection, classification, and localization of ships at sea.” 2 This was 

a time when the Soviet Union was dramatically expanding its naval fleet. That request 

by Leonard now can be interpreted as prescient with respect to a far more ambitious 

intelligence framework, which by the early years of the new millennium would evolve 

into one of the most audacious and expansive ship monitoring capabilities ever 

developed. Often referred to as “maritime domain awareness,” this system of systems 

co-evolved with the changing threats to the United States since the late 1960s. 3

“We at NRL revolutionized—and I mean revolutionized—the nation’s ability to 

attain maritime domain awareness,” said Christopher Dwyer, who came to the lab in 

1985 while still in college and worked his way up to become Superintendent of the 

Naval Center for Space Technology’s (NCST) Space Systems Development Depart-

ment (SSDD), now one of the two divisions of the NCST. He would serve also as 

acting director of NCST after the founding director, Pete Wilhelm, retired at the end 

of 2014. At NRL, SSDD, like the lab’s other units, is known most often by its organiza-

tional code number, 8100 in SSDD’s case. “The country went from tracking a couple 

hundred ships out on the ocean, to thousands and thousands. People said that was 

impossible,” Dwyer noted with a touch of bravado. “Don’t tell me anything is impossi-

ble.” 4 He should know: Dwyer served as the technical director for the Comprehensive 

Maritime Awareness Joint Capability Technology Demonstration (CMA JCTD), 5

which in the first decade of the new millennium proved out many of the components 

of the overall system, as well as their integration. 

# 14 286 NRL AND T HE SPACE A G E 

Dwyer points out that the system in place now was the result of a three-phase 

process beginning with a technology demonstration project—known as the Vessel 

Tracking Project (VTP)—that unfolded from 2004 to 2006. VTP demonstrated the 

empowering value of moving from what essentially was a manual process of gather-

ing, correlating, and interpreting multiple sources and types of data about ships at sea 

to a more digitized and automated process. Following that, in the 2006 to 2009 time 

frame, was the buildup and execution of the CMA JCTD, which Dwyer helped to or-

chestrate and oversee. This went beyond vessel tracking, he explained, by adding the 

ability to discern which of the many ships out there are potential threats. “If you are 

monitoring thousands of ships, which ones do you worry about” is the key question, 

he said. 

This is where a variety of ship data—among them ownership, flags, insurance 

status, crew information, and itinerary—come into the system to move it from one 

that merely tracks ships to one that can help determine which ships to worry about. 6

Even as the CMA JCTD was going on, a third phase, known as MASTER—short for 

Maritime Automated Super Track Enhanced Reporting—also was under way. These 

two phases built on the lessons learned previously during the VTP to install, primar-

ily for the U.S. Coast Guard, an operational “ocean awareness” system in the North 

Atlantic. And this, Dwyer noted, is just a step toward a fully global system, involving 

international partners, which would monitor and, and as Dwyer puts it, “threat-

assess” thousands and thousands of ships everywhere and always. 

The challenge of knowing what is going on with the world’s oceangoing vessels is 

harder than keeping track of aircraft. “In many cases, you can’t take off or land 

without asking permission,” Dwyer noted, pointing out that this entails that someone 

knows about your actions. “That is not the same on the world’s oceans, because mar-

itime trade has been around as long as people have. It is not regulated to the extent 

that air travel and commerce is. It is very complex and not transparent at all. Ocean 

awareness is a tough problem to crack.” 7

That it was a problem the Navy would have to crack was becoming apparent even 

in the late 1960s to forward-looking leaders like Rear Admiral Leonard who were  

> Ocean Watcher .Christopher Dwyer,
> head of the Space Systems Devel -
> opment Department, is shown here
> with monitors displaying data about
> marine vessel traffic. (NRL photo
> 090707-N-4822B-004. jpg) 287 CHAPTER 14 — O CEAN SURVEILLANCE, E V E R Y WHERE A N D A LWAYS

eyeing the Soviet Union’s expansion of its naval capabilities and influence. “By the 

1970s, the USSR’s enormous investment in ‘blue water’ forces was evident in in-

creasing Soviet deployments (in strength) in the Mediterranean, Arabian Sea, Indian 

Ocean and southwestern Pacific,” according to a Navy-produced historical account 

of its own space activities. 8 At the same time, ELINT tools, including Poppy satellites 

and associated intelligence-gathering field sites around the world, began reporting 

electromagnetic emissions at various global locations, reiterating that the Soviets were 

taking their naval assets further afield. 9

The Mideast crisis in the fall of 1973, when Syria and Egypt launched a surprise 

attack on Israel and thereby increased the tensions between the already polarized U.S. 

and U.S.S.R., highlighted the growing potential of ocean-centric ELINT. During the 

crisis, the Soviets sent a veritable armada into Mediterranean waters. Until then, the 

Mediterranean had been known as “NATO’s lake” to highlight the contrast between 

the heavy NATO and American military presence and the absence of Soviet naval 

power. But during what became known as the Yom Kippur War, the Soviets sent 

scores of vessels to the Mediterranean where they played a dangerous game of tag 

with floating and submerged American naval assets. 10 

Hundreds of miles above this watery theater were two sets of Poppy satellites— 

under the designators of Poppy 6 and 7—which were launched roughly four and two 

years earlier, respectively. The situation in the Mediterranean was ideal for moving 

forward on a proposed “hull-to-emitter-correlation” intelligence capability afforded 

by the satellites. Known as HULTEC, it was the ability to tie a specific radar to a spe-

cific ship, after detecting the electromagnetic emissions and accurately characterizing 

the specifics of those emissions, such as the frequencies, pulse durations, and repeti-

tion patterns. “You knew a particular radar was on a particular ship,” Dwyer noted. 11 

Poppy started out as a program to supersede the GRAB satellites, which in their early 

1960s time frame were akin to the training-wheel phase of space-based ELINT. As 

discussed in previous chapters, the initial and primary role for both GRAB and Poppy 

was to identify and characterize major fixed radar systems such as the anti-ballistic 

missile (ABM) radar system surrounding Moscow and anti-aircraft radar systems 

installed throughout the Soviet heartland. But with each new and upgraded set of 

satellites in the seven Poppy launches between 1962 and 1971—along with upgrades 

in the ground stations and data analysis tools and techniques—it eventually became 

apparent to those in the national ELINT loop that the satellites couldn’t help but pick 

up on ship-derived emissions as the payloads spent time over the oceans during their 

orbital trajectories. And it was clear too from analyses of those signals that some of 

them were coming from specific Soviet navy vessels. 12 

The last set of Poppy satellites, Poppy 7, was launched on December 14, 1971, 

from Vandenberg Air Force Base. As they had done for the lab’s previous ELINT 

satellite launches, NRL’s Reid Mayo and Vince Rose made sure all was well prior to 

takeoff. 13  By then, Poppy 5, in orbit since May 1967, had entered its twilight phase. 288 NRL AND T HE SPACE A G E 

Poppy 6 satellites, which had been designed to listen in on a wider frequency range 

than previous Poppy satellites, had assumed orbital positions on September 30, 1969. 

But NRO’s partially redacted official history of the program, which was approved for 

release in 2012, reveals that command and telemetry subsystems in orbit failed to 

respond to interrogation by a mission ground station. In early 1970, one of the Poppy 

ground stations became “an emergency ward where [NRL’s] Satellite Techniques 

Branch strove, pass after pass, to bring [REDACTED] back to life.” 14 

During the Yom Kippur War, it would have been Poppy 7—whose primary 

ELINT targets were the strategic radar systems on Soviet territory—that conducted 

space-based ELINT collection on the Soviet ships and submarines in the Mediterra-

nean and other blue water locations. The partial historical accounts of the program 

that NRO has released do not reveal if and how Poppy was used during that conflict, 

but one passage indicates that just months prior to the conflict, Poppy 7 was provid-

ing “good Ocean Surveillance coverage without detracting from the other missions of 

the system,” referring to surveillance of Soviet land-based radar systems. 15 

The radar emissions from oceangoing vessels reached the early ELINT satellite 

systems at the speed of light. Even so, it could take days, weeks, months, and longer 

to work through the processing, analysis, packaging, and distribution of these raw in-

terceptions of signals before they could be of value for strategic or tactical uses. These 

uses included planning of wartime bombing routes by the Strategic Air Command, 

teasing out the Soviets’ electronic order of battle (EOB), and developing electronic 

countermeasures, including radar jammers or spoofers. 

The fundamental challenge in deploying ELINT satellites to detect and track 

seagoing vessels for real-time, or at least near-real-time tactical use, resided in the 

speed at which the raw sensor-harvested data could be converted into information 

that fleet and ship commanders could act upon. For tactical operations, timeliness is 

everything. Contributors at NRL, the National Security Agency, the Naval Security 

Group, and elsewhere helped traverse major steps toward this required timeliness 

with developments in the tasking (of sensors to obtain relevant data), collection of 

data, and the processing, exploitation, and distribution of the data and information 

products derived from it. TCPED is the acronym that those deep in this loop use to 

refer to these five data-handling categories. 16 

In the same year as the Yom Kippur War, 1973, NRL executed organizational 

changes that would open pathways to technology developments required to leverage 

satellite systems for tactical uses, most notably ocean surveillance. In that year, for 

one, the Satellite Techniques Branch was renamed the Spacecraft Technology Center 

(Code 7040 within the Space Science and Technology Division, which was coded as 

7000) under the leadership of Dr. Herbert Rabin, who at the end of the decade would 

become a Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Applied and Space 

Technology. 17  In-house champions at NRL of this emphasis on tactical applications 

included Fred Hellrich, who had helped secure state-of-the-art computer systems 289 CHAPTER 14 — O CEAN SURVEILLANCE, E V E R Y WHERE A N D A LWAYS 

and who handled multiple logistics issues during the GRAB and Poppy eras. He was 

assigned to head the Systems Development Section (7032). And Lee Hammarstrom 

was assigned to head the forward-looking Advanced Concepts Section (7033). 18  In 

the ensuing years, he would develop a deep understanding and appreciation of the 

data handling, packaging, analysis, and distribution challenges it would take to move 

meaningful and actionable textual, pictorial, and other intelligence-laden media— 

much of it from classified sources, which added the challenge of having to keep its 

origins secret—from anywhere on the globe to anywhere else. 19 

“Ocean surveillance was an operational military system,” pointed out military 

space historian and writer Dr. Dwayne Day. “The data collected from an ocean sur-

veillance system had to be immediately relayed to operators because the detected ships 

moved.” And the system had to have a global purview as the Soviet navy extended its 

operational capabilities. The Soviets showcased their growing naval power in a 1975 

military exercise dubbed Okean 75, involving more than 200 naval vessels operating in 

the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian oceans, as well as in the Mediterranean. 20 

On April 30, 1976, an Atlas F rocket roared spaceward from a launch pad at 

Vandenberg Air Force Base in California and deposited into an initial orbit a trio of 

classified payloads that were hung onto the NRL-designed Multiple Satellite Dispens -

er, or MSD, which could gingerly maneuver several satellites into their own specific 

orbits. 21  It was just one year before the official shutdown of NRL’s Poppy program. 22 

Still untold publicly are descriptions of the countless engineering and technical 

innovations that it would take over the following years to put in place an ocean aware -

ness system eventually capable of tracking and assessing in near real time a population 

of vessels numbering, as Dwyer has indicated, in the thousands and thousands. Daria 

Bielecki, a Ph.D. mathematician who arrived at NRL in 1988, was among the many 

partners who placed some of the foundation stones that would lead to this capability, 

in her case with her technical work and leadership in the Vessel Tracking Project.  

> Show and Tell. Pete Wilhelm, second
> from right, explains the technology
> and mission of the Multiple Satellite
> Dispenser (in the foreground) to rep -
> resentatives from the White House,
> with NRL colleagues on hand. (NRL
> photo P-1949(18).jpg) 290 NRL AND T HE SPACE A G E

From 1983 to 1988, before her years at NRL, Dr. Bielecki worked at the Naval In -

telligence Support Center (NISC), then a part of the Ballistic Missile System Division 

of the Naval Weapons Technology Department (NISC now resides within the Office 

of Naval Intelligence). There, she analyzed the guidance, control, and accuracy of for -

eign ballistic missile systems, a signals intelligence (SIGINT) task. When she moved 

to NRL in 1988, she helped guide scientists and engineers in the then two-year-old 

NCST toward solutions to various mathematical and engineering issues associated 

with space system development. Key among these was oceanic vessel tracking. 23 

A citation for the Navy Superior Civilian Service Award, which Bielecki won in 

2009 for her many years of work in this exceedingly complex arena, provides a some-

what more technical window on the work she did. The award, the second highest a 

Navy civilian employee can receive, recognized Bielecki for her “development of the 

Vessel Tracking Project (VTP), which features a layered defense approach incorpo-

rating support from sensors, databases and information feeds ranging from national 

technical means [such as satellites] to open source information.” 

As the Poppy program demonstrated, ELINT satellites could pick up relevant 

signals from Soviet naval vessels. However, these vessels were well-known threats. If 

the task was to become aware of and identify potential threats amongst all vessels on 

the world’s oceans, then the overall system, in addition to being able to detect electro-

magnetic signals, needed to reveal who is on board the vessels, what is on board, who 

owns what is on board, who’s buying what’s on board, where the ships have been and 

where they are going, what nations they are flagged under, “and on and on,” said 

Dwyer. “Threat detection is almost infinitely more difficult” than merely tracking 

vessels, he added. 24 

Bielecki’s early work at NRL prepped her for the global-scale vessel tracking chal-

lenge that would become a pillar of a national maritime defense initiative, especially 

following the 9/11 attacks in 2001. She started out in the late 1980s in the Space Sys-

tems Technology Department (Code 8300) of the Naval Center for Space Technology.  

> Math Powerhouse. With particular strengths
> in mathematics and data fusion, Dr. Daria
> Bielecki played important roles in the Vessel
> Tracking Project, which fed into the larger
> Maritime Domain Awareness framework for
> identifying and tracking threats on the world’s
> seas. (NRL photo BieleckiD.jpg) 291 CHAPTER 14 — O CEAN SURVEILLANCE, E V E R Y WHERE A N D A LWAYS

There, she was tasked with looking into the intelligence-based question of how much 

information about, say, an ocean vessel and other kinds of vehicles one could glean 

from data stored on electronic identification chips, radio frequency identification 

tags, and other electronic data-containing technologies that were just coming into 

use. But when her growing expertise in that area landed her in what she described as 

a “customs activity” at Dulles Airport, near Washington, DC, she felt that her career 

was moving away from that of a technology developer to that of an intelligence offi-

cer. 25 

It would have been a move that did not suit her. So she eagerly accepted an op-

portunity to apply her skills and knowledge to other efforts. 26  Her bosses were branch 

head George Price (son of Charlie Price who had learned during his Poppy days how 

to solve tough and geographically distributed logistics issues for global-scale projects) 

and Mike Regan, who, she recalls, “gave me the freedom to investigate any kind of 

sensor or intel source that I thought could be useful for this tracking work.” 27  Regan, 

who was not on NRL’s payroll, was a sponsor of NRL’s technology development work. 

The particular vessel-tracking task she was asked to take on, Bielecki recalled, was 

akin to that of the cocktail party challenge in which one strives to hear the voices of 

a few friends among many strangers. “So you would have to use your other senses to 

find them,” she explained. “You might hear them talking, or listen to their particular 

laugh, or smell their perfume.” Pushing the art, science, and technology of ocean 

surveillance required a similar mind-set. “You had to use everything available to you 

to do ship tracking,” Bielecki explained. 28 

“A lot of work you are doing when you come up with a ship track is to see if cer-

tain parameters go together,” such as ELINT and acoustic signals from sonobouys, she 

says. “You need to know about the source of the data and what to expect of the data. 

But then, when you are [trying to connect the dots] manually, you are looking to see 

if it all makes sense or not.” 29  The key to a practical system that could track thousands 

upon thousands of vessels was to automate the normally all-too-human task of mak-

ing sense of the data. “That was the big breakthrough,” Bielecki noted in an interview. 

But it also had familiar roots at NRL. For example, the automation process involved, 

among many other details, teasing out signal characteristics of maritime navigation 

radars, including pulse repetition intervals (PRIs), which even the GRAB system 

relied on to do its job of monitoring Soviet land-based radar systems. 30 

In the early 1990s, as a prelude to the technology tasks that a full ocean surveil-

lance system would require, Bielecki and her colleagues in NCST and the lab’s Tactical 

Electronic Warfare Division (TEW) began working on a data component of that 

automation process by investigating the potential of an ELINT technology known as 

Specific Emitter Identification (SEI). The point of SEI is for sensors on ships, aircraft, 

and other mobile and fixed settings, to detect and analyze radar emissions from 

seagoing vessels and to integrate the traits of those emissions (frequency, PRI, etc.) 292 NRL AND T HE SPACE A G E 

into specific electromagnetic portraits for each emitting radar. In contrast to the sub-

sequently deployed public maritime Automatic Identification System (AIS)—which 

was not operational until the late 2000s and by which dedicated emitters on vessels 

deliberately (and by law) exchange information about a vessel’s course, destination, 

and speed to others ships and appropriate maritime authorities 31 —SEI can help track 

and identify even vessels whose occupants are deliberately operating without having 

or activating an AIS emitter. 

One of the earlier and more telling studies in this effort unfolded over a five-week 

period in 1991 at the United Kingdom Coast Guard site in Dover, England, the south-

eastern coastal town that is famous for its white cliffs made of the calcium carbonate 

remains of tiny sea creatures. It also is a so-called maritime choke point—the Strait of 

Dover is the narrowest segment of the English Channel and so it is like a cattle chute 

for boats, to mix metaphors. The UK Coast Guard photographed all ships that went 

through the Strait, which was one type of data that, with the addition of ELINT and 

input from a variety of sensors and databases, could help make vessel tracking work. 

“We were trying to see how much info we could correlate from the pictures the 

UK Coast Guard had with the ESM [electronic surveillance measures] equipment 

tapping into SEI signals,” explained Bielecki, who led a VTP team of about 20 NRL 

colleagues, contractors, and academics from the Naval Postgraduate School in Mon -

terey, California. 32  Feeding into this operation were pictures from a company called 

PhotoFlight, which made a living by snapping photographs of ships in the Strait from 

the air and then selling the pictures to the ship owners and their passen- gers. Still at 

this time, nothing was automated or networked, so it took human eyes and brains to 

look for patterns and relationships in the different types of data. People were running 

up and down the stairs of the Coast Guard building in Dover trying to establish infor -

mative data correlations in real time as ships literally passed by in the Strait, Bielecki 

recalled. 

“So we had pictures, we had the ELINT, we had the SEI from the ships, we had 

radar blobs,” Bielecki says. “We were trying to see how much info we could get and 

whether we could separate it into the uniqueness of vessels,” which is to say, into data 

portraits and signatures that identified specific ships. The plan was for each such 

portrait to go into a growing database (ultimately comprised of multitudes of data-

bases) in order to make subsequent identifications and tracking tasks easier. A similar 

test was going on at another of the planet’s primary shipping choke points, the Strait 

of Gibraltar between Spain and northern Africa. A sobering lesson of these exercises 

was that it simply was not possible for human beings, even teams of them, to manual-

ly fuse, integrate, process, and make sense of the different kinds of ship-related data in 

a timely and tactically useful way. 

Bielecki was looking carefully at the system as a whole. If vessel tracking on the 

scale that the U.S. Navy, the Coast Guard, and other security organizations in the 

United States and elsewhere wanted was going to work, the process would have to be 293 CHAPTER 14 — O CEAN SURVEILLANCE, E V E R Y WHERE A N D A LWAYS 

automated as extensively and fully as possible. Toward that end, Bielecki said, she 

and her NRL colleagues initiated in 1994 a development project, the Chokepoint 

Monitoring System, at NRL’s Chesapeake Bay Detachment (CBD). 33  A World War 

II-era research facility high up on the western shore of the Bay (replete now with a 

massive but defunct Cold War antenna structure for over-the-horizon aircraft 

surveillance), CBD provides, according to the lab, “facilities and support services for 

research in radar, electronic warfare, optical devices, materials, communications, 

and fire research.” 34  Here, in addition to everything Bielecki and collaborators tried 

in Dover, the team added data on each passing vessel acquired from an acoustic 

buoy and a high-frequency, surface-wave radar system. This was when some of the 

astonishing power of a mature vessel-tracking capability started to become apparent. 

Noted Bielecki, “you could sit in Building 59 [on NRL’s main campus in Washington, 

DC] and you could see everything going on at CBD and you could see it through the 

Internet.” 35 

To be sure, the technical, engineering, and information-related challenges that 

she took on in her various leadership roles over the years were huge by themselves. 

But developing the immensely capable tracking system that emerged from the Vessel 

Tracking Project, which was a foundational step toward global maritime domain 

awareness, also “required skill and sensitivity to overcome the natural cultural issues 

associated with coordinating the inputs from the large and disparate group of govern-

ment agencies involved,” noted the lab’s public information office in its announcement 

of Bielecki’s Navy Superior Civilian Service Award. “Dr. Bielecki is cited as having 

‘superb management skills and technical innovation that have contributed significant-

ly to the security of the United States as well as the free world,’” the statement said. 36 

Over the course of the next decade or so, into the first years of the new millen-

nium, Bielecki headed up the “data fusion/correlation” task. The work centered on 

identifying the sensors (including ones on satellites, on and under the surface of the 

oceans, on planes, and on the ground by chokepoints), algorithms, automation  

> Privileged Perch. NRL’s Chesapeake
> Bay Detachment in Chesapeake Beach,
> Maryland, hosts a portfolio of research
> and development facilities and activ -
> ities, including ones associated with
> tracking vessels and with the ocean
> surveillance system often referred to
> as maritime domain awareness. (NRL
> photo CBD. jpg) 294 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

systems, and other small and large components that it would take to deploy a vast and 

complex system that is ever more able to monitor and track ever more vessels on the 

world’s oceans. 

In the course of all of these projects, Bielecki and various teams she has overseen 

participated in large demonstration exercises, among them Crusade 2000, a joint US-

UK-led exercise held in March 2000 in Halifax, Nova Scotia. “The experiment included 

data from high-frequency surface wave radars, RADARSAT (a Canadian satellite), air-

craft imaging sensors for ground truth/identification of national assets,” among other 

components, Bielecki noted. 37  Beyond her involvement with the enormity and diversity 

of the technical issues that a global vessel-tracking capability entailed, Bielecki also 

spent much of her time conducting classified briefings to help sponsors communicate 

and negotiate with high-echelon decision makers and acquisition officials who were 

responsible for procuring and paying for all the system’s pieces. 38 

In 2003, when John Young, the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, De-

velopment and Acquisition (ASN, RDA), called for a Maritime Domain Awareness ar-

chitecture that would provide surveillance well beyond the Soviet and Chinese navies 

(which no longer were the most grave and most imminent threats to the U.S.), Bielecki 

was in a perfect position to begin what became a seminal contribution. “9/11 was 

what renewed interest in merchant vessels,” thousands upon thousands of them, which 

suddenly were viewed by the defense and security communities with more urgency be-

cause they were likely means for terrorists to carry out attacks, Bielecki pointed out. 39 

Her initial response to Young’s request was to prepare a “white paper” on a much 

wider view of vessel tracking with help from NRL colleagues and partners at contrac-

tor firms. Because of her math expertise and penchant for quantification, Bielecki was 

able to provide Young with a cost figure, $540 million, for a full-blown global-scale 

vessel tracking system. Young was impressed by the proposal, but he was unable to 

commit that much money, Bielecki said. His compromise was to implore Bielecki and 

her vessel tracking teams—which typically numbered in the dozen to 20 range, 

depending on the specific task—to do the best innovating they could with the $30 

million budget that he would be able to muster. 

The approach Bielecki adopted was to look for the “low hanging fruit,” which is 

to say, already available technologies that could work in the expanded vessel-tracking 

system Young and others wanted. Among this reachable technological fruit were hy-

perspectral imaging (beyond the visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum), high-

frequency surface wave radar (designed for at-surface monitoring), acoustic sensors to 

listen in on ship sounds, and a host of other systems. One key task the team moved on 

was the Modular Sensor System (MSS), which Bielecki describes as “a remotely con-

trollable automatic collection command center for multiple sensors, including Track 

While Scan (TWS) Radar, an advanced [Electronic Surveillance Measurement] system 

to provide Electronic Intelligence (ELINT) data, and a Precision Direction Finder 

(PDF)” to help locate the origins of radio frequency emissions. Explained Bielecki 295 CHAPTER 14 — O CEAN SURVEILLANCE, E V E R Y WHERE A N D A LWAYS 

in mild techspeak: “MSS forms a pool of sensors that can be configured to meet the 

individual needs for MDA at selected ports/sites with high automation and minimum 

manpower requirements.” 40 

“And we had something called the Common Distributed Virtual Database for 

Information Extraction that brought all of this information together,” Bielecki contin -

ued. Those who work with this component of MDA actually refer to the 

entire acronym, CDVD/IE, like a series of words—Cee, Dee, Vee, Dee, Eye, Ee—and 

struggle to remember what the letters stand for. “The CDVD/IE semiautomatically 

identifies vessels via multisource data,” wrote the NCST team—including Mike Bell, 

Scott Elliott, Daniel Yang, and Piseyroth You—that had been developing the system. 

This provides the primary end user, the U.S. Coast Guard, “with maritime domain 

awareness of vessels operating in an area of responsibility (AOR) encompassing the 

Atlantic Ocean, north of the equator, and the Gulf of Mexico/Caribbean Sea.” 41 

The Coast Guard’s primary mission is maritime safety and crime fighting. This 

overlaps with, but is not the same as, the homeland security and defense missions 

of the Navy, Dwyer pointed out. In today’s defense-related context rife with terrorist 

worries, he added, MDA includes knowing such things as whether this or that 

vessel—among the many thousands of vessels in the system’s purview—has on board 

anyone on a terrorist watch list, or changed its identifying information mid-voyage. 

A guiding principle for the overall MDA architecture has been to make as much 

of the system’s sensor data immediately available to many users of the system whenev-

er a critical “point defense” situation might arise—such as a small, swift, and threat-

ening boat approaching New York City. “For this reason, the entire operation of MSS 

is fully automated and can provide 24/7 situational awareness with no staff at all,” 

Bielecki wrote in 2008 in NRL’s annual book-length review of its researchers’ work. 

“For routine functional checks or an occasional reset of subsystems, the entire system 

can be maintained via a series of simple Web pages that not only provide situational 

awareness, but also allow the user to check on instrument and equipment status and 

health.” 42 

One important demonstration along the way occurred in 2005 in collaboration 

with Canadian researchers working on homeland security, and participants and ob-

servers from the UK, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. It was called the Maritime 

Seize and Interdiction Experiment, or MARSIE, and took place when Hurricane 

Katrina was wracking the Atlantic Ocean. “The idea was to track a merchant vessel 

going across the Atlantic carrying a homemade contraband package that the Cana-

dians developed, that was then dropped in the fishing areas off of Newfoundland, 

picked up by a fishing vessel, then carried to the coastal waters and passed to a small 

boat or vessel,” Bielecki said. 43  Without going into details, Bielecki described the result 

as “successful” and a demonstration of “how you can bring technologies together” to 

construct new types of homeland security capabilities. 44 296 NRL AND T HE SPACE A G E 

By 2006, the team began delivering to the primary end users—most notably at 

the Coast Guard’s Maritime Intelligence Fusion Center in Virginia Beach, Virgin-

ia—what eventually would amount to the most capable maritime domain awareness 

system on the planet: a system that can track hundreds of thousands of oceangoing 

vessels around the world in tactically realistic ways that can guide operations such as 

tracking, identification, and interdiction. 

“Since the development of the VTP, the capability to collect, fuse, and correlate 

data continually and automatically from a variety of sensors that include electronic 

intelligence, imagery, Automatic Identification Systems [from ship emitters], and 

acoustics has drastically improved,” according to an NRL press release. In developing 

these capabilities, the statement said, Bielecki and her colleagues tapped into over 300 

databases, among them the Coast Guard’s MAGNET [Maritime Global Awareness 

Network] database and the Office of Naval Intelligence’s Seawatch database. 45  These 

enhanced frameworks also accommodated additional data threads to link data about 

shipping companies, ships, banking, insurance, and other common attributes within 

worldwide databases, all in a quest to connect dots that might reveal previously 

hidden threats. These provide the means for converting a surveillance system that 

merely indicates that vessels of some kind are out there on the ocean to an “awareness 

system” that provides information relevant to assessing whether those vessels pose 

threats, Dwyer noted. 46 

Bielecki and her many colleagues over the years also took the overall system way 

beyond ship tracking so that it could garner information automatically about the 

people and cargo on vessels, a capability showcased in the Comprehensive Maritime 

Awareness and MASTER Joint Capability Technology Demonstrations. According 

to an extensive tactics memo, written in heavy techspeak and issued by the Office of 

the Chief of Naval Operations, MASTER amounts to “a Web-based vessel-tracking 

tool that correlates tracks from sources across multiple security domains.” 47  NRL’s 

2010 Fact Book adds that MASTER, whose present iteration is known as Sealink Ad-

vanced Analysis (S2A), “provides global, persistent, cooperative and non-cooperative 

maritime vessel tracking awareness and information that is valuable to intelligence 

analysts, joint warfighters, senior decision makers, and interagency offices within the 

SCI [sensitive compartmented information] community.” 48  That’s a matter-of-fact-

way of saying something like “this system is one of the most far-reaching intelligence 

tools ever devised, built, and deployed.” 

Dwyer outlined in the lab’s annual review in 2007 a few scenarios of how the 

evolving system could serve homeland security roles. “Once disparate sources of 

information are correlated and fused, the information is used to identify anomalies 

and threats,” Dwyer wrote. “Identification of anomalies might be as simple as auto-

matically finding discrepancies between various data sources. For instance, as a ship 

approaches Long Beach, its AIS may indicate the ship’s name is Tokyo Maru. Howev-

er, the automated tool searches databases and shows the Tokyo Maru was seen in Rot-297 CHAPTER 14 — O CEAN SURVEILLANCE, E V E R Y WHERE A N D A LWAYS 

terdam one day earlier. The track would be flagged automatically. Another case could 

be a ship approaching Long Beach with an Advance Notice of Arrival indicating crew 

size of 34, when the last port of call in Singapore shows crew size of 30. An automated 

report would flag the ship for investigation.” 49 

An initial and limited test of the evolving system unfolded in 2006 in an exercise 

centered at the Atlantic Area Coast Guard Maritime Intelligence Fusion Center in 

Virginia. But through the CMA and MASTER JCTDs (technology demonstration 

exercises), it was expanded in the following years by stakeholders—among them the 

Navy, Coast Guard, National Security Agency, Department of Defense, and Depart-

ment of Homeland Security—to a global scale. Pivotal to the success of this effort 

was Dwyer, who, in the words of one observer, “skillfully coordinated a large number 

of national and international players to sell the CMA JCTD.” 50  JCTDs are massive, 

high-profile technology testing and proving exercises, rife with daunting logistical, 

administrative, communications, technical, and many other challenges. They are 

designed to preview the future of military technology and operations. 

One enormous challenge in pulling off this large effort and in moving this system 

toward operational status, noted retired NCST director Pete Wilhelm, Dwyer’s boss 

until the end of 2014, “is protecting secure information and its sources while declas-

sifying the appropriate information so it can be used by people who need it. Chris 

began by formulating a strategy to develop a ‘culture of sharing’ between interna-

tional partners and the United States, and among U.S. agencies.” 51  Another challenge, 

Dwyer added, had been to develop what amounts to a common language by which 

the human and machine elements of a comprehensive maritime awareness system can 

reliably communicate as they collectively produce, assess, and continually update the 

identification and perception of threats on the world’s oceans. 

“The key to achieving that goal was to create a set of types and values that could 

be used to describe beliefs about maritime entities, relations, and events, as well 

as the evidence for those beliefs,” Dwyer and several collaborators outside of NRL 

wrote in the  2009 NRL Review . What has been emerging from this work is a versatile 

net-friendly language schema, known as the Maritime Information Exchange Model 

(MIEM), that amounts to a universal language for describing, conveying, and com-

municating about the maritime threat environment in ways that are understandable 

and accessible to all of the people, computers, and other data-involved parts of the 

system. “Types” in this context refers to, for example, kinds of vessels, cargo, people, 

ports, and threats; “values” refers to, say, the size of a tanker, the normalcy or abnor-

malcy of a vessel track, or the degree of certainty about a potential threat. 52  For the 

operational success of a system that monitors many thousands of ships around the 

world, “this was a big deal,” said Dwyer. “MIEM is a pivotal piece that allows this to 

work.” 53 

There is more to come. The Vessel Tracking Project, which proved that intel-

ligence systems as audacious as a CMA and MASTER might indeed be possible, 298 NRL AND T HE SPACE A G E 

concentrated on “low hanging fruit,” Bielecki stressed, adding that there are “other 

sensors out there that will address different parts of the problem that will enhance 

capabilities.” The logical endpoint is clear enough: to have a relentless eye on the hun-

dreds of thousands and even millions of vessels that comprise all maritime traffic on 

the world’s oceans and waterways and an ability to discern which of these vessels pose 

threats to the nation.  

> 1

Ronald Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C Electronic Intelligence Satellites (1957–1977) ; LEO 

Systems Program Office, National Reconnaissance Office, September 3, 1988; declassified with 

redactions and approved for release from NRO on June 13, 2012.  

> 2

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , pp. 139–142.  

> 3

Potts, pp. 139–142. 

4 Chris Dwyer, interview with author, February 19, 2012. 

5 http://servicetoamericamedals.org/SAM/finalists09/nsm/dwyer.shtml. 

6 Chris Dwyer, interview with author, September 26, 2013. 

7 Chris Dwyer, interview with author, February 19, 2012. 

8 Applied Research Laboratory, The Pennsylvania State University (ed.) , From the Sea to the 

Stars: A Chronicle of the U.S. Navy's Space and Space-related Activities , 1944–2009  (revised and 

updated edition, 2010),  p. 74. 

9 Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , Chapter 11; Dwayne Day, “Above the Clouds: the White 

Cloud Ocean Surveillance Satellites,”  The Space Review , www.thespacereview.com/arti-

cle/1351/1, April 13, 2009.  

> 10

Dwayne Day, “Above the Clouds.”  

> 11

Chris Dwyer, interview with author, September 26, 2013.  

> 12

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , Chapter 11. See pp. 223–224 for the launch history of the 

Poppy series.  

> 13

Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C , p. 212.  

> 14

Potts, p. 181.  

> 15

Potts, p. 219.  

> 16

Chris Dwyer, interview with author, September 26, 2013.  

> 17

Herbert Rabin bio, University of Maryland, http://www.ece.umd.edu/faculty/rabin.  

> 18

A rough timeline for the Naval Center for Space Technology is available on NRL’s web site at 

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/ssdd/ncst.  

> 19

Ivan Amato,  Pushing the Horizon: Seventy-Five Years of High Stakes Research and Technology 

at the Naval Research Laboratory  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1998), pp. 

334–336.  

> 20

Dwayne Day, “Above the Clouds.”  

> 21

Official NRL manifest indicates the MSD was in operation for 41 days while its three pay-

loads operated for 7 years and 9 months.  

> 22

Robert A. McDonald and Sharon K. Moreno,  Raising the Periscope…GRAB and Poppy: Amer -

ica’s Early ELINT Satellites , (Chantilly, VA: Center for the Study of National Reconnaissance, 

National Reconnaissance Office, September 2005).  

> 23

NRL Press Release, “Dr. Daria Bielecki Receives the Navy Superior Civilian Service Award,” 

April 6, 2009, http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2009/dr-daria-bielecki-re-

ceives-the-navy-superior-civilian-service-award.  

> 24

Chris Dwyer, email correspondence, October 2, 2013.  

> 25

Daria Bielecki, interview with Art Collier, February 19, 2008.  

> 26

Daria Bielecki, interview with Art Collier, February 19, 2008; interview with author, April 12, 

2012. 299 CHAPTER 14 — O CEAN SURVEILLANCE, E V E R Y WHERE A N D A LWAYS  

> 27

Daria Bielecki, interview with Art Collier, February 19, 2008; interview with author, April 12, 

2012.  

> 28

Daria Bielecki, interview with Art Collier, February 19, 2008; interview with author, April 12, 

2012.  

> 29

Daria Bielecki, interview with Art Collier, February 19, 2008; interview with author, April 12, 

2012.  

> 30

Daria Bielecki, interview with Art Collier, February 19, 2008; interview with author, April 12, 

2012.  

> 31

Daria Bielecki, “NRL Global Vessel Tracking Project (VTP),”  2008 NRL Review  (Washington, 

DC: Naval Research Laboratory), pp. 166–167.  

> 32

Daria Bielecki, interview with Art Collier, February 19, 2008; Daria Bielecki, extended re-

sume provided to author.  

> 33

Daria J. Bielecki, extended resume provided to author.  

> 34

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/field-sites/chesapeake-bay-det.  

> 35

Daria Bielecki, interview with Art Collier, February 19, 2008.  

> 36

Daria Bielecki, interview with Art Collier, February 19, 2008.  

> 37

Daria Bielecki, extended resume provided to author.  

> 38

Daria Bielecki, extended resume provided to author.  

> 39

Daria Bielecki, interview with Art Collier, February 19, 2008.  

> 40

Daria Bielecki, interview with Art Collier, February 19, 2008.  

> 41

An article by an NRL team who developed CDVD/IE appeared in the  2005 NRL Review :

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/content_images/06Information_Bell.pdf.  

> 42

Bielecki, “NRL Global Vessel Tracking Project (VTP),” 2008.  

> 43

Bielecki, “NRL Global Vessel Tracking Project (VTP),” 2008.  

> 44

Daria Bielecki, interview with Art Collier, 2009.  

> 45

“Dr. Daria Bielecki Receives the Navy Superior Civilian Service Award,” April 6, 2009.  

> 46

Chris Dwyer, interview with author, September 26, 2013.  

> 47

Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, Department of the Navy, Maritime Domain Aware-

ness (Navy Warfare Development Command TACMEMO 3-32.1-10), Edition November 2010, 

pp. 2–13.  

> 48

NRL Fact Book 2010  (Washington, DC: Nava Research Laboratory), caption on p. 108.  

> 49

Chris Dwyer,  2007 NRL Review , pp. 165–167.  

> 50

Art Collier, personal communication.  

> 51

Quoted at http://servicetoamericamedals.org/SAM/finalists09/nsm/dwyer.shtml.  

> 52

Chris Dwyer, R. Hayes-Roth, D. Reading, and G. Small, “A Maritime Information Exchange 

Model (MEIM) for Sharing Actionable Intelligence,”  2009 NRL Review  (Washington, DC: 

Naval Research Laboratory).  

> 53

Chris Dwyer, interview with author, September 26, 2013. C4ISR: A QUEST FOR OMNISCIENCE 

With projects like LACE and Clementine for missile defense; the never-flown 

Interim Control Module for the International Space Station; the Upper Stage for clas-

sified payloads; the Windsat and its indefinitely shelved follow-on Microwave Imager 

Sounder for fine-grained monitoring of meteorological and ocean conditions; the 

space tether payloads TiPS and the ill-fated ATEx; and the late 2011 milestone launch 

of its 100th satellite, TacSat-4 (see Chapter Sixteen), NCST surely remained in the 

satellite-building game from the 1980s into the new millennium. That, even as its pri-

mary initial sponsor in the 1960s, NRO, switched in the 1970s and 1980s to a policy 

of acquiring its systems from industry partners rather than funding organizations like 

NCST to build them. A large portion of NCST’s work always would remain in space 

hardware, but more on the component and systems scale, rather the full-satellite scale. 

A portion of NCST’s work also would always remain classified. But a sea change for 

NRO meant a sea change for NCST. 

For NCST as an institution, the strategic shift resided in reconsidering the pay-

loads it had built, or helped design, for industry partners, as “orbiting peripherals” 

within a much larger technological context of C4ISR. Spelled out, C4ISR in long form 

comes to “Command, Control, Computers, Communications, Intelligence, Surveil-

lance, and Reconnaissance.” Think of it as an evolutionary and ever-expanding project 

to build a globally distributed megasystem of sensors, electronic boxes, data-process-

ing modules, communications devices, and a long list of other gadgets and compo-

nents that sum into a means for providing real-time, all-the-time, anywhere and ev-

erywhere awareness about whatever military, terrorist, or other security threat might 

be lurking out there. It’s a big enough project to occupy hundreds of NCST personnel 

and their contract partners. It is that audacious, at least in theory. 

“We started out as a space science group back in the 1950s. Then we evolved 

into a space technology program, one program in particular,” observed Robert “Ike” 

Eisenhauer in an interview. Already working at NRL in 1962 as the Poppy satellite 

ELINT program was getting under way, Eisenhauer had taken the helm of NCST’s 

Code 8100, the Space Systems Development Department (SSDD), when it formed in 

1986 and held that position until his retirement in 2008. The one particular program 

Eisenhauer is referring to was the one that began with the GRAB and Poppy satellites 

under NRO’s sponsorship. The program was entirely classified until 1998 and 2005 

when portions of its earliest history with the GRAB and Poppy projects, respectively, 

began to become “tellable.” “But then we evolved even further into a C4ISR program.” 1

# 15 302 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

In time, the satellites became merely the highest-altitude components of a much 

larger intelligence technology ecosystem that processed, packaged, analyzed, and 

otherwise recast the raw intelligence data from satellites and other sensor-bearing 

platforms into information products that had operational and tactical value for an 

extensive range of users. These users resided primarily in the arenas of national 

defense, intelligence, security, and eventually even law enforcement and emergency 

response communities. The term “orbiting peripheral,” Eisenhauer recalled, started 

out as a good-hearted joke from a contractor that the NRL satellite team was working 

with closely in developing processing software for ground stations, but it became an 

apropos term for much of NCST’s raison d’être. 2

“If it falls under that umbrella, C4ISR, chances are we are doing something in 

there,” said Eisenhauer in an interview. “If we are not collecting and processing the 

data, we are taking that data and figuring out how to distribute it worldwide or how 

to combine it along with other types of data, and how to turn out products, such as 

targeting information, and then broadcasting that back out to receiving terminals so 

the actual guy in the field has the target data now.” 3

In a sense, the rebalancing of NCST’s portfolio with C4ISR technologies since the 

1980s has reconnected the Center with NRL’s early history in pushing the boundaries 

of radio communications, a tactics-minded quest. The difference is that the commu-

nications and intelligence landscapes have diversified and expanded to wondrous 

and daunting scales. Despite widespread interest to improve and expand tactical use 

of national intelligence capabilities, it took some time for Eisenhauer and his NCST 

colleagues to develop the sponsor relationships and internal cultural mindset they 

needed to move forward on these ideas.  

> Robert Eisenhauer, at NRL since the 1960s, took over as head of Code
> 8100, the Space Systems Development Department, when it was formed
> in 1986 along with the Naval Center for Space Technology (Code 8000).
> He is shown here at a clean desk in 1989. (NRL photo P-2792(11).jpg) 303 CHAPTER 15 — C4ISR: A Q UEST FOR OMNISCIENCE

“Our primary customer always has been the military operational forces, tactical 

support, as opposed to what the rest of the NRO does, which is more strategic than 

tactical,” noted Art Collier of the former Special Projects Office (also designated as 

SPAWAR 004-5). Later, he became a consultant to NCST. 4

Even in the 1970s, noted Collier, the lab’s satellite technology contingent began 

to realize that its primary user base—the U.S. government in general and the Navy in 

particular—was unable to fully exploit the available intelligence. “They did not have 

the automated systems that would enable them to process it quickly enough,” said 

Collier, referring primarily to the data acquired from intelligence satellites—“the na-

tional technical means”—that NCST built or helped design. “So we said ‘hey, we need 

to get in there and help them use the data that we were giving them’ and that spawned 

the impetus within the program to develop the tactical side and figure out how to 

process the data and display it rapidly and effectively.” 5

This insight meshed with a push by the U.S. Army in the early 1970s to exploit, 

in the words of an administrative history of the Navy’s space activities, “national sat-

ellite-based reconnaissance systems in support of its tactical forces on the ground.” 6

This led to Army efforts to develop concepts and hardware that would put intelligence 

data from national systems into the hands of corps-level users. It caught the fancy of 

Congress, which in 1977 strongly encouraged all of the military services to move in 

a similar direction. The Navy’s first follow-through on this request was to establish 

the Navy Tactical Exploitation of National Capabilities (TENCAP) Office as a branch 

within the Office of the Director of Navy Command and Control.⁷ 

In some ways, there was nothing new here. The naval intelligence community had 

long embraced the practice of supporting the operational fleet with the information 

it had access to from national reconnaissance systems, including Poppy ELINT satel-

lites. But the Congressional push in this same direction, and the official establishment 

of a Navy TENCAP effort, “became a significant factor in improving the usefulness of 

space-based surveillance and reconnaissance to the fleet,” according to the adminis-

trative history of the Navy’s space efforts.⁸ 

In the 1980s, the Navy TENCAP Office orchestrated research and development 

projects that earned a reputation throughout the Department of Defense for getting 

things done faster and leading to results at a fraction of the cost, compared to other 

military services and intelligence organizations. Some of these other organizations 

were eager enough to partner with the Navy researchers, many of them within NCST, 

that they kicked in funds, leading to a growth in joint agency TENCAP R&D projects. 

Participation of specialized contractor firms grew dramatically, amounting to up to 

half of the technical personnel for TENCAP programs.⁹ 

One of the first at NRL to realize that the seemingly denigrating phrase “orbiting 

peripheral” actually amounted to a signpost pointing toward a potentially sustainable 

and fund-attracting trajectory for NCST was Eisenhauer. Soft-spoken, yet confident 

and proud of having been a leader in his country’s space-technology community 304 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

for decades, Eisenhauer, who died in 2016, was not one for denial that the context 

was changing and that NCST would either adapt or fade away. He had been in charge 

of much of the electronics work that NRL’s satellite technologists had developed and 

built over the years and he could see that much of what it would take to realize the 

TENCAP ideal would be anchored in electronic boxes that could do wonders with 

electromagnetic signals—including a veritable tower of Babel of radio formats known 

as waveforms—and data. 

“Eisenhauer saw that our relationship with our traditional sponsors was chang-

ing,” observed SSDD superintendent Chris Dwyer. “And we needed to go figure out 

how to stay alive by redefining our business model and doing other things,” that is, 

other than building classified satellites. 10  Eisenhauer could see the coming emphasis 

on tactical systems even in the 1970s, noted Dwyer, an electrical engineer who began 

working for Eisenhauer in the summer of 1982 as a student contractor. Eisenhauer 

hired him in 1985 and by 2004 Dwyer had worked his way up to run NRL’s branch 

coded as 8140, and known more verbosely as Command, Control, Communications, 

Computers, and Intelligence (C4I). In 2009, he succeeded Eisenhauer as superinten-

dent of SSDD (Code 8100). 

“The requirements of the systems were constantly changing and so the technol-

ogy was constantly changing too,” Eisenhauer explained, referring to the ELINT and 

other intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance systems that NRO was acquiring 

and operating. The NRO always had a national-scale purview, and early on, NRL’s sat-

ellite work with the NRO reflected that bias. But for Eisenhauer, the strategic question 

that NCST had to fully take on if it were to stay in business even as the NRO shifted 

the satellite-building business to industry was this: “What good is intelligence if you 

can’t get it to the guy who needs it on the tactical leading edge?” 

It was one of the questions driving the Navy’s TENCAP efforts. It was also a 

question whose roots for NRL and NCST extend even to the 1960s when those within 

the Poppy infrastructure were seeing evidence that the nation’s SIGINT (signals 

intelligence, which includes ELINT and COMINT, that is, electronic intelligence and 

communications intelligence) satellites could play an important and unprecedented 

tactical role for the U.S. Navy by identifying and even tracking Soviet military vessels 

at sea. 11  If the satellites were the orbiting peripherals, then the rest of the system 

would have to quickly get the data from these space-based sensors—and other sensor 

assets—to those military personnel at sea, and on the ground and in the air, who 

could use the data to avoid, track, or target the enemy. A buzz phrase Eisenhauer likes 

to utter to encapsulate this satellite-to-warfighter pathway is “sensor to shooter.” 12 

For NRL’s ELINT satellite systems, “we knew what the data product was that was 

coming out of it,” said Eisenhauer. This led to a natural diversification of NCST’s busi-

ness to develop technologies in the overall system that moved data from the periph-

ery (from the sensor) to the user (to the shooter, as it were). 305 CHAPTER 15 — C4ISR: A Q UEST FOR OMNISCIENCE 

Distributing and delivering the tactical data to the user amounted to a technical 

challenge that, in Eisenhauer’s words, took NCST “into programs ongoing today that 

you never would have thought it would have been tied to.” 13  There is an irony here for 

the Naval Center for Space Technology in that in order for the organization to remain 

a player in the Space Age it helped establish in the 1950s, it would have to shift a size -

able portion of its work back down to Earth. Much of NCST’s research, development, 

and engineering portfolio would have to become devoted to ground-based data and 

signals processing, and communications systems. On top of that, as NCST engineers 

were innovating the hardware, algorithms, software, and systems to do just that begin -

ning in the early 1980s, the information landscape was undergoing its own dramatic 

transformation driven by the advent of the World Wide Web, Internet, and net-centric 

everything. 

“It was all about taking our bright, smart engineers, who know the sensors and 

what kind of data come from them, and figuring out ways of getting that data into 

tactical users’ hands,” said Eisenhauer. 14  The first deliverables for the end user, in the 

early 1980s, would become known as Tactical Receive Equipment (TRE). These 

units would enable existing radio equipment on floating naval vessels to receive data 

broadcast by the satellites, but also to filter the data so that it would reveal to end 

users only specified signals of interest within geographical areas of interest. In its first 

incarnation, “it was a modem to go into existing radios,” according to Robert Burdett, 

who was among the small team of engineers in Eisenhauer’s department in Building 

59 where they designed and built the first units. 15  The TRE, in effect, turned a regu -

lar radio receiver into one that could access a variety of ELINT products, including 

satellite-derived ones. In time, Eisenhauer pointed out, the equipment would diversify 

and become ever more sophisticated. “It would get down to the point where it could 

fit into small handheld devices that would tailor the information for a mission when a 

soldier is in the field,” he said. 

“We took what we knew about space, and how to design things that went into 

space—that had to be small, lightweight, low power, modular—and started apply-

ing that knowledge and know-how and engineering skill, along with what we knew 

about sensors and receivers, to other stuff,” added Dwyer. “This is C4I on the ground, 

air, and sea,” he said, acknowledging the apparent historical twist in a space-based 

organization like NCST becoming heavily invested in more surface-based technolo-

gies. 16  But that is how it always was and had to be. After all, satellites are connected to 

a much larger system by which the satellite data can provide both long-term strategic 

value and up-to-the-second battlefield tactical value. 

“At first we were using management reserve dollars” to build prototype devices 

that would demonstrate how the Navy could extract more tactical value from intelli-

gence data, noted Collier. When the NCST team started to roll out technologies that 

could do just that in practical ways, other military services wanted in and began to 

fund NCST to carry out additional prototyping work. 306 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

With each passing year over the past few decades, there have been ever more 

computers, databases, optical fiber trunks and satellite links, communications 

systems, sensors and surveillance systems, transmitters and receivers, indeed more 

of everything when it comes to acquiring, processing, packaging, transporting, and 

using data. The civilian version of this is sophisticated all right, but it is the digitized 

battlefield that pushes toward the impossible and is sometimes reality-checked by that 

boundary. 

Many NRL researchers have their imprints on the myriad pieces comprising 

C4ISR, most of them known by acronyms (the long forms of which even their design-

ers and champions sometimes fail to remember). TRE: Tactical Receive Equipment. 

MATT: Multi-Mission Advanced Tactical Terminal. Add a B, to get BMATT, for 

Briefcase Multi-Mission Advanced Tactical Terminal. JTT: Joint Tactical Terminal, 

and its briefcase model, the BJTT. JTRS: Joint Tactical Radio System. SDR: Software 

Definable Radio; and SDRP: Software Definable Radio Payload. IDM: Improved Data 

Modem. A2C2S: Army Airspace Command and Control System. UCIM: Universal 

Communication Interface Module. TacSat: Tactical Satellite. There are more, many 

more. 

Focusing on the list all at once is a sure way to lose the C4ISR forest for the trees 

or even the leaves, especially if one drills into the specific circuitry, radio frequency 

engineering, algorithmic, and other technical advances at the heart of each of these  

> C4ISR and More. This chart of C4ISR technology, from a long-time industry partner with NRL, Assurance Tech -
> nology Corporation, illustrates the evolution and proliferation of electronic sensing and communications “black
> boxes” for deployment on the ground, sea, air, and space.

307 CHAPTER 15 — C4ISR: A Q UEST FOR OMNISCIENCE 

acronyms. For most of these and other related components and systems, the hold-in-

your-hand, or rack-in-a-stack, object associated with them is one or a suite of elec-

tronics-filled boxes with sizes ranging from cracker boxes to kitchen appliances. “The 

IDM and other NCST tactical efforts came from using the dense satellite packaging 

techniques to put all of the functions required to handle the digitized data in a mod-

est-sized package,” summed Lee Hammarstrom, an electrical engineer who had been 

a behind-the-scenes driving force in many national defense technologies and whose 

ties to NRL date back to the early 1960s. 17  NRL’s space technologists always have been 

good at designing and building such boxes. Dust-covered prototypes, testing and 

evaluation models, some of them decades old, populate window sills, the tops of file 

cabinets, and other nooks and crannies of NCST’s work and laboratory spaces. 

One of the primary starting points that led to NCST’s sensor-to-shooter technol-

ogy portfolio—and from there to an extended portfolio of C4ISR technologies that 

could be of use also to nonmilitary markets including law enforcement, emergency 

response organizations, and even the White House Communications Agency (see 

Chapter Sixteen)—unfolded beginning in 1980. That is when Pete Wilhelm, then 

director of the pre-NCST Spacecraft Technology Center, initiated the effort that trans-

formed what had been an expendable component of the Multiple Satellite Dispenser 

(MSD), which he and his NRL team had been building for years, into an on-orbit 

tactical communications transponder.  

> C4ISR on Parade. NCST engineers and their partners have diversified command, control, computers, communica -
> tions, and intelligence (C4I) technologies into systems for a range of end users. In the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks,
> NCST and its partners mixed and matched technologies they had developed in the past to make them applicable in
> more of the threat situations of concern to changing national and homeland defense communities. 308 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

The 6-foot-diameter, annular-shaped “plume shield” previously had only per -

formed the transient job of protecting the satellite payloads—particularly their 

delicate optical elements, solar cells, and sensors—from exhaust plume and particles 

as the payloads were maneuvered from a primary orbit to their final operating orbits 

and then separated from the MSD. Normally, once its job was done, the shield would 

become yet another piece of space junk. But during a meeting with partners in some 

of NRL’s space technology projects, Wilhelm came up with the idea that a quick and 

inexpensive way to test out whether it would be possible to deliver tactically useful 

intelligence data to the floating fleet would be to modify the plume shield so that after 

its normal role, it could serve a second and long-term lifetime as a convenient and 

already orbiting technology test bed. 18 

At a meeting back at NRL where Wilhelm first floated the idea, a participant 

asked him what the satellite would be called, recounted James Winkler, a then nearly 

20-year space engineering veteran with NRL. When Wilhelm replied, “LIPS,” Winkler 

continued, “there were a few snickers from the group but Pete explained that this 

acronym stood for Living Plume Shield.” There was another less-fun surprise at the 

meeting. “We had just six months to design, build, test, and deliver the satellite 

to support a December launch,” said Winkler, who would get the job of spacecraft 

manager. 19 

“The initial reason for LIPS was to prove the feasibility of using a low Earth 

orbiting [LEO] satellite to broadcast into the polar regions for tactical communica-

tions in addition to the [much higher flying] geosynchronous satellites,” Eisenhauer 

noted. “We had to make sure we could receive data from the rapidly moving satellite 

at sea aboard maneuvering vessels.” 20  A longer-range view was to see if a repurposed 

and properly equipped plume shield could become an orbiting relay—a so-called bent 

pipe—for relaying streams of digitized data originating from a variety of sources so 

that the data could become tactically available and swiftly accessible to a multitude of 

military end users. 

The basic several-minute sequence went something like this: First, satellites, 

aircraft, and ground sensors would send data about intercepted signals to their usual 

“ground segment”—the ground stations—where the raw data would be automatically 

processed into useful information for characterizing adversaries’ (mostly the Sovi-

ets until the 1990 time frame) radar emissions. That done, the now tactically parsed 

data would get reformatted, encrypted, and otherwise prepared for transmission to 

floating naval vessels. A sophisticated electronic box at the ground station, dubbed 

Uplink Command Encoder Receiver, with the comedic acronym ULCER, carried out 

this reformatting task. This unit would then send the tactical-information-bearing 

signal to an antenna in the ground station network that was placed in such a way that 

it could beam the signal stream to the orbiting bent-pipes, that is, low Earth orbit and 

geosynchronous communications satellites with lines of sight to all recipient naval 

vessels within their fields of view. The transponder in the system is referred to as a 309 CHAPTER 15 — C4ISR: A Q UEST FOR OMNISCIENCE 

“bent pipe” because it does no further processing of the signal; it receives a signal 

from one location and relays it downward in all directions (omnidirectionally), there-

by diverting a linear transmission into a horizon-to-horizon broadcast. 21 

In a way, the LIPS mission was a prescient precursor to a big conceptual push in 

the satellite community, beginning in the early 1990s, to build “smaller, cheaper, fast -

er, and better” satellites. 22  Lightsats, cheapsats, smallsats, microsats would all become 

part of the space technology lexicon in this regard. 

In preemptive accordance with that future small-is-better approach, it took less 

than six months from the conception of LIPS, and only $2 million (instead of sig-

nificantly more for a stand-alone space experiment requiring its own newly designed 

satellite), for a team of about three dozen NRL space technology engineers to modify 

a plume shield into a powerful, on-orbit communications relay. The first LIPS to make 

it to orbit, a redesigned version of the original one, was 6 feet in diameter, 4 inches 

high, and weighed 130 pounds. 23 

“Part of the reason this was even possible,” observed Winkler, “was due to the in-

novative fabrication technique for the structure. It was to be made almost entirely of 

aluminum sheet metal. The exception was the center cylinder that was manufactured 

by rolling an aluminum C-beam into a cylinder. The highly skilled machinist who 

accomplished this was Vic Callahan, assisted by Joe Collins and George Gregory,” 

who were among the hands-on experts that converted ideas about space technology 

at NRL into launchable hardware. Added Winkler, “The other innovation was to build 

the various parts from sketches and then develop the engineering drawings from the 

parts,” an approach from the past that was essentially backwards from the usual and 

more time-consuming approach of developing the engineering drawings first. 24 

In a memoir of his years at NRL, Winkler provided a snapshot of the kind of 

teamwork it took to build space-worthy high technology, such as the LIPS satellites, at 

a breakneck speed. (1) A thermal design crew, headed by Jack Hunter and Charlie 

Buhler, designed individual enclosures—each with multiple layers of thermal blankets 

and their own strip heater and thermostat—for each black box on LIPS. (2) Battery 

experts Fred Betz, Wilbert Barnes, and Skip Shepherd built and tested, wrote Winkler, 

a compact nickel-cadmium battery pack and lightweight solar panels. (3) Bill Collins, 

the go-to guy for gravity-gradient-based attitude controls, delivered a reliable and 

lightweight boom and damper system. (4) Bob Burdett and Mark Johnson managed 

to combine a power-stingy central processor, an analog-to-digital converter, and 

other components into a lightweight telemetry system. (5) The RF system was Len 

Hearton’s work, with help from Leo Ferrari and Joe Mattaino and an ultra-high-fre-

quency (UHF) transponder featuring a deployed boom antenna designed, built, and 

tested by Fred Domer. (6) Under the direction of Robert Palma, a small team de-

signed the electrical power system and in a second task, Palma, according to Winkler, 

“designed the Ordnance Control System which fired the pyrotechnic devices that 

released the RF boom and the Gravity Gradient boom and damper.” 25 310 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

There was more to it than that. The six-month schedule would have been impos-

sible to meet, Winkler noted, were it not for the variety of on-hand technical support 

groups, among them ones for electrical and mechanical fabrication, environmental 

testing, launch vehicle integration, orbital tracking and operation, and the lab’s sup-

port divisions, including the Supply Division, the Engineering Services Division, and 

the Travel Office. 26  This ability to mix and match a huge diversity of skill sets always 

has been one of NRL’s greatest strengths. 27 

All of this work and all of these people worked together to build the first Living 

Plume Shield, or LIPS 1, and have it ready for launch aboard an Atlas F rocket at 

Vandenberg Air Force Base on December 8, 1980. As a tough reminder of how risky 

any rocket-based technology was, this first LIPS assembly never made it into orbit: 

the Atlas F failed soon after it lifted off. 

The outcome was better the next time around, which was just over two years later. 

LIPS 2 launched successfully on February 9, 1983, atop an Atlas H rocket. It carried 

a single-channel, ultra-high-frequency transponder—the bent pipe. And its perfor-

mance demonstrated that it should be possible to relay space-gathered intelligence in 

tactically valuable and timely ways to a diversity of potential users, ranging from 

fleet commanders at sea perhaps to individual warfighters equipped with appropriate 

receiving radios for the tactical data. 

The next in the LIPS series, LIPS 3, was launched successfully on May 15, 1987. 

But Winkler and a team, including Pete Wilhelm, who were at the ground station at  

> LIPS Service. The first successfully launched satellite in the Living Plume Shield series, LIPS 2,
> went into space in early 1983. It was developed by modifying a launch vehicle’s protective shield
> that is usually jettisoned in space. The LIPS 2 satellite was used as a demonstration program to
> prove the capability of the direct downlink of tactical data from a low Earth orbiting spacecraft.
> The LIPS satellites were designed, built, and tested by the Spacecraft Engineering Department at
> NRL’s Payload Processing Facility. (NRL photo 79878(41).jpg)

311 CHAPTER 15 — C4ISR: A Q UEST FOR OMNISCIENCE 

Vandenberg AFB, soon had reason to worry. The spacecraft was designed, built, test-

ed, and prepared for launch in under nine months. 28  The project had little to do with 

the tactical use of intelligence data, but furthered the frugality of the LIPS concept 

for which Wilhelm, Eisenhauer, and others saw a lot of promise. The brainchild 

of NCST physicist James Severns, and once again under the project leadership of 

Winkler, LIPS 3 served primarily as a platform for doing head-to-head tests of more 

than 140 experimental solar cell and power devices designed by 18 different research 

laboratories and aerospace firms. 29  To accommodate cell designs involving optically 

focusing sunlight into tighter areas, the roughly 30-person LIPS 3 team had to include 

precision attitude control on the 130-pound LIPS 3 platform to maintain an advan-

tageous orientation with respect to the sun. 30  As was generally the case, this mission 

included at least a few innovations. “One of the unique features of this satellite was a 

passive Attitude Control System (ACS), which employed magnetic coils to maintain 

the orientation of the satellite, obviating the need for reactive jets and mission-limit-

ing fuel,” Winkler noted. 31 

As the spacecraft made its very first pass over the ground station, Winkler was 

preparing to send command signals to deploy the solar cell panels and to confirm that 

the attitude and the spin rate, key for stabilizing the satellite, were in good stead. “If 

we did not accomplish this on the first pass, it was possible that the satellite-generated 

power would be insufficient and we might lose everything,” stated Winkler, who was 

in charge of the pass procedure at the Blossom Point ground station in Maryland. The 

telemetry data indicated that the attitude and spin rate were completely outside of the 

specifications. “Nothing looked like what we expected.” 32  

> LIPS 3. Living Plume Shield 3, and its payload of multiple test panels of
> solar cell materials and technologies, is readied for launch. Launched on
> May 15, 1987, LIPS 3 provided a test bed for new space power sources.
> It provided data obtained from more than 140 new solar-cell experiments
> configured on a primary spacecraft’s plume shield, which in the past would
> have become nothing but a piece of space debris. Like its predecessors,
> LIPS 3 was designed and built in less than a year. Engineer Robert
> Towsley is standing on the left. (NRL photo 99-130.jpg) 312 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

The pass would only last 12 minutes and Wilhelm made the call to send the 

command to deploy the solar panels regardless of the telemetry data. That’s when the 

whole ground station went down. Frantic action by the crew got the ground station 

up again in time to send the deploy command before the pass was over. But that didn’t 

work either. With time waning, Winkler ordered the use of a back-up command. The 

panels finally deployed. 

That was a good result, but there still were problems. Rather than spinning 

smoothly, the spacecraft was wobbling like a tottering spinning top. One of the LIPS 

team members, Robert Towsley, identified a fix: by firing a pulse from an attitude-con-

trolling jet nozzle at a specific point in the rotation, the wobble could be minimized to 

an acceptable degree. “We tried it,” recalled Winkler. “It worked perfectly! Although 

used by others in the space business, NRL dubbed it the ‘Towsley maneuver.’” 33  LIPS 3 

operated in its orbital perch for the next six years. 

As one team of NRL space technology engineers worked on the transmission side 

(the orbiting LIPS side) of making tactical data available to operational forces at a 

more useful classification level, another NRL space technology contingent was work-

ing on the receiving side of the system on the ground. That meant designing radios for 

receiving the tactical transmissions. These boxes would become known as TREs, short 

for Tactical Receive Equipment. These would become the starting point for an 

astounding evolution of C4ISR technologies and capabilities, most of them in the form 

of unpretty electronics-loaded boxes, countless lines of computer code, intangible 

cryptographic and broadcast protocols, and an overall system design without which 

any complex technology frameworks like this would amount to not much at all. 

Among the components in a TRE unit—the portal by which warfighters would 

gain access to the massive system—would be a UHF satellite communication receiver, 

cryptographic modules, and a message processor. Although former NCST electronic 

engineer Chris Herndon and his colleagues designed and built the prototypes, the San 

Diego-based Naval Ocean Systems Center (NOSC)—a laboratory then subordinate 

to the Naval Electronics Systems Command (NAVALEX), which would morph into 

the Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command (SPAWAR)—would orchestrate the 

manufacture and certification of production TRE models that made it into the field in 

the 1990s. 34 

It began, Herndon recalled, with a series of radios, most notably ones dubbed the 

MDR 610 and MDR 1210, 35  which he and his fellow electronic engineers built to test 

out the system. “Before you can reliably think that you could deliver data to the 

warfighter, you have to do all sorts of series of tests,” said Herndon, who left the lab in 

2005. “Most of the space-based platforms were low Earth orbiting satellites. These are 

not like the geosynchronous birds that stay above the same known spot of the Earth all 

day and night. With a LEO satellite, you have to know the ephemeris [orbital trajecto-

ry] to see where it is going to be, so you can have the radio’s antenna pointed for what 

is called AOS—acquisition of signal—and so it will track the satellite across its orbit 313 CHAPTER 15 — C4ISR: A Q UEST FOR OMNISCIENCE 

plane. Depending on where it is on the horizon, you may get a signal from the satel-

lite for 7 or 8 or 12 minutes, all depending on the type of orbit it is in and where it is 

in reference to you.” 36  The first TREs, Art Collier noted, were designed to interface to 

existing shipboard UHF antennas, which could receive signals from all directions and 

so did not have to track the moving satellites. 37 

In addition to the challenge of overhead passes that last only minutes, the sat-

ellites’ signals “have to be robust and work even in the presence of powerful search 

radars” (and other potential sources of electromagnetic interference including delib-

erate jamming systems), Herndon pointed out in an interview. “All of those kinds of 

questions and tests are basically aimed at measuring the quality of the link.” 38  What’s 

more, the satellites’ signals needed to include built-in means of revealing errors in the 

data streams, and the TREs needed to be able to operate in the electromagnetically 

busy shipboard environment. 39  The NRL team worked closely with Mnemonics, a 

Melbourne, Florida-based contractor, to procure these prototype radios, which be-

came the basis of production TREs. 

“As the on-orbit systems were checked out and data had been validated and we 

were pretty confident of the reliability, accuracy, and timing of all those things, we 

actually started taking these prototype TRE systems and putting them out into the 

field,” Herndon recalled. 40  At the time, in the mid-1980s, Herndon still was an elec-

trical engineering student at the University of Maryland, working as a co-op student 

but also feeling like a genuine member of an exciting, big technology development 

project. In 1986, he became a full-fledged NCST engineer. 

By then, TRE units had already been passing important tests in the field. In 1984, 

Collier noted in an interview, a Spruance-class destroyer successfully received tactical 

signals from LIPS 2 with a prototype TRE. 41  A second successful demonstration 

unfolded aboard the aircraft carrier USS  Midway . These helped to whet the appetite 

of Navy leadership for the tactical use of satellite intelligence data. 42  So rather than 

serving merely as a technology demonstration platform, LIPS 2 was designated as an 

operational tactical data relay system and served that role for eight years. 

Integral to this capability was the development of a specialized broadcast format 

by which tactical data could be transmitted to TRE-equipped platforms. “Guys at 

NRL chaired the brain trust” of collaborating engineers by which this broadcast 

format, which became known as TADIXS-B (Tactical Data Information Exchange 

Subsystem B), was devised and deployed in the mid-1980s, recounted Collier. 43 

This would be broadcast from “bent pipes” on LEO platforms, including LIPS 

2, and FLEETSATs, which were a series of Navy communications satellites in opera-

tion beginning in the late 1970s. Collier credits NOSC engineer James Wangler and 

Commander Matt Rogers, a SPAWAR project manager, for figuring out that it would 

be possible to essentially embed TADIXS-B broadcasts as low-intensity signals at a 

frequency tuned away from the main center frequency of FLEETSATs. That way, it 

became possible for an existing satellite system to serve as a crucial means for leverag-314 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

ing intelligence data into tactically useful information for the fleet. Key here, Collier 

noted, is that TADIXS-B would be unobtrusive and would not interfere with other 

mission-critical FLEETSAT operations. 

Fully in on this development, added Collier, was an NRL team under Eisenhau-

er’s wing that included Herndon, Robert Burdett, and Jerry Phillips, and supervised 

by Andy Fox, a branch head within NCST’s Space Systems Development Depart-

ment. This team devised error-correction and other signal-processing protocols to 

accommodate for changes that the weak signal would undergo as it passed up to 

and back from the satellite through the ionosphere and onward to Tactical Receive 

Equipment. Heaping onto the challenge here was the restriction that no additional 

receive antennas could be installed on ships that would be dedicated to receive the 

TADIXS-B-based broadcast; the system would have to work with antennas already on 

the highly packed vessels. The broadcast channels developed for the TADIXS-B signal 

format was dubbed “TRE and Related Application (TRAP)” and its association with 

the end-point TRE units took on the acronym TRAP/TRE, often articulated as “trap 

tree.” This is an arena unmercifully rife with acronyms, which at times become nested 

into two-tier acronyms. 

Once in place, the system enabled essentially any ELINT intercept to be relayed 

to any platform in the world that had a TRAP/TRE system or an equivalent. Accord-

ing to Collier, NRL established a “control node” on its Washington, DC, campus, 

which operated for a number of years. “It was so successful and so good,” he said, that 

the TRAP broadcast was modified in the early to mid-1990s to an even more widely 

accessible one that became known as the Integrated Broadcast System (IBS). The IBS 

also opened the way to consolidating multiple transmission and receive formats and 

broadcasts into one universal broadcast that all of the military services could use. 

In the heart of yet another box that proved crucial in expanding the reach 

and tactical value of intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) data is an 

NRL-developed On-Board Processor (OBP). In its initial deployment in space in 

1996, according to an NRL account of the device, it proved to be “100 times more 

capable than anything else flying” and provided “real-time situational awareness 

information to military units located throughout the world.” 44  To achieve that scope, 

the primary designers of OBP—Andy Fox, Dave Petit, and F. Brad Kuhn, Jr.—made 

sure it could relay data to a range of receive radios, among them Navy TREs, Army 

Commander’s Tactical Terminals and SUCCESS Radios, and Air Force/USSOCOM 

Multi-Mission Advanced Tactical Terminals. The team took the OBP from the con-

cept state through system engineering, to hardware and algorithm development, to 

fabrication, testing, and deployment. 45 

There was powerful impetus to push the tactical angle. “The satellites were so 

prolific in the amount of data they gathered,” said Collier, that without augmenting 

the system with new C4ISR tools that could rapidly handle and parse the data into 

actionable information, “the fleet just wouldn’t be able to handle it. The satellites were, 315 CHAPTER 15 — C4ISR: A Q UEST FOR OMNISCIENCE 

in a sense, too good.” To leverage that goodness into as much tactical value as possible 

would require the ability to automatically gather data from diverse sources, fuse and 

correlate the data (geographically and in time, for example), and then display the 

resulting information on specialized terminals that, in Collier’s words, “would allow 

users aboard ship and elsewhere to deal with the large number of [threat] reports 

coming aboard. Up until we started developing these terminals, in a prototype envi-

ronment, sailors had to read the reports, determine if they were relevant to the ship’s 

location and then plot them on plastic displays, writing backward from behind the 

displays.” 46  Added Collier, the sheer volume of reports derived from satellite-based 

and other intelligence sources “resulted in many of them being ignored” and a sense 

on board that the incoming information was more of “a burden rather than a God’s 

eye view of the ocean to aid them.” 47 

In an effort to round up the funding required for developing these C4ISR tools, 

so as not to squander the vast amount of data that ISR assets were relentlessly gather-

ing, Collier, NCST leaders, and other partners called on Navy flag officers to “beckon 

for the equipment” to their superiors who would have to approve the use of such 

funds. Along these lines, Collier noted, “we were working with the Navy TENCAP 

Office to demo the tactical capability.” 48 

Rather than calling for production proposals for building TRE units, which 

would be costly and take years, engineers at the Naval Ocean Systems Center built 

and assembled roughly 100 of the units during the late 1980s. 49  TREs generally were 

installed aboard naval ships in the form of rugged, appliance-sized racks with receiv-

ers, cryptographic cards, and processors to orchestrate reception of TRAP broadcasts. 

As TREs proliferated and proved valuable to the operational fleet, they caught the 

attention of other military services, which then turned to NCST for help in procur-

ing similar field-level access to satellite data. The first extension, with development 

funding from the Air Force, inspired the TRE team at NCST, under the supervision of 

Eisenhauer, to miniaturize TRE equipment so that it was suitable for aircraft. This was 

a time when electronic engineers were packing ever more integrated circuitry—and 

thereby ever more computational, signal, and general digital processing power—into 

less and less space. For their part, the NRL engineers expressed that trend in tactical 

receive equipment by designing in the 1990 time frame the Multi-Mission Advanced 

Tactical Terminal, or MATT, which the U.S. Special Operations Command asked 

NRL to develop. 50  Herndon pointed out that the acronym MATT was chosen in hom-

age of then Commander Matthew Rogers, the program manager, who was impressed 

by the way the Navy was getting intelligence information to the floating fleet and 

wanted the same capability in the cockpits of tactical aircraft. “He worked to get this 

project funded,” noted Herndon. 51 

In 24 months, the NRL team managed to deliver the MATT prototype. Its face 

was about the size of a hardcover book in a housing that was 19 inches deep, which is 

to say it was small for the function it delivered. It could receive, decrypt, and 316 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

process intelligence data that had wended its way from various sources, including 

classified ones, through the network of ground stations, ULCER units, and LEO and 

geosynchronous (GEO) communications satellites, all the way to the gray, electron-

ic-card-filled MATT boxes. 

“The successful evaluation of the MATT led to the milestone decision for full-rate 

production and transfer of the technology to industry as the Airborne Joint Tacti-

cal Terminal (JTT),” according to an NRL account of its own major achievements. 52 

“MATT filled a need for a miniaturized multifunction radio and processor that pro -

vides near-real-time national intelligence data to field commanders and tactical fight -

ers.” More than that, MATT, with its multiple receive channels, could combine the 

intelligence data with local “theater data” to help with target selection. Rather than 

residing out there in the orbiting periphery, these end-user terminals were hands-on 

tactical oracles on the inner periphery of the overall network. 

“The MATT had the capability of receiving four intel broadcasts simultaneously 

from different [sources],” Eisenhauer pointed out in an interview, adding that the ter-

minal also delivered on the “Multi-Mission” part of its name. 53  The first MATTs were 

ready in 1991 and certified two years later by the National Security Agency (NSA) for 

meeting cryptologic and security standards. 54  In one of their airborne roles, MATTs 

became standard equipment in EA-6B aircraft whose mission is to gather electronic 

intelligence, sometimes on “wild-weasel-like” runs. In these missions, pilots deliber-

ately fly the aircraft over an adversary’s air space to elicit signals from various radar 

and other optical and electromagnetic threats within range and then fire missiles to 

destroy the sources of those signals. 

MATTs also became standard equipment “in a lot of ground operations,” 

Herndon added. 55  The prototype MATT units were built under NRL oversight by a 

consortium of support contractors including Assurance Technology Corporation, 

headquartered in Carlisle, Massachusetts, and Aeronix and Symmetrics Industries, 

both headquartered in Melbourne, Florida. 56 

In the same time frame when the first MATT units were getting installed, the Air 

Force called upon the NCST electronics team to oversee development of a special-

ized high-speed digital modem for F-16 fighter jets. The Air Force wanted a compact 

unit that would enable pilots to automatically reform various types of relevant data   

> Downsized Tech. By miniaturizing appliance-size
> Tactical Receive Equipment terminals into the unit
> shown—the Multi-Mission Advanced Tactical Termi -
> nal, or MATT—NRL engineers were able to extend
> the value of tactical information from satellites and
> other assets to aircraft. (Source: matt-p1, Federation
> of American Scientists) 317 CHAPTER 15 — C4ISR: A Q UEST FOR OMNISCIENCE

coming into the cockpit via the MATT (on a nearby F-4) into information that could 

precisely inform and guide F-16 weapons systems, including radar-seeking HARMs 

(High Speed Anti-Radiation Missiles). Known as the Improved Data Modem (IDM), 

and developed under the supervision of program manager Bob Burdett, the box “es-

tablished the first digital link capability between fighter aircraft, and between fighter 

aircraft and ground units,” according to an NRL account of the technology. 57 

Herndon credits Jerry Phillips with discerning the opportunity for NCST to get 

into development work that led to the successful IDM project. Phillips learned about 

a requirement by Army Aviation, an administrative branch within the U.S. Army, 

to modernize an automatic targeting system that it had on its Kiowa Warrior and 

Apache helicopters. Recalled Herndon, “Phillips literally pulled two modules out of 

[another communications device his team had developed] 58  and repackaged them, 

and reworked some of the software, with help from a couple of contractors, and that 

was how the IDM was born.” 59  And that became the basis of a proposal to the Army. 

At the time, however, the Army did not have the requisite funding to immediately go 

ahead with the NRL proposal. 

That did not stop Phillips and his team moving forward by way of the Air Force. 

When the Air Force heard about the NRL proposal, it provided the funding neces-

sary to develop an aircraft version of the IDM, in this case primarily for F-16s. 60  So a 

project originally instigated by Army Aviation ended up as Air Force hardware. 

“What this box does is input digital data into an existing analog radio that then 

transmits it to another platform thereby allowing you to relay digital targeting infor -

mation,” Eisenhauer explained. 61  “The IDM allowed digital information to be 

transmitted in the background on the same frequency the pilots were using to com-

municate and at the same time,” added Collier. 62  “The IDM provides pilots the ability 

to communicate information in seconds (or less) what would otherwise take several 

minutes by voice, thus minimizing exposure to enemy jamming and/or transmission 

interception,” according to an official NRL account, which added that the IDM was 

installed on many platforms, including Air Force F-16s and the Navy’s carrier-based 

EA-6Bs. 63 

The McLean, Virginia-based firm Innovative Concepts (ICI) developed produc-

tion models of the IDM based on the NCST team’s preproduction models. Herndon 

added that these units were useful during development for “aircraft certification, 

air worthiness and other associated testing, all of that kind of stuff.” 64  A competitive 

contract was ultimately let for “full rate production” to Symmetrics Industries. “This 

transition from the laboratory to industry was exemplary and thousands of units were 

produced,” said Collier. 65 

All the while, the world had been turning and sometimes dramatically, as on Au-

gust 1990 when Iraq invaded its neighbor Kuwait. That quickly led President George 

H.W. Bush to authorize Operation Desert Shield, a military buildup in preparation 

for Operation Desert Storm, which began as an air war on January 17, 1991. 318 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

The Department of Defense already was concerned about tactical communica-

tions problems in battlefield settings. “Existing tactical radios lacked interoperability 

and could not be easily integrated on military platforms,” according to an NRL ac-

count. 66  “Comprehensive communications across the battlefield required the simulta-

neous use of many different radios.” A potential solution to this problem was to build 

a novel “software defined radio,” or SDR, in which one box could emulate, by way of 

software, a large range of radio types that operate on a diversity of radio frequency 

bands and signal modes, or waveforms. It was a technology waiting for a crisis to 

usher it toward hardware, and engineers at NCST were well positioned to make it so. 

The ground war component of Desert Storm proceeded so swiftly that the U.S. 

Army found it to be impossible for its multi-tent, multi-truck, multi-workstation, 

multi-officer Tactical Operations Center (TOC) to keep up with the fast-moving war-

fighters on the ground. A TOC is all about command and control of operating forces 

in a theater of war. There was no major remedy for the situation within the six weeks 

before a cessation of hostilities on February 28, 67  but the deficiency was not lost on 

military leadership. The Desert Storm experience revealed to the Army that it needed 

an airborne command and control capability in anticipation of future conflicts involv-

ing swiftly moving forces. Software defined radio technology would only add more 

tactical power to such a capability.  

> Chameleon Radio. Rather than building individual radios for uses ranging from voice communication to data transfer
> to navigation, why not build one radio that can become all of these by way of onboard software that can orchestrate
> the function changes? The chart, from NRL contractor and technology development partner Assurance Technology
> Corporation, shows the evolution of this technology, known as software defined radio. (Source: SDR_ACT, courtesy of
> Assurance Technology Corporation) 319 CHAPTER 15 — C4ISR: A Q UEST FOR OMNISCIENCE

An early incarnation of software defined radio emerged from a late-1970s ini-

tiative by the U.S. Air Force Avionics Laboratory initiative known as the Integrated 

Communication, Navigation, Identification and Avionics (ICNIA) program. 68  The 

first flight test of an SDR radio within the ICNIA program took place in 1992, just a 

year after Desert Storm. A few years before that test, the Air Force Research Labo-

ratory paved some of the way to that test flight by developing a processor that could 

simultaneously manage several communications waveforms—a term that refers to 

digitally definable communications frameworks encompassing, among other traits, 

transmission frequency information, how the frequency is modified (as in ampli-

tude modulation or frequency modulation, AM or FM), and coding and encryption 

schemes. The approach was modular too, so that the same architecture could be 

scaled up to handle more and more waveforms within the same box. It was just a 

matter of swapping out or adding more software. 

Examples of waveforms that could be accommodated within the same SDR 

system (though maybe not all at once) include: UHF-Ultra High Frequency com-

munication, the standard voice transmission method; WNW-Wideband Network 

Waveform, a single RF networking protocol waveform with variations depending 

on spectrum allocation and access rights; IFF-Identification Friend or Foe, which 

uses a protocol contained in the transmission to autonomously determine whether 

a con- tact is associated with an ally and not an enemy; ILS-Instrument Landing 

System, which provides information relevant to a pilot landing his or her aircraft; 

TACAN-Tactical Air Navigation, which gives a pilot information as to his range 

(distance) and bearing (direction) to or from a beacon; and TTNT-Tactical Target -

ing Network Technology, a waveform associated with a network that supports the 

goal of locating, identifying, targeting, and attacking the enemy. 69 

Well before that first flight test within the ICNIA program, and before the term 

“software definable radio” came into vogue, NRL’s space technology cadre already 

had developed an expertise in the technology, though they first were applying it in 

low Earth orbit rather than in the lower atmosphere where military aircraft operate. 

“If we put a radio into space, we had to be able to configure it,” noted Herndon. “You 

had to be able to put waveforms into that radio to do new things.” 70  And the more 

entrepreneurial researchers within NCST—among them Eisenhauer, Phillips, and 

Herndon—were eager to take that skill set and technology to new markets. 

To the Army, for instance. In 1994, the Army took steps to turn into hardware 

its need for mobile and agile command and control platforms. Having worked with 

NRL previously to develop the IDM, it asked NRL to convert a UH-60 Blackhawk 

helicopter into a stand-alone Army Airborne Command and Control System, or 

A2C2S. “The idea was that the commander, if he had to, could go aboard a Black-

hawk helicopter with his intel guy, logistics guy, maybe one or two others, and each 

would have an identical workstation separately configured to support the function 

each guy is responsible for,” explained Collier. “And then they could keep flying 320 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

to new locations to keep up with a fast-moving battle line.” 71  What’s more, if that com-

mand and control helicopter were taken out of the loop by accident or enemy action, 

another similarly equipped copy could readily take its place, conceivably within 

minutes. 

“The challenge was to take this big conglomeration of trucks and vans that forms 

an Army Tactical Operations Center in the field and integrate all of that functionality 

into a small Blackhawk helicopter,” explained Collier. “That is what A2C2S was. And 

NCST did that.” 72  The requirements called for a system that could support 37 heritage 

radios, 73  a massive amount of equipment that previously required a tent and truck 

city. And this is where the software defined radio innovations came in, in particular a 

box that Burdett, Herndon, Robert Higgins, Jerry Phillips, and their colleagues called 

the Joint Combat Information Terminal (JCIT). 

JCIT was the same size as a MATT box but had eight radio channels, appropriate 

cryptologic function, and adequate processing power to emulate any number of radi-

os. Through the mediation of software, the JCIT could, in principle, take “the place of 

the 37 heritage radios, demanding as a consequence only a fraction of the latter’s size, 

power and weight,” stated an NRL summary of the achievement. 74  “We could load 

different waveform software onto it so that it could emulate all of these radios and 

we were able to achieve with this integrated radio something like an 80 percent size 

reduction compared to the existing radios,” explained Herndon. 75  In practice, the gov -

ernment terminated JCIT development at a point at which the units could emulate up 

to eight of these. 

What in the past had taken dozens of racks of equipment—each one devoted to 

the specific radio waveforms associated with, say, intelligence data, voice communi-

cation, or command and control signals—now became compact enough to fit in the 

little available space inside a Blackhawk helicopter. The NCST team proved it could be 

done with a Blackhawk helicopter that the Army had delivered to the lab. “We took a 

Blackhawk helicopter and filled it up with all of the crypto, all of the radios, all of the  

> Command Control. As NCST diversified its portfolio of research and development in the 1990s, its engineers
> became adept at building miniaturized tactical information systems that could, for example, turn a helicopter into
> a Tactical Operations Center that previously would have been ground based, far less agile, and required far more
> equipment. Shown here (with NRL’s main administrative building in the background) is a UH-60 helicopter ren -
> dered into an Army Airborne Command and Control System (A2C2S), along with a view of Command and Control
> personnel at onboard tactical workstations. (NRL photos 99-098(11).jpg and 99-000122 (25).jpg) 321 CHAPTER 15 — C4ISR: A Q UEST FOR OMNISCIENCE

boxes you need to be airborne command and control,” said Eisenhauer, who assigned 

Higgins as the lead design engineer on the project. In an extensive series of tests in 

the mid-1990s at Ft. Hood, Texas, Higgins, Herndon, and other test engineers and 

software developers worked the kinks out of the system. Herndon served as a “techni-

cal flight observer” aboard a UH-60 helicopter. 76  “I was helping the guys learn [what 

would become the A2C2S] system and operate it. This is where we really start to hit a 

C4I system” for the warfighter, Herndon said. 77 

Subsequent tests with the Blackhawk and other military platforms proved the 

concept that a full-service command and control function, such as an Army TOC, 

could be miniaturized and made mobile enough so that the command and control 

center could be essentially as agile and flexible as individual soldiers on the ground. 

“Would anyone ever have thought that the Navy Center for Space Technology would 

be building the Army’s airborne command and control system,” Eisenhauer pointed 

out with amusement and noticeable satisfaction. “But you take a bunch of competent 

and good engineers, put them together and create the right work environment, and 

you would be amazed at what you can get.” 78 

The dramatic reductions in the weight, space, and power needs that the ongoing 

feats of electronics miniaturization made possible fanned the engineering and entre-

preneurial flames for NCST’s C4ISR experts. From MATT, for one, NCST’s C4ISR 

team spun out a lineage of derivative boxes in the 1990s and beyond that just kept ex-

panding the potential reach of tactical information. For example, they developed the 

Briefcase MATT, or BMATT, for special operations forces, although it never got much 

traction. Only a few copies were ever built. Though BMATT was not a field success, 

Herndon and his colleagues leveraged the lessons learned from it into a program 

ominously named Radiant Hail. 

As part of this program, the NCST engineers heaped more into the mix by 

integrating into these boxes computer-based, three-dimensional visual renderings, in 

this case of battlefields and other militarily relevant landscapes. Using photorecon-

naissance feeds from, for example, high-flying U-2 aircraft, whose function now also 

can be served by drones, “you could lay down a tactical battlefield picture and then 

do a 3-D fly-through of it,” Herndon said, noting that this was a time when this was 

only possible with cutting-edge graphics processors. “So we married this 3-D terrain 

processing with the MATT and were able to show a radar threat on map [on a visual 

display], through 3-D visualization where that threat had visibility, so that you could 

literally plan an entire ingress and egress,” explained Herndon. “Radiant Hail was a 

huge success.” 79 

There was another innovation built into Radiant Hail that would expand the 

tactical value of yet more of the C4I boxes that NCST engineers could design and that 

could provide warfighters with previously out-of-reach capabilities. Radiant Hail 

units had the ability to receive Tactical Broadcast System (TBS) signals from U-2s and 

other sensor platforms. “Radiant Hail yielded the first TBS capability [for warfight-322 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

ers], and it was back-ended into the MATT,” opening up a pathway, said Herndon, “to 

a whole family of receivers.” 80 

In an ongoing project at the time with Army Aviation, stemming from the com-

mand and control shortfalls that became apparent during Operation Desert Storm, 

the NCST team was finessing its technology to bring tactical data into the Army’s he-

licopters, including the Apache, Kiowa, and UH-60, and ultimately into the planned 

state-of-the-art Comanche, which ended up getting canceled in 2004 before any were 

built. 81  These technology developments and testing efforts amounted, said Herndon, 

“into a proof of concept that you could in fact do command and control from these 

helicopters.” 82 

That NCST would be developing a software defined radio and other C4I-related 

and tactical communications systems for end users outside of the Navy required both 

chutzpah and competence. “It was other peoples’ money,” Eisenhauer said, referring 

to the Army and other sponsors who followed suit in turning to NCST for its C4ISR 

wares, and “if they were going to give us money, and it was the only money they 

had for a particular need, then we damn well better succeed. If we didn’t, someone 

was going to take our head off.” 83  As the head of NRL’s Space Systems Development 

Department, and as one of the first of NCST’s leaders with a sense of urgency for the 

Center to forge alliances with more sponsors, Eisenhauer made it his mission to make 

this work. 

And so did the rest of the C4I team members. The NCST team’s work on the 

A2C2S program—the mobile command and control project for the Army—under 

the leadership of Robert Higgins, instilled in them the imperative of keeping tech-

nology as small, lightweight, and power efficient as possible. And, with its entrepre-

neurial spirit, the NCST team knew that if it were going to get its C4I technology 

accomplishments into more of the Department of Defense’s airborne and ground 

platforms, it was going to have to do so by way of existing tactical radios, especially 

ones in aircraft. These radios had their own names and acronyms like HAVEQUICK 

and SINCGARS, the latter of which stands for Single Channel Ground and Airborne 

Radio System. 

As it turned out, the JCIT, which was envisioned to become a communications 

terminal that all of the military services could adopt, never went into production. 

Instead, many of its innovations and concepts were subsumed in a more comprehen-

sive and ultimately trouble-plagued, Department of Defense-wide program known 

as Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS). Even so, the same C4I technology lineage that 

went from LIPS to TRE to MATT to JCIT to the Blackhawk-hosted A2C2S opened 

pathways throughout the 1990s and the first decade of the new millennium for an 

ongoing series of technology transfers to industry manufacturers. This progression 

yielded a veritable catalog of receiving terminals, data handling processors, interfaces, 

and other C4ISR components. And these were assembled into systems tailored for 

a multitude of airborne and ground-based platforms, among them CH-47 Chinook 323 CHAPTER 15 — C4ISR: A Q UEST FOR OMNISCIENCE 

heavy-lift helicopters, agile Blackhawk helicopters, F-16 fighter jets, the much larger 

Joint Surveillance and Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS) aircraft, Abrams tanks, 

and the U.S. Marine Corps’ Light Armored Vehicles (LAVs) and Assault Amphibious 

Vehicles (AAVs). 84 

“The JCIT program was the leverage point” for all of this, noted Herndon. “It 

showed the power of being able to have multiple radios of different frequency bands 

integrated together in the same command and control environment.” 85  From the per -

spective of Herndon, Eisenhauer, and others who were working on C4I technology 

at NCST, JCIT had what it took to become the long-coveted universal tactical radio 

throughout the Department of Defense. 

The Department of Defense-wide JTRS program began with good intentions and 

promised enormous potential payoff. After all, each year for decades, the Depart-

ment of Defense had a growing sense of urgency for new-generation communication 

systems that could accommodate the expanding diversity of defense- and warfight-

ing-relevant categories of RF signals, among them voice, intelligence, tactical data, 

and imagery. It had been clear for many years that the parallel but independent devel-

opment of many such systems by the Air Force, Navy, Army, smaller organizational 

units, and other military and government services was leading to duplication of effort 

and expense. 

This concern led to the establishment of the joint U.S. government JTRS program 

to, in Eisenhauer’s words, “solve the problem once.” The problem in this case was to 

develop an architecture and technology that would meet requirements for multimedia 

communication and networking throughout the military sector for the coming years. 

It was a vision to reduce a veritable “Tower of Radio Technology Babel” into a coher-

ent radioscape. Moreover, in the late 1990s, as the Internet was in its ascent, military 

commanders were reformulating their visions of the future for “net-centric” warfare 

in which a military version or modification of the Internet would be integral to strate -

gic planning and tactical operations. This too would have to become part of the essen -

tially universal communications systems the Department of Defense envisioned. The 

JTRS program evolved into an enormous and ultimately overly ambitious technology 

development project that proved too unwieldy to manage with foresight or compe -

tence. It would fail to achieve its goals. 

According to an analysis of the troubled JTRS program that the U.S. Government 

Accountability Office (GAO) released in September 2006, one cause of failure was a 

relentless sequence of additions and changes by the partners of the joint program to 

the required capabilities of the systems. This practice ultimately led to results such as 

“mobile” units that, as one wry observer put it, “weighed as much as a drill sergeant.” 86 

The vision to deploy software defined radio technology and a massive, multibil-

lion-dollar, 15-year Department of Defense program to realize the vision took a 

severe hit in 2011 when the Army canceled a major JTRS subprogram, known as the 

Ground Mobile Radio (GMR). The program took another huge hit in 2012 when the 324 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Pentagon shut down its central JTRS office and shifted future JTRS acquisition duties 

to the Army within the auspices of a newly formed Joint Tactical Networking Cen-

ter. 87 

Getting shut out of the ill-fated program also forced NCST’s C4I team to think 

even further out of the box than it had before when it was bold enough to think that 

non-Navy military services actually would even consider technologies designed by 

Navy engineers. But the technologies the team had developed were too good to let 

die on the vine. “For the first time,” said Herndon, “really and truly, we had all of the 

these capabilities that would not only help warfighters, but that were extendable to so 

many other issues related to land-mobile types of communications needs.” It was a 

matter of survival, in part, because the flow of R&D money for C4I would surely di-

minish greatly if the team could not find new partners and markets for its technology. 

The same ability the C4I team had demonstrated to tap into all kinds of data, intelli-

gence, and communications sources and types that underlay, for example, the A2C2S, 

could help solve vexing problems in the civilian sector. Said Herndon, “We started 

reaching out to the National Institute of Justice and other places that were talking 

about interoperability problems in the civilian world, in police, fire, emergency, and 

medical services.” 88 

In pursuit of these partnerships, in August 2001, NCST’s C4I researchers and 

managers held a discussion with officials at the World Trade Center’s Office of Emer-

gency Management. The discussion focused on interoperability and doing commu-

nications in a major infrastructure outage. “We got a tour of the command center 

on the 23rd floor of Building 7” of the WTC complex, Herndon recalled. It was one 

month before September 11, 2001.  

> 1

Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author, March 12, 2012.  

> 2

Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author, March 12, 2012.  

> 3

Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author, March 12, 2012.  

> 4

Art Collier, personal correspondence during interview with Robert Eisenhauer, March 12, 

2012.  

> 5

Art Collier, personal correspondence during interview with Robert Eisenhauer, March 12, 

2012.  

> 6

Applied Research Laboratory, The Pennsylvania State University (eds.),  From the Sea to the 

Stars: A Chronicle of the U.S. Navy’s Space and Space-related Activities, 1944–2009  (revised and 

updated edition, 2010), p. 76, http://www.history.navy.mil/content/dam/nhhc/browse-by-topic/ 

exploration-and-innovation/navy-and-space-exploration/FromTheSeaToTheStars/FromThe-

SeaToTheStars%20-%202010ed.pdf.  

> 7

From the Sea to the Stars , p. 76. The TENCAP office also was designated as OP 943E and the 

Office of the Director of Navy Command and Control also was designated as OP 94.  

> 8

From the Sea to the Stars , p. 77.  

> 9

From the Sea to the Stars , pp. 111–112.  

> 10

Chris Dwyer, interview with author, February 19, 2012.  

> 11

Ronald L. Potts,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C Electronic Intelligence Satellites (1958–1977) , LEO 

Systems Program Office, National Reconnaissance Office, September 3, 1998, pp. 168–170. 325 CHAPTER 15 — C4ISR: A Q UEST FOR OMNISCIENCE  

> 12

Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author, March 12, 2012.  

> 13

Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author, March 12, 2012.  

> 14

Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author, March 12, 2012.  

> 15

Robert Burdett, interview with author, January 22, 2013.  

> 16

Chris Dwyer, interview with author, February 13, 2012.  

> 17

Lee Hammarstrom, draft of memoir (unpublished), prepared in late 2013.  

> 18

James Winkler, My Career at the Naval Research Laboratory, draft given to author in 2012, p. 

61.  

> 19

Winkler, My Career at the Naval Research Laboratory, p. 61.  

> 20

Bob Eisenhauer, interview with author, March 12, 2012.  

> 21

Art Collier, personal correspondence, April 2014.  

> 22

The phrase is attributed to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, who ran the agency from 

1992 to 2001; see http://history.nasa.gov/dan_goldin.html.  

> 23

Lloyd Carter, “NRL Team Converts Protective Shield Into a Spacecraft,” in  Labstracts , Naval 

Research Laboratory, January 13, 1984.  

> 24

Winkler, My Career at the Naval Research Laboratory, p. 61.  

> 25

Winkler, My Career at the Naval Research Laboratory, pp. 61–62.  

> 26

Winkler, My Career at the Naval Research Laboratory, pp. 61–62.  

> 27

See, for example, Ivan Amato,  Pushing the Horizon: Seventy-Five Years of High Stakes Research 

and Technology at the Naval Research Laboratory  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 

1998).  

> 28

Amato,  Pushing the Horizon , p. 70.  

> 29

Winkler, My Career at the Naval Research Laboratory, p. 69.  

> 30

Labstracts , NRL February 5, 1988 and September 29, 1988.  

> 31

Winkler, My Career at the Naval Research Laboratory, p. 69.  

> 32

Winkler, My Career at the Naval Research Laboratory, pp. 71–72.  

> 33

Winkler, My Career at the Naval Research Laboratory, pp. 71–72.  

> 34

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 35

MDR stood for Moderate Data Rate.  

> 36

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 37

Art Collier, personal communication, April 2014.  

> 38

Chris Herndon, interview with author (for  Pushing the Horizon ), February 1998.  

> 39

Art Collier, personal communication, April 2014.  

> 40

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 41

Art Collier, in interview with Peter Wilhelm and the author on May 17, 2013; Art Collier, 

interview with author, January 29, 2013.  

> 42

Art Collier, interview with author, January 29, 2013.  

> 43

Art Collier, interview with author, April 22, 2012.  

> 44

Naval Research Laboratory, 75th Anniversary: Awards For Innovation, NRL/PU/1001--98-

359, June 1998, p. 68.  

> 45

Naval Research Laboratory, 75th Anniversary, p. 68.  

> 46

Art Collier, personal correspondence, April 2014.  

> 47

Art Collier, personal correspondence, April 2014.  

> 48

Art Collier, interview with author, April 22, 2012.  

> 49

From the Sea to the Stars , p. 126.  

> 50

Naval Research Laboratory, “The U.S. Naval Research Laboratory (1923–2005) Fulfilling the 

Roosevelts’ Vision for American Naval Power,” NRL/MR/1001--06-8951 (Washington, DC: 

Naval Research Laboratory, March 6, 2006), p. 55.  

> 51

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 52

NRL, “Fulfilling the Roosevelts’ Vision,” p. 55.  

> 53

Bob Eisenhauer, interview with author, March 12, 2012.  

> 54

NRL, “Fulfilling the Roosevelts’ Vision.” 326 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE  

> 55

Chris Herndon, interview with author (for  Pushing the Horizon ), February 1998.  

> 56

Art Collier, personal correspondence, April 2014.  

> 57

NRL, “Fulfilling the Roosevelts’ Vision,” p. 55.  

> 58

Herndon was referring to the ACIM, or Advanced Communications Interface Module.  

> 59

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 60

Art Collier, personal correspondence, April 2014.  

> 61

Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author and Art Collier, March 12, 2012.  

> 62

Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author and Art Collier, March 12, 2012.  

> 63

NRL, “Fulfilling the Roosevelts’ Vision,” p. 55.  

> 64

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 65

Art Collier, personal correspondence, April 2014.  

> 66

NRL, “Fulfilling the Roosevelts’ Vision,” p. 58.  

> 67

Army Live: The Official Blog of the United States Army, “A Timeline of Operation Desert 

Storm,” http://armylive.dodlive.mil/index.php/2013/02/operation-desert-storm/.  

> 68

David Burrill, “Evolution of Software Defined Radios in Military Aircraft Communications,” 

(Washington University: 12/6/2006), accessed at http://www.cs.washington.edu/education/ 

courses/csep590/06au/projects/radios.doc; Minh Nguygen, “Software Radio (R) Evolution and 

Its Application to Aeronautical Mobile Communications,” Integrated CNS Conference, May 

19–22, 2003, accessed at http://www.mitre.org/work/tech_papers/tech_papers_03/nguyen_ra-

dio/nguyen.pdf.  

> 69

Burrill, “Evolution of Software Defined Radios in Military Aircraft Communications.”  

> 70

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 71

Art Collier, personal correspondence, April 2014.  

> 72

Art Collier, personal correspondence, April 2014.  

> 73

NRL, “Fulfilling the Roosevelts’ Vision,” p. 58.  

> 74

NRL, “Fulfilling the Roosevelts’ Vision,” p. 58.  

> 75

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 76

Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author and Art Collier, March 12, 2012.  

> 77

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 78

Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author and Art Collier, March 12, 2012.  

> 79

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 80

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 81

http://nation.time.com/2012/05/25/real-lessons-from-an-unreal-helicopter/.  

> 82

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 83

Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author and Art Collier, March 12, 2012.  

> 84

This list appears in many places, but a good start would be with “Capabilities Overview” 

presentations prepared by ATC (Assurance Technology Corporation), which has worked with 

NCST engineers on many projects.  

> 85

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 86

Government Accountability Office, “Defense Acquisitions: Restructured JTRS Program 

Reduces Risk, but Significant Challenges Remain,” GAO-06-955 (Washington, DC, September 

2006).  

> 87

See, for example, http://www.nextgov.com/mobile/2012/08/pentagon-shutters-joint-tacti-

cal-radio-system-program-office/57173/.  

> 88

Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013. C4ISR 2.0 

“Everything has changed” was a commonly heard phrase in the wake of the ter-

rorist attacks on September 11, 2001. To be sure, the nation’s perspective on the nature 

and diversity of its enemies changed drastically and with it changed the country’s 

sense of urgency for intelligence, communications, and defense needs. As terrorism, 

rather than state-based enmity, became the focus of national defense thinking—so 

much so that the government would undergo a massive reorganization to accommo-

date the new Department of Homeland Security—any practice, protocol, or technolo-

gy that could bring the military, intelligence, and first-responder communities closer 

to a state of omniscience about “the threat space” became more interesting to the 

defense and homeland security communities. 

Additionally, improving the ability to compensate for massive failures—due to 

natural and human-wrought disasters—in the communications infrastructure shot to 

the top of the national priority list. In a September 2004 article in  Signal  magazine, a 

publication of the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association, 

retired Air Force Colonel Michael D. McDonald told a reporter that the White House 

had experienced communications difficulties during the terrorist attacks three years 

earlier. “It was the ‘Mother’s Day Effect,’” he was quoted as saying. “Everyone wanted 

to communicate at the same time. The communications systems were inadequate to 

meet the needs of responding to the threat … A lot of people think all the President 

needs to do is say ‘launch.’ Well, in order to do that, he’s got to have some kind of situ -

ational awareness, and that was the initial challenge that we had on 9/11.” 1

“The first question was, What the heck is going on?” concurred Chris Herndon, 

the former NRL employee who worked on C4ISR projects for NCST. And answering 

that question, no matter what the crisis might be, is all about developing and de-

ploying communications capabilities that remain reliable even under extraordinary 

circumstances. 

This was a familiar state of mind for the Naval Center for Space Technology, 

which celebrated its 15th anniversary in 2001. From its launch of the world’s first spy 

satellite in 1960 to monitor Soviet strategic air and missile defense radars, to its role in 

an expansive all-ocean surveillance system, to its military C4I work with the goal of 

packaging the nation’s intelligence capabilities into tactical information tools that can 

deliver to warfighters previously unimaginable levels of situational awareness, NCST 

has been all about emulating a God’s eye view regarding threats to the nation. 

# 16 328 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

The airliner attacks by Al Qaeda operatives on 9/11 in New York and at the Pen-

tagon, and the passenger-thwarted attack that ended with a no-survivor crash in the 

Pennsylvania countryside, hit the country like a modern day Pearl Harbor. The ability 

to identify and monitor potential adversaries, whoever they might be and wherever 

they might be in the world, at all times, immediately topped the list of the nation’s 

technology development to-do list. For those at NCST who had been developing 

compact, mobile, and versatile C4I technologies in the military “sensor-to-shooter” 

paradigm, it was clear that this new heightened state of alert would open up new 

applications for integrated miniaturized packages of command, control, communica-

tions, computers, and intelligence (C4I), which they had first demonstrated the pre-

vious decade in, for example, the A2C2S system designed for the Army’s Blackhawk 

helicopter. 

The first glimmers of a wider role for NCST in the nation’s civilian and home-

land security C4I capabilities go back even further, to the 1980s when NRL’s industry 

partners in NRO-sponsored programs started referring to the satellites as “orbiting 

peripherals” of a much larger intelligence and communications system. By the mid-

1990s, it was possible to become an NCST employee and end up having little to do 

with the satellites that had been the focus of the organization and its lineage going 

back to Project Vanguard of the 1950s. “My history here at NRL has never been with 

space,” Robert Roberts—a former Navy officer who left the service to earn an engi-

neering degree before joining NCST in 1995 where he began working on the A2C2S 

demonstration program—said in an interview. “I don’t have any working knowledge 

in the space aspect of NCST; it’s all on the ground side,” said Roberts, who since 2005 

has been head of the Tactical Technologies Development Laboratory (TTDL), 2 which 

is housed in a windowless, multistory cube on the river-side of Building A59 on NRL’s 

campus. Herndon was head of TTDL until Roberts took over. 

More and more since the 9/11 attacks, Herndon initially and then Roberts and 

their respective colleagues, have been adapting technologies originally developed for 

Department of Defense purposes so they can be deployed for nonmilitary services 

that handle emergency situations or have a role in local, regional, or national secu-

rity. Roberts’ colleague George Arthur in NCST’s C4I Branch, for example, worked 

on software and testing phases of the MATT (Multi-Mission Advanced Technical 

Terminal) in the 1990 time frame, but then later found himself applying his skill set 

to developing technologies for civilian sector emergency responders. 3 One of them 

was the New York City Fire Department (FDNY), a connection that was initiated by 

Dave Derieux, a second-generation NRL employee who first started working at NRL 

in 1984 on a powerful laser project in the Plasma Physics Division. Derieux joined 

NCST in 1987 to become part of the team developing the Improved Data Modem 

(IDM) for fighter aircraft. From there, he worked his way up to become the Associate 

Superintendent of the Space Systems Development Department of NCST. 4329 CHAPTER 16 — C4ISR 2.0 

The FDNY was looking to solve a problem that came to the fore during its 

response to the 9/11 jetliner attacks on the World Trade Center towers in lower Man-

hattan. At the time, FDNY was using a firefighter tracking system known officially as 

BF4 (for Battalion Form 4) and less officially as “the riding list.” During a response 

to a call, the names of firefighters on a truck would be written down in duplicate on 

a paper form. “One copy stayed on the clipboard on the truck; the other copy stayed 

in the pocket of an officer,” who was also on the truck, Arthur explained. “When the 

towers came down, they destroyed all of the equipment and killed so many people 

that they [FDNY] had no way of knowing who had been there. They didn’t ever want 

that to happen again.” 5

At the invitation of the FDNY, Arthur and several NCST colleagues spent two 

days in New York City, visiting firehouses, rushing off to fires in the fire chief ’s car, 

and getting a feel for how the department operated. At FDNY headquarters, the 

NCST contingent ended up around a table with FDNY’s Deputy Fire Commissioner 

Milton Fischberger. “We were just pitching some ideas back and forth, and out came 

the idea that we could put together an RFID [radio frequency identification] system” 

that could replace the BF4 system, Arthur recalled. By 2006, the NCST team had col-

laborated with FDNY to get half of the system—known as EBF4 (Electronic Battalion 

Form 4)—in place. With radio-emitting RFID tags attached to their gear and commu-

nicating with receivers at the firehouse, the system keeps accounts of when firefighters 

leave to respond to a fire and when they return. A key advance here is that firefighters’ 

names are stored away from the emergency location. “The complementary half of 

the system would track the firefighters when they are in the burning structure, and 

then you would be able to track them from the moment they left the firehouse to the 

moment they came back,” explained Arthur. 

Along that line, Arthur and his colleagues fitted a handful of engine, ladder, and 

rescue rigs in Queens, New York, with RFID receivers that Arthur said he hoped 

would evolve into a tracking system throughout the city that will be able to keep tabs 

on firefighters throughout the entire duration of a response. As of 2014, fifteen vehi-

cles had been fitted with the receivers. 6 Even before that was in place, he noted, the 

RFID program yielded additional NRL/FDNY collaboration. “They liked our software 

so well that they asked us if we could expand it into an administrative tool that they 

could deploy citywide and that would allow them to do all of their shift planning. 

And we have done that,” Arthur said. “That went hot in 2009 and it is their standard 

planning tool now.” 7

That the Naval Center for Space Technology would become a partner with a big 

city fire department might appear to be an enormous stretch, unless one considers 

two things: (1) so much of NCST’s portfolio, and the skill sets of its staff, has been 

centered on communications, and (2) the FDNY’s need for a better way to track its 

firefighters emerged out of what essentially was an act of war. 330 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

After 9/11, the reach of NCST’s C4I team and its technologies would extend to 

other government organizations. One symbol of this work was a tan satellite com-

munications truck that TTDL researchers had on hand on campus near the Potomac 

River, noted technician Bruce Morgan. Like Dave Derieux, Morgan’s father had 

preceded him on the NRL campus, in his case as an officer with the Naval Security 

Group, which was associated with the spy satellite programs from which NCST would 

emerge. “After 9/11 happened, that vehicle was reconfigured,” Morgan said. 8

“We leveraged our ability to do [satellite communications] pretty much anywhere 

in the world, and all our work in radio communications and interoperability,” said 

Herndon, who was Morgan’s boss at the time. 9 Within days of the collapse of the 

World Trade Center, NRL had assembled a team that could have restored services to 

the first responders on the ground in New York City. 

“It wasn’t pretty because we had put it together so quickly, but we clearly showed 

the capability of standing up a private cellular node, standing up land-mobile capa-

bilities, and integrating all of that onto a common backbone, and then teleported that 

over a satellite so that you could draw a local dial tone … at a disaster site,” explained 

Herndon. The initial setup—before the team turned the tan truck into one of the 

most capable C4I hubs on four wheels—involved two Humvees at the lab, including 

one from another lab division, the Information Technology Division, which had a 

satellite dish on it. “So we used their satellite dish and Humvee, and our radio comms 

and our satellite modems, and cobbled together a two-truck version of what became 

InfraLynx,” Herndon said, turning to the short form for the overall stand-in commu-

nications package that they dubbed “Infrastructure Linkage and Augmentation Sys-

> The Tan Truck . As symbolized by this tan truck in front of NRL headquarters, NCST became so
> adept at adapting its collective expertise in electronics, communications, miniaturization, logistics,
> and other areas that it became a go-to organization when the need for powerful stopgap commu -
> nications services emerged due to natural disasters or hostile actions by terrorists or others. (NRL

331 CHAPTER 16 — C4ISR 2.0 

tem.” 10  The NRL team was getting ready to deploy the Humvees to Manhattan, but the 

Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA), Herndon said, “wouldn’t 

allow anybody else in that city at that point.” 11 

Despite that red light for Ground Zero in New York City, the tan truck at the 

lab became a test bed and demonstration vehicle for taking compact and mobile C4I 

capabilities that NCST engineers and their partners had developed during the “sen-

sor-to-shooter” campaign of the 1980s and 1990s and adapting it under the rubric of 

InfraLynx for use in nonmilitary but critical situations. 12 

The swiftness to readiness that the NCST team demonstrated in the wake of the 

9/11 attacks became a selling point. The C4I team was able to win over the office 

of the Chief of Naval Research (CNR), which provided the funding for outfitting a 

C4I concept vehicle that the team could take out on the road for demonstrations of 

its capabilities. “We integrated this black Humvee with a black satellite dish, and all 

of these software definable radios—and a bunch of Motorola radios and things like 

that—a private cell switch, and then we took it out on the road to show what interop-

erable comms could mean, especially when you integrated it with a satellite back haul,” 

Herndon recounted. 13 

One of the first deployments, due to a request of the Department of Justice’s 

Office of Defense Preparedness, was to Salt Lake City for the 2002 Winter Olympics 

where organizers expected a flow of 70,000 visitors each day. “InfraLynx provided 

closed circuit TV surveillance and a land-mobile communications bridge from Park 

City, over the mountain, back down to Salt Lake City to FEMA’s command center,” 

Herndon said. If all other communication infrastructure went down, this truck could 

just about replace it, at least on a stopgap basis. The vehicle also was equipped to  

> Comms on Wheels. As the InfraLynx mobile communications technology proved itself, NRL began promoting
> it actively as shown with this page from an InfraLynx brochure. Also shown is the brochure image depicting the
> overall communications architecture and capabilities. 332 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

provide two-way links through commercial satellites, data networking (including the 

ability to handle streaming video), and land-based mobile radio service. It also could 

serve as a private cellular telephone switching station. 

InfraLynx teams would be called to service over the next years for a variety of 

national needs. The mobile C4I truck that the NCST outfitted became the model for 

dozens more vehicles that would go into service for various federal agencies. 14  “Basi-

cally all of these vehicles are designed around the idea that they have interchangeable 

components that we can rack and stack depending on what your requirements are 

and what the task is,” said Morgan. 15 

One of Morgan’s more memorable deployments was to Navy-heavy San Diego 

in 2003 for Super Bowl XXXVII in which the Tampa Bay Buccaneers defeated the 

Oak- land Raiders, 48–21, in front of 67,603 fans. The 9/11 attacks occurred only 14 

months earlier and any large gathering with iconic Western symbolism was consid-

ered a prime target for another Al Qaeda attack. Among the more than 4,000 law and 

security officers and staff at the event, NCST deployed a Humvee-based InfraLynx 

vehicle and a crew, including Morgan, to San Diego. “The threat at the Super Bowl 

was that Qualcomm Stadium was a seven-minute flight from an airport in Mexico,” 

Morgan noted, adding that there also was a fuel refinery nearby. Some distance away 

from the stadium itself, he said, “we were set up in a location to give restorative com-

munications links if an event occurred.” Fortunately, no such event occurred. 

The NCST engineers did not get to watch the game in the stadium, but they were 

treated to some perks. “The San Diego Police Department was so tickled to have the 

capability out there that they took my entire team to the ‘NFL Experience’ the night 

before the Super Bowl so they got to meet the players,” Herndon said. 16 

Another big year for InfraLynx was 2005. NCST teams deployed to New Orleans 

and Texas to help make up for the pivotal communications systems taken down in the 

one-two punch of Hurricane Katrina, which devastated New Orleans and other parts 

of the Gulf Coast, and Hurricane Rita, which bore down especially on the Louisiana/ 

Texas border. The seed of the deployment was planted when Roberts received a call 

on Saturday morning (during his son’s soccer game) from a “gentleman with CNI,” 

which stands for Commander of Navy Installations, who told Roberts he had heard 

that NRL had mobile communications ability. That set a series of actions into motion. 

As Roberts began seeking authority to get the InfraLynx truck and a support truck 

rolling south from NRL, Morgan and several colleagues were prepping the vehicles 

and testing their systems. By Tuesday morning, NRL’s Director of Research, John 

Montgomery, gave the green light and two NCST trucks headed to devastated New 

Orleans. 

“We got in the vehicle [at NRL], we drove down to New Orleans, we set up, and 

we got our [initial] marching orders from the local command,” Roberts said. The 

NCST team parked the truck on a street outside the city’s convention center. 17  The 

truck effectively became a major wireless communications conduit that replaced 333 CHAPTER 16 — C4ISR 2.0 

some of the region’s lost landline infrastructure. “We wired the Convention Center’s 

communication system basically into our vehicle so that we could back haul it over a 

satellite,” said Roberts. The team members, usually six at a time, slept on the floors of 

the two trucks NCST had deployed. 

“We established a satellite link back here in DC,” by way of a receiving antenna 

on top of NRL’s Building 12, Morgan explained. Colleagues in NRL’s Systems Direc-

torate had a receiving antenna there that could pick up InfraLynx signals. “And once 

we connected back here, we could put out a variety of communications capabilities 

to a ground site back in New Orleans or a command post.” 18  The NCST hub served as 

a stopgap until USS  Iwo Jima , an amphibious assault ship nearly three football fields 

long, arrived with its own high-volume satellite communications abilities. By that 

time, even commercial carriers, like Verizon and ATT, also had been able to reestab-

lish some communications lines. 

Once USS  Iwo Jima  and its crew arrived, Roberts noted, “they pretty much took 

over and we were no longer needed.” 19  This was a sure sign that the InfraLynx tech-

nology had done the job its NRL designers envisioned it could do. It was just then, 

though, that Hurricane Rita came barreling in and CNI asked Roberts to redeploy the 

InfraLynx team for that impending disaster. So Morgan and his colleagues set up shop 

in Jasper, Texas, and provided communications service for about 10 days to Jasper 

County’s Emergency Operations Center. After that, the NRLers finally were able to 

return home. All in all, Morgan said, he was away from the lab for two months or so, 

and upwards of 20 NCST staff rotated in and out during that time. 

The promise of the InfraLynx system was becoming known among government 

communications agencies well before it had proved itself in that terrible 2005 hurri-

cane season. Very soon after the 9/11 attacks, recalled Herndon, “I got a call one 

day and was asked to come over to the Anacostia Naval Station” to the White House 

Communications Agency (WHCA), just a mile or so north of NRL on the other side 

of Bolling Air Force Base. Said Herndon, “I met with a Colonel and some other folks 

and we talked about communications issues.” 20  It was a sure sign that word about 

InfraLynx was getting around. Herndon was asked to draw upon NCST’s deep expe-

rience and track record with C4I technologies to help the WHCA strengthen White 

House communications abilities on the road. “I was sucked into the White House 

Communications Agency at that point,” Herndon said, clearly happy that he had 

been. 

“That sparked a relationship with us and we designed over the next four years 

nine different development projects for various communications systems,” Roberts 

recalled. 21  This work all unfolded during the administration of President George W. 

Bush, but the relationship never ended. Roberts pointed out that all versions of these 

mobile communications hubs evolved from the A2C2S project during the 1990s and 

included spinoffs of the Joint Combat Information Terminal (JCIT). 

NRL’s C4ISR experts and WHCA developed a long-term relationship that has 

continued. Herndon credits Jerry Phillips, his former boss when they were both 334 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

working on MATT, IDM, and other C4I components in the 1990s, with teaching him 

how to promote technological know-how and hardware to government partners like 

the WHCA. 22  In Presidential motorcades, a hint of NCST’s handiwork is visible atop a 

heavily modified Chevrolet Suburban known as the Mobile Communications Vehicle 

(MCV). The MCV is a rolling platform to provide communications for the Presi-

dent at times when he is not at the White House. 23  “While we are not providing the 

WHCA as much as we used to, we still provide critical comms to the President’s cars 

and motorcades and provide other support to the agency in areas such as technical 

consulting,” said Andy Cox, a longtime leader in NRL’s C4ISR work. “We are the ones 

who are responsible for the technology in these vehicles.” 24 

The Air Force Space Command, the organization responsible for, among other 

things, maintaining the nation’s intercontinental ballistic missiles in remote locations, 

was another high-priority InfraLynx customer. “The ICBMs get moved out of the 

silos and get transferred [by truck] to an upper level maintenance facility and then get 

pulled back down” into their silos, Roberts explained. “So there is swapping. Every so 

often the transport trucks, because of the high winds out west, were at risk of getting 

blown over,” he notes nonchalantly. “So then you have an incident and of course you 

have a nuclear weapon on a truck. So what they need in that sort of circumstance is a 

mobile command post. They came to us for that. So we developed a mobile command 

post.” 25  Roberts stressed that all of this sounds worse than it is because the weapons 

are built to withstand this sort of rare incident. 

“We built three trucks,” dubbed Minuteman InfraLynx Communications Systems 

(MICS), said Cox. 26  These are full-service communications hubs, featuring voice over 

internet, data, video, and other communications formats, all with satellite linkage 

anywhere, anytime. The NRL team delivered the trucks to three Air Force bases in 

the late 2000s: Malmstrom AFB in Montana, Minot AFB in North Dakota, and F.E. 

Warren AFB in Cheyenne, Wyoming. 

All in all, Roberts estimates that the NCST InfraLynx team prepared about 50 

customized communications vehicles. Now, much of this technology has transferred 

to commercial companies with which government agencies can contract for produc-

tion models. 27  Meanwhile, the same body of work that NCST has been doing and 

the same portfolio of technologies it has been developing has kept on catalyzing new 

collaborations. 

One of these has been with the Maryland Natural Resources Police (NRP), the 

enforcement arm of the state’s Department of Natural Resources (DNR). Following 

the 9/11 attacks, the charge of helping to protect the country from acts of terrorism 

that might come in by way of Maryland waters became more prominent for the 

NRP. “When Osama bin Laden was killed, intelligence gathered from his compound 

suggested there could be threats against commercial rail travel, so the Governor of 

Maryland told his security guys that he wanted coverage for railroad bridges that go 335 CHAPTER 16 — C4ISR 2.0 

over Maryland waterways,” Roberts said. 28  “We assisted Maryland’s anti-terrorism 

mission from the water with a real-time vessel tracking system.” 29 

It took some time for the collaboration to build momentum, but in 2010 the 

NRL/NRP team began assembling what would become the Maritime Law Enforce-

ment Information Network (MLEIN) with roles ranging from homeland security to 

conservation law enforcement to search and rescue missions. By the end of fiscal year 

2014, the team had set up 10 fixed radar towers for monitoring, tracking, and identi -

fying vessels in the northern part of the Chesapeake Bay and beyond to the 

Atlantic Ocean near Ocean City, Maryland, and into the National Capital Region, 

which includes the District of Columbia and six near-in counties in Maryland and 

Virginia. These look like communications towers except that they have radar anten-

nas and cameras mounted on them. The team augmented this surveillance network 

with a transportable sensor system that can operate in areas where communications 

and power infrastructures are lacking. In addition, in 2012 and 2013, Roberts and his 

NCST colleagues fitted 30 vessels of the multi-agency Maritime Tactical Oper- ations 

Group (MTOG) with antennas, transponders, and other equipment that collec- tively 

formed into a secure tracking system linked into a command center from which it is 

possible to monitor, manage, integrate, and deploy all of the MLEIN’s resources. 

In 2013, the NRP began reporting using the new NCST-developed vessel-track-

ing and surveillance system to thwart illegal fishing and poaching in oyster beds and 

to identify and assist boaters in distress. “With its ability to be on duty around the 

clock and to see for miles, no matter what the weather, MLEIN makes the Bay and 

its tributaries a smaller neighborhood to patrol,” said NRP Superintendent Colonel 

George F. Johnson IV in a statement released by the NRP in late 2013. 30 

These particular applications are a far cry from anti-terrorism roles but they still 

are part of NRP’s law enforcement responsibilities. They are an even farther cry from 

the Space Age origins of NCST, yet there is a discernible line from NRL’s early satellite 

work to its extension into maritime and terrestrial surveillance, military C4ISR, and 

onward into law enforcement initiatives against oyster poaching in the Chesapeake 

Bay. 

As NCST’s C4I engineers and their industry partners developed TRE, MATT, 

IDM, JCIT, and variations on these themes for tactical information systems that could 

package and deliver data from satellites and other intelligence-gathering assets, upper 

echelon military planners were craving ever more agility in these systems. NCST’s 

own long-term emphasis on eking as much tactical value for warfighters out of the 

large and small components of the national intelligence infrastructure was comple -

mented and supplemented by such strategic-level conceptual frameworks 

as FORCEnet, which one seminal document defined as “the operational construct 

and architectural framework for naval warfare in the Information Age, integrating 

warriors, sensors, command and control, platforms, and weapons into a networked, 

distributed combat force.” 31 336 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Just as the TENCAP mantra of getting “national capabilities”—even ones whose 

origins must remain highly classified—into the hands of warfighters for tactical 

guidance required interfaces such as MATT, so too would the Navy’s call for expand-

ing this trend to net-readiness. This could only be achieved with interface technology 

between the existing Internet infrastructure and specific Navy systems—whether it 

is a SIGINT satellite or Tactical Receive Equipment on one of the Navy’s several hun-

dred ships. So the plan for naval forces to become more net-centric included fund-

ing for an all-purpose, net-ready, C4ISR interface. Funded by and primarily for the 

Marine Corps and called the Universal Communication Interface Module, or UCIM, 

the device had to work both with newer net-ready equipment and with older legacy 

systems. To integrate the latter systems, their outputs would have to be converted 

into net-friendly forms. And input to them from the net would have to be converted 

into forms the legacy systems could manage. It was akin to the way NCST’s Software 

Defined Radio technology could work both with legacy radio systems already bought 

and installed in thousands of air, ground, and floating vehicles, and with new and 

future communications systems. 

“Basically, the UCIM takes everything in a Tactical Operations Center [TOC] 

and it allows you to integrate it all into a single,” far more mobile platform, remarked 

Bob Eisenhauer, who was central in NCST adopting the development of tactical com-

munication equipment as a major part of its portfolio. 32  “UCIM enabled you to go 

into an existing TOC and replace all the point-to-point connections between comput-

ers and radios with a digital backbone that allowed any device to communicate with 

any other without having to be wired to each other directly,” added Art Collier, the 

former head of the Special Projects Office and who has been a keen observer of NCST 

over the years. “This included new digital equipment as well as old analog ones.” 33 

This spurred Eisenhauer and his NCST colleagues, along with industry partners, 

to mix and match all of the boxes that emerged during the C4I-related technology 

development since the 1980s into assemblages tailored for specific platforms. These 

include ones for the modified Chevrolet Suburbans in the President’s motorcade, for 

fast-moving military field operations, such as TOCs, and for temporary communica-

tions outposts during disasters like Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Sandy. 

The Secretary of Defense also was seeking to exploit with more agility the ever 

more detailed situational awareness that the vast C4ISR system of systems was 

providing. Toward that end, in May 2003, the Secretary of Defense’s Office of Force 

Transformation launched the Operationally Responsive Space (ORS) program. 34  NRL 

joined this effort by developing components for a tactical space system concept that 

would give the Department of Defense an ability to quickly place equipment-bearing 

platforms into low Earth orbit for specific tactical and intelligence, surveillance, and 

reconnaissance needs in a particular situation, say, a sudden outbreak of hostilities in 

mountainous terrain like the Tora Bora region on the Afghanistan-Pakistan border. A 

series of tactical satellites, or TacSats, became the focus of NCST’s latest generation 337 CHAPTER 16 — C4ISR 2.0 

of satellite engineers. With ORS, NCST was getting back in the game of building sat-

ellites, albeit on a smaller scale than when it was routinely building satellites for NRO 

and SDIO. 

The first of this series, TacSat-1, proved to be a dry run of sorts in that the space-

craft was built in Building A59—from mid-2003 to mid-2004—but never launched. 

The point of the ORS mission was to demonstrate that within a year of a request and 

a green light by those with authority to give it, an operational satellite with ELINT, 

ocean surveillance, and/or other tactically valuable capabilities could be placed into 

orbit with a commercial launch vehicle and at a modest expenditure compared to 

that of traditional space missions. For the TacSat-1 mission, “the entire spacecraft 

was completed in less than a year, from go-ahead to the end of system-level testing, 

for less than $10M,” according to Timothy M. Duffey and Michael S. Hurley, Jr., the 

principal NCST engineers on the project. 35  

> Black Boxes. The Universal Communication Interface Module, which is a module
> of mix-and-match modules, addresses the need to interlink an enormous diversity
> of communications, data processing, computers, and other devices to the Internet
> and defense communications infrastructures.

338 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

TacSat-1 was slated for launch in 2004 from Omelek Island (in the Kwajalein 

Atoll in the Pacific Ocean) in what would have been a spectacular and historic space 

technology demonstration for the nascent commercial space industry: it would have 

been the maiden voyage and mission for the Falcon 1, which space entrepreneur Elon 

Musk’s firm SpaceX (Space Exploration Technologies) had designed and built. 

The flight was scrubbed in part, however, when it became clear that the second in 

the series, TacSat-2, could host an advanced sensor for tracking ships (via the Auto-

matic Identification System) in a smaller, lighter, and less power-hungry package. The 

NRL payload on TacSat-2 was known as the Target Indicator Experiment, or TIE. 36 

Had the SpaceX rocket become qualified for the launch sooner, noted NCST engineer 

Chris Huffine (an expert in software reprogrammable radio and signals collection 

technologies), the payload might have made it into orbit before a new generation of 

technology came around. The shelving of TacSat-1 for a more capable TacSat-2 also 

bought enough time to include an NCST-developed tactical sensor and computer sys-

tem known as Copperfield-2 for the comprehensive task of keeping track of as much 

ocean traffic as possible. There was just so much more that TacSat-2 could demonstrate 

that it no longer seemed prudent to the sponsor (the Operationally Responsive Space 

Office) and the NCST team to spend the $5 million or so that it would cost to actually 

launch TacSat-1. It was a novel decision dynamic that resided in the deliberately rapid 

development time of these satellites designed within the ORS framework. As a result, 

just like the Interim Control Module (ICM) that NCST engineers had built and read-

ied in case the Russians didn’t come through with a booster unit for the International 

Space Station, TacSat-1 joined the ranks of the good-to-go but unlaunched satellites.  

> Space Comms. TacSat-1 was designed as the first of what would become a series of payloads
> designed to improve tactical communications for operational warfighters in mountainous, canyon-
> rich, and other communications-difficult regions. TacSat-1, shown here in 2004 undergoing prepa -
> rations, was not launched but its follow-on payloads were. (NRL photo DG7P1080.jpg)

339 CHAPTER 16 — C4ISR 2.0  

> Copperfield. Designed for airborne platforms involved in tracking maritime traffic, engineers at the Naval Center for
> Space Technology designed a miniaturized electronic intelligence system known as Copperfield, shown here in two
> views. (NRL photos B58Z6804.tif and B58Z6813.tif)

On December 16, 2006, just seven months after the initiation of the contract for 

the TacSat-2 mission, a Minotaur 1 booster, designed and supplied by Orbital Scienc-

es, headquartered near Dulles Airport in Virginia, lifted TacSat-2 from Wallops Island 

Space Flight Facility in Virginia to a low Earth orbit of about 260 miles (420 kilome-

ters). This was an Air Force-led mission that included another 10 or so scientific and 

experimental technology payloads beyond NCST’s TIE payload. Its roughly 40-degree 

inclination established an orbit that provided simultaneous coverage of a circular sur-

face domain about 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) in diameter as the spacecraft flew 

over the Earth. The global ocean surveillance framework known as maritime domain 

aware- ness had begun. 37 

NCST was not involved in TacSat-3, another Air Force-led mission run out of the 

Air Force Research Laboratory’s Space Vehicles Directorate at Kirtland Air Force Base 

in Albuquerque, New Mexico. That satellite was launched with a Minotaur 1 booster 

on May 19, 2009. According to an Air Force press release issued on May 1, 2012, the 

day the satellite burned up during reentry, “TacSat-3 was the first on-orbit Depart-

ment of Defense intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance capability delivered to 

U.S. Strategic Command for their direct imagery support to worldwide combatant 

commanders.” 38  

> TacSat-2. NCST engineers integrate
> antennas—including ones that will tap
> into the maritime system known as AIS,
> or Automatic Identification System—onto
> the TacSat-2 spacecraft in preparation for
> a launch in December 2006. 340 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

A half-year before TacSat-3 de-orbited, TacSat-4, this one an NCST-led mission 

with some 30 key personnel involved, made it into orbit after a spectacular night-

time launch on September 27, 2011 with a Minotaur IV+ booster from the Kodiak 

Launch Complex in Alaska, which is run by the Alaska Aerospace Corporation. The 

Operationally Responsive Space Office funded the launch. 39  The original launch date 

had been set for two years earlier, but that date changed due to delays associated with 

the booster, as well as Department of Defense-specified changes in the mission’s 

requirements. 40  As had been the case so many times before, an NCST team at the lab’s 

Blossom Point Tracking Facility in southern Maryland monitored and controlled the 

spacecraft throughout its service lifetime. 

Still in orbit as of 2014 but lacking funding for what had been a possible transi-

tion from an experimental to operational satellite, 41  the spacecraft’s primary function 

was to push forward ultra-high-frequency (UHF) satellite communication tech-

nologies using UHF channels suitable for tactical communication; data transfer; 

and “friendly force tracking” to help global surveillance systems better distinguish 

between friendly and hostile military assets. The radio communication system was 

designed particularly to support forces on the move so that even individual warfight-

ers with “manpack” tactical receive radios could readily and quickly tap into TacSat-4 

signals in ways that minimize their exposure to enemy gunfire and hostility. 

The spacecraft’s highly elliptical orbit placed it routinely in a high-perch position 

where it offered lines of sight into otherwise hard-to-reach battle regions such as 

the valleys and crevices in mountainous settings including those in Afghanistan and 

Pakistan. These hotbed regions are not routinely serviceable using the higher-flying 

geosynchronous spacecraft that remain affixed above a particular equatorial surface 

spot of the planet. 

The TacSat-4 mission also pushed forward the strategy for designing and building 

a standard satellite bus, that is, a common physical framework onto which many 

kinds of components can be integrated in an essentially plug-and-play manner. The 

notion is that with such standardization will come improved reliability and agility for  

> TacSat-4. On September 27, 2011, at
> the Kodiak Launch Complex in Alaska,
> a Minotaur IV+ booster begins to ferry
> TacSat-4 into orbit where the spacecraft
> tested out tactical communication roles
> for a variety of end users. (Source: U.S.
> Navy photo by John F. Williams) 341 CHAPTER 16 — C4ISR 2.0

quick-turnaround satellites. That, in turn, should reduce costs for future tactical satel-

lites, automated ground operations, net-centric operations, and other elements of the 

Operationally Responsive Space concept. The mission’s so-called Integrated Systems 

Engineering Team (ISET) included a dozen government and industry partners. NRL 

and the Johns Hopkins University’s Applied Physics Laboratory designed and built 

the “ORS Phase III Standardized Bus.” 42 

For NCST, TacSat-4, which is no longer functioning but whose payload and first 

year of operation was funded by the Office of Naval Research, was a milestone simply 

by virtue of making it into space, let alone for the technologies it carried there; Tac-

Sat-4 stood as NRL’s 100th acknowledged satellite. In the summer of 2012, TacSat-4 

was an important part of the annual weeks-long Trident Warrior exercise during 

which the Navy tested experimental tactics, techniques, and technologies to see if 

and how to continue developing them for the fleet. 43  The tests with TacSat-4 proved, 

among other things, that a quick-response, low-cost space platform could link ship 

and submarine warfighters with both mobile and stationary ground-based units. In 

a smaller test earlier in 2012, the U.S. Coast Guard Cutter  Healy  (WAGB 20) used 

TacSat-4 to communicate from its location in the Bering Sea off the western coast of 

Alaska to the U.S. Coast Guard Base in Alameda, California. 44 

Among the other end users putting TacSat-4 to the test were the U.S. Army’s 

Space and Missile Defense Command Battle Laboratory, the U.S. Marine Corps, and 

international partners in the United Kingdom and Canada. Among the experiments 

the end users performed were ones that used TacSat-4 with various legacy radios and 

antenna types to determine the best combinations; ones that evaluated the orbit-

ing link in mountainous and urban settings by users who are on foot or in moving 

vehicles; ones that tested the spacecraft in time-sensitive tasks, such as an uplink and 

relay for “unattended ground sensors”; and to flight-test a new lithium ion cell battery 

design. 45 

TacSat-4 might never have made it to the launchpad were it not for a young 

mechanical engineer, Christopher Amend, whom NCST hired into its Spacecraft 

Engineering Department from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University in 

Blacksburg. One of his early assignments was to work with some colleagues, includ-

ing RF (radio frequency) engineer Michael Nurnberger, to procure a deployable an -

tenna with the right characteristics for TacSat-4’s mission and expected capabili- ties. 

“So they put out an RFP,” that is, a Request for Proposals, from companies who could 

bid on the job, recounted John Schaub, a longtime head of NCST’s Spacecraft Engi -

neering Department (SED) and director of NCST from 2016 to 2018. “The proposals 

they got back were for dollar amounts that exceeded the budget we had for the entire 

program.” 46  And that was just for the reflector, not the entire antenna system. “So we 

said to Chris, ‘Why don’t you come up with a design?’ And he didn’t know any better, 

so he came up with an antenna for about one tenth the cost,” Schaub said with a smile 

on this face. 342 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

It was a feat of design and engineering for which Amend and Nurnberger secured 

a patent. The mission required that the 12-foot-diameter reflector, once it unfolded 

and was deployed in space, deviated from a perfect parabolic shape by no more than 

a quarter of an inch. This was a tight tolerance but actually forgiving enough to open 

cost-effective options to the NCST design team. In addition, the antenna could weigh 

no more than 60 pounds and had to be delivered within a year for a cost under $4 

million, all of which forced the decision to design and build the antenna in NCST’s 

own Building A59. Amend, Nurnberger, and their colleagues needed to determine 

Team TacSat.  The TacSat-4 satellite, shown here in 2010 in Building A59 with the team that built 

COMMx, the major component of the spacecraft aside from its overall framework, or bus. Still 

furled, the umbrella-like antenna (large, silver-colored component above the blue bus) embodies 

innovations that kept overall costs manageable. A larger TacSat team in early 2011 prepared the 

spacecraft for shipping—by way of an Air Force C-17 and a truck—to the Alaska Aerospace Kodiak 

Launch Complex. There, in September 2011, an Orbital Sciences Minotaur IV+ booster launched 

TacSat-4 into a highly elliptical orbit (HEO) with an apogee of 12,050 kilometers. (NRL photos 

100823-N-3456S-025.jpg and 110224-N-4822H-118.jpg) 343 CHAPTER 16 — C4ISR 2.0 

the best folding geometry and mechanism for unfurling the antenna. They needed to 

make materials choices for the framework, ribs, springs, and components of the um-

brella-like structure, all the while remaining within weight specifications. Also a key 

driver of the design was to minimize any metal-to-metal contacts, which models and 

simulations indicated could reduce the antenna’s all-important reception sensitivity. 

The team zeroed in on a design in which they would use 2,000 nonmetallic but 

high-performance fasteners to link triangular-shaped panels (gores) both to each 

other and to the ribs of the deployment structure using a high-tech polymer called 

Kapton. The team even made sure the reflector membrane was of a precise thickness 

so that the gores would behave as RF reflectors, rather than absorbers or scatterers 

of specific ranges of RF signals. There were 1,001 additional details and problems to 

overcome. And it all had to be light enough and tough enough to make it into orbit 

and work once it got there. Three days after the TacSat-4 launch, the NCST-designed 

receiver antenna popped open like an umbrella, and a few days after that began relay-

ing voice messages. 47 

NCST’s TacSat-4 team, under Program Manager William (Bill) Raynor and mis-

sion design principal investigator Michael Hurley, built the spacecraft, solving count-

less challenges all along the way, just as had been done at NRL since the Vanguard 

era. Designed with cost, versatility, and the ability for quick concept-to-launch turn-

around in mind, the project always has been modest compared to the Department 

of Defense’s next-generation communication satellite system known as Mobile User 

Objective System (MUOS). That system, slated for completion later in the decade, by  

> Space Umbrella. Shown in all of its
> unfurled glory is the umbrella-like main
> receiving antenna of TacSat-4 as it
> undergoes radio frequency testing in an
> anechoic chamber at NRL. (NRL photo
> IMG_4655.JPG)

344 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

which time all four of the system’s massive geosynchronous satellites are scheduled to 

be in place, will amount to a worldwide substitute for cell-phone towers for military 

users in need of voice or data connections anywhere, anytime. 

According to Raynor, Hurley, and the ORS launch sponsor, TacSat-4 (during its 

experimental lifetime, which effectively ended with the close of 2013) “demonstrated 

SATCOM performance that matches or beats current geosynchronous satellites” for 

some voice and signal communications capabilities while also “demonstrating many 

elements of the ORS concept such as maturing the ORS bus standards, developing an 

enhanced Minotaur-IV+ launch vehicle capability … and highly automated com -

mand and control.” As TacSat-4’s leadership sees it, a constellation of six TacSat-4-like 

satellites could provide nearly continuous communications coverage for any possible 

theater of war. For now, the single experimental TacSat-4 remains on-orbit but is not 

funded for a transition to an operational status. “Follow-on efforts have been stud-

ied and should the need arise, a TacSat-4-like constellation could be procured and 

provide utility to any number of users,” Raynor and Hurley said in 2013 at a confer-

ence of fellow experts who are pushing the boundaries of small satellite design and 

operation. 48  

> 1

Maryann Lawlor, “Keeping the President Connected,” Signal (online), September 2004, http:// 

www.afcea.org/content/?q=node/346.  

> 2

Robert Roberts, interview with author in the presence of George Arthur and Bruce Morgan, 

April 19, 2012.  

> 3

George Arthur, interview with author in the presence of Robert Roberts and Bruce Morgan, 

April 19, 2012.  

> 4

David Derieux, interview with author on September 9, 2012. In the 1980s, David Derieux 

worked for a summer at NRL alongside his father, Thomas Derieux, who was part of the team 

working with the high powered Pharos laser as part of the lab’s plasma physics program (for 

fission and fusion studies).  

> 5

George Arthur, interview, 2012. 

6 NRL Press Release, August 26, 2104, “New York City Tracks Firefighters to Scene with NRL 

Radio Tags, Automated Display,” http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2014/ new-

york-city-tracks-firefighters-to-scene-with-nrl-radio-tags-automated-display#sthash. Qs -

DgjJuw.dpuf. 

7 George Arthur, interview, 2012. 

8 Bruce Morgan, interview with author in the presence of Robert Roberts and George Arthur, 

April 19, 2012. 

9 Chris Herndon, interview with author, February 4, 2013.  

> 10

Chris Herndon, interview, 2013; also see Naval Research Laboratory, “The U.S. Naval Re -

search Laboratory (1923–2005) Fulfilling the Roosevelts’ Vision for Amer- ican Naval Power,” 

NRL/MR/1001--06-8951 (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, March 6, 2006), p. 62.  

> 11

Chris Herndon, interview, 2013.  

> 12

Science Daily, February 11, 2002, accessed at http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2002/02/ 

020211080250.htm.  

> 13

Chris Herndon, interview, 2013.  

> 14

Robert Roberts, interview, 2012.  

> 15

Bruce Morgan, interview, 2012. 345 CHAPTER 16 — C4ISR 2.0  

> 16

Chris Herndon, interview, 2013.  

> 17

Robert Roberts, interview, 2012.  

> 18

Bruce Morgan, interview, 2012.  

> 19

Robert Roberts, interview, 2012.  

> 20

Chris Herndon, interview, 2013.  

> 21

Robert Roberts, interview, 2012.  

> 22

Chris Herndon, interview, 2013.  

> 23

Chris Herndon, interview, 2013.  

> 24

Andy Cox, personal communication, March 2014.  

> 25

Robert Roberts, interview, 2012.  

> 26

Andy Cox, personal communication, March 2014.  

> 27

Robert Roberts, interview, 2012.  

> 28

Robert Roberts, interview, 2012.  

> 29

Draft of “Maritime Law Enforcement Information Network (MLIEN),” an item submitted by 

NCST Section 4130 to NRL leadership as a FY14 R&D Accomplishment; “Encrypted Tracking 

System (ETS) Integration for Maryland Natural Resources Police (NRP) and the Maritime 

Tactical Operations Group (MTOG),” NRL/PU/8140--13-586, October 2013, Naval Research 

Laboratory, Washington, DC.  

> 30

http://news.maryland.gov/dnr/2013/11/06/new-nrp-enforcement-tool-reaps-early-rewards/.  

> 31

Vern Clark, Admiral USN, Chief of Naval Operations, Michael W. Hagee, General USMC, 

Commandant of the Marine Corps, 2005, “FORCEnet A Functional Concept for the 21st Cen-

tury,” accessed at http://www.navy.mil/navydata/policy/forcenet/forcenet21.pdf.  

> 32

Robert Eisenhauer, interview with author and Art Collier, March 12, 2012.  

> 33

Art Collier, personal correspondence.  

> 34

See the Operationally Responsive Space web site: http://ors.csd. disa.mil/.  

> 35

2005 NRL Review  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 2005), pp. 227–229.  

> 36

Chris Huffine, “TacSat-2, Target Indicator Experiment (TIE), AIS Payload Overview,” pre-

sented at 2007 Maritime Domain Awareness Forum, dated October 27, 2007.  

> 37

Chris Huffine, interview with author, March 12, 2012.  

> 38

Air Force Space Command press release, “TacSat-3 Ends Operations,” May 1, 2012, http:// 

www.afspc.af.mil/news/story.asp?id=123300195.  

> 39

Naval Research Laboratory, “TacSat-4 Lifts Off… Augmenting SATCOM and Advancing 

Operationally Responsive Space,”  Spectra  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, Fall 

2011), pp. 1–5.  

> 40

eoPortal, “TacSat-4,” https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/t/tac-

sat-4#gp8EC19cHerb.  

> 41

Matthew Anderson, Bill Raynor, and Mike Hurley, “TacSat-4: Military Utility in Small 

Communications Package,” presented at the 27th Annual AIAA/USU Conference on Small 

Satellites, August 10–15, 2013, University of Utah in Logan.  

> 42

The “ISET Team” included AeroAstro, Air Force Research Laboratory, Johns Hopkins 

University APL, ATK Space, Ball Aerospace & Technologies, Boeing, Design Net Engineering, 

General Dynamics AIS, Microcosm, Sierra Nevada Corp., Massachusetts Institute of Technolo-

gy, Lincoln Laboratory, Orbital Sciences, NRL, SMC, Space Systems/Loral, and Raytheon.  

> 43

See, for example, NRL Press Release, “TacSat-4 Participates in Navy Fleet Experiment Trident 

Warrior,” http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2012/tacsat-4-participates-in-na-

vy-fleet-experiment-trident-warrior#sthash.MLfuIRjv.dpuf.  

> 44

NRL Press Release, “TacSat-4 Enables Polar Region SatCom Experiment,” March 9, 2012, 

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2012/tacsat-4-enables-polar-region-satcom-ex-

periment.  

> 45

eoPortal, “TacSat-4,” https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/t/tac-

sat-4#gp8EC19cHerb.  

> 46

John Schaub, interview with author, February 28, 2012. 346 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE  

> 47

Chris Amend, Michael Nurnberger, Paul Oppenheimer, Steve Koss, and Bill Purdy, “A Novel 

Approach for a Low-Cost Deployable Antenna,” NASA/CP-2010-216272, accessed at http:// 

www.esmats.eu/amspapers/pastpapers/pdfs/2010/amend.pdf; see also https://directory.eopor-

tal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/t/tacsat-4#gp8EC19cHerb.  

> 48

Anderson et al., “TacSat-4: Military Utility in Small Communications Package,” 2013. NCST INSIDE 

Starting with the Vanguard program and its first successfully launched satellite 

on St. Patrick’s Day in 1958, the Naval Research Laboratory subsequently would place 

100 satellites of one kind or another into orbit by the early years of the new millenni-

um. TacSat-4, the 100th in this six-decade space venture, was boosted into orbit on 

September 27, 2011. 1 Any organization that has been responsible for, on average, at 

least one payload every year since the late 1950s has earned a prominent place in the 

emergence and evolution of the ongoing Space Age. But NRL’s manifest of satellite and 

payload launches summarizes only the most visible chapters of the lab’s overall space 

technology story. 

“A lot happened that’s not on that chart that was just part of a payload provided 

to someone, or that supported someone else’s mission, and so is just lost between the 

pages of [NCST’s] history,” remarked mechanical engineer Aaron Chilbert of NCST’s 

Spacecraft Engineering Department. 2

Chilbert started working at NRL in 1983, before the lab’s space technology efforts 

were consolidated and reorganized with the establishment of NCST in 1986. During 

his first few years, he said, the space technology program “was pretty well dominated 

by the NRO program and what was then the SDI program.” At the time, NRL’s part 

of the Strategic Defense Initiative’s technical program centered on LACE and a classi-

fied NRO-sponsored program whose roots extend to the GRAB program in the early 

1960s when NRO itself was first established. “These programs took us well into the 

early 1990s,” Chilbert said, 3 and overlapped for a decade with the expansion of NCST’s 

C4I work that would be guided by the “sensor-to-shooter” technology ethic. 

After that, he said, “the shift at the end of the Cold War, and congressionally 

directed reprioritization of funding, drove a lot of things in a different direction.” 

Cost-cutting pressure, together with the earlier SDI connection, led to the NCST’s 

central role in the budget-conscious Clementine technology-testing program that 

ended up yielding the finest map of the moon at the time. 

“A lot of other smaller projects started coming up from various sponsors that we 

had never worked with before,” noted Chilbert in his small office in the otherwise cav-

ernous Building A59. One large category of work involved “radiation hardening” of 

sensitive electronic components for spacecraft. High-energy radiation, such as X-rays 

and cosmic rays, or fast moving electrons and other ions from solar storms—or even 

possibly from nuclear blasts in space—is what kills components and satellites in orbit 

and carries much of the blame for why spacecraft need to be replaced. “So there has 

# 17 348 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

been a fair amount of work here just developing electronics that are tolerant to that 

environment,” said Chilbert. 4

One low-profile example was the Microelectronics and Photonics Test Bed 

(MPTB), which carried 24 motherboards with various electronic and photonic de-

vices into an elliptical orbital journey aboard a host satellite with the help of a Titan 

rocket in November 1997 for a multi-year space-environment-exposure experiment. 5

In addition to directly measuring how space radiation affects the performance of 

microelectronic and photonic devices, the payload simultaneously measured and 

characterized the on-orbit radiation environment. A complementary component of 

the mission was to conduct extensive ground tests in which the same devices that 

were flown in space were subjected in laboratory settings to radioactive sources, such 

as radioactive isotopes and beams from particle accelerators. This enabled the MPTB 

team to evaluate how well the simpler and less costly ground-based experiments 

reflect what actually happens in space. For this project, NCST engineers worked with 

NRL partners in the Solid State Devices Branch of the lab’s Electronics Science and 

Technology Division. 

“It was just one of those 1990s kinds of programs to take COTS [commercial 

off-the-shelf] hardware and prove it can work in the space environment,” Chilbert 

noted, referring to a government-wide push to avoid reinventing wheels, as it were, 

if suitable technologies had already been developed and were available in the com-

mercial sector. “It was a collection of a lot of little experiments from many different 

providers—universities, international partners, all sorts of partners. And NRL—this 

group at NCST—pulled it all together on a payload.” 6 The lessons learned during the 

MPTB project about how components fail in space due to radiation effects, and about 

which radiation-hardening tactics are more protective than others, were transferred 

to the partners on the project. By way of example, Chilbert noted that the company 

BAE Systems, which was working on reconfigurable logic circuits known as field pro-

grammable gate arrays (FPGAs), was able to make these devices more space-worthy 

due to data from the MPTB. 

The High-Temperature Superconductivity Space Experiment (HTSSE) was 

another consequential space technology program that represents the way the lab 

routinely assembles the multiple skill sets it has on hand to pull off complex, high-risk 

experiments that expand the boundaries of what is possible in space. HTSSE’s roots 

began just as the Naval Center for Space Technology was established in 1986. That 

same year, materials researchers with IBM reported their discovery of remarkable ma-

terials that could conduct electricity without any resistance whatsoever at tempera-

tures much higher than could any previously known superconductors. The discovery 

of these new materials, dubbed high temperature superconductors (HTSCs), set off a 

global research wildfire out of which quickly emerged several new families of HTSCs, 

including ones for which inexpensive liquid nitrogen cooling was sufficient to keep 

them superconductive. Over the next months, researchers around the world showed 349 CHAPTER 17 — NCST INSIDE 

that electronic and radio frequency devices made with these materials exhibited a 

combination of tantalizing properties, among them low noise (cleaner, clearer sig-

nals), low attenuation (stronger signals over longer distances), wide bandwidth (larger 

signal capacity), and high-speed switching (for high frequency communication, for 

example). 

Within two years, engineers at NRL were taking bold steps to accelerate these 

laboratory developments toward HTSC devices that might improve the performance 

of space-based sensors and communications systems. In December 1988, NCST’s 

Space Systems Development Department, along with partners in the lab’s Materi-

als Science and Technology Division, Condensed Matter and Radiation Sciences 

Division, and Electronics Science and Technology Division, initiated the HTSSE 

program with multiple sponsors, including the U.S. Navy, NRO, BMDO, and DARPA. 

The overall plan was for various academic, industry, and government HTSC research 

teams around the country, NRL among them, to submit designs for devices, such as 

receivers, analog-to-digital converters, and multiplexers, to NCST engineers. They, 

in turn, would help to render the devices space-worthy, rigorously test them, and 

integrate them into experimental payloads. 

The first payload, HTSSE-I, would have carried a set of simple HTSC-based 

electronic devices into orbit had the U.S. Air Force satellite into which they were 

integrated not fallen into the ocean rather than making it into space. But even before 

that disappointment, NCST had begun work on HTSSE-II. Under the program lead-

ership of Gerald Golba, the NCST team integrated eleven fully functional microwave 

components, which either were built in-house by partners in NRL’s Materials Science 

and Technology Division or were delivered by external collaborators such as Westing-

house and TRW, into an innovative cryocooler-equipped framework designed under 

the leadership of NCST mechanical engineer Tom Kawecki. 7 Kawecki, who joined the 

lab in 1982, had developed expertise in thermal design and cryogenic technology for  

> Chill Tech . It took innovative engineering to design and build a system capable of integrating almost a dozen
> experimental microwave devices that needed to be chilled with a liquid nitrogen cryogenic system. Shown is the
> overall system, known as the High Temperature Superconductivity Space Experiment (HTSSE), and a close-up
> of the components for circulating the chilled nitrogen. (NRL photos HTSSE 001 and HTSSE 002) 350 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

work he had done on a classified project. He was able to apply some of that know-

how to the HTSSE-II-associated challenge of designing a cryocooler that could chill a 

dozen or so separate devices and subsystems to superconductivity-inducing tempera-

tures. In an interview, he recalled the experience, fondly noting how Golba and the 

rest of NCST management provided him with an all-important “sense of ownership 

and responsibility.” He has an engineering model of the HTSSE payload in his office 

in Building A59 as a reminder of what it is all about for him and his NCST colleagues. 

“The reason we are engineers is that we like to build stuff,” he said. 

The NCST HTSSE team—which included, among others, James Winkler, who 

worked on the complex “electrical harness” that had to accommodate all of the 

payload’s components, and old-timers Vince Rose and Ed Becke, who applied their 

expertise in integrating microwave devices into payloads 8—then shipped the exper-

iment-laden HTSSE payload to Rockwell International where it was integrated into 

the Advanced Research and Global Observation Satellite (ARGOS). On February 23, 

1999, a Delta II booster hoisted ARGOS into orbit. And for the next three years, be-

fore the program was terminated, NCST satellite controllers at the lab’s Blossom Point 

facility controlled, monitored, and harvested data from the HTSSE devices. “This 

program was nationally touted for fostering industrial competitiveness in the area 

of superconducting microwave devices,” noted Donald Gubser, NRL’s lead materials 

scientist on the project. 9

Observed Chilbert, “A lot of little projects like this have come and gone over the 

years.” 10  And signs of them are all over Building A59 in both small and sometimes 

massive ways. Building A59, the largest structure on NRL’s main campus, is a physical 

embodiment of NRL’s long, bold, and ongoing role in the Space Age and the overall 

U.S. space program. The building’s initial mission in the 1940s, before it was annexed 

to become part of the Naval Research Laboratory, was to accommodate machin-

ists and the massive naval and other military guns they were making or repairing 

throughout World War II. Remnants of that activity remain in the unimproved parts 

of the building in the form of rusting railroad tracks, pitted concrete loading bays, 

and steel-girded materials-moving frameworks fitted into the high ceilings. Juxta-

posed with these open and often dank and dimly lit areas are building sectors that 

at various times over the years have been modernized into office suites, conference 

rooms, and high-tech laboratories, among them anechoic chambers for testing an-

tenna performance and a clean room for working with semiconductors components. 

Some occupants of A59 describe it as a collection of smaller buildings within a larger 

building. Meander around A59 and you even can happen onto freight containers 

that were modified to serve as offices for, among others, Ed Becke, the brilliant RF 

technician who joined the lab in the 1940s, worked on classified and other programs 

(including the command, control, and data collection huts much like his own ship -

ping-container office), and then continued on at NCST to exercise his expertise in 

antenna design until he died in 2013. 351 CHAPTER 17 — NCST INSIDE 

Besides the World War II-era spaces and the office areas are several enormous 

work spaces—high bays with ceilings that soar to 60 feet—where so much of NRL’s 

satellite building and testing has unfolded for decades. Throughout the building are 

electronics racks, multi-drawer cabinets, and other furnishings to hold everything 

from old and new oscilloscopes and RF waveguides, to wires and cables of any and all 

gauges, to memory chips and central processing units, along with ten thousand other 

components that space engineers know what to do with. Also in these high-bay areas 

are massive testing chambers, such as the 16-foot-diameter, 30-foot-deep “Big Blue,” 

which can host entire payloads and satellites and subject them to thermal and vacu-

um conditions similar to those in space, and a vibration chamber that can simulate the 

mechanical and acoustic rigors of a launch. 

All over Building A59 are signs of workplace pride: pictures of satellite or payload 

teams who worked together night and day for months on end, framed photos of glo-

rious launches at Cape Canaveral or Vandenberg Air Force Base, and large emblems 

commemorating the institutional teamwork that it takes to usher a space technology 

concept all the way into orbit. The same emblems, almost like family shields, end up 

on correspondence, shirt and jacket patches, and t-shirts and coffee mugs. Lumbering 

and unpretty as A59 might be, it is an embodiment of NRL’s and NCST’s history of 

accomplishment in space technology. 

Chilbert’s NCST colleague Dr. Paul Jaffe, head of the Systems Integration Sec -

tion of NCST’s Space Electronics Systems Development Branch, knows all about that 

accomplishment, at least since 1994. That’s when he was an electrical engineering 

student at the University of Maryland and in a co-op program in which he landed a ju -

nior engineer job in NRL’s Radar Division. It was a common school-to-work path- way 

for many employees of NRL. Jaffe didn’t know it then, but within the next 20 years, his 

resume would include an ever-lengthening roster of spacecraft and space technology 

acronyms. “It was around the same time that Clementine was launched,” Jaffe recalled 

of his co-op days at NRL. “And they were doing the operations of the satellite and it 

was covered in Labstracts,” NRL’s campus newsletter. “I was like, ‘man, I would really 

like to work in that part of the lab.’” 11  Two years later, in 1996, that opportunity arose, 

but it would entail one of the most harrowing interviews Jaffe ever had. It was with 

George Flach, then head of the Space Electronics Systems Develop- ment Branch. 

Flach, an electronic engineer whose many roles would include chief engineer on the 

Interim Control Module project for the International Space Station, 12  had grown up 

professionally at NRL during the classified Poppy program in the 1960s. Said Jaffe: 

“There were a number of folks who interviewed me but I sweated more bullets during 

the interview with George than in all of the other interviews combined.” 13 

With a face that reveals little of his thinking and a deftness in the use of silence 

along with soft-spoken words to communicate, Flach, who continued after he retired 

to work for NCST as a consultant, could be intimidating. What made Jaffe sweat some 352 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

of those bullets was what followed when he told Flach that his hobby was to make little 

robots. “Hmm,” Jaffe recalled Flach saying, “so why don’t you draw me the control cir-

cuit for one that you built.” Jaffe stretched his memory and sketched out a circuit with 

Flach watching. “I was hoping I would not get the capacitor polarity wrong,” Jaffe said. 14 

Jaffe’s first job as a new NCST engineer was to work on the Special Sensor Ultra-

violet Limb Imager, or SSULI, which was a joint project with the lab’s Space Science 

Division. The denizens of this NRL division are the intellectual progeny of Dr. Herbert 

Friedman, Dr. Richard Tousey, and the NRL team of upper atmosphere researchers 

who got used to using rockets for their studies in the 1940s and 1950s and followed 

with the SOLRAD series of satellite payloads. In astronomy, the word “limb” refers to 

the edge of a disk of a celestial body, such as a planet, star, or moon. The SSULI project, 

which was aimed at improving the monitoring and forecasting of the behavior of the 

ionosphere, started back in the 1980s and was supposed to have been launched by the 

time Jaffe started at NRL. But as often is the case with space programs, the SSULI proj-

ect did not unfold as expected. 

The team was building a series of five imagers for use on the same number of 

satellites in the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP). The Department of 

Defense had been relying on these satellites for generic weather monitoring and fore-

casting, but the SSULI instruments were designed to measure the effects of sun-driven 

space weather. “It detects things like the free electron concentration in the ionosophere 

and the prevalence of different ionic species, and from that you can answer questions 

like, ‘Will my over-the-horizon radar work on a given day and can you make a forecast 

model?,’” Jaffe explained. 15  The SSULI data also can help to predict and improve the 

accuracy of GPS, he added. By having the instrument viewing the planet’s limb at a 

glancing angle, it can get the clearest and most comprehensive view of the ionosphere  

> Serial Engineer . Among the many projects engineer Dr. Paul Jaffe has
> worked on in the Naval Center for Space Technology is a module for con -
> verting solar radiation captured by photovoltaic panels into radio frequency
> energy that can be beamed to receivers. Jaffe is shown with the U-PRAM
> (Photovoltaic DC to RF Antenna Module) and a customized vacuum cham -
> ber for testing it in the background. (NRL photo 140128-N-JF840-007)

353 CHAPTER 17 — NCST INSIDE 

and capture data important for determining electron and ion concentrations. This first 

project of Jaffe’s tied him back to the upper atmosphere and ionosphere research issues 

that were priorities for the lab’s founding scientists who in the 1920s were trying to 

improve the Navy’s high frequency communications abilities. 

Rather than working on entire satellites to be delivered to a sponsor like NRO, 

SDIO/BMDO, or NASA, as was the case with programs like GRAB, Poppy, LACE, 

Clementine, and ICM, Jaffe’s role was to work with a team on the SSULI, which was 

but one of many sensors that the DMSP satellites would carry. The first SSULI did 

not make it into its orbital perch until 2003, a good seven years after Jaffe began work 

on the project. By early 2014, four of the five remote sensing imagers he and his col-

leagues built had made it into orbit. 16 

Having learned the hard lesson after the GRAB and Poppy days of relying too 

much on a single sponsor, Jaffe’s supervisors in NCST’s Spacecraft Engineering De-

partment soon had him splitting his time on other projects. “For any project, the poli-

tics could change and it could go away, or it could get canceled for any number of rea-

sons,” Jaffe pointed out in an interview. 17  He provided as an example a project known 

as the Naval Earth Map Observer (NEMO). The mission, which was sponsored by the 

Office of Naval Research and several other Department of Defense entities, started out 

as a collaboration between government, primarily NRL, and industry partners, origi-

nally including Boeing and several smaller firms, including Space Technology Devel-

> Sensor Aloft . The contractor team of Lockheed Martin
> and United Launch Alliance orchestrated the launch of
> an Atlas V at 0746 on April 3, 2014, bearing the 19th
> Defense Meteorological Satellite Program payload and
> with it the fourth NRL-built SSULI sensor for measuring
> electron densities in the ionosphere. 354 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

opment Corporation (STDC). The original agreement called for the government and 

the industry team to each pony up $60 million. 18 

Jaffe and the NEMO team, led at NRL by Tom Wilson, aimed originally to build 

a hyperspectral imager—essentially a camera sensitive to wavelengths ranging from 

the infrared through the visible and beyond into the ultraviolet region—to provide 

unclassified imagery to the Navy as well as to the wider defense and commercial 

communities for which the imagery could be valuable. 19  In an effort to save mon -

ey, which the Clementine mission had demonstrated was possible to do while still 

scoring a great success, the NEMO team had its collective eyes on an existing satellite 

frame, or bus, from a financially strapped commercial satellite phone venture by the 

firm Globalstar. The company had suffered from miscalculations about the rise of 

cellular phone technology and the potential customer base, as well as a calamitous 

launch failure in 1998 that destroyed a dozen satellites at once. When the prospects 

for the business venture seemed rosier, a factory in Rome had been churning out the 

Globalstar satellite buses. During the planning stages of NEMO, these buses were just 

sitting on a shelf. The NEMO team procured one of these to host its hyperspectral 

imager, a much cheaper option than designing and building a one-of-a-kind bus. 

“This was great for me,” Jaffe recalled. “I was in my 20s and I got to spend all of 

this time in Italy and in Germany,” said Jaffe, who was the lead on the group respon-

sible for the test equipment that would check out NEMO before and after launch. As 

it turned out, when Boeing pulled out of the project in 2000, STDC could not come 

up with the funding it needed to participate. The project fell apart and was eventually 

canceled. 20  “We built a lot of hardware and ended up not flying anything,” Jaffe said. 

“It was a great project and we did a lot of development, but it ultimately fell victim to 

circumstances beyond our control,” he lamented. 21 

Flach, an old hand in the space business by the time Jaffe joined NCST, always 

counseled new hires about the many possible fates of space projects. His message, 

Jaffe recalled, was that a project could get canceled for a thousand reasons, so you 

always have to get as much as you can out of what you are doing as an educational 

experience and as a way to develop skills that likely will prove useful in subsequent 

projects. “That made it easier for me to approach a lot of these things,” Jaffe said. 22 

Meanwhile, the SSULI project was humming along. And when the time came in 

2003 for the first SSULI sensor to go into orbit, Jaffe desperately wanted to witness the 

launch of the first sensor he had worked on. So, even though he was working days, 

nights, and weekends, he flew out to Vandenberg Air Force Base in California for the 

liftoff of the DMSP satellite bearing the instrument. But—in a disappointing reality 

check—the launch was delayed. Jaffe’s involvement with the new Tactical Satellite 1 

(TacSat-1) and other projects, however, meant there was no way he could stay out at 

the launch site indefinitely. He returned to NRL, and within a day or two of doing so, 

the SSULI-bearing DMSP satellite went up. 355 CHAPTER 17 — NCST INSIDE 

One consolation for missing the sound and fury of the launch was to spend time 

at a nearby National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 

ground station in Suitland, Maryland, where he was able to see some of the first data 

coming in from the satellite, a sure sign that the work he had put into the SSULI proj-

ect was likely to pay off. “That was very gratifying,” Jaffe said. “It is always cool when 

something that you had in your hands actually makes it into space. When you think 

about that, it is a little mind boggling.” 23 

The disappointment of missing his first SSULI launch in 2003 was more than 

compensated for a few years later: within a two-week period in the fall of 2006, Jaffe 

witnessed two launches of sensors he had worked on at NCST. The first, a NASA 

mission with a two-satellite system built by the Johns Hopkins University Applied 

Physics Laboratory, launched with a Delta II booster on October 25, 2006, from Cape 

Canaveral in Florida. Known as STEREO (Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory), 

the twin satellites serve as orbiting front ends of a space weather monitoring system 

for imaging and tracking solar flares in three dimensions. These sun-watching eyes 

in deep space make it easier to determine when a solar flare’s punch is headed Earth-

ward or, instead, in some other less troublesome direction. Solar flares are serious 

events bearing high-energy particles that knock out sensitive satellite electronics and 

can wreak large-scale havoc on the ground by, for example, destabilizing the power 

grid. 

The STEREO-based instrument that Jaffe worked on with colleagues at NCST 

and in the lab’s Space Science Division is called SECCHI-COR2. SECCHI is the Sun 

Earth Connection Coronal and Heliospheric Investigation package, a suite of several 

instruments, and the COR part of the acronym is short for “coronagraph,” an instru-

ment that masks the bright disk of the sun to allow the dimmer coronal emissions to 

be “seen” by the instruments’ sensors. The SECCHI acronym maps onto the name of 

Father Angelo Secchi, a 19th century Jesuit priest and astronomer in Italy. Of partic-

> Edge View . A typical scan of Earth with a SSULI sensor looking out toward the edge of the planet produces a spec -
> trum that indicates the intensity of emissions of different wavelengths at different upper atmosphere altitudes. 356 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

ular relevance is that Father Secchi was pushing the art of measuring the spectra of 

light from stars and he was among the first astronomers to clearly identify the sun as 

a star, the one that happens to be nearest and dearest to Earthlings. 

The technical and scientific success of the SECCHI project was augmented by a 

more public accolade. Although the primary value of the STEREO spacecraft is to 

monitor and predict solar weather events in part so that the satellite community can 

take precautions (such as changing the orientation of a spacecraft as one in a boat 

might do to minimize the effect of a massive incoming wave), one standout result 

for Jaffe ended up showing up on IMAX screens. Prior to STEREO and its SECCHI 

payloads, the magnificent IMAX film “Solar Max,” replete with epic music, had been 

playing at venues like the Smithsonian Institution. Released in late 2000, the movie 

was based in part on data from the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), 

another NASA mission for which NRL’s Space Science Division played a leading role. 

“I remember going to see it with a bunch of folks from the lab and afterwards I said, 

‘when we finish SECCHI they are going to have to do a 3-D IMAX film because we 

will have 3-D imagery of the sun.’” And that is what happened: a couple of film pro-

duction companies partnered with NASA and in 2007 released the IMAX film “3D 

Sun.” “I felt really gratified,” said Jaffe. 24 

On November 4, 2006, a mere 11 days after he watched the launch of the STE -

REO satellite pair, Jaffe was on the west coast at the Vandenberg Air Force Base to 

witness his second dazzling launch of an instrument that he had played a role in 

making. 25  His neck craned as he watched a Delta IVM booster take a SSULI sensor, 

the second in the series of five, along with a half-dozen other sensors into orbit. The 

third SSULI would go into orbit in 2009, and the fourth in 2014. 

The nation’s defense weather program suffered a major disappointment in 

January 2012 when the U.S. Air Force canceled the Defense Weather Satellite System 

(DWSS)—the follow-on program to the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program. 

But that did not happen before the SSULI program scored one of its greatest possible 

successes. After years of testing the sensors and software associated with them, the 

Defense Weather Systems Directorate of the Air Force Space and Missile Systems 

Center (SMC) recommended in June 2011 that the SSULI data should serve as input 

for space weather models as well as stand-alone data products that can be useful for 

satellite operators, telecommunications companies and services, and other military 

and civilian applications for which the electrical characteristics of the upper atmo-

sphere can matter. 26 

To go from concept to hardware to having an operational role is among the 

greatest rewards for those at NCST, Jaffe noted. Even when Jaffe was on a nine-year 

hiatus from working officially on the SSULI program, which is managed by NRL’s 

Space Science Division, Jaffe still got calls with questions like “Hey, what does this 

data point mean?” 27  Small as a question like that sounds, few people on Earth have 

the specialized knowledge and experience to answer it. 357 CHAPTER 17 — NCST INSIDE 

The gratification was of a very different sort when it came to the never-to-be-

flown TacSat-1, for which Jaffe, along with colleagues including RF expert Chris Huf-

fine, worked on electronic components. Despite TacSat-1’s fate as a forever-grounded 

spacecraft, Jaffe pointed out that the mission “is still lauded as one of the efforts that 

really helped to build momentum behind the Operationally Responsive Space (ORS) 

concept because we were able to build TacSat-1 in less than a year.” 28  ORS refers to the 

concept of building military satellites quickly and cheaply for specific tactical needs 

that arise, and for launch in weeks or months rather than the years it traditionally 

has taken to go from concept to orbit. As noted in the previous chapter, the lessons 

learned from TacSat-1 made it into orbit on TacSat-2 on December 16, 2006. (NRL 

had little to do with TacSat-3; launched in 2009 and deliberately de-orbited and de-

stroyed in May 2012, it was primarily an Air Force project, though it included many 

partners.) 

Jaffe continued work on the ORS concept and the Tactical Satellite series with 

contributions to TacSat-4, which made it into orbit in 2011 and demonstrated how 

satellite-based communication channels can create voice linkages and distribute 

tactical data and other types of information to end users in several military services. 

Jaffe was part of the large engineering team that included NCST colleagues, the Johns 

Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, and many other partners, which 

designed the satellite’s framework, the bus. 

“The bus provides all of the utilities you need to be in the business of operating in 

space,” explained Jaffe. 29  Hanging on it are solar panels that power up the spacecraft’s 

batteries. It has thrusters and an attitude control system, including a star-tracker for 

maintaining the satellite’s orientation. TacSat-4 essentially was a two-piece assembly— 

the standard bus and the COMMx payload (for satellite-based communication for 

warfighters on the move), which was designed and built to snap into the standard bus 

by way of a novel, versatile interface that could take on many other payloads. 30  It’s the 

sort of plug-and-play trait that underlies the ORS concept. 

“The whole idea with ORS was to reduce the cost of putting assets in space and to 

reduce the amount of time it takes to take advantage of assets you have in space,” said 

Jaffe. The concept unfolds by building up resources on the ground, including commu-

nications, imaging, and radar payloads of different kinds and capabilities that all can 

be affixed to the same standard bus as the need arises. That, together with inexpensive 

and agile launch systems, could sum into an operationally responsive space capability, 

at least in concept. 31 

These are tantalizing ideas, to be sure, but they have been floating about among 

tidal forces that could delay their realization. In early 2012, for example, the White 

House budget requests for fiscal year 2013 entailed the shuttering of the ORS Office. 

A few months later, a Senate subcommittee and the House both reinstated funds to 

keep the space initiative alive. 32  “This same back-and-forth over the ORS Office’s 

funding has played out nearly annually between different governmental organizations 358 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

every year since,” Jaffe remarked. It had been a reminder of the lesson George Flach 

taught his mentees, Jaffe among them, that space projects could come to a screeching 

halt at just about any moment for a thousand different reasons. 

Jaffe’s colleague, Carl Ford, who can list microbrewing along with his space 

technology credentials, prepared a pair of brews called “Standard Bus Stout” and 

“COMMx Bitter” to celebrate the work his NCST colleagues and their partners had 

devoted to the TacSat-4 payload. Jaffe noted that the two “could very appropriately be 

combined to make a Black and Tan since COMMx and Standard Bus were combined 

to make the TacSat-4 spacecraft.” Added Ford: “It’s noteworthy that Standard Bus was 

heavy, like a stout, and COMMx featured occasional moments of bitterness.” 33 

Even though the Space Age now is 60 years old, it can’t help but attract those with 

visionary tendencies, and elicit bold ideas from those working on the nitty-gritty 

engineering of space components and systems. “When Arthur C. Clarke talked about 

communications satellites back in the 1940s, before anyone had even put up a satel-

lite, people thought that sounded crazy,” Jaffe pointed out in defense of a “crazy idea” 

that he and others have had on a mid-burner for years: space solar power. 34  The idea 

is to collect solar energy from enormous reflective surfaces in space, concentrate it, 

and then beam it down via microwaves or lasers to collection systems on the Earth’s 

surface that can store that energy. 

The concept dates back to the 1960s and both NASA and the Department of En-

ergy invested considerable sums of money in it during the energy crisis of the 1970s. 

One historical incarnation of the technology centers on a solar collecting surface that 

is 10 kilometers long and 1 kilometer across, an area of almost 4 square miles. 35  It 

would require hundreds of materials-ferrying launches and vast expense, which 

is why it has yet to make it beyond the concept stage. Crazy as it seems, someone in 

some government agency revisits the concept every 10 years or so. In October 2007, 

for one, the Department of Defense’s National Security Space Office released a study 

suggesting that beaming solar energy from space would enable the military to do 

away with dangerous fuel transports to their forward operating bases in war zones. 36 

Subsequently, Jaffe and an NCST team conducted a technical assessment of what 

it would take to build a space solar energy collection system. Publicly released in 

2009, the report—prepared by nearly 30 NRL scientists and engineers within NCST 

and other lab divisions, as well as several contractors—concluded that such a system 

indeed could have some military applications and so was worth at least keeping in 

the bin of ideas. The report also noted that it would be prudent for NCST to remain 

engaged in the field, futuristic as it might be, by keeping up with develop- ments and 

going to relevant meetings. This way, noted Jaffe, “If someone says ‘hey, should we 

really drop like $100 million on technology development related to space solar power,’ 

we would have the knowledge base for advising, or we could say ‘yes, but you should 

focus here or there because you might then get a spinoff application for some other 

less far-fetched idea.’” It is akin to the consulting role NCST staff routinely has played 359 CHAPTER 17 — NCST INSIDE 

for the National Reconnaissance Office where the NRL space technolo- gists often 

have been detailed to oversee the development and acquisition of complex, expensive, 

and highly classified systems from industry partners. 37 

In his own thinking about space solar energy systems, Jaffe has been exploring 

lasers as a possible alternative to microwaves as the means of conveying the collected 

solar power to the surface. Remarked Jaffe, “If you use laser beams, you don’t need 

the enormous antennas and you don’t have to deal with things like getting frequency 

allocations from the Federal Communications Commission [FCC] that you do for 

the high power microwave approach.” That doesn’t address the issue of atmospheric 

sapping of the energy as it beams down to the surface, or the possible political implica-

tions of sending a high-power laser beam to Earth from space. The space solar power 

concept will likely continue to be a point of fascination for Jaffe, with its prospect of 

continuous, globally redirectable power without fuel. “There are so many little sub-

areas you could do research on,” Jaffe noted, and so “there’s a unique opportunity to 

‘boldly fly what never has flown before.’” 38  For example, Jaffe and a team of researchers 

from NRL’s Radar Division and Electronics Science and Technology Division built and 

tested what Jaffe rates as “the world’s most efficient sunlight-to-microwave conversion 

module.” 39  It goes by the name U-PRAM, for Photovoltaic DC to RF Antenna Module. 

He got double duty out of the work by using it as the basis for his Ph.D. dissertation; 

he was awarded his degree in December 2013. “NRL did a press release on the work 

that went somewhat viral,” Jaffe noted. 40  “It was picked up by Wired, Der Spiegel, The 

Daily Mail, and others. I was interviewed on MSNBC.” 

“One crucial point in the U-PRAM project and essentially all NCST projects is 

the depth of expertise on the teams,” Jaffe stressed. “For U-PRAM, even though I was 

the [Principal Investigator], the project would never have succeeded without support 

from other folks in NCST and at NRL. Whenever you run into a tricky challenge, it 

seems there is always someone you can turn to or someone who knows another NRLer 

that can help out. This is a huge, huge benefit of being at a multidisciplinary research 

facility. Heck, I had a student who got a patent even before I had my first one, in large 

part because he asked the right questions and NRL had the right people for him to talk 

to!” 41 

Another acronym in the list of projects Jaffe has worked on is MIS, for Microwave 

Imager Sounder—the follow-on sensor to the Windsat microwave sensor that the 

Department of Defense has been using for a decade or so to map out wind speed and 

direction on the planet’s oceans. Since about 2008, Jaffe has spent much of his time 

as the lead electrical engineer for MIS, which also can gather land-based data crucial 

for remotely assessing soil moisture content, a key measurement for planning ground 

operations in which the wheels of a war machine would be rolling over various terrain 

types. “If you are in Afghanistan and you have to drive 400 kilometers, knowing if you 

will be going over hard-packed dry earth or three inches of mud will help you figure 

out how long it is going to take,” Jaffe explained. 42  In yet another instance of Flach’s 360 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

cautionary attitude about the progress of space missions, the MIS project went on an 

indefinite hold as of September 2013. 

Chris Huffine is another prolific and accomplished member of the younger 

generation working for NCST in the massive Building A59. Huffine is an NCST radio 

frequency engineer who is credited with moving software defined radio (SDR) tech -

nology (also referred to as Software Reprogrammable Payload, or SRP) into new 

arenas such as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). 43  When he began working for NCST 

after a trial run as part of a cooperative electrical engineering program with Mar-

quette University, Huffine was working for George Price—a branch manager in Bob 

Eisenhauer’s Space Systems Development Department—in a ramshackle, World War 

II-era building near the lab’s front gate along Interstate 295. Price, the second-gener-

ation NRLer whose father was part of the GRAB and Poppy projects, had a knack for 

hiring good people and then giving them the freedom to solve problems as they saw 

fit. 

Huffine’s first assignment was to work on software for satellite ground stations 

that could predict and model the emission and reception patterns of different an-

tennas. It was part of the lab’s perennial challenge of calibrating the electromagnetic 

emission and reception traits of space assets in orbit with key components of the 

system, such as command and control systems, on the ground. It was work that put 

Huffine squarely into the bailiwick of electronic engineer Wendy Lippincott, one of 

NCST’s master antenna engineers. It also placed him within the globally expansive 

realm ruled by mathematician and software engineer Windie Borodin, manager of 

the 158-acre Midway Research Center (MRC) satellite calibration facility headquar-

tered adjacent to the Marine Corps Base in Quantico, Virginia. The MRC got its name  

> Radio Head . Electronic engineer Chris Huffine shows off
> hardware from the Software Reprogrammable Payload (SRP)
> project for which he has led development and testing. SRP re -
> lies on software to enable a radio to emulate, and interoperate
> with, many of the radios in use throughout the military. (NRL
> photo 140910-N-JF840-003) 361 CHAPTER 17 — NCST INSIDE

from a Marine Corps housing area there named after the Pacific island Midway. A 

linear triplet of blue, 100-foot radomes marks the facility as undoubtedly part of the 

Space Age’s infrastructure. 

Huffine followed the antenna calibration software work with hardware develop-

ment by way of a task to refurbish a legacy calibration device, called Scripted Emitter. 

He learned later these devices were originally housed inside the very same huts in 

which GRAB and early Poppy operators communicated with NRL-made ELINT 

satellites beginning in the early1960s. This new project for Huffine unfolded before 

anything about GRAB had been declassified in 1998, so at first he knew nothing 

about the history of the huts when he was working on the refurbishing project. He 

recalled spending a lot of late nights and early mornings at the MRC, much of the 

time waiting for satellites to fly overhead. 

He moved from there onto a next-generation calibration package called Pulstar. 

Each unit was housed in a shipping container like the ones used in trucking and 

railroad transportation, only it had a radome on top. Huffine built and deployed 

a half-dozen or so of these around the world, including on remote islands such as 

Guam and Diego Garcia, a long-time central Indian Ocean location for military 

assets. “Join NRL and see the world,” Huffine said with a smile during an interview. 44 

By about the turn of the millennium, Huffine was transitioning, in his words, 

“into some efforts looking at predecessors of Maritime Domain Awareness.” “There 

were a variety of programs going on in our branch, in the early 2000s, in which we 

were looking at how to transition space technology down here,” he noted, referring 

to the institutional drive to diversify NCST’s product and customer base, mostly by 

way of tactically relevant technologies in the command, control, communications, 

computers, and intelligence (C4I) category. 45 

“One big thrust was how do we take these [radio frequency] components, receiv-

ers and other things we built for spacecraft and put them into ground-based collector 

systems,” Huffine recalled. Among them were the Choke Point Monitoring systems 

that harvested ELINT data from vessels passing through narrow traffic lanes such as 

the English Channel and the Strait of Gibraltar. Out of that emerged, in the 1980s and 

into the 1990s, the Story Finder system, which was the Navy’s name for an ELINT 

system on EP-3E Aries II electronic warfare and reconnaissance aircraft. “There is a 

cool symmetry here,” noted Huffine, referring to the repurposing of technologies first 

designed for and deployed in space so that they can work for surface-based applica-

tions. “WD-40 was a great lubricant for the Saturn 5 rocket and now you buy it at the 

hardware store,” Huffine offered as a rough analogy of the space-to-ground technolo-

gy transfer that NCST has been doing. 46 

The EP-3E Aries II is a sizeable aircraft with four turboprop engines and enough 

space to accommodate more than 20 crew members, so there was no particular need 

to shoot for a small package with Story Finder. That changed dramatically following 

the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, after which national security planning 362 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

called for an enormous burst of additional intelligence, surveillance, and reconnais -

sance efforts. This included stepped-up deployment of UAVs with various sensor 

capabilities. UAVs are generally much smaller than manned aircraft, so Huffine and 

his colleagues found themselves with the task of rebuilding the capability of a Story 

Finder system originally designed for large aircraft into smaller, lighter, and more 

power-efficient packages. The theme of miniaturizing a roomful of technology into a 

portable box has been central in the history of NCST for several decades. 

“We took what was required to do a certain electronic and processing job in the 

past, looked to see what kinds of advances in electronics we could leverage, and then 

miniaturized the system,” said Huffine. 47  The resulting ELINT package became known 

as Copperfield. The system was not as small as the NCST engineers would have liked, 

but it was smaller than the Story Finder system. They tested Copperfield prototypes on 

a larger-sized UAV, a Predator, at the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, Califor -

nia. With requests from sponsors for fitting yet smaller systems with the C4I package, 

Huffine and colleagues undertook another iteration in the miniaturization game. The 

result of that effort was Copperfield 2, specified with the chemical-formula-like acro -

nym CuF2. Its modular architecture meant that it could be customized for particular 

jobs and situations. “You could have the ELINT module, a GPS module, an image 

capture module,” Huffine explained. “It was much more flexible.” 48 

As the engineering vision for the ELINT package shifted from the original one, 

which focused on the EP-3E Aries II aircraft, into a more flexible, reconfigurable 

payload that could readily be made suitable for many platforms, NCST engineers 

continued to make performance balances and adjustments that would “future-proof ” 

the system from the risk of obsolescence. It was designed to be evolvable. “With the 

broader capability designed into the hardware and software, CuF2 became a core 

product and acted as a springboard to a number of other unforeseen projects, each 

program adding further capability valuable to follow-on work,” Huffine explained in 

an article in the  2009 NRL Review. 49  As the decade progressed, a veritable library of 

software and hardware modules became the basis for a mix-and-match system for 

customizing CuF2 systems for aviation, space, subsurface, and ground platforms. 

This falls under the design ethic of “solving the problem once.” The idea is to keep 

in mind during design tasks the more extreme thermal, radiation, mechanical, vibra-

tional, and other stresses that electronic and other components might be subjected to 

in foreseeable ground, air, and space applications. Then, leverage that foresight with 

technologies like Software Reconfigurable Payloads (yet another term for Software 

Reprogrammable Payload and Software Definable Radio) that enable payloads to 

dramatically switch functions on the fly—say, from ELINT to plane-to-plane commu-

nication. That way the same overall architecture can be deployed all over the bat-

tlespace. 

One example is the Copperfield 2 system Huffine and his group designed for 

UAVs. They space-hardened the electronics so that a single hit from a high-energy 363 CHAPTER 17 — NCST INSIDE 

particle—either from cosmic or human-made sources—wouldn’t take out the entire 

unit. They also wrapped in additional software, and environmental, vibration, and 

thermal testing. Then they got the green light to install it onto TacSat-1, the tactical 

satellite that ultimately never launched. When the Copperfield 2 unit did get into 

orbit on TacSat-2 in 2006, it proved itself. “We flew that and got good data,” including 

captured data from ships’ Automatic Identification System (AIS) units, Huffine said. 

The Software Reprogrammable Payload concept has expanded since then. “You 

can talk to the aircraft, you can talk to the guys in the squad on the next hill [even 

when] there is a mountain between you, you can talk to your commander back at the 

forward operating base and say, ‘Permission to do this?,’” Huffine noted in an NRL 

statement in 2014 providing updates on the SRP program. “You can talk to the intel 

guys; you can say, ‘Hey, we hear suspicious chatter going on.’” 50 

Moreover, the NRL SRP team envisions SRP-equipped Marine Corps aircraft 

eventually summing into a “string of pearls” type of communications network that 

could provide “reach-back capability” to any warfighter anywhere in the world and 

even when satellite communications might not be an option. Also key for making all 

of this work are comprehensive security measures throughout the system—from data 

and software encryption to hardware protection. “There’s a whole architecture that’s 

designed to protect the box against intrusion or any sort of malware or things like 

that,” said Huffine. 51 

In 2012, the SRP team pulled off a major demonstration of the overall interop-

erability that SRP promises at the Marine Corps Air Station Yuma in Arizona, the 

premier training facility for Marine Corps aviators. With an SRP-equipped KC-130 

aircraft serving as the reach-back communication hub, “we were linking Yuma with 

Twentynine Palms, which are 150 miles apart or so; we were collecting SIGINT from 

200 miles away, in the Pacific Ocean; we were doing SINCGARS [communications] 

relay,” Huffine recounted. “We got to do the full Monty; everything was working.” The 

team has done similar demos with MV-22 Osprey tiltrotor aircraft, unmanned aerial 

vehicles (or drones), and Humvees. 

Those who work with Huffine point out that he has Howard Lorenzen-like ten-

dencies, which is to say he has a knack for building relationships with, in Jaffe’s words, 

“folks at the Pentagon and those actually involved in military operations. He also has 

remarkably sharp technical skills for someone who’s such a good manager. This is 

partly because he does all sorts of electronics and engineering projects at home.” 52 

That last trait applies to yet another of NCST’s young Turks: senior engineer Dr. 

Carl Glen Henshaw, who works in NCST’s Spacecraft Engineering Department. In 

2012, he joined VIPs in the rollout of a brand new Laboratory for Autonomous 

Systems Research (LASR) on NRL’s campus. The gleaming new facility illustrates the 

role that the Navy and Department of Defense expect robotic systems to play in the 

future of defense technologies, including space systems. The LASR includes a high 

bay rigged with multiple camera and sensor systems for analyzing the motion and be-364 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

havior of autonomous systems, a greenhouse with a simulated East Asian rain forest 

that can rain at a rate of 6 inches per hour, a simulated desert environment, and a 

shallow pool in which researchers can test prototypes of underwater vehicles, sensors, 

and energy-harvesting systems. With his focus on space robotics, Henshaw finds 

himself sometimes in this new lab, and sometimes in the high bay of Building A59. 

Henshaw, who has been with NCST since 2004, is living out a boyhood dream. 

Henshaw grew up on a farm and became familiar with traditional farm machinery, 

but at college ended up with three friends at Brigham Young University in Provo, 

Utah, who all loved building robots. In the 1980s, the quartet bought one of the first 

personal computers to become available, a Commodore, and Henshaw began learning 

how to use it for command and control of robots. “I knew even then that I wanted 

space robotics to be what I was going to do,” he recalled. 53 

When he arrived at NRL, Henshaw found himself at a fascinating and troubling 

phase of the nearly half century old Space Age: there are so many defunct spacecraft, 

satellite components, and junk of all kinds and sizes, particularly in low Earth orbit, 

that sending up new assets could become like crossing an interstate highway at rush 

hour. There are about 5,000 intact satellites alone circling Earth in various orbits. 

The smaller rocket pieces and other debris, ranging in size from tiny paint chips to 

bowling-ball sized killers to yet more massive obliterators, number in the hundreds 

of thousands range. The NASA Orbital Debris Program Office puts it this way: “More 

than 21,000 pieces of orbital debris larger than 10 cm [centimeters] are known to ex-

ist. The estimated population of particles between 1 and 10 cm in diameter is approxi-

mately 500,000. The number of particles smaller than 1 cm exceeds 100 million.” 54 

Unless this space debris can be reduced and managed, Henshaw and many others in 

the space business, including retired NCST director Peter Wilhelm, say it will get  

> Space Robotics . Surrounded in his office by pictures drawn by his
> children, Henshaw has extended his boyhood interest in computers and
> robotics into space-based robotics projects, including ones focused on
> salvaging valuable intact antennas from otherwise “dead” spacecraft and
> for delicate on-orbit maneuvers between spacecraft, including grabbing
> with a robotic arm. (NRL photo 110411-N-4822H-002.jpg)

365 CHAPTER 17 — NCST INSIDE 

to the point where your next payload might make it to orbit or it might get smacked 

by a tens-of-thousands-of-miles-per-hour piece of debris that turns it into the newest 

plume of space junk. And then the new debris from that destroyed payload will make 

it all that much riskier to send up the next payload. Every now and again, occupants 

of the International Space Station are ordered into a docked Soyuz capsule in case a 

piece of debris on an uncomfortably close trajectory actually hits the ISS in a way that 

would require an emergency escape. 55 

So one of the primary aims of Henshaw and his NCST colleagues, and partners 

elsewhere, is to build space robotic systems—he calls them robotic space tow trucks— 

that can latch onto obsolete satellites and other forms of space junk and haul them 

out to a long-term parking orbit (often referred to as a graveyard orbit) far above the 

geosynchronous altitude of 22,236 miles, a popular orbital location for functional 

satellites. In a graveyard orbit, the junk is out of the way of new, functional satellites 

and their location and motion are far more predictable. 

For their initial foray into this part of NCST’s overall space technology portfo-

lio, Henshaw and his NCST partners wrote up a feasibility study that landed them 

$500,000 in seed money in 2003 from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agen-

cy (DARPA), the visionary R&D agency established in 1958 in the shadow of Sputnik 

1 with a mission to help the United States remain on the leading edge of military 

technology. Over the next few years, additional engineering analyses began to make 

the vision of space robotics for shuttling, repairing, upgrading, and otherwise manip-

ulating orbiting satellites more than merely visionary. Taking the next step, DARPA 

green-lighted the procurement of flight-quality hardware for lab studies in Henshaw’s 

sometimes dark-as-space high bay in Building A59. The particular DARPA program 

Henshaw became part of in 2008 was known as FREND, for Front End Robotic En-

abling Near-Term Demonstration. 56 

“The task was to build something that would be general purpose and work with 

all satellites,” almost all of which had not been pre-designed for servicing, Henshaw  

> Robot Practice . In a high bay of Building
> A59 called the Proximity Operations Test -
> bed, NCST engineers conduct full-scale
> tests of robotic grappling and manipula -
> tion using models of spacecraft. They can
> test flight mechanisms, sensors, robotic
> manipulators, and control logic under
> realistic orbital conditions. (NRL photo
> DARPA_NRL_FREND-DEMO4-Image4.
> jpg) 366 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

remarked while standing next to a robotic arm delivered by Alliance Spacesystems 

(acquired by a company now known as MDC US Systems) of Pasadena, California, 

a collaborating company in the FREND project. 57  “This capability allows nearly any 

satellite to be repositioned on-orbit and provides a number of national benefits in-

cluding better ground coverage in times of crisis, satellite life extension by eliminating 

the requirement imposed on fully functional satellites to expend their fuel to move 

to a safe disposal orbit, and disposal of derelict spacecraft which present navigation 

hazards to active satellites,” Henshaw and colleagues at NCST and partner firms ex-

plained in the  2008 NRL Review .58 

Not only was the all-purpose requirement of latching onto any satellite an 

obvious challenge because of the structural differences in the many satellites that 

need to be grabbed and ushered to a graveyard orbit, but the great distance of that 

orbit, even beyond geosynchronous orbits, would also pose an issue. “We found out 

early that there is a two- to ten-second delay in command and control signals for ro -

bots at geosynchronous distances,” Henshaw said, and this meant there could be 

no real-time maneuverability despite the required precision of the grappling proce -

dures. 59  This meant that Henshaw and his colleagues had to build in autonomous 

operations by way of an assemblage of machine vision, laser-based proximity sensors, 

nuanced grappler and thruster controls, and sequencing algorithms for making mo-

ment-to-moment adjustments in the control and motion of the robotic grappler. 

In 2008, according to the agreement with DARPA, if Henshaw and his NCST 

team were to move forward, they needed to find a partner, one who would pro-

vide 50 percent of the several million dollars it would take for conducting a more in -

volved series of in-lab demonstrations, as well as for developing control software 

and simulation development. The project was speculative enough and its timeline far 

off enough that attracting a partner willing to put skin into this game proved to be 

difficult. But Henshaw was convinced of the vision’s potential, a conviction that helped 

him keep the NCST team intact by securing a share of the 6.2 research and develop -

ment funding that the Office of Naval Research designates for NRL. “This was 

a harrowing pitch,” Henshaw recalled. “You get one chance per year and each branch 

gets one project to pitch.” The 6.2 money that the robotics project received was suffi-

cient to keep Henshaw and a handful of NCST coworkers on the task. 60 

In the meantime, DARPA segued from FREND into a more ambitious follow-on 

vision called Phoenix with the goal of developing technologies to, in the words of 

DARPA’s web site, “cooperatively harvest and re-use valuable components from re-

tired, nonworking satellites in [geosynchronous orbit] and demonstrate the ability to 

create new space systems at greatly reduced cost.” 61  As DARPA’s Director at the time, 

Regina E. Dugan, stated it, “If this program is successful, space debris becomes space 

resource.” 62  The technology could open up cost-saving options in which new, small, 

and relatively cheap satellites could be launched and then fitted with massive, already 

built antennas robotically recovered from the graveyard orbit as though they were 367 CHAPTER 17 — NCST INSIDE 

salvageable parts in a car junkyard. The overall value of satellites already languishing 

in the graveyard orbit amounts to more than $300 billion, according to DARPA. 

The vision of turning space junk into a vast resource using fleets of robots and 

on-orbit recovery and construction devices is currently unproven and far from 

deployment. But the NCST space robotics team continued to work on the pieces that 

would all have to come together. Among these was the Low Impact Inspection Vehi-

cle (LIIVe) program. The team developed algorithms and overall protocols that would 

enable a small satellite to inspect disabled satellites from a distance of a human arm’s 

length, a meter or so. Also, NASA has adopted the same technology for use in its 

small satellite program known as SPHERES, an acronym for the inelegant, long-form 

name: Synchronized Position Hold, Engage, Reorient Experimental Satellites. Built 

by engineers at MIT, the SPHERES, which look like boxy soccer balls (and are about 

that size), are designed to fly in formation and to serve as sensor-equipped assistants 

to astronauts. 63 

Henshaw is a natural for this work. He said his robotics interests, spanning 

back to his hobbyist days, impressed upon him that nothing about the hardware or 

software challenge is easy or for anyone who is easily frustrated. “I had built robots 

from scratch before becoming an expert,” he said. Now, in addition to his homegrown 

and long-term work with robotic systems, he has computer science and aerospace 

engineering credentials from the University of Maryland also under his belt. “Systems 

engineering has grown organically in my brain and hands,” he said in an interview, 

noting that creating complex systems that work is what NCST always has been about. 

Said Henshaw as he looked up at an experimental set-up in his A59 high bay, “we are 

good at systems engineering, at putting it together.” 64 

Chilbert, Jaffe, Huffine, and Henshaw, as exceptionally productive as they have 

been, are merely representative of the many hundreds of engineers that have been 

part of the NCST narrative. The accounting of all projects, spacecraft, and other 

systems with some piece of hardware, software, know-how, or other aspect of NCST’s 

portfolio inside would take many volumes to complete. They would dwarf the NCST 

manifest of 100 satellites and payloads. Says Jaffe, “there are plenty of things that don’t 

show up there because they didn’t have their own launch or they were not their own 

satellite. We have worked on a lot of projects also that didn’t really end up going into 

space, but they still are things people spent a lot of time and effort on. I don’t know 

how you count those, but they all count.” 65    

> 1For an NRL article on milestones, see http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2011/
> nrl-center-for-space-technology-reaches-century-mark-in-orbiting-spacecraft-launches; for a
> timeline of NRL space projects, see http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/publications/65-years-in-
> space-a-time- line/pages/65-Years-In-Space-Timeline-NRL.pdf.
> 2Aaron Chilbert, interview with author, February 21, 2012.
> 3Aaron Chilbert, interview, 2012.

368 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

4 Aaron Chilbert, interview, 2012. 

5 For an NRL fact sheet on MPTB, see http://www.nrl.navy.mil/research/nrl-review/2004/ 

space-research-and-satellite-technology/clark/. 

6 Aaron Chilbert, interview, 2012. 

7 T.G. Kawecki, G.G. Golba, G.E. Price, V.S. Rose, and W.J. Meyers,  IEEE Trans. on Microwave 

Theory and Techniques , vol. 44, p. 1198 (1996). 

8 James Winkler, My Career at the Naval Research Laboratory, 2012.  

> 9

Donald U. Gubser, “US Navy’s Superconductivity Programs: Scientific Curiosity to Fleet Utili-

ty,”  IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity,  21(3), pp. 931–935 (2011).  

> 10

Aaron Chilbert, interview, 2012.  

> 11

Paul Jaffe, interview with author, February 28, 2012.  

> 12

http://appel.nasa.gov/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2013/05/NASA_APPEL_ASK_27s_nuts. 

pdf.  

> 13

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 14

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 15

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 15

See, for example, http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2014/nrl-to-launch-ssuli-on-

april-3rd-will-measure-ionosphere-electron-density.  

> 17

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 18

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012; United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit (Unpub -

lished), No. 05-1671, Space Technology Development Corporation; Earth Search Sciences, 

Incorporated; Accuprobe, Incorporate, vs The Boeing Company; 

Argued September 19, 2006, and decided on December 12, 2006.  

> 19

See, for example, http://www.globalsecurity.org/space/systems/nemo.htm.  

> 20

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012; United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, 2006.  

> 21

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 22

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 23

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 24

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 25

For launch specifications, see http://space.skyrocket.de/doc_sdat/dmsp-5d3.htm.  

> 26

NRL Press Release, “NRL Instrument Provides Key Space Weather Data”, June 22, 2011, 

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2011/nrl-instrument-provides-key-space-weath-

er-data.  

> 27

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 28

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 29

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 30

Michael Hurley, William Raynor, and Kenneth Weldy, “TacSat-4 COMMx, Advanced SAT-

COM Experiment,” Naval Research Laboratory (Washington, DC, 2009).  

> 31

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 32

See, for example, http://www.spacepolicyonline.com/news/sasc-adds-funds-for-ors-stp-and-

commercial-imagery-purchase.  

> 33

Paul Jaffe, correspondence with author, July 2014; Carl Ford’s quote was supplied by Jaffe.  

> 34

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 35

See NASA/DOE studies of the concept, for example, http://www.nss.org/settlement/ssp/li-

brary/1978DOESPS-ReferenceSystemReport.pdf.  

> 36

National Security Space Office, “Space‐Based Solar Power As an Opportunity for Strate -

gic Security” (a feasibility study), October 10, 2007, http://spacesolarpower.files.wordpress. 

com/2007/11/final-sbsp-interim-assessment-release-01.pdf.  

> 37

W. Neil Johnson et al., “Space-based Solar Power: Possible Defense Applications and Oppor-

tunities for NRL Contributions,” NRL/FR/7650--09-10,179, October 23, 2009; http://www.nss. 

org/settlement/ssp/library/2008-NRLSBSP-PossibleDefenseApplicationsAndOpportunities.pdf.  

> 38

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 39

Paul Jaffe, correspondence with author, July 2014. 369 CHAPTER 17 — NCST INSIDE  

> 40

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2014/solar-power-when-its-raining-nrl-builds-

space-satellite-module-to-try.  

> 41

Paul Jaffe, correspondence with author, July 2014.  

> 42

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012.  

> 43

Chris Huffine, interview with author, March 22, 2013; see also http://www.nrl.navy.mil/me-

dia/news-releases/2014/software-reprogrammable-payload-srp-nrls-airborne-box-brings-con-

nectivity-jamming-to-troops-in-remote-areas.  

> 44

Chris Huffine, interview, 2013.  

> 45

Chris Huffine, interview, 2013.  

> 46

Chris Huffine, interview, 2013.  

> 47

Chris Huffine, interview, 2013.  

> 48

Chris Huffine, interview, 2013.  

> 49

Chris Huffine, “Cross-Domain Payload Migration,”  2009 NRL Review  (Washington, DC: 

Naval Research Laboratory, 2009), pp. 172–174.  

> 50

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2014/software-reprogrammable-pay-

load-srp-nrls-airborne-box-brings-connectivity-jamming-to-troops-in-remote-areas.  

> 51

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2014/software-reprogrammable-pay-

load-srp-nrls-airborne-box-brings-connectivity-jamming-to-troops-in-remote-areas.  

> 52

Paul Jaffe, correspondence with author, July 2014.  

> 53

Glen Henshaw, interview with author, March 2, 2012.  

> 54

http://orbitaldebris.jsc.nasa.gov/faqs.html.  

> 55

“ISS Crew’s Emergency Scramble...And We Aren’t Talking About Eggs,” SatNews.com, March 

26, 2012.  

> 56

Glen Henshaw, interview, March 2, 2012; www.darpa.mil/WorkArea/Download- Asset. 

aspx?id=2147486079.  

> 57

Glen Henshaw, interview, March 2, 2012.  

> 58

B.E. Kelm et al., “FREND: Pushing the Envelope of Space Robotics,”  2008 NRL Review ,

(Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 2008), pp. 239–341.  

> 59

Glen Henshaw, interview with author, March 2, 2012.  

> 60

Glen Henshaw, interview with author, March 2, 2012.  

> 61

http://www.darpa.mil/our_work/tto/programs/phoenix.aspx.  

> 62

See, for example, http://phys.org/news/2011-10-satellites-the-darpa-phoenix.html.  

> 63

NASA Press Release, “NASA ‘Smart SPHERES’ Tested Successfully on International Space 

Station,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/tdm/telerobotics/11-160.html.  

> 64

Glen Henshaw, interview, March 2, 2012.  

> 65

Paul Jaffe, interview, 2012. THE HOUSE OF WILHELM 

Think of Microsoft; Bill Gates comes to mind. Think of Apple; the late Steve Jobs 

comes to mind. Baseball: Babe Ruth. 

The Naval Research Laboratory does not enjoy the kind of name-recognition 

that Major League sports and the biggest companies in the world do, but anyone who 

knows about NRL’s pioneering and long-haul role in the history of American space 

technology will instantly recognize the name Peter Wilhelm. Wilhelm himself would 

balk at that characterization, knowing firsthand that it takes teamwork to achieve 

anything in space and because he is too humble, but the facts also do speak for them-

selves. 

At the end of 2014, Wilhelm was deep in his 56th year as a space technology 

engineer, manager, and leader at the Naval Research Laboratory. On December 17, he 

announced in a characteristically unassuming and to-the-point e-mail, and with an 

engineer’s flair for counting years, that he was retiring: 

To Everyone in Code 8000 and the Greater NRL, 

This is an e-mail unlike any I have ever sent before -and I don’t know any other 

way but to cut to the bottom line. In typical military lingo they apparently refer to this as 

BLUF -Bottom Line Up Front. 

I have decided to retire on 12/31/14. After 55.75 years at NRL I have put in my time. 

My health is still good and I would like to not have to come to work every day. 

I am sure this will come as a surprise to most of you, but once I decided, I did not 

want to drag it out. 

This has been the best career anyone could have asked for. NRL is the best place 

someone like me could ever work and the best part is the people that I have worked with. 

You all will do fine in the future and anything I can do, in my retirement, to help I will 

do. 

Pete Wilhelm 

It had been a run unlike any other. Wilhelm had continuously worked as a space 

engineer longer than perhaps anyone else in the in the U.S. government, which means 

maybe longer than almost anyone else in the entire U.S. space program since its incep-

tion in the middle of the last century. 

# 18 372 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

In December 1959, just two years after Sputnik became humanity’s first artifi- cial 

satellite, Wilhelm was in the midst of designing and hand-building a transmitter that 

would make it into orbit a half-year later where it would send down the world’s first 

spy data ever collected from space, as well as scientific data about solar radia- tion 

from NRL’s first SOLRAD payload. Six years after that, he would be leading the Sat -

ellite Techniques Branch at NRL in an early phase of his own ascendant trajectory as 

one of the pioneers of the Space Age. In 1986, he became director of the then brand   

> Peter Wilhelm, an embodiment of NRL’s role in the Space Age, is shown here early in his career in
> 1962 testing a turn-on mechanism intended for a satellite designed for calibrating the Naval Space
> Surveillance (NAVSPASUR) system; in his office in 1985, the year before the Navy established the
> Naval Center for Space Technology; and in 2012 in a ceremony marking a change in military com -
> mand at the lab. (NRL photos 60807(92), P-2188(13).jpg, and 120830-N-JF840-182.tif) 373 CHAPTER 18 — THE H O U SE O F WILHELM

new Naval Center for Space Technology, established by the Navy in recognition of 

NRL’s leading role in the Navy’s space activities, and he remained in that position un-

til his retirement. In September 2011, when TacSat-4 soared into orbit from a launch 

pad in Alaska, the youthful septuagenarian Wilhelm had been a guiding force in 

upwards of 100 payloads, both classified and unclassified ones. Even in 2014, Wilhelm 

was far more apt to talk about ambitious space engineering visions—among them 

using “electrodynamic tethers” in systems to clean up and manage the dire problem of 

space debris, or the Microwave Imager Sounder (MIS), the yet-to-launch follow-on to 

Windsat—than to even contemplate retiring from NCST and government service. 

Peter Wilhelm is one of the biggest names in space technology that most Ameri-

cans have never heard of. But he has been well known to generations of NRL scien-

tists and engineers, as well as to generations of top-echelon Navy and Department 

of Defense military and civilian leaders, directors of the nation’s most important in -

telligence organizations, and Presidents of the United States, who have personally and 

officially commended him for his service to the country. 

Many of those who have known Wilhelm most closely—his colleagues at NRL 

over the course of more than half a century—find it hard to overstate their admira-

tion for him. “I consider him to be the best systems engineer in the world,” said Fred 

Hellrich, a senior scientist with the Office of Naval Research and a former coworker 

of Wilhelm’s when both were building spy satellites and assembling the lab’s space 

technology capabilities and know-how. Wilhelm’s list of recognitions from official-

dom has grown every year, beginning in 1962 when he earned the Navy Meritorious 

Civilian Service Award. A half century later, the list would include the Presidential 

Distinguished Rank Award, the highest award the United States can bestow on a 

government senior executive; the little-publicized honor of being named a Pioneer 

of National Reconnaissance (so far, not even 100 have been so-named by the Na-

tional Reconnaissance Office, which was established in 1961); and induction into 

the National Academy of Engineering. The dozens-long list includes just about every 

award and recognition a space engineer could covet. All of this recognition matters to 

Wilhelm, but primarily in the way it reflects on the teams and the many hundreds 

of fellow engineers, scientists, managers, and technicians he has worked with over the 

years. 

“There is a saying about ‘standing on the shoulders of giants’ that applies to my 

career,” Wilhelm said. “I accept all of the recognition that I have received as an 

endorsement of the quality of the whole program … I feel very fortunate to have had 

the opportunities I had in my career. I believe it definitely was unique. I was there at 

the right time, and I just had a set of experiences that no one else had … I had a very 

general goal in my career: I just wanted to be part of making important contribu-

tions.” 1 It is that simple in the end. Wilhelm, NRL, and NCST have made important 

contributions to the Space Age, to the ongoing history of space technology and the 

U.S. space program, and to national and homeland security. And Wilhelm has been 374 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

the Cal Ripken of NRL’s space technology team, never missing a game for decades 

and standing out all the while. When it comes to NRL’s part, he has seen it all. 

Born in New York City in 1935, Wilhelm first heard about NRL when he was in 

junior high in Yonkers. He had read an article in Colliers magazine describing a truly 

audacious project, led by NRL radar engineer James Trexler, to build an antenna dish 

that was 600 feet in diameter, about 45 feet more than the Washington Monument’s 

height. 2 “My gauge of distance back then was how far a home run could be hit, and 

I thought, even Babe Ruth couldn’t have hit one this far, 600 feet.” 3 To top that off, 

he noted, this high-tech “ear” of a magnitude even Egyptian pharaohs would have 

admired was to be steerable from horizon to horizon. 

“I’m thinking, ‘wow, two football fields across and how in the heck could you get 

something like that that could move and everything,’” Wilhelm recalled in an inter-

view, with excitement in his voice even more than half a century later. “I’m thinking, 

‘boy, they must have some smart people at that Naval Research Laboratory.’” What the 

article could not have revealed at that time, in the late 1950s, was something that only 

would have blown the young Wilhelm’s mind even more: in addition to its publicly 

divulged role as a world-class radioastronomy observatory, the “big ear’s” even more 

pressing role was to listen in on radio and other electromagnetic signals from the 

Soviet heartland after these had bounced back to the Earth from the moon. He could 

not have known then either that by the end of the decade he would become not just 

a part of this NRL that he had come to admire, but a driving force who would help 

elevate the lab into a major player in the U.S. space program. 

As an electrical engineering student in the 1950s at Purdue University in West 

Lafayette, Indiana (a program he had gotten into, he says, because his aunt’s sister was 

married to the dean of admissions), 4 Wilhelm had heard about the Vanguard pro-

gram to orbit a scientific satellite as part of the International Geophysical Year, which 

spanned over 1957 and 1958. “The idea of putting an artificial satellite into orbit 

around the earth was kind of a mind boggling thing to a lot of people, including me,” 

Wilhelm recalled. 5 Four months after he graduated in 1957, the Soviet Union placed 

the world’s first satellite, Sputnik, into orbit. Wilhelm himself was coming of age in 

the moment of history when the Space Age was beginning. 

He had just moved to Chicago where his newly wed wife at the time had landed 

a job as a schoolteacher. It was a move that would soon lead to his first direct contact 

with NRL. He had gotten his first post-college job with the Chicago-based company 

Stewart Warner Electronics where he was assigned to work on a Navy radar test set 

for submarines. It was a full-scale education for an electrical engineer. “It involved all 

kinds of circuitry that would later … prove important in a lot of things,” he said. “I 

mean it had high-voltage power supplies to run the cathode ray tube, and I worked on 

that. There was lots of pulse circuitry, so I learned how to design circuits like that. Au-

dio amplifiers. Video amplifiers. A lot of delay lines for delaying a pulse.” 6 Part of this 

job was to test the equipment in temperatures that ranged from 40 degrees below zero 375 CHAPTER 18 — THE HOUSE OF WILHELM 

centigrade to 55 degrees above, extreme-temperature tasks that he sometimes did in 

his bathing suit and that once required a nurse to treat what he described as a nearly 

flash-frozen throat. 7 In his first job, Wilhelm did what it took to get the job done, and 

he would carry that trait throughout his entire career. 

The work at Stewart Warner was going well. The equipment was getting designed 

and built. But there was one pivotal step that had to be taken. In early spring 1959, 

the company sent him along with the radar test set to the Naval Research Laboratory’s 

IFF Branch (IFF stands for Identification Friend or Foe), which had the authority to 

accept or reject the equipment. The very first day Wilhelm got there and began work-

ing with his NRL cohorts, Laddie Rhodes, who was head of the IFF Branch, offered 

him a job developing technologies to help warfighters make that all-important IFF 

distinction in the midst of battles. With flowers blooming and memories of the cold 

and snow of Chicago, Wilhelm accepted the offer. He did not even consult his wife, he 

admitted much later with some incredulity. 

Within months of arriving, he discovered one of the traits that NRL’s scientists 

and engineers most often tout about the lab: it has an R&D portfolio so diverse and 

broad that it generally is possible to find partners on site who can help you with any 

particular research project or challenge or with whom to pursue new research inter-

ests. Within months of working in the IFF Branch, Wilhelm found himself interview-

ing with Marty Votaw about another possible job at NRL. Votaw was one of the few 

Project Vanguard remnants 8 at NRL who was resolved to resurrect a satellite pro-

gram at the lab in the midst of the Presidentially mandated transfer to NASA of the 

more than 200 engineers, technicians, and managers that comprised the lab’s entire 

Vanguard team. Before his first year at NRL was ending, Wilhelm had become part 

of Votaw’s tiny group of first-generation satellite engineers in the brand new Satellite 

Techniques Branch. As Wilhelm thought about it later when he was cleared to work 

on classified programs, he could see that Votaw was mightily moved by the secret 

plans laid by Howard Lorenzen and Reid Mayo in 1958 to build an audacious new 

Cold War technology—spy satellites for gathering electronic intelligence (ELINT) as 

the spacecraft zoomed over the Soviet heartland. 

“Marty realized that if we can detect these Soviet radars with our little satellite, 

that’s a big deal for this country and I think that is why he came back,” Wilhelm 

explained, referring to Votaw’s step of applying to return to NRL after being officially 

transferred to NASA as part of the Vanguard team. “He knew that was going to be 

really important.” 9 And with Lorenzen as a champion of the project, it was likely to 

go places. Said Wilhelm: “Howard Lorenzen, as an individual, was already considered 

kind of the father of ELINT. He had a huge reputation and he knew everybody in the 

business.” 10 

“Looking back, if we had not been as scared as we were, I do not believe we—as a 

country—would have put as much effort into developing new technologies as we did,” 

Wilhelm said, referring to the nation’s Cold War angst. “We felt like the underdog, 376 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

and I believe that was probably good for our psyche. We concluded that we could not 

overpower them, so we had to beat them with smarter systems and technology.” 11 

Behind the scenes, and unknown to Wilhelm at the time, was that the titans 

of the lab—among them, Robert Page, the radar pioneer who had become the lab’s 

research director, Lorenzen, and Dr. Herbert Friedman, the top-tier solar physicist 

and astronomer who had managed to elude the NASA transfer—were orchestrating a 

spectacular comeback. When it came to space, this was a make-or-break moment for 

the lab. Page, for one, did not think the lab should be in the rocket engineering busi-

ness per se, as it had been during the Viking and Vanguard programs. He feared that 

that enormously expensive and labor-intensive activity would consume too much of 

the lab’s funds and undermine the diversity of expertise and basic research that made 

the lab unique. Satellites, though, were acceptable new elements of the lab’s R&D 

portfolio. 

Using a Vanguard-style payload, NRL’s first satellite mission after the NASA 

transfers would presage the lab’s dual interests in open scientific research and secret 

national defense R&D. It became two missions in one: Friedman and his space 

science colleagues would perpetuate the lab’s solar physics and upper atmosphere re-

search with radiation-measuring instruments, and Lorenzen, with Mayo and others, 

would install a radar-detecting device (originally designed for submarines at sea) into 

the same satellite shell, thereby rendering it the first spy satellite in history. As far as 

Wilhelm knew at first, his entire charge was to build a little transmitter for the scien-

tific payload—called SOLRAD, for solar radiation—that had to work at a then unusu-

ally high frequency of 136 megahertz. 12  It was an engineering problem, requiring the 

use of newfangled and still-unreliable solid-state transistors instead of vacuum tubes. 

Building the transmitter with the new transistors was a problem to solve and that is 

what engineers love to do. It happened to be a transmitter destined for space. “That is 

how I got into the satellite business,” Wilhelm said. 13 

When he joined the Satellite Techniques Branch in 1959, the branch was com-

posed of fewer than 10 engineers working in a few rooms of Building 59, near the lab’s 

guarded entrance gates. The overall team included a secretary and a few addi- tional 

technicians from Mayo’s branch, bringing the total count at the branch to a dozen or 

so. 14 

Wilhelm found himself in a heady context in which the lab’s well-known upper 

atmosphere and solar scientists, most notably Friedman and Dr. Richard Tousey, were 

collaborating with the Satellite Techniques Branch to build SOLRAD 1. “The satellite 

looked just like the [later] Vanguards—a 20-inch sphere,” Wilhelm said in an inter-

view, adding that there still were some transistors and other usable parts from the 

Vanguard program that didn’t quite make their way to NASA. 15  He had not yet been 

cleared to know about the top-secret payload that this same 20-inch sphere would 

shuttle around the planet when it made it into orbit on June 22, 1960. 377 CHAPTER 18 — THE H O U SE O F WILHELM 

“I had been there (in the Satellite Techniques Branch) several months, I guess, be-

fore they told me what else was going on,” Wilhelm recalled. “Up until that time, I did 

not know there was a second payload in the satellite.” 16  Mayo, Rose, and others who 

were in on the classified payload would “come over to our branch at night and do their 

thing,” Wilhelm said. Lorenzen was “absolutely paranoid about security,” so he made 

sure none of his “countermeasures people were hanging out with satellite people.” 17 

It was Mayo who spilled the beans to Wilhelm in the spring of 1960. And it was an 

amazing revelation, particularly in light of the shooting down of Gary Powers over the 

Soviet Union in a U-2 spy plane just a month or so earlier. Said Wilhelm: “Everyone 

knew that trying to spy on the Soviet Union was a pretty goddam dangerous thing to 

be doing. And here we were doing it. So I thought that was really neat.” 18  Once in the 

classified world, Wilhelm would never leave it, but he was driven by the sensible en-

gineering truth that components and systems designed for any one mission, classified 

or not, could point to the solution for challenges of other missions, classified or not. 

That sort of technology transfer would characterize the next 50-plus years of satellite 

engineering for Wilhelm and the NRL teams he would lead. 

They all would grow together through world-changing developments. When they 

were building SOLRAD 1 and its classified stowaway, 19  most often dubbed GRAB 1, 

this was a momentous time in the history of technology. Side by side with the advent 

of the Space Age was a shift from the familiarity of vacuum-tube-based generations of 

electronics to the new solid-state transistors and other power-efficient electronic 

devices that promised to perform even better at a fraction of the size, cost, and weight. 

One of Wilhelm’s early tasks, to build that 136-megahertz transmitter, pushed the 

outer limit of the frequency that transistors were capable of generating at the time. 

“You would only get a few transistors out of the whole batch that would work at all,” he 

recalled. 20 

Most startling to Wilhelm was the output of his little palm-sized transmitter would 

be less than one watt, equivalent to that of a dim nightlight. Recalled Wilhelm: “I am 

thinking, this is supposed to be hundreds of miles up in space and we are supposed 

to get a signal back. It was blowing my mind. But of course we built it, tested it, and it 

worked.” Wilhelm’s transmitter sent the first data on Soviet radar systems ever in -

tercepted in space to ground stations built around the world as part of the classified 

GRAB program. The results turned heads in the intelligence community, which then 

wanted more of what the NRL team was showing it could deliver. “We started having 

the money to get the test equipment and facilities for building satellites, like the vacu-

um chambers and the vibration machines and that sort of thing,” Wilhelm said. 21 

In an early illustration of his own seat-of-the-pants and frugal style of engineering 

that would later score enormous successes for the space program, he even conduct-

ed his own bootleg test. When colleagues who had gone to Cape Canaveral to work on 

the June 22 launch of SOLRAD 1/GRAB 1 called to share the good news that the 378 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

satellite had made it into orbit, Wilhelm went to the roof of Building 59 with a small 

receiving antenna in hand. There was a painter’s ladder up there. “I opened it up and 

laid it on its side to form a ‘V,’ and I laid an antenna on the … ladder and aimed it in 

the general vicinity [of the satellite’s trajectory],” he recounted, adding that he also 

had run a cable down to the lab where he could hook it up to a radio equipped with 

earphones. “By God,” said Wilhelm, “just right on time, here comes the satellite. We 

could hear it. That was probably one of the greatest thrills I ever had. My own hands 

had built that transmitter and the whole episode really got me hooked” on satellites. 22 

It didn’t take long for Wilhelm to learn the lesson that getting into the business of 

leading-edge space technology was risky. The next three satellites he worked on failed 

to make it into orbit, all due to problems with their respective Thor Able Star boost-

ers. “It really looked like we would just have to go out of business,” he recalled, but the 

Air Force’s new Thor Agena booster proved to be reliable enough to get things back 

on track. It was just one of the near-death experiences that NRL’s space technology 

cadre would experience. 

From the beginning, Wilhelm pointed out, he and his fellow engineers found 

ways of transferring aspects of existing technologies into the relentless flow of new 

ones they needed as they pioneered into the new overhead territory of space. One 

early technology standout, in Wilhelm’s view, were the solutions the lab developed 

for the then-enormous problem of storing data picked up by, say, radiation and radio 

frequency receivers on a satellite. Ground stations were few and far between. Unless 

there was some way to store data at times where there was no ground station within 

a spacecraft antenna’s line-of-sight, the satellite could essentially listen in on Soviet 

radar systems but not report—by way of a data dump—on what it had heard. So 

Wilhelm, Bob Eisenhauer, and their colleagues set out to work with industry partners 

to invent a memory system that would enable their satellites to pick up signals, store 

them as data, and then relay them to a ground station at its earliest possible conve-

nience. 

“The first attempt to use a motor to drive a magnetic belt … turned out to be a 

loser,” Wilhelm recalled. “We couldn’t get accurate enough registration or repeat -

ability with the mechanical motor and gears, and all the tolerance involved, to read 

out what had previously been recorded.” The NRL engineers teamed up with a small 

company, Spacetac, that had been delving into a solid-state alternative—a magnetic 

core memory system in which each tiny donut-shaped “core” could be electrically 

written to, and read from, without requiring moving parts. “Together with them, we 

developed the first solid-state memory for the SOLRAD program so it could record 

the output of the X-ray detectors all around the orbit without gaps,” Wilhelm said, 

specifying that the memory unit first flew in space in 1965. 

In another illustration of the newness of satellite technology in the 1960s, Wil-

helm built an entire satellite almost all by himself. The point of it was to help calibrate 

the pathbreaking space surveillance system (NAVSPASUR) that NRL colleagues Rog-379 CHAPTER 18 — THE H O U SE O F WILHELM 

er Easton and Jack Mengel had designed to keep track of whatever satellites anybody, 

particularly the Soviets, might fly over U.S. territory. Wilhelm’s satellite was one of a 

series dubbed SURCAL, for Surveillance Calibration, whose satellites were designed 

with specific and known shapes and sizes. They served as reference objects for the 

NAVSPASUR system so that NAVSPASUR operators could discern more details from 

radio echoes deriving from other objects, such as Soviet satellites. Said Wilhelm: “I 

basically built that whole satellite by myself. It was so small that one guy could handle 

it.” 23  The general trend from there would be that ever-larger engineering teams would 

build ever-larger and more complex satellites. 

Wilhelm also built an on-payload receiver to listen in on the fan-shaped radio 

beam transmitted from the NAVSPASUR ground stations. “When that satellite would 

come through the beam, it would pick up the first side lobe of this fan beam, and it 

would turn on and then reradiate a very strong signal down, which enabled us to es-

sentially plot the whole beam structure of ‘the [NAVSPASUR] fence,’” Wilhelm said. 24 

Well, it would have, had it made it into orbit. The Thor Able Star booster failed during 

its January 24, 1962, launch attempt, sending Wilhelm’s hand-built SURCAL satellite 

into the ocean. Joining it were two other satellites that were in the rocket’s fairing: 

another SOLRAD satellite 25  for measuring solar X-rays and a payload named LOFTI 

intended to test whether low frequency radio signals could traverse the ionosphere 

intact enough to be useful for communicating with submerged submarines. 26  There 

was one additional payload on the rocket, tucked inside the SOLRAD shell: another 

ELINT payload that would have become known as GRAB 3 had it made it into orbit. 27 

Wilhelm got a powerful inkling in 1965 that leadership was in his future—wheth-

er he wanted it or not! That is when Ed Dix, Wilhelm’s boss and RF engineering 

mentor, confided that he would be following Marty Votaw, the man most responsible 

for preserving a satellite technology beachhead at NRL, into the nascent commercial 

satellite communications industry by taking a job at COMSAT. 28  Wilhelm already had 

become head of the Satellite Instrument Section, but he did not think he was quite up 

to the role of running the entire Satellite Techniques Branch. Ed Dix thought other-

wise and told Wilhelm he thought he was the logical choice. 

After all, as head of the Satellite Instrument Section, Wilhelm was getting a feel 

for all aspects of a satellite—including mechanical, electrical power, and RF com-

munications components and systems. “It kind of got me in touch with everything 

that went into a satellite,” Wilhelm said. Without being intentional about it, he was 

becoming a noticeably capable and innovative systems engineer who would earn the 

admiration of so many in the years to come. The promotion from section head to 

head of the Satellite Techniques Branch was not a done deal: there had been no prec-

edent at the lab for the leap in rank and pay grade that Dix was envisioning for the 

young Wilhelm, whose own heart remained on the bench. He was not himself pining 

for administrative responsibility. 380 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

In fact, the lab’s leadership was inclined to conduct an external search, a move 

that would have delayed the addition of an administrator’s hat for Wilhelm. But the 

prospect of finding someone from the outside to airdrop in and supervise the tight-

knit satellite group did not appeal to anyone in the branch. Without Wilhelm’s knowl-

edge, every engineer in the branch signed a petition in support of hiring him as head 

of the branch and they delivered their petition to the top-tier of the lab’s leadership 

in Building 43. The petitioners were successful. Wilhelm got the promotion and sud-

denly became the leader of the Satellite Techniques Branch that by then had grown to 

about 30 staff members. It would grow to more than 10 times that staffing level in the 

years to come. This set Wilhelm into a course of taking on ever more administra- tive 

and programmatic responsibility, even as he strove to keep his engineering skill set 

actively engaged in the mix. 

When he took over as head of the Satellite Techniques Branch in 1965, the work 

was split between unclassified projects in collaboration with Friedman, Tousey, and 

their space scientist colleagues, on the one hand, and on the classified ELINT pro-

gram that was sponsored by the National Reconnaissance Office, on the other hand. 

Both programs were earning a top-notch reputation for the laboratory, but the classi-

fied side also was winning over those in a position to seek and deliver the substantial 

financial support that it took to run these expensive programs. “We really started 

demonstrating some things that some people in the military realized could not be 

done any other way,” recalled Wilhelm. 29 

NRL’s space science and space technology groups both grew up together from the 

post–World War II years in the 1940s when the lab was using captured V-2 rockets to 

loft measuring instruments to unprecedented heights in the upper atmosphere. But 

two decades later, as Wilhelm’s responsibility was on the rise, there was at least a par-

tial divergence of the two arenas—space science and space technology—in the offing. 

In the years leading up to Wilhelm’s big promotion, the ELINT team was building its 

classified payloads to detect more and more bands of radar, which they could only 

do by packing more circuitry and other components inside. “It started to get tight 

inside that little sphere,” Wilhelm recounted. The original 20-inch sphere hosting the 

dual SOLRAD 1/GRAB 1 payloads gave way to a 24-inch diameter shell and then to 

a version with a stretched belly. Add to that the need for SOLRAD experiments to 

have a platform pointing toward the sun, whereas the ELINT payloads were naturally 

earthward-pointing missions, and the idea that the two missions might have to be 

physically separated onto different platforms readily came to mind. 

“You could see it coming that basically these two payloads are not compatible 

with each other,” Wilhelm recalled. “We could not optimize either one because of the 

such different missions. So really the two missions needed to kind of go their own 

way.” 30  It was time for the space science and space technology elements of the labo-

ratory, which remained merged by necessity after the Vanguard team transferred to 

NASA, to begin taking independent trajectories. 381 CHAPTER 18 — THE HOUSE OF WILHELM 

In 1971, the lab undertook a major administrative reorganization by which 

Wilhelm’s Satellite Techniques Branch fell under the wing of Howard Lorenzen, who 

with Reid Mayo had secured the lab’s pioneering place in the history of space-based 

ELINT. Lorenzen at the time was head of the lab’s Space Systems Division (one of 

four divisions in the Space Science and Technology Directorate under the leadership 

of Herb Rabin). And unlike Wilhelm’s previous boss, Dr. William R. Faust, who was 

not so interested in satellites, Lorenzen saw a big future in space. Said Wilhelm of 

Lorenzen: “He was dedicated to the space effort and was a real hard-charging guy … 

He let me pretty much run my show, but he supported me very strongly, and brought 

in some real major programs for the Navy that were very successful … Lorenzen had 

quite a good reputation in his own field [of electronic countermeasures]. That was 

probably one of the significant steps that we made that put the space program on a 

growth curve.” 31 

This was an expansive time for NRL’s satellite cadre. From the early to middle 

1970s, they were working simultaneously on three major programs: the scientific 

SOLRAD program, including SOLRAD Hi, a satellite pair whose circular orbits took 

them out to 60,000 nautical miles from the surface; the Timation navigation program 

that Roger Easton had devised and that would demonstrate the key technologies 

underlying the Global Positioning System (GPS); and a new program, the Multiple 

Satellite Dispenser (MSD), that was an evolutionary step in the classified ELINT pro-

gram and that would lead to its own consequential lineage of technologies. “The NRL 

space program was getting lots of attention from lots of different quarters,” Wilhelm 

noted. 32 

As if the challenge of running three major programs while undergoing a reor-

ganization was not enough to keep Wilhelm busy, he also learned in the early 1970s 

that the Air Force had decided it was switching its workhorse booster from the Thor 

Agena to the far larger Titan III. The NRL ELINT program—also then known as 

Program C of the National Reconnaissance Office—depended on the Air Force-based 

Program A of NRO for the boosters, and Program A’s team was designing larger sat-

ellites that required larger boosters. “We figured if we [had] to pick up the additional   

> Multitasker. NRL space technolo -
> gists developed the Multiple Satellite
> Dispenser, depicted in orbit in this
> drawing. The MSD could deliver sev -
> eral individual payloads into distinct
> orbits. (NRL photo 76549.jpg) 382 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

cost of these expensive boosters, that could kill our program,” Wilhelm recalled later. 

And then, in a particularly consequential application of his problem-solving skills, 

Wilhelm arranged for the lab to gain access to Atlas ICBM boosters that were getting 

mothballed in the California desert as they gave way to next-generation Titan ICBM 

boosters. 

“The Atlas could not get into orbit by itself, but it could get close,” Wilhelm knew, 

but he also had a solution in mind. “By stacking another solid rocket on top of it, it 

could reach orbital altitudes. I was an electrical engineer, and I did not understand too 

much about orbitology in those days. But I taught myself.” 33 

With proper modifications—most notably in the form of “a very small rocket 

within the satellite itself ” that could refine the satellite’s orbit once the Atlas booster 

had brought it there—Wilhelm saw it could do the job of positioning the ELINT sat-

ellites where they needed to be, and at a bargain price. The price tag for achieving the 

proper orbit would be $6 million with the Atlas, rather the $25 million it would take 

with the Titan III. This would save $19 million 1970s dollars on every launch. 

In its way, it was as big and bold an idea as Mayo’s vision to loft into orbit a ra-

dar-detecting sensor originally designed for submarines. Indeed, the idea of success-

fully using obsolete ICBMs in a cost-saving coup for a pivotal national reconnaissance 

capability seemed outlandish to the NRO leadership at the Pentagon. 34  “My boss [Lo-

renzen] and I went to ‘4C1000,’ what we called the NRO offices in the Pentagon at the 

time,” Wilhelm recalled. “I got up in front of the NRO people and started describing 

the concept. General Bradburn 35  jumped and said, ‘No, no. That is not going to work! 

What in the heck are you talking about! No way! You can’t make orbit with that vehi-

cle.’ I said, ‘Sir, I think we can.’ He said, ‘Well, you’re not an expert! I want my people 

to check this out! This briefing is over!’” 36  By the next week, General Bradburn’s own 

experts had confirmed that Wilhelm’s plan should work. The fire-sale Atlas rockets be -

came workhorse boosters for the NRL engineers for nearly 15 years. And the concept 

of attaching a small rocket to the satellite structure itself, particularly in com- bination 

with the Multiple Satellite Dispenser (MSD)—another Wilhelm brainchild— was 

replicated or modified several times as Wilhelm’s team designed, built, and transferred 

to industry partners subsequent generations of orbiting ELINT systems. 

The Atlas/MSD innovation proved to be a lasting and expanding success. It also 

led to a career highlight for Wilhelm. In 1976, Wernher von Braun, one of the most 

famous names of the Space Age and the archetypal “rocket scientist,” visited the space 

technology operation that Wilhelm was running. 37  For Wilhelm, it was one of the 

greatest moments of his life. He recalls one particular episode this way: “We took him 

on a tour of the whole laboratory, and I took him into the clean room where we had 

some of the micro-thrusters. I showed him how, over the years, we had managed to 

make them smaller and smaller. He was sitting at the microscope, adjusting it and 

shaking his head. He said, ‘I can’t get over this! My whole career I have tried to make 383 CHAPTER 18 — THE HOUSE OF WILHELM 

the rocket bigger and bigger, and you guys are making things smaller and smaller!’” 

In a capping moment, the two giants of space technology traded autographs. 38 

Neither Wilhelm, nor the space technology tradition at NRL, would ever become 

household names as did Wernher von Braun and NASA. But within the deliberately 

and necessarily lower profile of the military and classified side of the U.S. space pro-

gram, Wilhelm and his NRL space technology colleagues would become a go-to team 

in the government when it came to national needs in space. When Lorenzen retired 

in 1973, and with an additional reshuffling within the lab’s organizational structure 

that morphed the Satellite Techniques Branch into the Spacecraft Technology Center 

(Code 7040), more of the lab’s space-based research and development consolidated 

under Wilhelm’s leadership. It also placed Wilhelm only one tier away from the level 

of the Space Science and Technology directorate’s Associate Director of Research, a 

position that reported directly to NRL’s civilian Director of Research, at the time Dr. 

Alan Berman. 

In 1981, another administrative shift elevated the Spacecraft Technology Center 

to a full-blown division: the Space Systems Division. “What the lab was trying to 

drive toward was basically to get all of the space work into one organization,” Wil -

helm explained. 39  And there seemed to be ever more to pack in. By 1984, Wilhelm 

found himself in charge of eight branches: Electrical Systems and Spacecraft Inte-

gration, Terrestrial Systems, Mechanical Systems, Systems Engineering and Anal-

ysis, Digital Systems, Radio Frequency and Optical, Space Applications, and Space 

Sensing Applications. Wilhelm was on the verge of getting overwhelmed. After this 

reorganization had unfolded, “it was very difficult for me to interface adequately with 

that many people,” Wilhelm conceded. “I tended to focus more attention on certain 

groups than on others. I just couldn’t cover that many bases.” 40 

That situation was rectified in 1986 during the next major reorganization with 

the establishment of the Naval Center for Space Technology, NCST, which was the  

> Space Giants. In 1976, the most famous
> rocket engineer of the era, Wernher von
> Braun, visited NRL. From left to right is
> Wilhelm, von Braun, another non-NRL
> visitor, and James Winkler. 384 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

result of a revamped Navy Space Policy put forward in the first half of the 1980s by 

the Secretary of the Navy, Dr. John Lehman, and other top-echelon planners. As 

mentioned in Chapter Twelve, NCST initially was organized into three departments. 

Wilhelm, director of the new NCST, assigned three senior engineers and confidants 

to head them—Robert Eisenhauer took the helm of the Space Systems Development 

Department, Robert Beal took the directorship of the Spacecraft Engineering Depart -

ment, and Lee Hammarstrom took on leadership of the Space Systems Technology 

Department, which in 1992 would merge into the other two departments. 41 

The reorganization brought with it what almost proved to be a deal breaker for 

Wilhelm. The lab’s Director of Research at the time, Dr. Timothy Coffey, wanted Wil-

helm, who was now an equivalent of the lab’s other Associate Directors of Research 

(ADORs), to relocate his office to the lab’s main administrative building, Building 

43. It was a move that would place Wilhelm’s office next to the other ADORs, but 

Wilhelm also knew such a move would have been anathema to his own penchant to 

remain close to, in his words, “the technical scope of the program.” 42  Wilhelm had 

some leverage here. After all, the operation he had been overseeing had a record of 

bringing money and clout to the lab, and of producing highly valued intelligence, 

surveillance, and reconnaissance capabilities for the country. He was able to work out 

a compromise. His colleague, Fred Hellrich, became an administrative deputy and he 

agreed to occupy an office in Building 43. Meanwhile, Wilhelm continued to focus on 

the technical portfolio in Building A59 and a few other R&D locations at the lab and 

at field sites, such as the satellite control facility at Blossom Point. This arrangement 

spared Wilhelm additional administrative tasks that would have demanded much of 

his time. 

The establishment of a place like NCST within the Navy took longer than it 

should have, according to Wilhelm. After all, he said, “the Navy’s role is basically a 

worldwide one covering three-quarters of the Earth, and the Navy is spread out so far 

that when you think of how the Navy can conduct its mission, I think that you would 

very quickly be led to the view that space-based systems can really fill the role and 

solve some of the Navy’s problems, like probably nothing else can.” 43  With the open-

ing of NCST in 1986, Wilhelm added, he had hoped the Navy finally would make 

the larger commitment to space he thought it needed to. At the same time, he also 

understood the delay because he knew the Navy’s more natural and intuitive concerns 

were assets like ships and submarines, not satellites and C4I equipment. 

At about the same time that NCST was established, NRL Director of Research 

Coffey was pushing for a change of mind-set by the space technologists at the lab. It 

had been clear for years already that the survival of the group could not ride indef-

initely on the NRO’s classified programs—nor on the new money that was coming in 

during the 1980s with the Strategic Defense Initiative, first for the LACE mission 

and then for Clementine. In response, Wilhelm’s staff became more intentional about 

partnering with many of the lab’s other 16 major R&D divisions on projects ranging 385 CHAPTER 18 — THE HOUSE OF WILHELM 

from new superconducting materials for next-generation sensors to theoreti-

cal studies of large-scale solar energy harvesting from space. 44 

It was a partnering practice that capitalized on one the lab’s greatest assets—a 

multidisciplinary nature that made it possible for researchers with different skills to 

find one another to solve problems that each on his or her own could not solve. Said 

Wilhelm: “Just working here at NRL, I can’t think of how many times, when we had a 

problem in the satellites, I could just walk basically across the street to another division 

and there was an expert over there—whether it be a metallurgist or a chemist or what-

ever—who could help solve a problem for us. The fact that this laboratory is so broadly 

based has been a real asset for our space technology mission.” 45 

Under the entrepreneurial leadership of Eisenhauer, then head of NCST’s Space 

Systems Development Department, NCST also in the 1980s began expanding its efforts 

and accomplishments in the myriad components and systems that were underneath 

the “orbiting peripherals,” the satellites. This led to technology developments that eked 

ever more tactical value for warfighters out of the national intelligence assets in orbit. 

NCST’s C4I portfolio expanded as the satellite work began to wane, at least compared 

to the previous two decades. 

When the Air Force announced in the 1970s that it was shifting its booster from 

the Thorad Agena booster for NRL’s Poppy ELINT satellite program to the larger and 

far more expensive Titan III, Wilhelm responded with his innovative idea to adapt 

the less expensive Atlas F ICBMs, which the country was phasing out of their original 

nuclear-warhead delivery role, for NRL’s space projects. Reducing the cost of getting 

mass, including satellites, into orbit had been a long-time theme for Wilhelm and, for 

that matter, the space community in general. 

That is why the continuing trend by the Air Force toward even bigger rockets 

during the 1980s primed Wilhelm into considering another approach to reducing 

launch costs. It would grow into a major NCST project between 1988 and 1991. Known 

in its long form as Sea Launch and Recovery, SEALAR was reminiscent of a World 

War II scheme by the German rocket engineers in Peenemünde who had designed a 

version of their V-2 ballistic missile that could strike the United States. Their idea had 

been to insert a V-2 inside large waterproof capsules, which a U-boat would then tow 

across the ocean to within striking distance of U.S. cities. Once there, ballast tanks 

in the capsule would be flooded to render the capsule vertical. Then the U-boat crew 

would set the missile’s guidance system and launch the weapon. German war engineers 

built a launch container for this variant of the V-2 before the war ended, but they never 

conducted a live fire test. 46 

In addition to reducing launch costs, the SEALAR project also was about liberating 

the Navy from dependence on the Air Force for launch services. “Let’s say that in the 

future we need a booster that is much bigger than the Saturn 5,” Wilhelm said in an 

interview, referring to the massive booster made famous during the Apollo missions. 

“It really starts to boggle your mind on how you can handle anything of that size on the 386 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

land without building facilities that would make the pyramids look like child’s play.” 47 

“If it turns out that the best way to actually get access to space is by use of the 

ocean itself, sea launch and recovery could be the answer to our space transportation 

needs,” he continued. “In that case, the Navy would not only have ‘more to gain’ from 

space, but would also have ‘more to contribute’—a sort of poetic justice.” 48 

The SEALAR program began almost by chance at the end of a visit Wilhelm 

made in 1988 to an Admiral at the Pentagon. As he was leaving, another Navy officer 

handed him a proposal about the concept of launching and recovering rockets at sea 

by Robert Truax, a former Navy Captain, who managed rocket design programs for 

the Navy until retiring in 1959. In 1966, with an interest in furthering his own life-

long quest to reduce launch costs, he founded his own rocket engineering company, 

Truax Engineering, Inc. (TEI). “I found it fascinating,” Wilhelm said of the proposal, 

“and I contacted Truax.” 49  Wilhelm also got in touch with the Chief of Naval Research 

at the time, John R. “Smoke” Wilson (USN Rear Admiral, retired). Recalled Wilhelm, 

“He saw this as a way for the Navy to really use all of Naval capability to put things 

into orbit. All you had to do was a little engineering,” 50  Wilhelm said with deliberate 

understatement. 

Later in 1988, NCST sent out a call for bidders with the task of collaborating on a 

project to design and build a two-stage, sea-launched, recoverable launch system that 

could put 10,000 pounds into low Earth orbit at minimum cost. As it turned out, TEI 

won the contract. 51 

The initial tack Truax pushed was to build the rockets using an especially strong 

type of steel, maraging steel. Truax was convinced that despite its tendency to become 

brittle under stress, this type of steel would withstand a hit on the ocean surface after 

its boosting role had been completed. Initial tests using 6- to 8-inch-diameter scale 

models shot into a water tank at another naval research facility justified going to more 

involved “drop tests” using helicopters. In a series of three such tests in Monterey Bay, 

California, larger models were dropped into the ocean near the Naval Postgraduate 

School from an altitude high enough that the models would reach the same terminal 

velocity they would have had they fallen from the edge of space. Wilhelm points out 

that the team was only able to carry out the tests after assuring Greenpeace activists 

that the drops would not threaten sea lions in the area. 52 

During the first drop, the vehicle wobbled unstably and was flattened by the 

impact, Wilhelm recalled. 53  For the second test, Wilhelm called on his engineers in 

Building A59 to increase the vehicle’s stability by heavying it up, enlarging its fins, and 

building in a larger separation between the center of pressure and the center of mass. 

The test went well. But during the third drop test, the vehicle landed on the side of a 

wave and, says Wilhelm, “got beat up pretty bad.” The data was in: either the design 

or the maraging steel was not up to the job at hand, that is, to render a booster rocket 

recoverable after it had fallen into the sea. 387 CHAPTER 18 — THE HOUSE OF WILHELM 

It was time for another tack. The collaborators dubbed the new test vehicle the 

X-3, which included four steerable LR101 rocket engines built by Rocketdyne. It was 

a single-stage, suborbital test vehicle fueled by a liquid oxygen (LOX)/kerosene com-

bination. The booster included a valve system that retained enough internal pressure 

once the fuel was exhausted to give the now empty structure enough integrity to 

survive an ocean landing. After sufficient testing of the rocket components, Wilhelm 

said, a big next step would be to try a water launch in a so-called spar-buoy, a partic-

ularly stable type of buoy that is long and floats upright when its bottom is filled with 

water. It is reminiscent of the V-2 tow-and-launch vessel that German engineers had 

envisioned during World War II. 

With an eye on keeping development costs down for the static firing tests of the 

liquid fuel main vehicle, which was the natural next step, Truax recommended that 

the collaboration acquire a surplus Navy barge. To pull that off, Wilhelm assigned 

John Schmidt, who had earned a reputation for being able to secure materials and 

means for a variety of NCST projects. “He could get almost anything you want,” 

Wilhelm recalled. In addition to acquiring a supply of Rocketdyne’s LR101 rocket en-

gines, Schmidt got hold of a Yard Fleet Navy Barge that was in San Diego. Equipped 

with lathes, band saws, and other tools, the Navy had used the barge as “a floating 

schoolyard for training machinists,” Wilhelm said. For the SEALAR project, it would 

become a platform for conducting static firing tests of 10-foot models of the main 

vehicle. The full-size rocket design would rise to 25 feet. 

After overcoming glitches, including damage to the barge as a tug boat hauled 

it overzealously to waters off of Redwood City near the San Francisco Bay, which is 

where TEI was located, the momentum on the SEALAR program began to build. 

Once the barge was in place and fitted with spherical fuel tanks for the liquid oxygen 

and kerosene and the plumbing to pressurize the test rockets, the team conducted  

> Booster Redo. Shown here is the
> SEALAR project logo along with
> images from a helicopter drop test
> in Monterey and a static firing from
> a barge that served as a research
> platform. 388 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE

a number of static tests—with the rocket exhaust shooting into and spectacularly 

vaporizing the ocean water—to determine the optimal fuel pressures in the rockets’ 

tanks. The engineering phase of the SEALAR project seemed to be entering a smooth 

gait. 

It was looking promising enough in 1990 that the Senate Armed Services Com-

mittee in July upped the Navy’s 1991 SEALAR budget request by 900 percent (from 

$2.5 million to $22 million), and called for a competition between SEALAR and the 

Air Force’s Advanced Launch System (ALS) program. The Committee’s report on the 

fiscal year 1991 defense budget concluded that SEALAR indeed could lower launch 

costs and increase operational responsiveness for a fraction of the cost of the Air 

Force’s advanced launch system. The report characterized the ALS development pro-

gram as being entirely unrealistic. 54  The ALS program featured a booster three times 

larger than the already massive Titan IV. 55 

For NCST and TEI this surely was good news. The SEALAR program suddenly 

had become a significant component of NCST’s overall R&D portfolio, perhaps one-

third by Wilhelm’s estimate. 56  But it didn’t take long for Wilhelm to receive a rude 

reminder of how precarious is the game of rocket engineering, which NRL had gotten 

out of decades earlier after the Vanguard program transferred to NASA when the 

civilian agency was established in 1958. Back in Washington, while on a golf outing 

with coworkers, Wilhelm learned via a bad-news phone call from colleagues on site at 

the barge in California that the liquid oxygen tank on a test vehicle had violently split 

open during a test involving repeated pressurization cycles. 

This convinced Wilhelm that Truax’s choice of maraging steel, which NRL’s own 

materials experts thought was a bad idea from the start, would have to give way to the 

traditional rocket material, aluminum, even though that would set the engineering 

clock back considerably. He set his engineers in Building A59 on the task of fabricat-

ing the aluminum version of the flight demonstrator and by the end of 1991 they were 

making quick progress toward a vehicle that would be ready for flight tests. 57 

But there was an even more perilous development in the overall SEALAR context 

to contend with: the sponsorship for SEALAR had shifted from the Office of Naval 

Research, headed by the enthusiastic Chief of Naval Research (CNR), Smoke Wilson, 

to an office within the Secretary of the Navy, which was none too keen on the project. 

When this failure occurred, Navy leadership pulled its support. 

“SEALAR was a sobering lesson,” commented Timothy Coffey, a plasma scien-

tist who was NRL’s civilian Director of Research during the SEALAR program. Even 

though Wilhelm and his collaborators managed to get the CNR to commit some $15 

million to the program over several years, it was not sufficient for the program to suc-

ceed, Coffey said, adding that there were a lot of politics involved. For one thing, not 

everyone in government, particularly the Air Force, wanted the Navy to have its own 

launch capability. And the project was controversial within NRL too because, Coffey 

noted, it was not clear where the money for a sustained SEALAR effort would come 389 CHAPTER 18 — THE HOUSE OF WILHELM 

from. 57  The Senate Armed Services Committee also urged NCST to secure funding 

beyond the 1991 government outlay. 58 

Even so, Wilhelm remained convinced that some SEALAR-like design could 

dramatically reduce launch costs, so he maintained a mostly conceptual level of 

SEALAR engineering at NCST. With the hazards of liquid fuel in mind, the team 

developed designs for hybrid motors in which liquid oxidizer would flow through 

wagonwheel-shaped cores of solid propellant. As with the Space Shuttles, these would 

strap onto a larger central liquid oxygen tank on the overall vehicle. The hybrid 

motors would constitute the first and second stages of the ascent before giving away 

to the liquid-oxygen-based third stage. In the interest of realism, the NCST designers 

abandoned the requirement that all parts of the booster be recoverable. Instead, they 

focused on systems in which only the central core of the vehicle would need to make 

a soft landing. One design included parafoils that would steer the vehicle into a net 

stretched over a barge. Another featured a “rotary decelerator,” or a helicopter-like 

rotor that would develop lift to counter the speed of descent. 

“I had quite a team working on this,” Wilhelm said, including contractors. With 

the help of Lee Hammarstrom, who during his career worked both at NRL and the 

National Reconnaissance Office, Wilhelm managed to get NRO to commission a 

study—dubbed Basic Launch Understanding (BLUE)—on the challenge of lowering 

launch costs. This spawned what appeared to Wilhelm as a resurgence of interest in 

the SEALAR concept. “I was pretty well convinced that we were going to move ahead 

and have a nice program,” he said. 59 

Then, once again, the axe came down on the program. As Wilhelm explained it, 

there were two reasons. One was that Hammarstrom, a friend of NCST within NRO, 

had to take time away from NRO for other necessities. The other, Wilhelm claims, 

was that a high-level Air Force officer at NRO became convinced that NCST actually 

was onto a good idea and relayed that sentiment to the Space and Missile Systems 

Center, the Air Force’s space headquarters in Los Angeles. 

“As soon as they found out we were doing something good,” Wilhelm said, they 

killed BLUE, which amounted to the follow-on project to SEALAR. The Air Force 

told NRO that “it was getting out of its lane,” that the building of rockets was Air 

Force business, not NRO business. “We got word from NRO that the program was 

dead” in early 1995, Wilhelm stated. 

The same year that NCST stopped its SEALAR efforts, a collaboration called Sea 

Launch began between RSC Energia, Russia’s largest manager of spaceflight projects 

with roots going back to the beginning of the Space Age; the Boeing Company in 

the United States; and several other partners. Since its first demonstration launch in 

1999 from an enormous self-propelled platform (a modified oil rig), Sea Launch has 

executed a few dozen launch operations with Russian-built Zenit-3SL vehicles from 

oceanic sites for a variety of customers. Four of the launches have failed, including 

one in early 2013. And the pathbreaking commercial space firm SpaceX, as well as 390 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

others in this nascent industry, have begun conducting their own initial experiments 

with boosters recoverable at sea. 

Wilhelm always has had multiple balls in the air. Even as on-again/off-again 

SEALAR was approaching its end game, he and his NCST brethren were in the busi-

ness of designing, building, and operating payloads. In one of his greatest displays of 

the right stuff that it takes to be in the space business, Wilhelm in early 1994 almost 

singlehandedly saved an innovative sub-$100 million space technology mission— 

Clementine, that is—from what otherwise would have been a total failure. The prob-

lem resided in a rechargeable, nickel-hydrogen battery system that Wilhelm had some 

experience with during the Timation program of the 1960s and 1970s. Recharging the 

battery depended on solar cells that had to be pointed correctly with respect to the 

sun. 

“The satellite got into trouble and it wasn’t oriented properly initially and so we 

weren’t getting much charge,” Wilhelm recounted. 60  As a result, every time the team 

tried to turn the satellite systems on, a sensor registered an undervoltage and the sat-

ellite would automatically turn off. There were hints from telemetry signals (associat-

ed with the gas pressure inside the battery, a surrogate for the charge level) indicating 

that the battery was low, not dead. Wilhelm knew this meant there was some hope of 

reviving it. 

This is where Wilhelm’s right stuff kicked in. He recalled it this way: “So I said 

let’s stop commanding it; just leave it alone and let it get charged back up. And we 

did that for 24 hours. We didn’t send a damn command to the satellite. And then we 

finally crossed our fingers and sent a command and the battery was now up and was 

strong enough that we could reorient [the spacecraft] and we were off and had a very 

successful mission.” The gas gauge, which engineers at NRL had long ago included 

in the battery design on the Timation program, saved the day, Wilhelm said, noting 

how small engineering innovations years ago could be pivotal for a future mission’s 

success. 61  This sort of leveraging of knowledge, expertise, and technology can only 

occur in a long-term context such as a space technology tradition that NRL had been 

building since 1946, he noted. 

On September 27, 2011, Wilhelm and his 275 colleagues celebrated the lab’s 

100th payload launch with the successful placement of TacSat-4 into orbit from a 

launchpad in Kodiak, Alaska. It was a return to the small and quick-turnaround 

mentality of the early days a half-century earlier. The prospects for a lot more actual 

satellite building had not been good for some years already, though NCST in the teen 

years of the new millennium was keeping a hand in a leading-edge movement toward 

so-called microsatellites (sometimes called nanosatellites), or cubesats, in which 

space platforms of greater or lesser complexity are built up from modules that could 

fit inside a box of facial tissues. Cubesats at various stages of design and completion 

could be found in several NCST locations, among them Building A59 and at the 

ground station in Blossom Point, Maryland. In the same time frame, there were other 391 CHAPTER 18 — THE H O U SE O F WILHELM 

major and exciting projects in the works, including the Microwave Imager Sounder 

whose ultimate fate remains uncertain. 

Wilhelm, NCST, and its predecessor organizations within NRL have been there 

before. Near death has been a routine challenge that they have overcome each and 

every time. Wilhelm has never been much of a worrier; he is more of a doer, a plan-

ner, and a problem solver. High on his mind as the new millennium’s second decade 

unfolds is the growing danger that the massive and still growing amount of orbiting 

detritus of the Space Age could become that which puts the brakes on further progress 

in space. 

One mention of TEPCE, for example, which stands for Tether Electrodynamic 

Propulsion Cubesat Experiment, and Wilhelm lights up with an expression that surely 

is just today’s version of what he looked like when he worked on his first satellite trans-

mitters back in 1959 and 1960. With roots in NCST’s TiPS and ATEx projects, TEPCE 

consists primarily of two cubesats connected with a one-kilometer-long conductive 

tether. As it moves through the thin, electrically charged plasma that infiltrates near-

Earth space, an electrical current, which is generated with solar cells, is supposed to 

start running in the tether, providing power for an electric propulsion system so that 

the spacecraft can maneuver without the need for canisters of fuel or gas. 

With such spacecraft, Wilhelm projected, you “could go collect a piece of debris, 

probably with a robot attachment, drag this thing down to a lower altitude, let it go, 

and let it burn up and then boost yourself back up and just keep doing that ... You 

would probably envision a fleet of these things up there, like little garbage trucks going 

around grabbing stuff.” 62  

> Charge Up. Building on earlier work with two-part
> payloads connected by a tether, Peter Wilhelm and
> a team of NCST engineers developed the Tether
> Electrodynamic Propulsion Cubesat Experiment,
> TEPCE, to test the concept of generating electricity
> for propulsion as a conductive tether moves through
> electrically charged plasma in near-Earth space.

392 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

He is as passionate about this vision as any he has had during his more than 

half-century ride with the entire Space Age. Said Wilhelm, “To me it is a game chang-

er, and I would just like to be a part of seeing that technology, which has never been 

done before, get used and help solve this damn debris problem that we have made for 

ourselves. We’ve really screwed space up in the 50 years we’ve been at it.” 63 

This is perhaps his biggest lament, his most lasting gripe, in an otherwise ebul-

lient view of his, NRL’s, and NCST’s roles in the Space Age and the U.S. space pro-

gram. In 2012, while in his late seventies and still running NCST like a much younger 

man would, he knew that the time was not so far when he finally would hand over the 

reins. Said Wilhelm during a video interview about NRL’s roles in the advent of the 

Global Positioning System, “if my career ended tomorrow, I would have to say 

it was a good satisfying one.” Two years later, in his succinct announcement that he 

had decided to retire, he reiterated that assessment: “This has been the best career 

anyone could have asked for.” When Wilhelm retired, Chris Dwyer, head of NCST’s 

Space Systems Development Department, took the baton from him to serve as Acting 

Director, a role he alternated with John Schaub, then head of NCST’s Spacecraft Engi-

neering Department. In 2016, Schaub was named as the second director of NCST. As 

NCST’s new leadership takes the organization forward, Wilhelm’s legacy will contin-

ue to contribute as his numerous conceptual and engineering innovations will keep 

unfolding in the ongoing histories of NRL, NCST, and the Space Age. 

1 Robert A. McDonald (ed.),  Beyond Expectations—Building an American National Recon-

naissance Capability: Recollections of the Pioneers and Founders of National Reconnaissance 

(Bethesda, MD: National Reconnaissance Office and the American Society of Photogrammetry 

and Remote Sensing, 2002), p. 160. 

2 Peter Wilhelm, interview with TV crew and author, February 16, 2012; Peter Wilhelm, inter-

view with NRL Historian Leo Slater, August 7, 2009. 

3 Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009. 

4 Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009, p. 4. 

5 Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009. 

6 Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009, p. 6. 

7 Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009, p. 7. 

8 It would be more accurate to refer to him as a returnee in that any Vanguard staff that wanted 

to stay at NRL actually had to reapply for an NRL job after first officially transferring to NASA 

as part of the law that established the new civilian space agency. 

9 Peter Wilhelm, interview with author, February 16, 2013.  

> 10

Wilhelm, interview with author, February 16, 2013.  

> 11

McDonald,  Beyond Expectations , p. 155  

> 12

Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009, p. 10.  

> 13

Wilhelm, interview with author, February 16, 2013, p. 7.  

> 14

Peter Wilhelm, interview with NRL Historian David van Keuren and Archivist Dean Bundy, 

November 19, 1987, p. 7.  

> 15

Wilhelm, interview with van Keuren and archivist Bundy, November 19, 1987.  

> 16

Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009, p. 11.  

> 17

Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009, p. 11. 393 CHAPTER 18 — THE H O U SE O F WILHELM  

> 18

Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009, p. 11.  

> 19

More properly, it was the other way around. SOLRAD 1 was stowaway on the classified pro-

gram, which was the primary mission.  

> 20

Wilhelm, interview with TV crew and author, February 16, 2013.  

> 21

Wilhelm, interview with author, February 16, 2013.  

> 22

Wilhelm, interview with TV crew and author, February 16, 2013, p. 6.  

> 23

Wilhelm, interview with TV crew and author, February 16, 2013, pp. 13–14.  

> 24

Wilhelm, interview with TV crew and author, February 16, 2013, pp. 13–14.  

> 25

SOLRAD 4.  

> 26

LOFTI 2A.  

> 27

Robert A. McDonald and Sharon K. Moreno,  Raising the Periscope…Grab and Poppy: Ameri-

ca’s Early ELINT Satellites,  (Chantilly, VA: Center for the Study of National Reconnaissance, 

National Reconnaissance Office, September 2005), p. 19.  

> 28

Interestingly, it was one of the first co-directors of the National Reconnaissance Office, Joseph 

Charyk, who is partly responsible for the NRL-to-COMSAT conduit. Charyk left the NRO in 

December 1962 to become president of the company.  

> 29

Wilhelm, interview with TV crew and author, February 16, 2012, p. 16.  

> 30

Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009.  

> 31

Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009, p. 17.  

> 32

Wilhelm, interview with author, February 16, 2013.  

> 33

McDonald,  Beyond Expectations , pp. 155–162.  

> 34

McDonald,  Beyond Expectations , pp. 155–162.  

> 35

General David Bradburn had been involved in the Air Force’s leadership in satellite technolo-

gy since the late 1950s.  

> 36

Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009; Wilhelm, interview with author, February 16, 

2013.  

> 37

James Winkler, “My Career at the Naval Research Laboratory,” memoir shared with the 

author.  

> 38

Peter Wilhelm, Patrick W. Binning, and Jay W. Middour (interviewers): An Interview with 

Peter Wilhelm May 28, 2007 and July 16, 2007, transcribed by Patrick W. Binning.  

> 39

Wilhelm, interview with TV crew, February 16, 2013, p. 19.  

> 40

Wilhelm, interview with TV crew, February 16, 2013, p. 19.  

> 41

For a good schematic of these changes, see http://ncst-www.nrl.navy.mil/NCSTOrigin/NC-

STOrigin2.html.  

> 42

Peter Wilhelm, Patrick W. Binning, and Jay W. Middour (interviewers): An Interview with 

Peter Wilhelm May 28, 2007 and July 16, 2007, transcribed by Patrick W. Binning.  

> 43

Peter Wilhelm, Patrick W. Binning, and Jay W. Middour (interviewers): An Interview with 

Peter Wilhelm May 28, 2007 and July 16, 2007, transcribed by Patrick W. Binning, p. 24.  

> 44

Timothy Coffey, oral history with David K. van Keuren, October 8, 1998.  

> 45

Wilhelm, interview with Slater, August 7, 2009.  

> 46

See, for example, http://www.uboataces.com/articles-rocket-uboat.shtml and http://www. 

prinzeugen.com/V2.htm.  

> 47

Peter Wilhelm, oral history, October 8, 1998, p. 36.  

> 48

Wilhelm, oral history, October 8, 1998, pp. 37–38.  

> 49

Peter Wilhelm, phone interview with author, May 5, 2014.  

> 50

Wilhelm, phone interview with author, May 5, 2014.  

> 51

John R. London III, “LEO on the Cheap: Methods for Achieving Drastic 

Reductions in Space Launch Costs,” Research Report No. AU-ARI-93-8, Air University Press, 

Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama, October 1994, Chapter 9.  

> 52

Wilhelm, phone interview with author, May 5, 2014.  

> 53

Wilhelm, phone interview with author, May 5, 2014.  

> 54

London, “LEO on the Cheap,” 1994, p. 192. 394 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE  

> 55

“Panel Seeks Competition of Navy, USAF Boosters,” Aviation Week and Space Technology, 

July 30, 1990, p. 28.  

> 56

Wilhelm, phone interview with author, May 5, 2014.  

> 57

Coffey, oral history with van Keuren, 1998, p. 147.  

> 58

“Panel Seeks Competition of Navy, USAF Boosters,” 1990.  

> 59

Wilhelm, phone interview with author, May 5, 2014.  

> 60

Peter Wilhelm, interview with TV crew, “GPS Day 2,” February 15, 2012, pp. 6–8.  

> 61

Wilhelm, interview with TV crew, “GPS Day 2,” February 15, 2012, pp. 6–8.  

> 62

Wilhelm, interview with TV crew, “GPS Day 2,” February 15, 2012, pp. 20–24.  

> 63

Wilhelm, interview with TV crew, “GPS Day 2,” February 15, 2012, pp. 20–24. BIBLIOGRAPHY, REFERENCES, AND SOURCES 

This is the first book-length chronicle of the Naval Research Laboratory’s place in 

the advent and unfolding of the Space Age and, more particularly, in the U.S. Space 

Program. 

For the early chapters, the ones leading up to Project Vanguard, which marks 

NRL’s first program leading to an orbiting payload, I relied heavily on a small collec -

tion of scholarly papers and books—including one that I wrote—that focus on NRL 

and, in some cases, aspects of the lab’s history associated with its role in the Space 

Age. But many of the documentary sources I turned to in order to piece together 

what sums into a remarkable trajectory in the history of technology in the United 

States reside in a small set of cabinet drawers at NRL. Residing in these drawers’ 

partitions and folders are many kinds of documents related to NRL’s forgettable and 

unforgettable doings in the advent and unfolding of the Space Age. There are press 

releases, award citations, memoranda, pamphlets, photographs, newspaper clippings, 

internal laboratory communications, and all manner of papers that capture some 

moment, some thought, some ambition along the way. Also important have been a 

literature of more formal and technical sorts, such as papers published in scientific 

and engineering journals or by the lab itself as stand-alone lab reports. 

By far, the most important source material derives from interviews and discus -

sions with dozens of scientists, engineers, and technicians who have been NRL’s “right 

stuff,” to borrow the term author Tom Wolfe used for denoting the particular cour -

age and heroism—or here, that right stuff maps more onto engineering competence 

and creativity—that it takes to get hardware and humanity into space and to make it 

useful to warfighters on the ground, on the seas, or in the skies. In some cases, indi -

viduals associated with NRL and the Naval Center for Space Technology provided me 

with documents from their own files, among them resumes and curricula vitae, notes 

from work and writing projects, and official and unofficial correspondence they had 

saved. Also invaluable have been a number of oral histories conducted by profession -

al historians and archivists, some of whom have spent parts or all of their careers at 

NRL. 

Of particular value was the one book-length memoir by an NRL space engineer 

that I know about, this one by James Winkler and written primarily for the benefit 

of his family. In some ways, my several interviews with Peter Wilhelm, the long-time 

director of NCST, along with several lengthy oral histories, also amounted to a mem -396 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

oir. Lee Hammarstrom and Bruce Wald, both of who have worn several Department 

of Defense hats over the years, also generously shared memoirs-in-the-works that 

helped me clarify several otherwise confusing issues. 

The bibliographic listings that follow do not constitute a comprehensive account 

of the resources I consulted in the preparation of the book. I include extensive end -

notes for each chapter that complement the listings here and provide the reader with 

a more direct way to identify the provenance of a particular passage, claim, or fact. 

General and Periodic NRL-produced Information Sources 

NRL’s  Spectra  magazine highlights the laboratory’s advances in the areas of systems, 

materials science, ocean and atmospheric sciences, and space science. 

The  NRL Fact Book  is a reference source for organizational, personnel, and funding 

information about NRL. It is updated every year. 

The  NRL Review , published annually, is a “snapshot” of the Laboratory, highlighting 

featured research in selected fields and recognizing NRL personnel for major achieve -

ments. 

NRL’s  Major Facilities  book includes descriptions of NRL facilities. It is organized by 

directorate and division. 

Various publications of NRL’s Strategic Communications Office, most notably press 

releases and the monthly newsletter of all things NRL titled Labstracts. 

Writings that Focus on NRL History and/or Research and Development 

Allison, David Kite, “New Eye for the Navy: The Origin of Radar at the Naval Re -

search Laboratory,” NRL Report 8466 (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 

Sept. 29, 1981). 

Amato, Ivan,  Pushing the Horizon: Seventy-Five Years of High Stakes Research and 

Technology at the Naval Research Laboratory  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Labo -

ratory, 1998). 

Anderson, Matthew, Bill Raynor, and Mike Hurley, “TacSat-4: Military Utility in 

Small Communications Package,” presented at the 27th Annual AIAA/USU Confer -

ence on Small Satellites, Aug. 10–15, 2013, University of Utah in Logan. 

Bartholomew, C.A., “Quartz Crystal Oscillator Development for Timation,” NRL 

Report 7478 (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, Oct. 25, 1972). 

Beard, R.L., J. Murray, and J.D. White, “GPS Clock Technology and the Navy PTTI 397 BIBLIOGRAPHY, REFERENCES, AND SOURCES 

Programs at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory,” in Proceedings of the 18th Annual 

Precise Time and Time Interval (PTTI) Applications and Planning Meeting, 2–4 

Dec. 1986, Washington, DC, 1987; accessed at http://www.dtic.mil/cgi-bin/GetTR -

Doc?AD=ADA492721. 

Bielecki, Daria, J., “NRL Global Vessel Tracking Project (VTP),” in  2008 NRL Review 

(Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory), pp. 166–167. 

Binning, Patrick W., and Jay W. Middour, “A Brief History of NRL’s Early Firsts in 

Spaceflight,” presented at Astrodynamics 2007 and printed in the proceedings of the 

AAS/AIAA Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, Advances in Astronautical Scienc -

es, vol. 129, pp. 1233–1250. 

Clark, Vern Admiral, USN, Chief of Naval Operations, and Michael W. Hagee, 

General, USMC, Commandant of the Marine Corps, 2005, “FORCEnet A Functional 

Concept for the 21st Century,” http://www.navy.mil/navydata/policy/forcenet/forcen -

et21.pdf. 

A Clementine Collection  (companion book to the exhibit by the same name) (Wash -

ington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, June 1994). 

Creamer, N.G., T.J. Meehan, M.J. Vilcheck, J.A. Vasquez, G.C. Gilbreath, W.S. 

Rabinovich, and R. Mahon, “Inter-Spacecraft Optical Communication and Naviga -

tion Using Multiple Quantum Well Modulating Retroreflectors,”  2003 NRL Review 

(Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory), available at http://www.nrl.navy.mil/ 

research/nrl-review/2003/space-research/creamer/#sthash.tk2yEg6p.V4UT7HLC. 

dpuf. 

Drury, A.T., A War History of the Naval Research Laboratory (unpublished, 1954), 

NRL History Office. 

Friedman, Herbert, “Reminiscences of 30 Years of Space Research” (Washington, DC: 

Naval Research Laboratory, Aug. 1977). 

Friedman, Herbert, “From the Challenges of World War II to the Frontiers of Space,” 

in  1992 NRL Review  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory), pp. 19–33. 

Gaiser, P.W., “WindSat - Remote Sensing of Ocean Surface Winds,” in  2004 NRL 

Review , (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory), available at http://www.nrl. 

navy.mil/research/nrl-review/2004/featured-research/gaiser/. 

Gaiser, P.W., et al., “The WindSat Spaceborne Polarimetric Microwave Radiometer: 

Sensor Description and Early Orbit Performance,”  IEEE Transactions on Geoscience 

and Remote Sensing , vol. 42, no. 11, Nov. 2004. 398 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Gebhard, Louis A., “Evolution of Naval Radio-Electronics and Contributions of the 

Naval Research Laboratory,” NRL Report 8300 (Washington, DC: Naval Research 

Laboratory, 1979). 

Gilbreath, G.C., S.R. Bowman, W.S. Rabinovich, C.H. Merk, and H.E. Senasack, 

“Modulating Retroreflector Using Multiple Quantum Well Technology,” U.S. Patent 

No. 6,154,299, awarded Nov. 2000. 

Gimpel, Herbert, History of NRL, two volumes (first 50 years) (unpublished, 1975), 

NRL History Office. 

Goetz, Peter G., et al., “Modulating Retro-reflector Lasercom Systems at the Naval 

Research Laboratory,” presented at the 2010 Military Communications Conference in 

San Jose, CA, Oct. 31 – Nov. 3, 2010. 

Hevly, Bruce W., “Basic Research Within a Military Context: The Naval Research 

Laboratory and the Foundations of Extreme Ultraviolet and X-ray Astronomy, 

1923–1960,” PhD thesis, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 1987. 

Horan, D.E., R.E. Perram, and R.E. Palma, “The NRL LACE Program Final Report,” 

NRL Report NRL/FR/8121--93-9565 (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 

Aug. 27, 1993). 

Huffine, Chris, “TacSat-2, Target Indicator Experiment (TIE), AIS Payload Overview,” 

PowerPoint presentation in possession of author and presented at 2007 Maritime 

Domain Awareness Forum, dated Oct. 27, 2007. 

Huffine, Chris, “Cross-Domain Payload Migration,” in  2009 NRL Review  (Washing -

ton, DC: Naval Research Laboratory), pp. 172–174. 

Hurley, Michael, William Raynor, and Kenneth Weldy, TacSat-4 COMMx, Advanced 

SATCOM Experiment, Naval Research Laboratory (Washington, DC: 2009). 

Hyland, Lawrence A., Albert H. Taylor, and Leo C. Young, U.S. Patent 1,981,884, 

“System for Detecting Objects by Radio,” issued Nov. 27, 1934. 

Johnson, M.S., et al., “The NRL Precision Orbital Transfer Vehicle,”  2007 NRL Review 

(Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory), pp. 232–235, http://www.nrl.navy. 

mil/content_images/07Space_Johnson.pdf. 

Johnson, W. Neil, et al., “Space-based Solar Power: Possible Defense Applications 

and Opportunities for NRL Contributions,” NRL/FR/7650--09-10,179 (Washington, 

DC: Naval Research Laboratory, Oct. 23, 2009), available at http://www.nss.org/set -

tlement/ssp/library/2008-NRLSBSP-PossibleDefenseApplicationsAndOpportunities. 

pdf. 399 BIBLIOGRAPHY, REFERENCES, AND SOURCES 

Kawecki, Tom G., G.G. Golba, G.E. Price, V.S. Rose, and W.J. Meyers,  IEEE Trans. on 

Microwave Theory and Techniques , vol. 44, 1996, p. 1198. 

Kelm, B.E., et al., “FREND: Pushing the Envelope of Space Robotics,” in  2008 NRL 

Review  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory), p. 239. 

Krause, Ernst, Rocket Sonde Research Section Report. 

Lippincott, Wendy, et al., “Antenna Design, Modeling, and Testing on the WindSat 

Satellite Wind Direction Measurement System,” NRL/MR/8120—02-8613 (Washing -

ton, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, Mar. 29, 2002). 

Lorenzen, Howard,  Short History of Countermeasures .

Moore, Christopher I., et al., “Overview of NRL’s Maritime Laser Communication 

Test Facility,” NRL Release Number 05-1226-2651. 

Naval Research Laboratory, “75th Anniversary: Awards For Innovation,” NRL/ 

PU/1001--98-359, (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, June 1998). 

Naval Research Laboratory, “A Scientific Satellite Program,” by the Rocket Develop -

ment Branch of the Atmospheric and Astrophysics Division of the Naval Research 

Laboratory, NRL Memorandum Report 466, Apr. 13, 1955. 

Naval Research Laboratory, “The U.S. Naval Research Laboratory (1923–2005) Ful -

filling the Roosevelts’ Vision for American Naval Power,” NRL/MR/1001--06-8951 

(Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, Mar. 6, 2006). 

Naval Research Laboratory, “LACE,” NRL Publication 199-8105 (Washington, DC: 

Naval Research Laboratory, Oct. 1991). 

NRL Report 5097, “A Satellite and Space Vehicle Program for the Next Steps Beyond 

the Present Vanguard Program,” Dec. 10, 1957 (Washington, DC: Naval Research 

Laboratory). 

Newell, Homer, Artificial Earth Satellite Program for the IGY (4/15/56). 

Nozette, Stewart, et al., “The Clementine Mission to the Moon: Scientific Overview,” 

Science , vol. 266, Dec. 16, 1994, pp. 1835–1839; doi: 10.1126/science.266.5192.1835. 

Nozette, Stewart, C.L. Lichtenberg, P. Spudis, R. Bonner, W. Ort, E. Malaret, M. Rob -

inson, and M. Shoemaker, “The Clementine Bistatic Radar Experiment,”  Science , vol. 

274, no. 5292, Nov. 29, 1996, pp. 1495–1498. 

Potts, Ronald, “Profile of Howard Otto Lorenzen,” in  Labstracts  (Washington, DC: 

Naval Research Laboratory, Nov. 24, 2008). 400 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Report of NRL Progress  (Special 50th Anniversary Edition with historical essays) 

(Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory, 1973). 

Slater, Leo, “From Minitrack to NAVSTAR: The Early Development of the Global 

Positioning System, 1955–1975,” presented at the IEEE Microwave Theory and Tech -

niques Society International Microwave Symposium for 2011, Baltimore, MD, 7 June 

2011; doi: 10.1109/MWSYM.2011.5972582. 

Thomas, Linda M., Christopher I. Moore, and William Rabinovich, “The ONR 

Enabling Capability on High Bandwidth Lasercom,” in  Proc. SPIE , vol. 7685, Atmo -

spheric Propagation VII, 76850I, May 4, 2010; doi:10.1117/12.850893. 

van Keuren, David, “Moon In Their Eyes: Communication Moon Relay (CMR) at 

the Naval Research Laboratory, 1951–1962,” in Andrew J. Butrica (ed.),  Beyond the 

Ionosphere: Fifty Years of Satellite Communication , NASA SP-4217 (Washington, DC: 

National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1997). 

van Keuren, David K., “Cold War Science in Black and White: US Intelligence 

Gathering and Its Scientific Cover at the Naval Research Laboratory, 1948–62,”  Social 

Studies of Science , vol. 31(2), Science in the Cold War (Apr. 2001), pp. 207–229. 

Taylor, A. Hoyt, R adio Reminiscences: A Half Century  (Washington, DC: Naval Re -

search Laboratory, 1948). 

Taylor, A. Hoyt,  The First Twenty Five Years of NRL  (Washington, DC: Navy Depart -

ment, 1948). 

Whitlock, Robert R., and Thomas B. McCaskill, “NRL GPS Bibliography: An Anno -

tated Bibliography of the Origin and Development of the Global Positioning System 

at the Naval Research Laboratory,” NRL/MR/1001—09-8988 (Washington, DC: Naval 

Research Laboratory, June 3, 2009). 

Wilhelm, Peter G., “History of Propulsion Developments at the Naval Center for 

Space Technology (Naval Center for Space Technology),” presented at the AIAA Joint 

Propulsion Conference, July 27, 2010. 

Winkler, James, My Career at the Naval Research Laboratory, draft given to author in 

2012. 

Web Sources of NRL History and R&D 

NRL’s Web Site: 

www.nrl.navy.mil/ 401 BIBLIOGRAPHY, REFERENCES, AND SOURCES 

Naval Center for Space Technology’s Web Site: 

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/ssdd/ncst 

http://code8100.nrl.navy.mil/about/NCST/index.htm 

Timelines of NRL’s work in space: 

http://www.ncst.nrl.navy.mil/NCSTOrigin/NCSTOrigin.html 

www.nrl.navy.mil/media/publications/65-years-in-space-a-timeline/ 

NRL milestone in space technology: 

www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2011/nrl-center-for-space-technology-reach -

es-century-mark-in-orbiting-spacecraft-launches 

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2005/president-announces-roger-easton -

recipient-of-national-medal-of-technology 

Profile of Howard Lorenzen: 

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2000/a-tribute-to-the-father-of-electron -

ic-warfare 

Labstracts  history article on  Project Vanguard :

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/vanguard50/legacy.php 

NRL Press Release, “Small Tether Satellite Deployed by NRL,” 6/20/1996, http://www. 

nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/1996/small-tether-satellite-deployed-by-nrl 

NRL Press Release, “The Microelectronics and Photonics Test Bed (MPTB): The First 

Six Years” 

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/research/nrl-review/2004/space-research-and-satellite-

technology/clark/#sthash.ltw5bWQs.dpuf 

NRL Press Release, “Project ANDE Assembly and Testing Nears Completion at NRL for 

Fall Delivery to NASA,” 5/12/2005, http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2005/ 

project-ande-assembly-and-testing-nearscompletion-at-nrl-for-fall-delivery-to-nasa 

NRL Press Release, “Dr. Daria Bielecki Receives the Navy Superior Civilian Service 

Award,” 4/6/2009, http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2009/dr-daria-bielec -

ki-receives-the-navy-superior-civilian-service-award 

NRL Press Release, “NRL’s ANDE-2 Launches Aboard STS-127,” 7/15/2009, http://www. 

nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2009/nrls-ande2-launches-aboard-sts127 

NRL Press Release, “NRL’s Microwave Imager/Sounder Passes Major Program Mile -

stone,” 7/15/2010, http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2010/nrls-micro -

wave-imagersounder-passes-major-program-milestone 402 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

NRL Press Release, “NRL Instrument Provides Key Space Weather Data,” 6/22/2011, 

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2011/nrl-instrument-provides-key-

space-weather-data 

NRL Press Release, “TacSat-4 Enables Polar Region SatCom Experiment,” 3/9/2012, 

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2012/tacsat-4-enables-polar-region-

satcom-experiment 

NRL Press Release, “TacSat-4 Participates in Navy Fleet Experiment Trident Warrior,” 

8/29/2012, http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2012/tacsat-4-partici -

pates-in-navy-fleet-experiment-trident-warrior#sthash.MLfuIRjv.dpuf 

NRL Press Release, “Solar Power When It’s Raining: NRL Builds Space Satellite Mod -

ule to Try,” 3/12/2014 

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2014/solar-power-when-its-raining-

nrl-builds-space-satellite-module-to-try#sthash.ePwDouVb.dpuf 

NRL Press Release, “Software Reprogrammable Payload (SRP): NRL’s Airborne Box 

Brings Connectivity, Jamming to Troops in Remote Areas,” 10/8/2014 

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2014/software-reprogrammable-pay -

load-srp-nrls-airborne-box-brings-connectivity-jamming-to-troops-in-remote-ar -

eas#sthash.UVU4vA6t.dpuf 

NRL Press Release, “With SpinSat Mission, NRL Will Spin Small Satellite in Space 

with New Thruster Technology,” 9/18/2014 

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2014/with-spinsat-mission-nrl-will-

spin-small-satellite-in-space-with-new-thruster-technology#sthash.ptln0Iqe.dpuf 

NRL Press Release, “NRL to Launch SSULI on April 3rd; Will Measure Ionosphere 

Electron Density,” 3/31/2014 

http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2014/nrl-to-launch-ssuli-on-april-3rd-

will-measure-ionosphere-electron-density#sthash.bvC3haZA.dpuf 

NRL Press Release, “Space Station Astronauts Launch SpinSat; NRL Starts Getting 

Data,” 1/12/2015, http://www.nrl.navy.mil/media/news-releases/2015/space-station-

astronauts-launch-spinsat-nrl-starts-getting-data#sthash.d7QVDa4Z.dpuf 

NRO Fact Sheet, “Tether Physics and Survivability (TiPS) Fact Sheet,” 9/20/1996, 

http://www.nro.gov/news/press/1996/1996-08.pdf 

NSA document titled Cryptologic Almanac 50th Anniversary Series, http://www.nsa. 

gov/public_info/_files/crypto_almanac_50th/six_decades_of_second_party_rela -

tions.pdf 403 BIBLIOGRAPHY, REFERENCES, AND SOURCES 

Selected Oral Histories 

Alan Berman, oral history  interview in 1982 with Dr. Pitts 

Alan Berman interview by Ivan Amato, April 3, 1997 

Timothy Coffey, oral history with David K. van Keuren, October 8, 1998 

Roger Easton, oral history with David van Keuren, March 8, 1996 

Herbert Friedman, interview by Richard Hirsh on August 21, 1982, Niels Bohr 

Library and Archives, American Institute of Physics, College Park, MD 

E.O. Hulburt, oral history, NRL 

Chester Kleczek, interview by Leo Slater and Richard Easton, June 18, 2009 

Ernst Krause, oral history, interview by David DeVorkin on August 10, 1982, Niels 

Bohr Library and Archives, American Institute of Physics, College Park, MD 

Howard Lorenzen, oral history conducted by NRL Historian John A. S. Pitts at NRL 

on October 18, 1983 

Homer E. Newell, interview by Richard F. Hirsh on July 17, 1980, Niels Bohr Library 

and Archives, American Institute of Physics, College Park, MD 

Richard Tousey, three-part interview by David DeVorkin on 1981 November 17; 

1982 January 8; and 1982 June 4, Niels Bohr Library & Archives, American Institute 

of Physics 

Martin Votaw, interview for COMSAT History Project, July 12, 1984, http://www. 

comara.org/legacy/oralhistory/Martin_Votaw.pdf 

Selected Interviews 

All interviews were conducted with the author unless otherwise noted. 

George Arnold; April 19, 2012 

Ronald Beard; March 20, 2012 

Ed Becke; March 15, 2012 

Tom Betterton; July 18, 2012 

Daria Bielecki; February 19, 2008 

Robert Burdett; January 22, 2013 

Aaron Chilbert; February 21, 2012 

Art Collier; April 22, 2012 and January 29, 2013 

Andy Cox; January 9, 2013 

Chris Dwyer; February 13, 2012 and several other dates from 2012 to 2014 

Bob Eisenhauer; March 12, 2012 

George Flach; May 29, 2012 

Lee Hammarstrom; several dates in 2012 and 2013 

Fred Hellrich; May 25, 2012 

Glen Henshaw; March 2, 2012 

Chris Herndon; February 4, 2013 404 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Chris Huffine; March 22, 2013 

Paul Jaffe; February 28, 2012 

Tom Kawecki; October 15, 2012 

Brad Kuhn; interview with Art Collier, 2008 

Wendy Lippincott; May 1, 2012 

Jay Middour; February 20, 2012 

John Montgomery; June 3, 2012 

Bruce Morgan; April 19, 2012. 

Randy Nichols; at Chesapeake Bay Detachment, May 7, 2013 

Dave Petit, interview with Art Collier, date unspecified 

Anne Reed; June 4, 2014 

Robert Richard; April 19, 2012 

John Schaub; February 28, 2012 

Ed Senesack; May 8, 2013 

Linda Thomas; June 2, 2014 

Bruce Wald; May 23, 2012 

Peter Wilhelm, interview with TV crew and author, February 16, 2012 

Peter Wilhelm, interview with NRL historian Leo Slater, August 7, 2009 

Peter Wilhelm, interview with NRL historian David van Keuren and archivist Dean 

Bundy, November 19, 1987 

Peter Wilhelm, interview with author, February 16, 2013. 

Peter Wilhelm, phone discussion with author, July 23, 2014 

Bob Wilson, interview with author, April 9, 2013 

James Winkler, interview with author, 2013. 

Books, Journal Articles, and other Primary and Secondary Sources 

Abella, Lorenzo J., and M. Bruce Hollinger, “U.S. Navy in Space: Past, Present, and 

Future,”  IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , vol. AES-20(4), July 

1984, pp. 465-485. 

Aid, Matthew,  The Secret Sentry: The Untold History of the National Security Agency 

(New York: Bloomsbury Press, 2010) 

Air Force Space Command press release, “TacSat-3 Ends Operations,” May 1, 2012, 

http://www.afspc.af.mil/news/story.asp?id=123300195. 

Amato, Ivan, “Why, in the Jurassic era, an Earth day may have been only 23 hours 

long,”  Washington Post , Sept. 23, 2013. 

Amend, Chris, Michael Nurnberger, Paul Oppenheimer, Steve Koss, and Bill Purdy, 

“A Novel Approach for a Low-Cost Deployable Antenna,” NASA/CP-2010-216272, 405 BIBLIOGRAPHY, REFERENCES, AND SOURCES 

accessed at http://www.esmats.eu/amspapers/pastpapers/pdfs/2010/amend.pdf; see 

also https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/t/tacsat-4#gp8EC -

19cHerb. 

Applied Research Laboratory, The Pennsylvania State University (eds.),  From the Sea 

to the Stars: A Chronicle of the U.S. Navy’s Space and Space-related Activities, 1944– 

2009  (Revised and updated edition, 2010); http://www.history.navy.mil/content/dam/ 

nhhc/browse-by-topic/exploration-and-innovation/navy-and-space-exploration/ 

FromTheSeaToTheStars/FromTheSeaToTheStars%20-%202010ed.pdf. 

Associated Press, “Scientist Gets 13 years in Spying Case,” March 22, 2012. 

Bamford, James,  The Puzzle Palace: A Report on America’s Most Secret Agency  (Bos -

ton: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1982). 

Burrows, William E.,  Deep Black: Space Espionage and National Security  (New York: 

Berkley Books, 1986). 

Butrica, Andrew J. (ed.),  Beyond the Ionosphere: Fifty Years of Satellite Communica -

tion , NASA SP-4217 (Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administra -

tion, 1997). 

Caron, R., “Mysterious microsatellites in GEO: is MiTEx a possible anti-satellite ca -

pability demonstration?,”  The Space Review , July 31, 2006, http://www.thespacereview. 

com/article/670/1. 

Clarke, Arthur C.,  The Making of a Moon: The Story of the Earth Satellite Program 

(New York: Harper & Brothers, 1957). 

Clementine  issue, many authors,  Science , vol. 266, Dec. 16, 1994. 

Clinton, William J., “Report on Aeronautics and Space for Fiscal Year 1994,” Congres -

sional Record (Senate), p. S7388, May 24, 1995. 

Corliss, William R.,  NASA Sounding Rockets 1958-1968: A Historical Summary , NASA 

SP-4401 (Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1971). 

Corliss, William R., Histories of the Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network 

(STADAN), the Manned Space Flight Network (MSFN), and the NASA Communi -

cations Network (NASCOM), NASA CR-140390 (National Aeronautics and Space 

Administration, 1974). 

Day, Dwayne, “Above the clouds: the White Cloud ocean surveillance satellites,”  The 

Space Review , www.thespacereview.com/article/1351/1, Apr. 13, 2009. 406 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Day, Dwayne A., “Cover Stories and Hidden Agendas: Early American Space and Na -

tional Security Policy,” paper presented at the meeting, Reconsidering Sputnik: Forty 

Years Since the Soviet Satellite, Washington, DC, Sept. 30 – Nov. 1, 1997. 

Deac, Wilfred P., “The Navy’s Spy Mission in Space,” in  Naval History Magazine , Na -

val Institute Press, vol. 22(2), Apr. 2008. 

Degnan, John, J., “Thirty Years of Satellite Laser Ranging,” presented at the Ninth 

International Workshop on Laser Ranging Instrumentation,” held Nov. 7–11, 1994, in 

Canberra, Australia, accessed at http://ilrs.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/ilrw09_vol1.pdf. 

Department of Defense, DOD timeline of Desert Shield/Desert Storm, http://archive. 

defense.gov/news/newsarticle.aspx?id=45404. 

Department of the Navy, Annual Report of the Department of the Navy for the Fiscal 

Year of 1920, 1921 (Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1921). 

Department of the Navy, “ . . . From the Sea: Preparing the Naval Service for the 21st 

Century,” (Department of the Navy, Sept. 1992). 

Department of the Navy, Press Release, “Radio Fade-Outs Linked to X-rays from 

Sun,” National Military Establishment, Washington, DC, Mar. 24, 1949. 

DeVorkin, David H.,  Science With A Vengeance: How the Military Created the U.S. 

Space Sciences After World War II  (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992). 

Easton, Richard D., and Eric. F. Frazier,  GPS Declassified: From Smart Bombs to 

Smartphones  (Dulles, VA: Potomac Books, 2013). 

eoPortal, “TacSat-4,” https://directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/t/ 

tacsat-4#gp8EC19cHerb. 

Friedman, Herbert,  The Astronomer’s Universe: Stars, Galaxies, and Cosmos  (New 

York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1990). 

Friedman, Herbert, “From the Challenges of World War II to the Frontier of Space,” 

in  NRL Review 1992  (Washington, DC: Naval Research Laboratory). 

Gates, Stephen S., Stephen M. Koss, and Michael F. Zedd, “Advanced Tether Experi -

ment Deployment Failure,”  Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets , vol. 38, no. 1, 2001, pp. 

60–68; doi: 10.2514/2.3655. 

Government Accountability Office, “Defense Acquisitions: Restructured JTRS Pro -

gram Reduces Risk, but Significant Challenges Remain,” GAO-06-955 (Washington, 

DC: Government Accountability Office, Sept. 2006). 407 BIBLIOGRAPHY, REFERENCES, AND SOURCES 

Green, Constance M., and Milton Lomask,  Vanguard: A History , NASA SP-4202 

(Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1970). 

Gridley, D.H., and B.L. Sarahan, “Design of the Naval Research Laboratory 

Computer,”  Electrical Engineering  , vol.70, no.2, Feb. 1951, p.111; doi: 10.1109/ 

EE.1951.6437257, http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnum -

ber=6437257&isnumber=6437242. 

Gruntman, Mike,  Blazing the Trail: The Early History of Spacecraft and Rocketry  (Res -

ton, VA: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., 2004). 

Gubser, Donald U., “US Navy’s Superconductivity Programs: Scientific Curiosity to 

Fleet Utility,” I EEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity , vol. 21, no. 3, 2011, pp. 

931– 935. 

Hagen, John P., “The Viking and the Vanguard,” in  Technology and Culture , vol. 4, no. 

4 (Wayne State University Press, Fall 1963). 

Hammarstrom, Lee, draft of memoir (unpublished), prepared in late 2013. 

Howeth, L.S.,  History of Communications-Electronics in the United States Navy  (Wash -

ington, DC: Bureau of Ships and Office of Naval History, 1963). 

Johnson, Neil W., et al., “Space-based Solar Power: Possible Defense Applications 

and Opportunities for NRL Contributions,” NRL/FR/7650--09-10,179 (Washington, 

DC: Naval Research Laboratory, Oct. 23, 2009), http://www.nss.org/settlement/ssp/ 

library/2008-NRLSBSP-PossibleDefenseApplicationsAndOpportunities.pdf. 

Kleppner, Daniel (with Gary Taubes), “The Global Positioning System,” in series,  Be -

yond Discovery: The Path from Research to Human Benefit  (Washington, DC: National 

Academy of Sciences, Aug. 1996). 

Launius, Roger D., John M. Logsdon, and Robert W. Smith (eds.),  Reconsidering Sput -

nik: Forty Years Since the Soviet Satellite  (Amsterdam: Harwood Academic Publisher, 

2000). 

Mackay, Robert, “The Scientist Who Mistook Himself for a Spy,”  New York Times ,

Oct. 21, 2009. 

McDonald, Robert A. (ed.),  Beyond Expectations—Building an American National 

Reconnaissance Capability: Recollections of the Pioneers and Founders of National 

Reconnaissance  (Bethesda, MD: National Reconnaissance Office and the American 

Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 2002). 408 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

McDonald, Robert A., and Sharon K. Moreno, R aising the Periscope…Grab and Poppy: 

America’s Early ELINT Satellites  (Chantilly, VA: Center for the Study of National Recon -

naissance, National Reconnaissance Office, Sept. 2005). 

McDougall, Walter A.,  The Heavens and the Earth: A Political History of the Space Age 

(Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985). 

Merguerian, Charles, “The Vanguard Program,” in F.N. Magill, ed.,  Magill’s Survey of Sci -

ence, Space Exploration Series  (Pasadena, CA: Salem Press, Inc., 1989), pp. 2077–2082. 

Mulcahy, Robert D., Jr. (ed.), “Corona Star Catchers: Interviews with the Air Force 

Aerial Recovery Flight Crews of the 6593d Test Squadron (Special), 1958–1972” 

(Chantilly, VA: Center for the Study of National Reconnaissance, National Reconnais -

sance Office, 2012). 

National Reconnaissance Office, History of the Poppy Satellite System, approved for 

release on June 6, 2012. 

National Research Council,  The Global Positioning System: A Shared National Asset 

(Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 1995). 

National Research Council,  The Navy’s Needs in Space for Providing Future Capabilities 

(Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2005). 

National Security Space Office, “Space-Based Solar Power As an Opportunity for Strate -

gic Security” (a feasibility study), Oct. 10, 2007, http://spacesolarpower.files.wordpress. 

com/2007/11/final-sbsp-interim-assessment-release-01.pdf. 

Naval Research Laboratory, “Tac-Sat-4 Lifts Off… Augmenting SATCOM and Advanc -

ing Operationally Responsive Space,”  Spectra  magazine, Naval Research Laboratory, 

Washington, DC, Fall 2011, pp. 1–5. 

Navy Warfare Development Command TACMEMO 3-32.1-10, Maritime Domain 

Awareness, Department of the Navy, Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, Nov. 2010. 

Newell, Homer E.,  Beyond the Atmosphere: Early Years of Space Science , NASA SP-4211 

(Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1980). 

Norris, Pat,  Spies in the Sky, Surveillance Satellites in War and Peace  (Chichester, UK: 

Springer and Praxis Publishing, 2008). 

Nova-Sol company web page, “Dual-Mode Optical Interrogator (DMOI),” http://www. 

nova-sol.com/capabilities/optical-communications/dual-mode-optical-interroga -

tor-dmoi. 409 BIBLIOGRAPHY, REFERENCES, AND SOURCES 

Osgood, Kenneth, A., “Before Sputnik: National Security and the Formation of U.S. 

Outer Space Policy, 1953–1957,” paper presented at the meeting, Reconsidering Sput -

nik: Forty Years Since the Soviet Satellite, Washington, DC, Sept. 30 – Nov. 1, 1997. 

Paisley, Melvyn R., “Naval Space Technology Center: Guidelines for Establishment 

and Operation,” Feb. 13, 1984, provided to author by Peter Wilhelm and now in Naval 

Research Laboratory’s History Office. The document was attached to a Memorandum 

for the Chief of Naval Research and the Deputy Chief of Naval Material (Technology) 

and signed by Paisley, who was at the time the Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Re -

search, Engineering and Systems). The memorandum is dated 29 February 1984 and 

has the designator 7906-18:JNH:mvf. 

Parkinson, Bradford W., Thomas Stansell, Ronald Beard, and Konstantine Gromov, “A 

History of Satellite Navigation,”  Navigation , vol. 42, no. 1, Spring 1995, pp. 109–164. 

Potts, Ronald L., “History of the Poppy Satellite System,” National Reconnaissance 

Office, released with heavy redaction, in August 2006. 

Potts, Ronald L.,  U.S. Navy/NRO Program C Electronic Intelligence Satellites (1958-

1977) , LEO Systems Program Office, National Reconnaissance Office, September 3, 

1998; declassified with redactions and approved for release from NRO on June 13, 

2012. 

Price, Alfred,  The History of US Electronic Warfare , Vol. 1 (Arlington, VA: Association 

of Old Crows, 1984). 

Price, Alfred,  The History of US Electronic Warfare , Vol. 2 (Arlington, VA: Association 

of Old Crows, 1989). 

Priest, Dana, and William M. Arkin,  Top Secret America: The Rise of the New Ameri -

can Security State  (New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2011). 

Public Law 85-568, the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, signed by the 

President on July 29, 1958. 

Reed, W. Craig,  Red November  (New York: Harper Collins, 2010) 

Regeon, Paul, et al., Paper No. 96-e-40V, the Twentieth International Symposium on 

Space Technology and Science and Eleventh IAS conference, 1996. 

Rosen, Milton W., and Richard B. Snodgrass, “The High Altitude Sounding Rocket,” 

in Upper Atmosphere Rocket Research, 1953, p. 47, NRL History Office. 

Sapolsky, Harvey, M.,  Science and the Navy: The History of the Office of Naval Research 

(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990). 410 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Scott, James,  The Attack on the Liberty: The Untold Story of Israel’s Deadly 1967 Assault 

on a U.S. Spy Ship  (New York: Simon & Schuster, Reprint Edition, July 6, 2010). 

Scott, Lloyd N.,  Naval Consulting Board of the United States  (Washington, DC: Gov -

ernment Printing Office, 1920). 

Sidey, Hugh, “The Man Who Took the Beating for Vanguard,”  Life Magazine , Mar. 31, 

1958, p. 35. 

Smith, Marcia, “President Signs Bill Terminating DWSS,” spacepolicyonline.com, 

Jan. 1, 2012, http://www.spacepolicyonline.com/news/president-signs-bill-terminat -

ing-dwss. 

Spilker, James J., Jr., Penina Axelrad, Bradford W. Parkinson, and Per Enge,  Global 

Positioning System: Theory and Applications , Volume I, Progress in Astronautics and 

Aeronautics, vol. 163, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1996. 

Spudis, Paul, “Clementine—The Legacy, Twenty Years Later,” AirSpaceMag.com, Jan. 

21, 2014; accessed Apr. 2014 at http://www.airspacemag.com/daily-planet/clemen -

tine-legacy-twenty-years-180949523/. 

Taubman, Philip,  Secret Empire: Eisenhower, the CIA, and the Hidden Story of Ameri -

ca’s Space Espionage  (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2003). 

Taylor, A.H., and E.O. Hulburt, “The Propagation of Radio Waves Over the Earth,” 

Physical Review , vol. 27, no. 2, Feb. 1926, pp. 189–215. 

Temple, L. Parker, III,  Shades of Gray: National Security and the Evolution of Space 

Reconnaissance  (Reston, VA: American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 

Inc., 2005). 

Thompson, Tina D. (ed.), Space Log 1957–1987 (Redondo Beach, CA: TRW, 1988). 

Tsiao, Sunny, “‘Read You Loud and Clear!’: The Story of NASA’s Spaceflight Tracking 

and Data Network,” NASA SP-2007-4233 (Washington, DC: National Aeronautics 

and Space Administration, 2008). 

United States Court Of Appeals For The Fourth Circuit, Docket No. 05-1671, Space 

Technology Development Corporation; Earth Search Sciences, Incorporated; Ac -

cuprobe, Incorporated, Vs The Boeing Company; Argued September 19, 2006 and 

decided on December 12, 2006. 

Vilcheck, Michael J., et al., “Overview of the NCST’s New Optical Research Facility,” 

IEEE Aerospace conference, 2001, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/AERO.2001.931379. 411 BIBLIOGRAPHY, REFERENCES, AND SOURCES 

Wallace, Lane E.,  Dreams, Hopes, Realities: NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, The 

First Forty Years  (Washington, DC: National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

History Office, 1999). 

Wheelon, Albert D., “Strategic Reconnaissance,” presentation at the Symposium on 

the History of Physics in the National Defense, 1999 APS Centennial Meeting, Atlan -

ta, GA, Mar. 24, 1999, http://www.aps.org/units/fps/newsletters/1999/october/aoct99. 

html. INDEX 

A

A2C2S.  See  Army Airborne Command and 

Control System 

Able Engineering Company, 253 

ABM.  See  anti-ballistic missile 

adaptive optics, 251 

Adkins, Bill,  254 

Advanced Concepts Section (Code 7033), 240, 289 

Advanced Launch System (ALS; Air Force), 388 

Advanced Projects Office (Code 7030), 240 

Advanced Research and Global Observation 

Satellite (ARGOS), 350 

Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) 

Air Force space budget (1960), 131 

central control of space projects, 122, 131 

as DARPA, 101, 197, 365 

detecting and tracking space objects, 115 

establishment of, 101, 115, 365 

mission, 115 

NAVSPASUR funding, 197, 212 

Tattletale “disapproval,” 123 

Tattletale satellite launch vehicle, 117, 119, 120, 

121 

Advanced Space Precision Navigation and Timing 

Branch, 219 

Advanced Systems Technology Branch (Code 8120) 

Electro-Optics Technology Section, 255 

Middour as head, 78 

retroreflectors, 259–260.  See also  retroreflectors 

Advanced Tether Experiment (ATEx), 272–273 

Aerobee rocket 

Applied Physics Laboratory development, 39 

launch failure, 44 

as less expensive launch vehicle, 49, 54 

no military application, 53 

NRL satellite launch rocket, 65 

upper atmosphere workhorse, 50, 58 

Aerojet General Company 

Aerobee rocket engine, 39 

Transit 2A–GRAB 1 launch, 134 

Vanguard second-stage rockets, 67 

Aeronix company, 316 

Aerospace Corporation Collier Trophy, 225– 226 

Aerospace Systems Division (Code 7969),  212 ,

242 

AES.  See  anti-earth satellite 

Airborne Joint Tactical Terminal,  316 

Air Force 

621B satellite navigation system, 208–209, 214 

Atlas rocket for ICBMs, 64 

bigger rocket trend, 385.  See also  Titan III 

booster 

Blue Scout rocket, 150, 151, 157 

“Buckshot” five-satellite launch,  149 –150 

budget for space from ARPA (1960), 131 

Canes project opposition, 125 

Clementine launch, 265 

Collier Trophy for GPS, 225– 226 

Conical Microwave Imager Sounder, 277 

Coriolis satellite and Windsat, 276 

Corona/Sentry satellite film recovery, 101, 116, 

143, 147 

Defense Navigation Satellite Demonstration 

Program oversight, 211 

ELINT lead administrative body, 143 

ELINT national program, 102 

ELINT overlap with Navy, 181 

GPS 3 higher transmission power, 224 

HTSSE satellite,  349 

Improved Data Modem, 316–317 

InfraLynx for Air Force Space Command, 334 

International Geophysical Year, 59, 64, 65 

Multi-Mission Advanced Tactical Terminals, 314, 

315– 316 

National Reconnaissance Program, 147 

photoreconnaissance program, 109, 116, 156 

Program A of NRO, 155 

Program B of NRO, 156 

Samos program, 116, 151.  See also  Samos 

program 

Sea Launch and Recovery opposition, 389 

space project centrality, 59, 131 

space system authority, 144, 145, 177 

space system authority rescinded, 185 

TacSat missions,  339 , 357 

Titan ICBM, 68 

Upper Stage payload-builders, 278 

Viking and MX redundancy, 53 

WS-117L space reconnaissance, 115–116, 117 

Air Force Maui Optical Station (AMOS), 252, 

253–254 

Air Force Research Laboratory 

software definable radio, 319 

Starfire Optical Range, 256 

TacSat-3 mission, 339 

Air Force Satellite Control Network (AFSCN), 278, 

279 

> Page numbers in italics refer to images.

414 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Air Force Security Service, 156 

Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization 

(SAMSO), 211 

Air Force Space Command, 334 

Air Force Space Systems Division, 174 

Air Force Space Test Program, 236 

Alaska Aerospace Corporation, 280,  340 , 342 

Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory, 67 

Allen, Lew, 183 

Alley, Carroll, 259 

Alliance Spacesystems company, 366 

Amend, Christopher 

TacSat-4 antenna, 341– 343, 342 

TacSat-4 antenna patent,  342 

amplitude modulation jamming, 24–25 

Anacostia Naval Station, 333–334 

Analog to Digital Data System (A/DDS), 174 

ANDE (Atmospheric Neutral Density 

Experiment),  257 

Anderson, John A., 19–20 

anechoic chambers, 9,  343 , 350 

anti-ballistic missile (ABM) sites 

electronic warfare being ignored, 179 

GRAB discovery, 150 

NSA credits Poppy, 182 

Poppy against Soviet, 171, 172, 287 

Soviet development, 147, 171 

Wakelin pushing for more data, 151 

anti-earth satellite (AES) systems 

electronic warfare being ignored, 179 

Soviet ABM/AES systems, 171 

“Any Time, Any Place, Right Time, Right Place,” 

222 

AOS (acquisition of signal), 312–313 

apogee kick motor, 236, 237 

Apollo mission success adding costs, 186 

Applications Research Division 

Cleeton letter on launch failures, 151 

Faust as head, 171 

Satellite Techniques Branch, 129,  171 

Applied Physics Laboratory (APL; Johns Hopkins 

University) 

Aerobee rocket, 39.  See also  Aerobee rocket 

establishment of, 18 

military space program, 4 

proximity fuses, 35 

rocket-borne research, 35 

Rockoons, 49 

Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory, 

355–356 

standard satellite bus, 341, 357 

Transit satellites, 96, 121,  134 , 195.  See also 

Transit satellites 

Triton missile, 56 

Tuve running, 18 

WAC Corporal modified version, 49–50 

ARGOS (Advanced Research and Global 

Observation Satellite), 350 

Aries II aircraft Story Finder, 361 

Armed Forces Communications and Electronics 

Association, 327 

Armed Forces Courier Service and GRAB data 

tapes, 130, 137 

Army 

1st U.S. satellite, 76, 77, 100 

“Buckshot” five-satellite launch,  149 –150 

Explorer 1 launch, 76, 77, 100 

Explorer 1 NRL electronics package, 76, 

100–101 

Explorer 2 launch, 77 

Explorer support from ARPA, 101 

German rocket plunder, 28–29 

Ground Mobile Radio, 323 

helicopter command and control, 319–321,  320 ,

322–323 

Hermes project with GE, 28, 49–50 

International Geophysical Year launch,  64 –65 

Jet Propulsion Lab contract, 34 

Joint Tactical Networking Center, 324 

Navy ELINT for ground forces, 303 

Orbiter satellite, 65 

radar tracking at White Sands, 70 

software definable radio, 319–321,  320 

TacSat-4 use, 341 

Tactical Terminals and On-Board Processor, 314 

V-2 launches, 34–35,  36 , 37–39 

V-2 NRL instruments, 37,  38 , 65 

Vanguard project wins IGY launch, 65 

Vanguard refused use of Cape Canaveral, 67–68 

Viking for ballistic missiles, 53 

Army Airborne Command and Control System 

(A2C2S),  306 

InfraLynx origins, 333 

UH-60 Blackhawk helicopter to, 319–321,  320 

Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA), 76, 93 

Army-Navy Electronic Evaluation Group, 90 

Army Security Agency, 156 

Army Security Group, 185 

Army Signal Corps Laboratory 

early radar system development, 35 

Tattletale equipment vans, 118, 132 

Tattletale transmitter power supply, 121 

Army Tactical Operations Center 

into Army helicopters, 322 

UH-60 Blackhawk helicopter to, 319–321,  320 

Arnold, James M., 181 

ARPA.  See  Advanced Research Projects Agency 

Arthur, George, 328–329 

artificial satellites.  See  satellites 

Assurance Technology Corporation 

C4ISR technology to industry,  306 

MATT units,  316 

NRL quality assurance, 158 

software defined radio,  318 

Athos detectors, 103 

Atlantic Research company, 216 

Atlas F booster 

cost savings over Titan, 213, 216, 222, 382 415 INDEX 

fuel challenges, 213, 216–217 

GPS new satellites too heavy, 222 

LIPS 1 launch, 310 

Multiple Satellite Dispenser, 247,  289 

NTS-1 (Timation 3A) launch, 216–217 

NTS-2 (Timation 4) launch, 216, 217– 218 

Wilhelm using vs. Titan, 213–214, 216, 222, 

381–382, 385 

Atlas H booster LIPS 2 launch,  310 

Atlas rocket for ICBMs, 64, 119 

Soviet radar defense against, 147 

Atlas V booster SSULI launch,  353 

atmosphere.  See  upper atmosphere research 

Atmosphere and Astrophysics Division, 66 

Atmospheric Neutral Density Experiment (ANDE), 

257 

atomic clocks,  215 

accuracy, 106, 196, 200, 201, 203,  215 , 218 

accuracy and satellite height, 215 

“Any Time, Any Place, Right Time, Right Place,” 

222 

Beard over See ing, 211– 212 , 222 

cesium-based atomic clocks, 206,  215 , 217–218, 

219 

explanation of, 203 

funding, 204 

GPS Aha! moment, 200, 201 

hydrogen masers, 217 

master clock at USNO, 6, 206 

monitoring in satellites, 222, 260 

museum, 217 

NRL providing, 213, 217 

NRL testing and certifying, 206, 222 

passive ranging, 200, 201–202, 204– 206 , 218 

problems early, 219 

rubidium-vapor atomic clocks, 214–215, 217, 219 

satellites carrying, 200–201, 214, 215, 217, 218, 

219 

synchronization, 201– 202 , 206, 225 

theory of relativity, 210 

thermo-electric devices, 220 

time transfer applications, 225 

time transfer tests, 206, 207–208, 217 

Attitude Control System (ACS),  311 

Audico (audio-to-digital conversion), 142 

Automatic Identification System (AIS), 292, 296 

TacSat-2 satellite, 338,  339 , 363 

avionics and tactical terminal development,  306 

B

BAE Systems company, 348 

Bain, James G., 34–35 

Baker-Nunn telescope network, 69 

Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO) 

Clementine project origins, 263–264 

Clementine project team, 265 

HTSSE sponsor,  349 

other names for, 6, 263 

Soviet Union collapse, 267 

ballistic missiles 

laser fighting mirrors versus, 254 

Polaris launch while submerged, 137 

Redstone missile, 67–68 

Soviet anti-ballistic missile sites, 147, 171 

Viking rockets for, 52–54, 55–56 

Viking simulating orbit reentry, 53 

Ballistic Missile System Division, 290 

Barnes, Jim,  169 

Barnes, Wilbert, 309 

Bartholomew, Al, 205, 220 

batch processing vs. real-time interrupts,  173 

Bay of Pigs debacle, 151 

Beal, Robert 

gravity gradient stabilization of Poppy antennas, 

162 

Laser Atmospheric Compensation Experiment, 

250 

Mechanical Systems Branch head, 247, 250 

Shuttle Launch Dispenser, 250 

SOLRAD Transfer System design, 236 

Spacecraft Engineering Department head, 243, 

384 

three-axis stabilization, 175 

Beard, Ronald,  212 

“Any Time, Any Place, Right Time, Right Place,” 

222 

atomic clock oversight, 211– 212 , 219, 222 

GPS architecture, 211 

GPS historical account coauthor, 211 

GPS maser, 217 

GPS retroreflectors, 259 

on GPS time dissemination, 225 

NAVSTAR name, 211 

Space Applications Branch head, 259 

Timation program manager, 211 

Becke, Ed,  97, 169 

death of, 350 

freight container office, 350 

HTSSE, 350 

“huts” for spy satellite, 117, 350 

NRL career, 96,  97 , 117, 350 

Poppy 3 satellite,  169 

Satellite Techniques Branch, 96 

Bell, Mike, 295 

Bell and Howell Company subsidiary, 142, 159 

Bell Labs transistors, 132 

Beltsville Space Center, 3, 93.  See also  Goddard 

Space Flight Center 

Bendix Corporation, 67 

bent pipes 

explanation of, 309 

LIPS as, 308–309,  310 

TADIXS-B broadcast format, 313–314 

Berman, Alan 

Navy tour of Poppy lab, 182 

NRL civilian Director of Research, 179, 188, 239, 

383 

Poppy probationary status, 188 416 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

reorganizing lab, 188, 239 

Wilhelm briefing on NRL ELINT, 179 

Bernhardt, Paul, 258 

Bettenhausen, Mike, 275–276 

Betterton, Tom,  232 

NAVALEX Special Projects Office head, 

231–233,  232 , 238, 248 

NCST diversity of expertise, 280 

NCST formation, 239, 243 

Program C shift from NRL, 232–233, 280, 281 

Soviet naval threat, 234 

tactical applications of space capability, 234 

Wilhelm meeting, 233 

Betz, Fred, 309 

“Beyond Vanguard” report (NRL Report 5097, “A 

Satellite and Space Vehicle Program for the 

Next Steps Beyond the Present Vanguard 

Program”) 

communications satellites, 106–107 

declassification,  99 

electronic reconnaissance satellites, 104–105, 

106, 107–109,  108 

GPS origins, 106 

release of,  99 –100 

reviewed by top echelons, 100, 101 

space-based scientific studies,  105 

BF4 (Battalion Form 4), 329 

bibliography, references, sources, 395–411 

Bielecki, Daria 

Chokepoint Monitoring System,  293 

Common Distributed Virtual Database for 

Information Extraction, 295 

Comprehensive Maritime Awareness Joint 

Capability Technology Demonstration, 296 

Crusade 2000 exercise, 294 

global vessel tracking system, 294–296 

maritime data fusion and correlation, 293–294 

maritime domain awareness basis, 289– 290 

Maritime Seize and Interdiction Experiment, 295 

MASTER MDA system,  286 , 296–297 

Modular Sensor System, 294–295 

Navy Superior Civilian Service Award,  290 , 293 

Sealink Advanced Analysis, 296–297 

sponsor briefings, 294 

Vessel Tracking Project,  290 –293 

Big Blue thermal vacuum chamber, 9,  251 , 252, 351 

Big Ear program,  114 , 116,  140 , 164, 374 

Binning, Patrick, 65, 78 

Bissell, Richard, 123, 147 

Bistatic Radar Experiment, 266–267 

BJTT (Briefcase Joint Tactical Terminal),  306 

Blackbird photoreconnaissance planes, 123 

Blackhawk helicopters,  320 

to Army Airborne Command and Control 

System, 319–321,  320 

C4ISR component systems, 322–323 

blimps 

laser-based imaging, 258, 259 

over-the-horizon laser communication, 258 

Blossom Point, Maryland,  72, 279 

cubesats being built, 390 

data to Vanguard Computing Center,  73 

HTSSE control, 350 

LACE control, 252, 253 

LIPS 3 control,  311 –312 

Minitrack primary site,  72, 73 , 196, 197 

satellite ground station functions, 9 

TacSat-4 tracking,  340 

Upper Stage control, 278,  279 

Wilhelm overseeing, 384 

Winkler Learjet from Cape Canaveral, 237 

Blue Scout rocket launch failure, 150, 151, 157 

BMATT (Briefcase Multi-Mission Advanced 

Tactical Terminal),  306 , 321 

Bockscar plane, 51 

Boeing company 

Naval Earth Map Observer, 353, 354 

“To Boldly Fly What Has Never Been Flown 

Before,” 10 

space solar power as, 359 

Boresight Huff-Duff project, 89 

Borodin, Windie, 360 

Breit, Gregory 

high-altitude research via rocket, 19–20 

Hulburt connection, 18 

Brentnall, Brent, 211 

brickbat 01 prioritization code, 172 

Brooks, Ronnie, 181 

“Buckshot” five-satellite launch,  149 –150, 157, 379 

Buhler, Charlie, 309 

Building 1 only,  1

Building 12 satellite link antenna, 333 

Building 43 

Collier Trophy,  226 

leadership offices, 159, 380, 384 

windowless vault for Poppy meetings, 159 

Building 53 

atomic clock certification, 206 

atomic clock museum, 217 

Easton office, 206 

maser research remnants, 217 

Building 58 laser pulse timing, 256 

Building 59 

GRAB under cover of night, 129 

Satellite Techniques Branch, 376 

Tactical Receive Equipment, 305 

Wilhelm painter’s ladder antenna, 378 

Building 209 Poppy 3 model,  169 

Building 222 satellite exhibit,  98, 215 

Building 660 at Vandenberg, 159 

Building A59,  8, 251, 268, 338, 342, 343, 365 

anechoic chambers, 9,  343 , 350 

“Big Blue,” 9,  251 , 252, 351 

Chilbert office, 347 

Clementine spacecraft model,  264 

cubesats, 390,  391 

description of, 350–351 

freight containers,  342 , 350 417 INDEX 

history of, 350 

Interim Control Module,  268 , 269 

Kawecki office with HTSSE model, 350 

LACE spacecraft, 253 

largest structure on campus,  8, 350 

Microwave Imager Sounder, 278 

Poppy 7 satellite, 189 

Proximity Operations Testbed,  365 

Russian tour of, 268 

Sea Launch and Recovery vehicle, 386, 388 

TacSat-1 satellite, 337,  338 

TacSat-4 satellite,  342 

Tactical Technologies Development Laboratory, 

328 

Wilhelm overseeing, 384 

Windsat model in Navy tour, 274–275 

Buisson, James, 204, 205 

Bullseye Huff-Duff project, 89 

Burdett, Robert 

Improved Data Modem, 317 

Joint Combat Information Terminal, 320–321 

LIPS teamwork, 309 

Tactical Receive Equipment, 305 

TADIXS-B, 314 

Bureau of Aeronautics (BuAer) 

electronic countermeasures specified by, 101 

first electronic reconnaissance satellite, 105, 

114, 115 

Navy space policy, 124 

NRL to develop Electronic Countermeasures 

System, 101–102 

Regulus submarine-launched missile, 56 

Tattletale satellite funding, 117 

Viking as guided missile, 56 

Viking funding cut, 55 

Viking rocket partner, 51 

Bureau of Ordnance 

Canes/Transit co-launch, 126 

Gebhard giving ELINT paper to, 100 

Transit program funding, 122 

Bureau of Ships, 104, 113 

Bureau of Weapons (BuWeps) 

GRAB success and continuation, 141 

GRAB two-satellite configuration, 148 

Interstate 295 test of GPS, 204 

as Naval Air Systems Command, 176, 204 

NRL ELINT funding, 150 

NRL ELINT funding to NRO, 155 

Bureaus of Ships and of Yards and Docks, 88 

Burke, Arleigh 

“Beyond Vanguard” report, 100 

naval space readiness personnel, 126 

Navy space policy memorandum, 124 

Tattletale final approval, 118, 119 

Bush, George H. W., 317 

Bush, George W., 226, 333 

BuWeps.  See  Bureau of Weapons 

Byeman security system, 151 

C

C4I branch.  See  Command, Control, 

Communications, Computers, and Intelligence 

C4ISR (Command, Control, Computers, 

Communications, Intelligence, Surveillance, 

and Reconnaissance),  306 

Army Airborne Command and Control System, 

319–321,  320 

C4I branch.  See  Command, Control, 

Communications, Computers, and Intelligence 

device miniaturization, 305, 307, 315,  320 , 321, 

362 

funding, 305, 315, 322 

homeland security role, 7, 303– 306, 307 ,

327–328 

Improved Data Modem, 316–317 

InfraLynx,  330 –334,  331 

Integrated Broadcast System, 314 

Joint Combat Information Terminal, 320–321, 

322–323 

Joint Tactical Radio System, 322–324 

LIPS (Living Plume Shield), 307–312,  310, 311 ,

313 

Maryland bridge security, 334–335 

Multi-Mission Advanced Tactical Terminals, 

314, 315– 316 

NRL shift from satellites to data, 303–306, 

314–315 

On-Board Processor, 314 

“orbiting peripherals” mindset, 301–302, 303, 

328, 385 

origins of, 303 

Radiant Hail, 321–322 

RFID firefighter tracking, 328–329 

software definable radio, 317–319,  318 , 320, 362 

Software Reconfigurable Payloads,  360 , 362–363 

sponsors, 302–303 

sponsors non-Navy, 322, 324 

Tactical Receive Equipment, 305,  306 , 312–313 

TADIXS-B, 313–314 

technology to industry,  306, 307 

TRAP/TRE, 314 

Universal Communication Interface Module, 

336,  337 

White House Communications Agency, 333–334 

See also  ELINT; intelligence, surveillance, and 

reconnaissance 

California Institute of Technology Guggenheim 

Aeronautical Laboratory, 28, 34, 50 

Callahan, Vic, 309 

Calsphere satellite, 199 

Canal, Albert, 162 

Canes security system 

budgetary battles, 131 

final approval of project, 124–125, 126 

Galactic Radiation Experiment Background 

cover mission, 123, 126 

as GRAB code word, 99, 123, 126, 129.  See also 

GRAB 418 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Hold control system from Canes, 148 

Hold system to Byeman system, 151 

Navy space policy, 124 

security control protocol participants, 126, 131, 

134 

SOLRAD team versus, 129 

Tattletale program into, 122–123.  See also 

Tattletale 

Cape Canaveral, Florida 

“Buckshot” five-satellite launch,  149 –150 

GPS launch site, 220, 223 

GRAB launch, 133– 134 

LACE launch on Valentine’s Day, 251 

Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory launch, 

355 

SOLRAD 11 launch,  237, 238 

Upper Stage launch, 278– 279 

Vanguard can’t use, 67–68 

Vanguard TV-3 launch, 74–75 

Vanguard TV-4 launch,  77–78 

Carey, Bernard, 179 

Carnegie Institution of Washington (CIW), 18, 

19–20 

Castro, Fidel, 141 

cell phone geolocation-based apps, 225 

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) 

briefing on Program C, 182 

“chop chains” for GRAB data management, 

136–137 

cost-effectiveness of ELINT, 168, 169–170 

Dulles running Intelligence Board, 117 

GRAB to Poppy under Byeman, 151 

Mayo briefing on Poppy ELINT, 183 

Program B of NRO, 156 

Tattletale final approval, 120, 123 

cesium-based atomic clocks 

development of,  215 

as GPS clock of choice, 217–218 

NAVSTAR 4 carrying, 219 

NTS-2 carrying, 217, 218 

Timation ground station, 206 

CH-47 Chinook helicopter C4ISR components, 

322–323 

Chafee, John, 185, 186 

Challenger Space Shuttle explosion, 223, 247, 

249–250 

Chappie, Scott,  268 

Charged Aerosol Release Experiment (CARE), 

258 

Charyk, Joseph, 147 

cheapsats, 309 

Chesapeake Bay Detachment (CBD),  293 

Chokepoint Monitoring System,  293 

laser communications, 260–262,  261 , 293 

Chief of Naval Research (CNR) 

C4I concept vehicle funding,  331 

Collier Trophy for GPS,  226 

“Naval Space Technology Center” mission, 

240 –241 

NRL winner of IGY launch, 66 

Sea Launch and Recovery funding, 386, 388 

Viking rocket funding, 51 

Chilbert, Aaron 

Interim Control Module,  268 

NASA and Russian Space Agency heads, 268 

NRL career, 347–348 

NRO headquarter work, 269 

Spacecraft Engineering Department, 347 

on support personnel, 347 

Chinook helicopters C4ISR components, 322–323 

Chokepoint Monitoring System, 292,  293 , 361 

“chop chains” for GRAB data management, 136–137 

Christman, Don, 159 

Churchill, Winston, 88 

Clark, John, 120 

Cleeton, Claude, 151 

Clementine project,  264, 266 

achievements of,  264 , 265– 266 

“the bat cave,” 265–266 

Bistatic Radar Experiment,  266 –267 

as cheaper, faster, better, 263, 347, 354 

Clinton praising, 7, 266 

as Deep Space Program Science Experiment, 

6–7, 263 

funding, 265 

gas gauge from Timation, 390 

mapping the moon, 7, 265,  266 , 347 

Nozette on origins of project, 263– 264 

Nozette selling government secrets, 267 

purpose of, 6–7, 263, 264–265 

satellite launch, 265 

Science  magazine overview paper, 265 

Clinton, Bill, 7, 266 

clocks 

atomic clocks into satellites, 200–201, 214, 215, 

217, 218, 219 

crystal clocks into satellites,  202 –203, 204,  207 ,

208, 214 

GPS retroreflectors to monitor, 260 

hydrogen masers, 217 

master clock at USNO, 6, 206 

NRL providing, 213, 217 

NRL testing and certifying, 206, 222 

passive ranging, 201–202, 204– 206 

synchronization of, 201– 202 , 206, 207–208 

synchronization of LACE clock, 253 

synchronization via GPS, 1, 6, 201– 202 ,

206–208, 225 

theory of relativity and, 210 

thermo-electric devices for, 220 

time transfer commercial applications, 225 

time transfer tests, 206, 207–208, 217 

See also  atomic clocks 

CMA JCTD.  See  Comprehensive Maritime 

Awareness Joint Capability Technology 

Demonstration 

Coast Guard 

Common Distributed Virtual Database for 419 INDEX 

Information Extraction, 295 

Cutter  Healy  and TacSat, 341 

MAGNET database, 296 

maritime domain awareness, 286 

Maritime Intelligence Fusion Center, 296 

MASTER MDA system, 296–297 

Coffey, Shannon, 270 

Coffey, Timothy,  226 

Collier Trophy for GPS,  226 

NRL as site of NCST, 242 

NRL civilian Director of Research, 242, 280, 

384 

retirement, 280 

Sea Launch and Recovery funding, 388 

Wilhelm then Hellrich to admin building, 384 

Windsat sponsor pressure, 273 

Cold War 

driving technological development, 83, 147–148, 

375–376 

“freedom of space” and surveillance, 66 

Iron Curtain descending, 88 

Korean Peninsula, 54, 55 

Lorenzen applying knowledge, 89 

Mideast crisis, 287 

NASA and Russian Space Agency heads, 268 

NRL innovations, 1, 5, 15 

NRL space mission secrecy, 95 

Poppy hut operator foreign spouses, 159 

Soviet ABM sites, 147, 171 

Soviet Union collapse, 267, 347 

U-2 plane shot down, 133, 139, 377 

U-2 radar reconnaissance, 133, 147 

Viking as guided missile, 55–56 

Collection and Special Analysis (COSA), 130 

Collier, Art 

Army Airborne Command and Control System, 

320 

Improved Data Modem, 317 

NAVALEX Special Projects Office head, 238, 

248, 268, 303 

NRL shift from satellites to data, 314–315 

NRL shift to support role, 238, 248 

Russians at NCST, 268–269 

Tactical Receive Equipment, 313, 314 

Universal Communication Interface Module, 336 

Collier Trophy, 225– 226 

Collins, Bill 

gravity gradient stabilization, 162, 309 

LIPS teamwork, 309 

three-axis stabilization, 175 

Collins, Joe, 309 

COMINT (communications intelligence) 

ELINT versus, 100 

National Security Agency control, 117, 143 

Command, Control, Communications, Computers, 

and Intelligence (C4I; Code 8140) 

adapting DoD devices for nonmilitary, 328 

Army Airborne Command and Control System, 

319–321,  320 

Copperfield vessel tracker,  339 , 362 

CuF2 as evolvable, 338, 362–363 

Dwyer as head, 304 

FORCEnet, 335 

InfraLynx,  330 –334,  331 

Joint Tactical Radio System, 322–324 

MDA predecessors, 361.  See also  maritime 

domain awareness 

New York City Fire Department, 328–329 

Radiant Hail, 321–322 

“sensor-to-shooter” technology ethic, 304–306, 

307, 328, 331, 347 

Software Reprogrammable Payload,  360 ,

362–363.  See also  software definable radio 

sponsors non-Navy, 322, 324 

Tactical Receive Equipment, 305.  See also 

Tactical Receive Equipment 

technology to industry,  306, 307 

See also  C4ISR; maritime domain awareness 

Command, Control, Computers, Communications, 

Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance. 

See  C4ISR 

Commander of Navy Installations requesting 

InfraLynx, 332–333 

commercialization of space 

COMSAT creation, 161 

COMSAT for Votaw and Dix,  95 , 161, 170–171, 

379 

Globalstar satellite phone venture, 354 

GPS opened to development, 224–225 

Common Distributed Virtual Database for 

Information Extraction (CDVD/IE), 295 

Communication Moon Relay, 137 

communications infrastructure 

InfraLynx,  330 –333,  331 

massive failures due to disasters, 327 

Mobile Communications Vehicle, 334 

“Mother’s Day Effect,” 327 

RFID tracking of firefighters, 329 

satellite communications vehicle,  330 

Sept. 11, 2001, New York City,  330–331 

Sept. 11, 2001, White House, 327 

White House Communications Agency, 333–334 

communications satellites 

Arthur C. Clarke writing about, 358 

bent pipes, 308–309,  310 , 313–314 

“Beyond Vanguard” report, 106–107 

COMMx TacSat-4 component,  342 , 357 

COMSAT creation, 161 

COMSAT for Votaw and Dix,  95 , 161, 170–171, 

379 

DoD Mobile User Objective System, 343–344 

FLEETSATs using TADIXS-B, 313–314 

Globalstar satellite phone venture, 354 

Iridium system, 224 

jamming and spoofing, 107 

LIPS (Living Plume Shield), 307–312,  310, 311 

radio-isotope-fueled, 236 

submarine communication, 106–107.  See also 

LOFTI 420 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

TacSat-4 experimental, 280, 341, 344.  See also 

TacSats 

See also  C4ISR 

Communications Science Division, 188 

Communications Security Section (Radio Division) 

jamming German guided missiles, 23–26 

Krause and guided missiles, 29 

short radio pulse communication, 23 

COMMx 

“COMMx Bitter” microbrew, 358 

TacSat-4 component,  342 , 357 

Composite I five-satellite launch,  149 –150 

Comprehensive Maritime Awareness Joint 

Capability Technology Demonstration (CMA 

JCTD), 285,  286 , 296, 297 

computers 

Gorday’s electrical drawings, 157 

GPS ground segment software, 219 

GRAB data digitization, 139, 140, 142 

Modular Sensor System as fully automated, 295 

Naval Research Laboratory Electronic Digital 

Computer, 140, 142 

needed for ELINT data analysis, 138 

NSA new powerful computers, 159, 184 

Poppy 1.5-megabyte “moveable head disk,” 183 

Poppy 5 digital processing upgrade, 172–174, 

173 

Poppy data digitization, 166, 168–169 

Poppy for Navy field support, 180 

Poppy ground station digitization, 166, 186 

Poppy SEL 810A computer,  173 , 178 

President’s Science Advisory Committee, 155 

Programming Automatic Processing System, 189 

radar tracking systems, 70 

real-time interrupts vs. batch processing,  173 

ships located in hours not days, 179 

sneaker-net file delivery, 179 

SOLRAD 11 software, 236 

Timation range and azimuth program, 204 

Upper Stage orbit determination software, 279 

vacuum-tube-based, 70, 140 

Vanguard Computing Center, 72,  73 

vessel identification automation, 291–295 

See also  C4ISR; Internet 

COMSAT company 

creation of, 161 

Dix to, 170–171, 379 

Votaw to,  95 , 161, 379 

Condensed Matter and Radiation Sciences 

Division, 349–350 

Conical Microwave Imager Sounder, 277 

Connally, John B., 144 

Connolly, Thomas, 124 

McNamara and NRL ELINT, 144–145 

review of Navy space activities, 176–177 

Consolidated Electrodynamics Corporation, 142, 

159 

Convair company, 119 

Cook, Ralph, 180, 183 

Copperfield ELINT system,  339 , 362 

Copperfield 2 (CuF2) as reprogrammable, 338, 

362–363 

Corbin, Dave,  77 

Coriolis satellite and Windsat, 276 

coronagraph, 355–356 

Corona/Sentry program 

film recovery program, 101, 143, 147 

NRL Tattletale versus, 116 

Program B of NRO, 156 

Cosby, Lynwood, 170, 188 

cosmic dust particles, 79 

cosmic rays 

hardening of electronics, 347–348, 362–363 

Viking 11 detectors, 57 

cosmonaut Titov search radar, 150 

costs 

Apollo mission adding to, 186 

Atlas F savings over Titan, 382 

DoD cost-mindedness, 144 

ELINT evaluation, 168, 169–170 

first reconnaissance satellite, 114 

LIPS (Living Plume Shield), 309 

MDA global system, 294 

Satellite Techniques Branch cost-effective, 162 

Tattletale satellite, 116, 117 

Vanguard program, 94 

Vietnam War squeezing funding, 181 

Viking rockets, 57 

WS-117L space reconnaissance, 116, 117 

COTS as commercial off-the-shelf hardware, 348 

Countermeasures Branch (Radio Division),  152 

BuWeps funds for NRL ELINT, 150 

Canes/GRAB vs. SOLRAD, 129 

direction finding systems, 89, 102 

Electronic Countermeasures System, 101–102 

elevated to Electronic Warfare Division, 170 

GRAB 2 launch, 145 

GRAB advancements and legacy,  152 

GRAB data deluge, 137–138 

GRAB two-satellite configuration, 148 

Lorenzen establishing, 86–87, 88–89 

Mayo working in, 86–87 

national ELINT program, 102–103 

Poppy 4 delivery late, 163 

Poppy program teams, 161 

Speakman reunion with Lorenzen, 185 

Countermeasures Intercept Analysis Group, 90 

Cox, Andy, 334 

Craig Systems company, 132 

crimp connections from Valsi, 158 

cruise missiles and wind vectors,  274 –275 

Crusade 2000 exercise, 294 

crystal clocks into satellites,  202 –203, 204,  207 ,

208, 214 

crystal size and transmitter frequency, 132 

Cuba 

Bay of Pigs debacle, 151 

Missile Crisis, 156–157 421 INDEX 

Missile Crisis and Huff-Duff, 89 

Thor missile launch debris, 141 

cubesats, 390 

Tether Electrodynamic Propulsion Cubesat 

Experiment,  391 

Cudmore, Patrick, 162 

CuF2 (Copperfield 2), 338, 362–363 

“Cup of Joe” origins, 7 

Cutter  Healy  and TacSat-4, 341 

D

Daniels, Josephus, 7 

DARPA.  See  Defense Advanced Research Projects 

Agency 

Davis, Mark, 257 

Day, Dwayne, 289 

debris.  See  space debris 

Deep Space Program Science Experiment 

(DSPSE), 6–7, 263.  See also  Clementine project 

Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 

(DARPA) 

ARPA as, 101, 197, 365 

ARPA establishment, 101, 115, 365 

HTSSE sponsor,  349 

robotics funding,  365 , 366 

Upper Stage payload-builders, 278 

Defense Department.  See  Department of Defense 

Defense Intelligence Agency, 148 

Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) 

Defense Weather Satellite System as follow-on, 

356 

Special Sensor Ultraviolet Limb Imager, 

352– 353 , 354– 355 , 356 

Defense Navigation Satellite System (DNSS) 

Air Force over See ing demonstration program, 

211 

DDR&E Development Concept Paper, 210 

formation of, 208, 211 

to NAVSTAR GPS, 211 

Timation into NTS, 210.  See also  Navigation 

Technology Satellites 

Defense Systems Acquisition Review Council 

(DSARC), 213, 219 

Defense Weather Satellite System (DWSS) 

funding cut, 277–278, 356 

Microwave Imager Sounder on, 277–278 

Defensive Electronic Warfare Branch (Electronic 

Warfare Division), 170 

de Havilland company, 162 

Delta 4M booster SSULI sensor launch, 356 

Delta II booster 

ARGOS launch, 350 

for GPS satellites, 223 

Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory launch, 

355 

Upper Stage launch, 278– 279 

Department of Defense (DoD) 

Air Force as space systems authority, 144, 145, 

177, 185 

“Beyond Vanguard” report, 101 

“chop chains” for GRAB data, 136–137 

Countermeasures Intercept Analysis Group, 90 

Defense Meteorological Satellite Program, 

352– 353 , 354– 355 , 356 

GPS opened to commercial development, 

224–225 

Hagen coordination for Vanguard, 66– 67 

Joint Chiefs of Staff, 120, 208, 218 

Joint Tactical Radio System, 322–324 

Master Clock, 206 

McNamara overhaul of, 144 

Mobile User Objective System, 343–344 

National Reconnaissance Program creation, 147 

National Security Space Office, 358 

Naval Earth Map Observer, 353 

Navy Space Policy, 124, 241, 383–384 

Navy TENCAP Office reputation, 303 

NRL ELINT prioritized, 179–180 

NRL for atomic clock certification, 206 

NRL winning IGY launch, 65–66 

ORS program, 336.  See also  Operationally 

Responsive Space 

passive ranging demonstration, 204– 206 

Poppy for ocean surveillance, 185, 186 

Research and Development Board, 53, 54, 58 

satellite navigation system plan, 212–213 

satellite navigation system requirements, 208, 

218 

software definable radio,  318 

Space Test Program, 236, 273, 276 

Stewart Committee on IGY launch, 64, 65 

Tattletale/Canes satellite approval, 115–119, 123, 

124 

Vietnam War funding squeezes, 181 

Department of Energy space solar power, 358–359 

Department of Homeland Security 

emergence of, 7, 327 

MASTER MDA demonstration exercises, 297 

Department of Justice, 331–332 

Department of Transportation retroreflectors, 260 

Derieux, Dave, 328, 330 

“The Development of an Ocean Surveillance 

Capability,” 182 

deVezin, Howard, 204 

DeVorkin, David 

Viking as guided missile, 55 

Viking for ballistic missiles, 53 

Viking rockets, 51 

digitizing data 

Analog to Digital Data System, 174 

digital data format development, 145 

GRAB data, 139, 140, 142 

Poppy data, 168–169 

Poppy ground station digitization, 186 

direction finding (DF) systems 

Emitter Location Branch, 170 

explanation of, 89 

goniometer at Hybla Valley, 103– 104 422 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Lorenzen’s Countermeasures Branch, 89, 102 

periscope-mounted radar detector, 104, 113 

Precision Direction Finder, 294 

Director of Defense Research and Engineering 

(DDR&E) 

cesium as GPS clock of choice, 217 

“Defense Navigation Satellite Program 

Demonstration Program,” 210 

GPS jamming, 224 

Leonard satellites for ocean surveillance, 177, 

285, 286–287 

passive ranging Pentagon demo, 205 

Dix, Edgar L.,  97, 161 

commercial COMSAT, 170–171, 379 

GRAB 1 twin flight-worthy, 141 

GRAB 2 launch, 145 

GRAB activation, 134–136,  135 

GRAB station wagon transport, 133 

Poppy augmentation for ocean surveillance, 186 

as Program C consultant, 186 

Satellite Techniques Branch, 96 

Satellite Techniques Branch head,  161 

Tattletale transmitters, 121 

Wilhelm’s best engineering teacher, 161 

DoD.  See  Department of Defense 

Dodecapole 1 satellite, 166,  167 , 199 

calibration satellite importance, 167 

Domer, Fred, 309 

Doppler shift for geolocation, 195 

Dorchester  (steamer), 15 

Dosimeter payload, 160 

Douglas, James, 143 

Douglas Aircraft, 39, 162 

drones.  See  unmanned aerial vehicles 

DSPSE (Deep Space Program Science Experiment), 

6–7, 263.  See also  Clementine project 

Dual Mode Optical Interrogator,  261 , 262 

Dugan, Regina E., 366 

Dulles, Allen W., 117, 123 

Dwyer, Christopher,  286 

C4I head, 304 

Comprehensive Maritime Awareness Joint 

Capability Technology Demonstration, 285, 

286 , 296, 297 

“hull-to-emitter-correlation,” 287 

LACE components, 252–253 

Maritime Information Exchange Model, 297 

MASTER MDA system,  286 , 296–297 

NCST acting director, 285, 392 

NRL career, 304 

on NRL revolutionizing MDA, 285 

NRO headquarters work, 269 

Sealink Advanced Analysis, 296–297 

Space Systems Development Department head, 

85, 304, 392 

sponsor relationships changing, 304 

Vessel Tracking Project,  286 

which ships to worry about,  286 , 287, 290 

Dyno 1 as first intelligence-gathering payload, 15, 

150 

Dyno as Program C under NRO, 156 

See also  GRAB 

E

EA-6B aircraft IDM and MATT, 316, 317 

Early Bird satellite, 161 

Easton, Richard, 212 

Easton, Roger,  226, 227 

accolades,  226, 227 

accomplishments at NRL, 106, 195–196 

atomic clock accuracy, 106, 196, 203 

atomic clock first flight, 214 

atomic clocks into satellites, 200, 201 

death, 226 

GPS, 69, 195–196, 200, 201, 204 

GPS Aha! moment, 200, 201 

GPS framework meeting, 212–213 

Minitrack development, 170, 195, 196, 197 

Minitrack system, 65, 69, 70, 196.  See also 

Minitrack system 

National Inventors Hall of Fame, 226,  227 

National Medal of Technology, 226 

NAVSEG GPS proposals, 209–210 

NAVSPASUR development, 199–200, 378–379 

NAVSPASUR insight, 197 

passive ranging demos, 204– 206 

retirement, 226 

Timation patent,  227 

Timation program, 177, 195–196, 208, 381 

Vanguard TV-3 satellite, 74– 75 

Eaton Report on national ELINT, 179 

EBF4 (Electronic Battalion Form 4), 329 

ECM.  See  electronic countermeasures 

Edison (Thomas) and founding of NRL, 7 

Efratom company, 214 

Eisenhauer, Robert (Bob; Ike),  169, 302 

Improved Data Modem, 317 

Joint Combat Information Terminal, 320–321 

LIPS goals, 308 

Multi-Mission Advanced Tactical Terminals, 316 

NRL evolution, 301 

“orbiting peripherals” mindset,  302 , 303–304, 

385 

Poppy 3 satellite,  169 

retirement, 301 

“sensor to shooter” technology ethic, 304–306 

software definable radio, 319 

solid-state memory unit,  168 , 378 

Spacecraft Technology Center, 239 

Space Systems Development Department head, 

243, 301,  302 , 384, 385 

sponsor relationships changing, 303–304, 322 

Tactical Receive Equipment, 305 

Universal Communication Interface Module, 336 

Eisenhower, Dwight D. 

“Beyond Vanguard” report, 100 

Explorer 1 launch, 76 

GRAB 2 approval, 139 423 INDEX 

GRAB activation, 133, 135–136 

GRAB data collection, 136–137, 138 

GRAB launch approval, 133 

GRAB missions over Soviet Union, 137 

International Geophysical Year satellite launch, 

63 

NASA creation, 2, 93 

National Reconnaissance Office establishment, 

125–126 

NRL staff to Goddard, 3 

space reconnaissance satellite approval, 115 

Sputnik 1 launch, 73 

Tattletale/Canes final approval, 123, 124–125, 

126 

U-2 flights suspended, 133 

Vanguard briefing miscommunication, 74 

Vanguard objectives, 66 

Electric Propulsion Demonstration Module 

(EPDM), 272,  273 

electromagnetic spectrum,  17 

Allies’ predominance, 87 

Doppler shift for geolocation, 195 

hyperspectral imaging, 294, 354 

laser communication wavelengths, 260–261 

radar jamming, 84–85 

TREs operation, 313 

V-2 spectrograph, 41– 43 

electronic countermeasures (ECM) 

Defensive Electronic Warfare Branch, 170 

ECM system called for, 101–102 

German goniometer for RF angles, 103 

jamming and spoofing Soviet radar, 288 

laser communication immunity to, 261 

Lorenzen as networking hub, 87, 103 

Mayo insight for space reconnaissance, 113–114, 

152, 188 

Mayo wide-open receiver, 103, 104 

Navy space policy, 124 

NTPC establishment, 102.  See also  National 

Technical Processing Center 

periscope-mounted radar detector, 104 

Vietnam War, 170, 178–179 

electronic intelligence.  See  ELINT 

electronic order of battle (EOB) ELINT, 288 

Electronics Science and Technology Division 

HTSSE program, 349 

Solid State Devices Branch, 348 

U-PRAM sunlight-to-microwave module,  352 ,

359 

Electronic Warfare Division 

Berman reorganization of lab, 188 

Countermeasures Branch elevated to, 170 

ECM and repeater jammers on ships, 178–179 

Electro-Optics Technology Section (Code 8123) 

Atmospheric Neutral Density Experiment,  257 

Charged Aerosol Release Experiment, 258 

geodetic laser ranging, 259–260 

Gilbreath as head, 256, 257 

International Laser Ranging Service, 256–257 

laser communications, 255–256.  See also  laser 

communications 

one-meter photon-catching telescope, 255, 257 

Optical Test Facility, 255, 257,  271 

Reed as head, 255, 257 

retroreflectors, 259–262,  261 

Revolutionary Imaging Technology, 258–259 

satellite laser ranging, 256–257 

Scharpf as head, 255 

SpinSat, 258 

TRTEL transportable telescope, 258 

ELINT (electronic intelligence) 

Air Force as lead administrative body, 143 

“Beyond Vanguard” report, 104–105, 106, 

107–109,  108 

Bielecki global vessel tracking system, 294–296 

“chop chains” for GRAB data management, 

136–137 

COMINT versus, 100 

cost-effectiveness evaluation, 168, 169–170 

cost of first reconnaissance satellite, 114 

Countermeasures Intercept Analysis Group, 90 

Cuban Missile Crisis, 156–157 

data analysis for Soviet ABM sites, 147 

data digitization, 139, 140, 142, 145, 168–169, 

186 

data flow via Moffett Index, 185–186 

data format challenges, 145, 170 

data into Programming Automatic Processing 

System, 189 

data processing bottleneck, 148, 288 

data processing from weeks to minutes,  173 –174 

data processing in hours not days, 179 

data TCPED, 288 

description of ELINT, 86, 100 

electronic warfare being ignored, 179 

evolvable systems “future-proofed,” 362–363 

first electronic reconnaissance satellite, 15, 99, 

104–105, 106, 113–114,  134 , 195, 377.  See 

also  GRAB; Tattletale 

friend or foe ship identification, 180–181 

Global Information Grid, 165 

GRAB ABM complex discovery, 150 

GRAB as training wheels, 287 

GRAB data overwhelming, 137–138, 139, 

141–142, 146, 148,  152 

GRAB data tapes from huts, 130, 137 

GRAB payoff, 150, 151–152 

GRAB two-satellite configuration, 148 

gravity gradient stabilization of antennas, 162 

high-level analysis of, 179 

Hutchison as Navy coordinator, 118 

installations in ships, aircraft, vehicles, 89–90, 

319–323,  320 , 361–362 

Integrated Broadcast System, 314 

launch failures jeopardizing, 150–151 

lessons from German guided missiles, 24–25 

Lorenzen as “Father of Electronic Warfare,” 2, 

83,  84, 89 , 375 424 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Lorenzen ocean surveillance protocols, 184 

Lorenzen successes, 86, 103 

Mayo conception, 113–114, 152, 188 

Mayo wide-open receiver, 103, 104 

Mideast crisis, 287–288 

national ELINT program, 102–103 

National Security Agency control, 117 

National Security Agency coordination, 143 

National Technical Processing Center, 90, 102 

Naval Security Group, 102.  See also  Naval 

Security Group 

Navy field support, 180, 185 

Navy shift to tactical applications, 234 

near-real-time intelligence data,  173 –174, 288, 

316 

NRL Electronic Intelligence Satellite, 115.  See 

also  Tattletale satellite 

NRL ELINT expertise, 150, 302, 383 

NRL shift from satellites to data, 234, 238–239, 

303–306, 314–315 

ocean surveillance from space, 177, 178.  See 

also  ocean surveillance 

On-Board Processor, 314 

Poppy 6 novel seaborne intercepts, 184 

Poppy closed down, 189–190 

Poppy data and spectral range, 175 

Poppy data processing labor intensive, 176 

Poppy ELINT capabilities, 179–180 

Poppy for ships vs. radar, 181, 182 

Poppy shipborne emitter surveillance, 176, 

178–179, 285, 287 

post-Poppy architecture, 189 

Research, Development, Technology and 

Engineering coordinating group, 184–185 

SALT monitoring, 189 

sea-based systems for Soviet radar, 176 

Soviet AMB/AES systems, 147, 171 

Soviet threats driving ELINT, 83, 147–148, 

375–376 

Specific Emitter Identification, 291–292 

Tattletale alerting Soviets, 122, 124 

Technical Operations Group, 156 

TRAP/TRE broadcasts, 314 

Wald contributions, 124,  125 

See also  C4ISR 

Elliott, Scott, 295 

Emitter Location Branch (Electronic Warfare 

Division), 170 

Endeavour Space Shuttle,  257 

Engineering Services Division, 161, 310 

Enola Gay plane, 51 

EOSAT surveillance of U.S., 285 

EP-3E Aries II aircraft Story Finder, 361 

Ericsson, John, 204 

exhibits on NRL campus 

Building 43 Collier Trophy,  226 

Building 53 atomic clock museum, 217 

Building 209 Poppy 3 model,  169 

Building 222 satellites,  98, 215 

Building A59 Clementine model,  264 

Building A59 ISS ICM, 269 

Building A59 project emblems and photos, 351 

Explorer 1 satellite 

first U.S. satellite, 76, 77, 100 

NRL electronics package, 76, 100–101 

Van Allen radiation belts, 145–146 

Explorer 2 satellite, 77 

extreme UV radiation, 41–42,  43 , 44–45 

SOLRAD 11 satellite, 237 

Eyestrain project, 140 

F

F-16 fighter jets with IDM, 316–317 

fadeouts and ionosphere, 41–42, 45 

Fairchild company, 216 

Falcon 1 non-launch, 338 

Faust, William 

Applications Research Division head, 171 

not so interested in satellites, 381 

review of Navy space program, 177 

Federal Communications Commission, 196 

Federal Emergency Management Administration 

(FEMA),  331 

Ferrari, Leo, 309 

ferrets 

data output vs. GRAB, 137–138 

description of, 102 

direction finding equipment, 102 

ELINT device probes, 90 

satellites instead, 113–114 

Feynman, Richard, 247 

fiber communications.  See  laser communications 

firefighter tracking for FDNY, 328–329 

Fischberger, Milton, 329 

Flach, George 

Interim Control Module, 351 

Jaffe interview with, 351– 352 

motor-driven flywheel to control yaw, 175 

projects can get canceled, 354, 358 

reaction wheel stabilization, 222 

Space Electronics Systems Development 

Branch head, 351 

flame bucket spectacular failure, 216–217 

Flax, Alexander, 172, 175 

Fleet Satellite Communications System (FLTSAT 

COM), 243 

FLEETSATs using TADIXS-B, 313–314 

Fleming, John, 20 

Flopnik, 75,  76 

FORCEnet, 335 

Ford, Carl 

“COMMx Bitter” microbrew, 358 

“Standard Bus Stout” microbrew, 358 

Foster, John S., Jr., 210 

Fox, Andy, 314 

Frank, Alick, 205 

Fraser, Constance, 21 

“freedom of space” definition, 66 425 INDEX 

FREND (Front End Robotic Enabling Near-Term 

Demonstration), 365–366 

Frequency and Time Systems, Inc, 218 

Frequency Electronics Incorporated (FEI), 202, 

203, 214 

Friedman, Herbert,  37 

cosmic rays, 57 

giant in astronomy community, 2,  37 , 131 

ionosphere X-radiation effects, 98 

SOLRAD keeping GRAB alive, 131 

SOLRAD team spirits, 133 

SOLRAD vs. Canes/GRAB, 129 

on Soviets mocking U.S. program, 75 

on Sputnik 1 launch, 73–74 

on V-2 launches,  37 , 38–39 

on Vanguard TV-3 launch, 74 

friend or foe.  See  IFF (Identification Friend or Foe) 

Front End Robotic Enabling Near-Term 

Demonstration (FREND), 365–366 

Frosch, Robert, 179, 183 

Frost, Lawrence, 118, 119 

G

Gaffney, Paul,  226 

Gagarin, Yuri, 150 

Gaiser, Peter, 274, 275–276 

Gambert, John,  268 

gamma-ray bursts, 237 

Gates, Stephen, 273 

Gates, Thomas 

Canes final approval, 123, 124 

GRAB 2 recommendation, 139 

GRAB co-launch with Transit, 133 

GRAB missions over Soviet Union, 137 

GE.  See  General Electric 

Gebhard, Louis,  11 

ELINT paper to Bureau of Ordnance, 100 

high-frequency radio, 12, 13 

jamming German guided missiles, 23–24, 25 

Lorenzen support from, 85 

radar funding by Congress, 83 

radio as NRL mission,  11 

as Radio Division II director,  11 

Tattletale final presentation rehearsal, 119 

Geiger, Robert, 187–188, 231 

General Electric (GE) 

gravity gradient stabilization of antennas, 162 

Hermes project for rocketry, 28 

radar of shorter wavelength, 84 

TV-3 failure reaction, 75 

Vanguard first-stage engines and pumps, 67 

White Sands Army contract, 35 

geodesic radomes, 5,  271 , 361 

geodetic laser ranging, 259–260 

Geographos 

Clementine, 7, 265 

Clementine origins,  264 

first rendezvous with near-Earth asteroid, 265 

geolocation 

accuracy of, 202, 207, 208, 218 

atomic clock accuracy, 106, 200, 201, 218 

atomic clocks into satellites, 200–201, 214, 215, 

217, 218, 219 

commercial development of, 6, 224–225 

satellites for, 195, 200–201 

via satellite Doppler shift, 195 

See also  GPS (Global Positioning System) 

Germany 

jamming guided missiles of, 23–26 

V-2 engineer cooperation, 27, 38 

V-2 factory Mittelwerk, 28–29 

V-2 missiles in towable capsule, 27,  28 , 385, 387 

Getchell, Bassford, 142, 145 

GGSEs (Gravity Gradient Space Experiments), 

166–167 

Gilbreath, Charmaine 

Electro-Optics Technology Section head, 256, 

257 

modulating retroreflectors, 260 

one-meter photon-catching telescope, 257 

Glenn L. Martin Company 

Enola Gay and Bockscar planes, 51 

Martin Marietta precursor, 247 

TV-3 failure reaction, 75 

Vanguard assembly, 67 

Vanguard competing with Titan, 68 

Viking rockets, 51–52, 56, 59, 247 

glide bomb countermeasures, 85–86 

Global Information Grid, 165 

Global Positioning System.  See  GPS 

Goddard, Robert 

crashing rocket into moon, 19,  105 

liquid-fueled rocket launch, 19 

“A Method for Reaching Extreme Altitudes,” 19 

Goddard Space Flight Center, Maryland 

formerly Beltsville Space Center, 3, 93 

NRL personnel to, 2, 3, 79, 80, 83, 93–94, 375 

Golba, Gerald,  349 –350 

Goldin, Daniel, 268 

goniometer, 103 

Goodpaster, Andrew, 124, 183 

Gorday, Charlie, 157 

Government Accountability Office (GAO), 323–324 

GPS (Global Positioning System) 

accuracy of, 202, 207, 208, 218 

accuracy of Joint Chiefs system, 208, 218 

Atlas F booster for satellites, 213–214, 216–217. 

See also  Atlas F booster 

atomic clock accuracy, 106, 196, 200, 201, 203, 

215 

atomic clock accuracy and satellite height, 215 

atomic clock museum, 217 

atomic clocks from NRL, 213, 217 

atomic clocks into satellites, 200–201, 214, 215, 

217, 218, 219 

atomic clock synchronization, 201– 202 , 206, 225 

atomic clock testing by NRL, 206, 222 

awards, 225–226 426 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

“Beyond Vanguard” report, 106 

clock-bearing payloads on Poppy launches,  202 ,

204,  207 

clock thermo-electric devices, 220 

Collier Trophy, 225– 226 

commercial development of, 6, 224–225 

crystal clocks into satellites,  202 –203, 204,  207 ,

208, 214 

Delta II booster for satellites, 223 

Department of Defense requirements, 208, 218 

Easton accolades, 226,  227 

Easton as central figure in development, 69, 

195–196, 200, 201, 208 

funding, 204, 205, 219–220 

geolocation accuracy, 202, 207, 208, 218 

geolocation via atomic clocks, 200 

geolocation via Doppler shift, 195 

GPS3 higher transmission power, 224 

GPS name, 211, 212 

High Integrity GPS, 224 

Interstate 295 ground test, 203–204 

jamming and spoofing, 223–224, 225 

military applications, 223–224 

motto of Directorate, 222 

NAVSTAR GPS constellation into orbit, 219, 

222, 223 

NAVSTAR GPS name, 211, 212 

NRL framework with Air Force management, 

212–213, 214–215, 220 

NRL introduction, 1, 5, 6 

nuclear sensors on satellites, 222 

numbers of users, 225 

passive ranging, 200, 201–202 

passive ranging Pentagon demo, 204– 206 

ranging signal systems, 214, 218 

retroreflectors on satellites, 259–260 

satellite orbital inclination, 220, 223 

satellites for 3-D position, 200–201, 208, 

209–210, 213, 215–216, 219 

satellites in final configuration, 219, 220, 223 

SSULI data improving accuracy of, 352 

theory of relativity and, 210 

Timation as basis, 177,  202–206 , 207, 381 

Timation patent,  227 

time synchronization component, 1, 6, 201– 202 ,

206–208, 225 

time transfer applications, 225 

time transfer tests, 206, 207–208, 217 

Transit satellite launches, 96–98, 195,  202 , 203, 

207 

Transit system retired, 221 

See also  Navigation Technology Satellites; 

Timation 

GRAB (Galactic Radiation Background) 

experiment,  134, 152, 161 

advancements and legacy,  152 

antennas, 163 

budgetary battles and, 131 

Byeman security system, 151 

as Canes, 99, 123, 126, 129.  See also  Canes 

security system 

Canes into Hold security system, 148 

as classified, 5,  6, 98 –99, 123, 129, 133,  134 , 139 

construction, 129, 131–133 

construction at night, 98, 129, 377 

data and U.S. bomber safety, 150, 151–152 

declassification, 110n18, 153nn8–9, 301, 361 

Director of Naval Intelligence as Project Director, 

148 

as ELINT training wheels, 287 

first intelligence-gathering payload, 15, 99, 

104–105, 106, 113–114,  134 , 195, 377 

funding, 132–133, 141 

GRAB 1 activation of payload, 134–136,  135 

GRAB 1 contact lost, 138 

GRAB 1 data analysis, 138, 139, 141, 146 

GRAB 1 data collection authorization, 137 

GRAB 1 data collection engineering evaluation, 

136, 137 

GRAB 1 data collection management, 136–137 

GRAB 1 data overwhelming, 137–138, 139, 

141–142, 148, 152 

GRAB 1 magnetic recording of data, 129–130, 

136, 137, 139, 146 

GRAB 1 redundancy, 133, 141 

GRAB 1 S-band only, 136 

GRAB 1/SOLRAD 1 launch, 96–98, 133– 134 ,

195, 376 

GRAB 1 station wagon transport, 133 

GRAB 2 approval, 139, 140 

GRAB 2 data analysis, 147 

GRAB 2 data overwhelming, 146, 152 

GRAB 2 data storage before relay, 141 

GRAB 2 failing, 149, 156 

GRAB 2 frequency range wider, 136, 141 

GRAB 2 magnetic recording of data, 147 

GRAB 2 radar data mother lode, 150 

GRAB 2/SOLRAD 3 launch, 141, 145– 146 , 161 

GRAB 3/SOLRAD 3 “Buckshot” launch, 

149 –150, 157, 379 

GRAB name to Dyno, 150, 156 

GRAB name to Poppy, 151 

GRAB/SOLRAD 4 launch, 150, 157 

huts for communication, 129– 130 , 132–133, 

134–136,  135 

huts retrofitted with upgraded recorders, 142 

huts upgraded with air conditioning, 145 

huts with Scripted Emitters, 361 

plans for future GRABs, 146 

Poppy 7 as end,  187 

Poppy program from, 151, 287 

praise for, 141, 143, 150 

as Program C under NRO, 156 

religious feelings on being photographed, 134 

SOLRAD collaborative effort, 131, 235 

SOLRAD secret payload,  6, 98 , 129, 131,  134 ,

141, 235, 376–377 

SOLRAD team versus, 129 427 INDEX 

Soviet ABM complex, 150 

Soviet detection of GRAB, 135, 136, 139, 140 

Soviet detection of Tattletale, 122, 124, 125 

Tattletale program leak, 122–123 

two-satellite configuration, 148 

See also  Poppy; Tattletale 

Gran, Ralph, 162 

Grand Central Rocket Company, 67 

“grapefruit satellite,”  78 , 93 

graveyard orbit 

as long-term parking orbit, 365 

space debris harvesting and re-using, 366–367 

value of satellites in, 367 

gravity gradient stabilization 

difficulties of, 221 

LACE longest retractable booms, 252, 253 

Navy tour of Poppy lab, 183 

Poppy 4 GGSEs, 166 

Poppy antennas, 162–163 

reaction wheels with, 222 

three-axis stabilization improvement, 175, 184 

Timation 1 satellite,  202 , 221 

Timation 3 satellite,  215 

Timation and NTS satellites, 221 

TiPS Ralph and Norton, 271 

Great Lakes Naval Radio Station, 11, 13 

Gregory, George, 309 

Ground Zero, New York City 

RFID tracking of firefighters, 329 

satellite communications vehicles,  330–331 

Gubser, Donald, 350 

Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory of the 

California Institute of Technology (GALCIT), 

28, 34, 50 

guided missiles 

background of, 23–24 

German rocketry wake-up call, 26–27, 29 

German V2 engineers, 27 

glide bomb countermeasures, 85–86 

jamming German guided missiles, 23–26 

Krause as coordinator, 23 

repeater jammers onto ships, 178–179 

Rocket Sonde Research Section formation, 33. 

See also  Rocket Sonde Research Section 

V-2 rockets for research, 2, 20, 21, 29,  36 , 243 

Viking rockets as, 55–56 

Gulf War 

GPS use, 223 

software definable radio, 317– 318 

H

Hagen, John,  67, 75 

Director of Project Vanguard, 66 

on NRL approach to Space Age, 34 

radar funding by Congress, 83 

radio astronomy, 34 

space reconnaissance satellite approval, 117 

Sputnik 1 launch, 73 

on Vanguard achievements, 80 

Vanguard crossing NRL divisions, 66 

Vanguard objectives, 66– 67 . See also  Vanguard 

program 

Vanguard ordeals, 66–68,  67 , 73–77,  75, 76 ,

100–101 

Vanguard personnel to Goddard, 79, 94 

Vanguard TV-3 satellite,  75 

Hagerty, James, 63, 74 

Hall-effect thruster, 272,  273 

Hammarstrom, Lee,  164 

Advanced Concepts Section head, 240, 289 

Air Force space authority rescinded, 185 

briefing CIA on Program C, 182 

C4ISR compact devices, 307 

ELINT data digitization, 169 

ELINT data distribution challenges, 289 

ELINT data flow via Moffett Index, 185–186 

Global Information Grid, 165 

hazards of global travel,  164 

Lorenzen hiring, 163– 164 

Lorenzen ocean surveillance protocols, 184 

memoir-in-the-works, 396, 407 

National Reconnaissance Office work, 389 

Poppy 4 low-power signals, 167 

Poppy 5 ABM enhancement, 172 

Poppy architecture overhaul, 165–166 

Poppy computer upgrade, 172–174,  173 

Poppy data quality,  164 –165 

Poppy funding, 175 

Poppy ground station upgrades, 167 

Programming Automatic Processing System, 189 

Spacecraft Technology Center, 239 

Space Systems Technology Department head, 

243, 384 

hardening of electronics, 347–348, 362–363 

Harding, Roy A.,  97 

Harlfinger, Frederick J., II 

Poppy for ocean surveillance, 181, 183 

Poppy program head, 179–180 

HARMs (High Speed Anti-Radiation Missiles), 317 

Hauptman, Herbert 

Nobel Prize, 2 

Hayes, Harvey C. 

USNS  Hayes , 88 

Hearton, Len, 309 

Heat and Light Division, 14 

Helicop-Huts for GRAB, 132 

helicopters for command and control, 319–321,  320 ,

322–323 

Hellrich, Fred,  169 

award citation for data processing,  173 –174 

background, 169 

global travel for computerizing, 174 

ground station digitization, 186 

NCST Associate Director, 242–243 

NRL-NSA joint task on data processing, 184 

office to main admin building, 384 

Poppy 3 satellite,  169 

Poppy computer upgrade, 172–174,  173 , 288–289 428 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Poppy data processing citation,  173 –174 

Programming Automatic Processing System, 189 

Systems Development Section head, 240, 289 

on Wilhelm as best systems engineer, 373 

Henschel-293 glide bomb countermeasures, 85–86 

Henshaw, Carl Glen,  364 

background,  364 , 367 

Front End Robotic Enabling Near-Term 

Demonstration, 365–366 

Laboratory for Autonomous Systems Research, 

363– 364, 365 

Proximity Operations Testbed,  365 

robotics and space debris,  364 –367,  365 

Hermes project, 28, 49–50 

Herndon, Chris 

C4I concept vehicle,  331 

C4I sponsorship, 324 

co-op student to NCST engineer, 313 

Improved Data Modem, 317 

InfraLynx for Super Bowl, 332 

Joint Combat Information Terminal, 320–321, 

323 

software definable radio, 319 

Tactical Receive Equipment, 312, 313 

Tactical Technologies Development Lab head, 

328 

TADIXS-B, 314 

White House Communications Agency, 333–334 

World Trade Center command center, 324 

Hevly, Bruce, 20, 44 

Higgins, Robert, 320–321 

high-altitude balloon for imaging, 259 

high frequency direction finding (HF/DF; Huff-

Duff) 

“Beyond Vanguard” report, 108 

contributors to, 89, 114 

Cuban Missile Crisis and, 89 

goniometer at Hybla Valley, 103– 104 

Intercept and Signal Processing Branch, 170 

Sheets leading a team, 164 

high-frequency radio signals 

Hulburt wavelength selection protocols, 18, 40 

Physical Review  paper on propagation, 18 

radar discovery, 15 

skip distance phenomenon, 12– 13 

skip distance postcards, 14 

superconductivity high-speed switching, 349 

UV and X-ray effects, 45 

high-frequency surface wave radar, 294 

High Integrity GPS (HIGPS), 224 

highly elliptical orbit (HEO),  340, 342 

high-resolution imaging from space, 258–259 

High-Temperature Superconductivity Space 

Experiment (HTSSE), 348–350,  349 

high temperature superconductors (HTSCs), 

348–350,  349 

Hitz, Frederick W., Jr., 115, 142 

Hold control system, 148, 151 

Holloman Air Force Base, New Mexico, 259 

Holmes, David, 212 

homeland security 

Coast Guard mission, 295 

communication failures from disaster, 327 

Department of Homeland Security formation, 7, 

327 

InfraLynx communications vehicle,  330 –333,  331 

Maritime Seize and Interdiction Experiment, 295 

Maryland bridge security, 334–335 

MASTER MDA system, 296–297 

NCST expertise, 7, 303– 306, 307 , 327–328 

RFID firefighter tracking, 329 

“threat space,” 327 

Honeywell Company, 67 

Horan, Donald,  254 

Clementine mapping moon, 265 

Laser Atmospheric Compensation Experiment, 

250,  251, 254 

SOLRAD 11 experiments, 236 

Horn, Peter H., 100, 119 

House Committee on Science and Astronautics, 121 

Howard Johnson’s insight by Mayo, 113–114, 152, 

188 

HRB Singer company 

Analog to Digital Data System, 174 

Lorenzen hiring from, 163 

Poppy command receiving antennas, 168 

Poppy computer software,  173 

Poppy ground systems, 180 

Poppy solid-state receivers, 174 

Programming Automatic Processing System, 189 

HTSSE (High-Temperature Superconductivity 

Space Experiment), 348–350,  349 

Huff-Duff (high frequency direction finding) 

“Beyond Vanguard” report, 108 

contributors to, 89, 114 

Cuban Missile Crisis and, 89 

goniometer at Hybla Valley, 103– 104 

Intercept and Signal Processing Branch, 170 

Sheets leading a team, 164 

Huffine, Chris,  360 

antenna calibration software,  360 –361 

communications security, 363 

Copperfield, 362 

CuF2 software reprogrammable, 338, 362–363 

Maritime Domain Awareness, 361 

networking à la Lorenzen, 363 

NRL travel, 361 

Pulstar, 361 

Scripted Emitter, 361 

Software Reprogrammable Payload,  360 ,

362–363 

Story Finder ELINT system, 361–362 

TacSat-1 project, 338, 357 

working under George Price,  360 

Hughes Research Labs 

hydrogen masers, 217 

Hulburt, Edward O.,  14 

cosmic rays, 57 429 INDEX 

high-altitude research via rocket, 19–20, 40–41 

ionosphere effects,  14 

optics and radio expertise, 17 

Physical Review  paper on propagation, 18 

radio wavelength selection protocols, 18, 40 

Tuve taught by, 18 

V-2 spectrograph for UV research, 41– 43 

Vanguard crossing NRL divisions, 66 

Vanguard project, 66 

HULTEC “hull-to-emitter-correlation,” 287 

HUMINT (human intelligence), 109 

Humvees 

InfraLynx,  330 –333,  331 

Software Reconfigurable Payloads demo, 363 

Hunter, Jack, 309 

Hurley, Michael,  343 , 344 

Hurricane Katrina InfraLynx, 332–333 

Hurricane Rita InfraLynx, 332, 333 

Hutchison, Earle 

Navy’s ELINT coordinator, 118 

Tattletale final approval, 120 

Tattletale launch, 121 

Hybla Valley, Virginia, 103– 104 

hydrogen masers, 217 

hydrogen peroxide fuel component, 52, 67 

Hyland, Lawrence A. 

radar patent, 21,  22 

hyperspectral imaging 

description of, 354 

global vessel tracking system, 294 

Naval Earth Map Observer, 354 

I

IBM company 

704 computer Vanguard orbital computations, 72, 

73 

Collier Trophy for GPS, 225– 226 

Gorday’s electrical drawing program, 157 

high temperature superconductors, 348 

ICBMs (intercontinental ballistic missiles) 

Atlas rocket launch vehicle, 64, 119, 213 

InfraLynx for Air Force Space Command, 334 

Minuteman boosters, 213 

orbit reentry simulation by Viking, 53 

Soviet naval threat, 234 

Soviet radar defense against, 147, 171 

Viking rockets for, 52–54, 55–56 

ICM (Interim Control Module), 267–269,  268 

Identification Friend or Foe.  See  IFF 

IDM.  See  Improved Data Modem 

IFF (Identification Friend or Foe) 

ship identification, 180–181 

short radio pulses for, 23 

software definable radio, 319 

Wilhelm working on, 95, 375 

Ignatius, Paul, 179 

IGY.  See  International Geophysical Year 

ILS (Instrument Landing System), 319 

IMAX films 

“3D Sun,” 356 

“Solar Max,” 356 

IMINT (imagery intelligence), 109, 116 

Improved Data Modem (IDM),  306 

Air Force sponsoring, 316–317 

Derieux working on, 328 

Information Technology Division,  330–331 

InfraLynx (Infrastructure Linkage and 

Augmentation System) 

Air Force Space Command, 334 

hurricanes, 332–333 

interchangeable components, 332 

Minuteman InfraLynx Communications Systems, 

334 

NYC Ground Zero,  330–331 

Super Bowl, 332 

White House Communications Agency, 333–334 

Winter Olympics,  331 –332 

Infrared Sensor Array of LACE, 252 

Injun satellites, 145– 146, 149 –150 

Innovative Concepts company, 317 

Institute for Precision Instrument Engineering 

(IPIE; Moscow), 260 

Instrumentation Technology Engineering, Inc., 252 

Integrated Broadcast System (IBS), 314 

Integrated Communication, Navigation, 

Identification and Avionics (ICNIA) program, 

319 

Integrated Systems Engineering Team (ISET), 341 

intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) 

“Beyond Vanguard” report.  See  “Beyond 

Vanguard” report 

C4ISR introduction, 7.  See also  C4ISR 

(Command, Control, Computers, 

Communications, Intelligence, Surveillance, 

and Reconnaissance) 

Cold War push, 83, 147–148, 375–376.  See also 

Cold War 

cost of first reconnaissance satellite, 114 

Countermeasures Intercept Analysis Group, 90 

evolvable systems “future-proofed,” 362–363 

first electronic reconnaissance satellite, 15, 99, 

104–105, 106, 113–114,  134 , 195, 377.  See 

also  GRAB; Tattletale 

Global Information Grid, 165 

Integrated Broadcast System, 314 

Lorenzen as “Father of Electronic Warfare,” 2, 

83,  84, 89 , 375 

Lorenzen ELINT successes, 86, 90 

NRL introduction, 1, 7 

NRL shift from satellites to data, 234, 238–239, 

303–306, 314–315 

nuclear weapons tests detection, 106 

ocean intelligence as national objective, 181, 

186.  See also  ocean surveillance 

On-Board Processor, 314 

Radio-Countermeasures Sound Recorder-

Reproducer, 90 

See also  C4ISR; ELINT (electronic intelligence) 430 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Intercept and Signal Processing Branch (Electronic 

Warfare Division), 170 

Interim Control Module (ICM), 267–269,  268 

International Geophysical Year (IGY) 

committee for scientist experiments, 68 

dates of, 63 

as international collaboration, 3, 59 

NRL winning IGY launch, 65–66.  See also 

Vanguard program 

“open skies” precedent, 66 

satellites into orbit, 63–66 

Sputnik 1 launch, 3, 73–74, 197 

stamp commemorating,  64 

U.S. satellite launch announcement, 63 

Vanguard achievements, 78, 79–80 

Vanguard assigned frequency, 196 

Vanguard project, 3, 59, 196.  See also  Vanguard 

program 

Wilhelm boggled by Vanguard, 374 

International Laser Ranging Service (ILRS), 256 

International Scientific Radio Union, 63 

International Space Station (ISS) 

Russian service module, 267–269,  268 

space debris hazards, 365 

SpinSat, 258 

International Telephone and Telegraph (ITT), 121 

Internet 

C4ISR data into users’ hands, 305 

FORCEnet, 335 

maritime domain awareness, 293, 295 

MASTER MDA system, 296 

“net-centric” warfare, 323 

NRL history sources, 400–402 

Universal Communication Interface Module, 336, 

337 

Interstate 295 test of GPS, 203–204 

ionosphere 

fadeouts and, 41–42, 45 

high-altitude research via rocket, 19–20 

JPL WAC Corporal close to, 34 

LOFTI payload, 379 

Physical Review  paper on propagation, 18 

skip distance phenomenon,  13 , 14 

SOLRAD studies, 235 

Special Sensor Ultraviolet Limb Imager, 

352– 353 , 354– 355 , 356 

SSULI data for weather models, 356 

study needed, 14–15, 18 

thermoluminescence and ionospheric 

disturbances, 44–45 

very-low-frequency signal test, 149 

Viking 1 launch, 52 

Viking 10 positively charged ions, 56 

X-radiation effects confirmed, 98 

ion propulsion, 272,  273 

IRBM (intermediate range ballistic missiles), 52 

Iridium communication satellite system, 224 

Iron Curtain, 88.  See also  Cold War 

ISR.  See  intelligence, surveillance, and 

reconnaissance 

ISS.  See  International Space Station 

J

Jaffe, Paul,  352 

as celebrity, 356, 359 

IMAX film “3D Sun,” 356 

interview with Flach, 351– 352 

Microwave Imager Sounder, 359–360 

Naval Earth Map Observer, 353–354 

NEMO travel, 354 

NRL career, 351,  352 

projects can get canceled, 354, 357–358 

Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory, 355–356 

space solar power for Earth, 358–359 

Special Sensor Ultraviolet Limb Imager, 

352–353 , 354– 355 , 356 

Systems Integration Section head, 351 

TacSat-1 project, 354, 357 

TacSat-4 project, 357–358 

U-PRAM module,  352 , 359 

jamming 

anti-jamming via precision timing, 225 

communications satellites, 107 

German guided missiles, 23–26 

German radar, 85 

German radio-guided bombs, 85–86 

GPS, 223–224, 225 

laser communication jam resistant, 262 

low Earth orbit satellite signals, 313 

radar receiver vulnerability, 84–85 

repeater jammers onto ships, 178–179 

Soviet radar, 288 

SURCAL 2 jamming NAVSPASUR, 159 

jet-assisted takeoff (JATO), 28 

Jet Propulsion Lab (JPL) 

Army missile and rocket contract, 34 

Clementine Geographos rendezvous, 265 

Explorer 1 satellite launch, 76 

Rosen studying at, 34, 50 

WAC Corporal rocket success, 34 

Johns Hopkins University and Hurlburt, 17, 18.  See 

also  Applied Physics Laboratory 

Johnson, George F., IV, 335 

Johnson, Lyndon, 74 

Johnson, Mark, 309 

Johnson, Roy, 123 

Joint Chiefs of Staff 

passive ranging Pentagon demo, 204– 206 

satellite navigation system, 208, 218 

Tattletale priority for ARPA, 120 

Joint Combat Information Terminal (JCIT), 

320–321, 322–323 

InfraLynx origins, 333 

Joint Tactical Networking Center, 324 

Joint Tactical Radio System (JTRS),  306 , 322–324 

JTRS.  See  Joint Tactical Radio System 

JTT (Joint Tactical Terminal),  306 

Airborne Joint Tactical Terminal,  316 431 INDEX 

junk.  See  space debris 

Juno 1 rocket, 76 

Jupiter C rocket, 76 

K

Kapton polymer,  343 

Karle, Jerome 

Nobel Prize, 2 

Kawecki, Tom,  349 –350 

KC-130 aircraft SRP demo, 363 

KDF radio station probing upper atmosphere, 18 

Kennedy, John F. 

Cuban Missile Crisis, 156–157 

GRAB Project Director, 148 

McNamara as Secretary of Defense, 144 

Kershner, Richard B., 121 

Khrushchev, Nikita 

Cuban Missile Crisis, 157 

“grapefuit satellite,” 78 

Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico, 339 

Kistiakowsky, George B., 124, 125 

Kleczek, Chester, 204, 205 

Kodak promoting satellite cameras, 101 

Kodiak, Alaska, launches, 280,  340, 342 , 390 

Kolmorgen Optical company, 104 

Koss, Stephen, 273 

Krapf, Arthur, 143 

Krause, Ernst,  21 

Aerobee rocket, 39 

death of, 23 

German rocketry wake-up call, 26–27, 29 

guided-missile research focus, 29, 33 

jamming German guided missiles, 23–26 

leaving Rocket Sonde Research Section, 45, 52 

nuclear weapons testing, 45, 52 

physicist to NRL, 20– 21 

radar work,  21 –23,  22 , 196 

radio-guided bomb countermeasures, 85–86 

V-2 Panel, 35, 52 

V-2 rockets for research, 2, 20, 21, 29,  36 , 196, 

243 

See also  Rocket Sonde Research Section 

Kreplin, Robert, 236 

Kuhn, F. Brad, Jr., 314 

L

Laboratory for Autonomous Systems Research 

(LASR) 

autonomous robotics,  365 , 366 

Front End Robotic Enabling Near-Term 

Demonstration, 365–366 

funding, 365, 366 

Low Impact Inspection Vehicle, 367 

opening of, 363–364 

Phoenix component harvesting, 366–367 

Proximity Operations Testbed,  365 

robotic space tow trucks,  364 –366,  365 

Labstracts  as NRL campus newsletter, 351 

LACE.  See  Laser Atmospheric Compensation 

Experiment 

Laika (dog), 74 

Lakehurst Naval Station, New Jersey, 258 

Land, Edwin, 101 

Laser Atmospheric Compensation Experiment 

(LACE),  251, 254 

Challenger explosion and, 249–250 

closed,  254 

components of, 252–253 

explanation of, 251 

launch on Valentine’s Day,  251 –252 

longest retractable booms, 252, 253 

retroreflectors, 252, 254, 259 

as Strategic Defense Initiative component, 

249–250, 347 

team members,  254 

work on,  251 

laser communications 

1550 nm signal, 261 

Dual Mode Optical Interrogator,  261 , 262 

immunity to countermeasures, 261 

low-powered space-to-space, 255 

modulating retroreflectors for, 260–262,  261 

over-the-horizon, 258, 293 

Revolutionary Imaging Technology, 258–259 

laser ranging.  See  laser tracking and ranging 

lasers for space solar power, 359 

laser tracking and ranging 

Charged Aerosol Release Experiment, 258 

geodetic laser ranging, 259–260 

neodymium-YAG laser, 255 

NTS-1 retroreflector array, 214– 215 

Optical Test Facility overview, 255 

retroreflectors for, 258, 259–260.  See also 

retroreflectors 

Revolutionary Imaging Technology, 258–259 

RF vs. lasers, 255 

SpinSat retroreflectors, 258 

TiPS Ralph and Norton, 271 

laser weapons 

argon ion laser, 252 

atmospheric compensation experiments, 250, 

253–254 

fighting mirrors vs. ballistic missiles, 254 

Low Power Chemical Laser, 252 

launch failures adding up, 150–151, 378 

Program A responsibility, 155 

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 249, 

265 

LDEF (Long Duration Exposure Facility), 250 

Lehman, John 

Navy Space Policy, 383–384 

NRL as site of NCST, 242 

Leonard, William, 177, 285, 286–287 

Lester, Paul,  97 

Lichtenberg, Christopher L., 266 

lightsats, 309 

“limb” as edge of celestial body disk, 352 

Lincoln Laboratories, 236, 250 

Lippincott, Wendy 432 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

master antenna engineer, 360 

ocean surface wind vector, 274 

Windsat antenna modeling, 275 

Windsat spaceborne polarimetric microwave 

radiometer, 276 

LIPS (Living Plume Shield),  306, 310, 311 

cost of, 309 

fabrication innovations, 309 

goals of, 308–309 

LIPS 1 launch, 310 

LIPS 2 as tactical data relay system, 313 

LIPS 2 launch,  310 

LIPS 3 launch, 310–312,  311 

LIPS 3 passive attitude control,  311 

Multiple Satellite Dispenser into, 307–308,  381 

shield not space debris, 308,  311 

teamwork behind, 309–310 

Towsley maneuver, 312 

TRE receiving signals, 313 

Lockheed Martin, 272,  353 

Lockheed Thor Agena D booster, 162 

LOFTI (Low Frequency Trans-Ionospheric) 

satellites 

launch failures adding up, 151, 379 

LOFTI 2A satellite, 149 

LOFTI 2B satellite, 160 

low-frequency submarine communication, 107, 

149, 160, 162, 379 

metallic ribbon antennas, 162 

Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), 250 

Lorenzen, Howard Otto (Harv),  84, 130 

briefing Frosch on technology, 179 

briefing major commands on Poppy, 183 

CIA cost-effectiveness metrics, 168, 169–170 

Cold War ISR push, 83 

Countermeasures Branch, 86–87, 88–89,  130 .

See also  Countermeasures Branch 

Countermeasures Intercept Analysis Group, 90 

direction finding systems, 89 

ELINT station GRAB set up, 130 

“Father of Electronic Warfare,” 2, 83,  84, 89 ,

375 

first intelligence-gathering payload, 15 

geolocation of ships discussion, 178 

GRAB 1 payload, 376, 377 

GRAB 2 launch, 145 

GRAB 2 program, 146 

GRAB activation, 134–136,  135 

GRAB/Canes vs. SOLRAD, 98, 129 

GRAB data collection engineering evaluation, 

136 

GRAB data reduction effort, 142 

GRAB praise, 141, 143 

GRAB team spirits, 133 

hiring HRB Singer staff, 163–164 

machine shop, 85 

Mayo S-band intercept receiver in space, 114 

networking stature, 85, 87–88, 89, 103, 105, 

169, 170 

NRL exchanges with British experts, 87 

NSA data processing visit, 175 

ocean surveillance ELINT protocols, 184 

Poppy 5 ABM enhancement, 172 

Poppy data made useful, 168–169 

Poppy data tape handling by NSA, 184 

Poppy for ocean surveillance, 181 

Poppy global coordination, 159 

Poppy pitch to Office of Space Systems, 

171–172 

Poppy technical director, 156 

radar jamming, 84–85 

radar of shorter wavelength, 84 

Radio-Countermeasures Sound Recorder-Re 

producer, 90 

radio-guided bomb countermeasures, 85–86 

retirement, 383 

Space Systems Division head, 188, 239, 381 

Speakman reunion, 185 

Tattletale construction before approval, 118, 119 

Tattletale launch, 121–122 

Tattletale shepherding, 114, 116–121 

USNS  Howard O. Lorenzen , 88,  89 

vacuum tube electronics loyalty, 163 

Wilhelm on working under, 381 

Zenith to NRL, 83 

See also  “Beyond Vanguard” report 

low Earth orbiting (LEO) satellites 

AOS (acquisition of signal), 312–313 

LIPS bent pipe, 308,  310 

polar region tactical communications, 308 

software definable radio, 319 

TacSats, 336–337,  339 

TADIXS-B broadcast format, 313–314 

TRE challenges, 312–313 

low frequency submarine communication, 

106–107, 149, 160, 162, 379 

Low Frequency Trans-Ionospheric satellites.  See 

LOFTI 

Low Impact Inspection Vehicle (LIIVe), 367 

Low Power Chemical Laser (LPCL), 252 

Lowrance, Vernon 

establishing Technical Operations Group, 156 

first two-ball launch, 155 

praising Lorenzen team ELINT, 143 

Lunar Crater and Observation Satellite (LCROSS), 

267 

Lunar Prospector, 267 

Lyman, Theodore, 41 

Lyman-alpha 

explanation of, 41 

fadeouts and, 41–42 

first measurements of, 44 

new UV still not including,  43 

SOLRAD 1 satellite sensors,  98 

Vanguard 3 satellite sensors, 79 

Lynch, Don, 205 433 INDEX 

M

MAGNET (Maritime Global Awareness Network) 

database, 296 

magnetic recording of data 

data preserved for later analysis, 90, 102 

degaussing backlog of tapes, 175 

GRAB 1 output, 129–130, 136, 137, 139 

GRAB 1 output challenge, 139, 142, 146 

GRAB 2 output, 147 

Poppy output, 165, 167, 175 

Radio-Countermeasures Sound Recorder-

Reproducer, 90 

solid-state memory unit,  168 , 378 

Maloof, Matt, 203–204 

Marine Corps 

laser communications, 262 

O’Grady extraction, 223 

Software Reprogrammable Payload, 363 

TacSat-4 use, 341 

Universal Communication Interface Module, 336, 

337 

Marine Corps Air Station, Arizona, 363 

marital priorities, 251–252 

Maritime Automated Super Track Enhanced 

Reporting (MASTER),  286 , 296–297 

as Sealink Advanced Analysis, 296–297 

maritime domain awareness (MDA) 

Automatic Identification System, 292, 296 

Bielecki briefing sponsors, 294 

Bielecki data fusion and correlation, 293–294 

Bielecki global vessel tracking system, 294–296 

Bielecki laying foundation, 289– 290 

Bielecki on vessel identification,  290 –295 

Bielecki vessel identification automation, 

291–295 

as C4ISR, 7, 361.  See also  C4ISR 

challenges of, 286, 290 

choke point monitoring systems, 292,  293 , 361 

Common Distributed Virtual Database for 

Information Extraction, 295 

common language defining entities, 297 

Comprehensive Maritime Awareness Joint 

Capability Technology Demonstration, 285, 

286 , 296, 297 

Copperfield ELINT system,  339 , 362 

Copperfield 2 reprogrammable, 338, 362–363 

cost of global system, 294 

fully global system, 286 

funding, 294 

HULTEC “hull-to-emitter-correlation,” 287 

Leonard satellites for ocean surveillance, 177, 

285, 286–287 

MAGNET database, 296 

Maritime Seize and Interdiction Experiment, 295 

MASTER,  286 , 296–297 

Mideast crisis, 287–288 

Modular Sensor System, 294–295 

NRL revolutionizing, 285 

September 11 attacks and, 290, 294 

Soviet naval threat, 234 

Specific Emitter Identification, 291–292 

sponsors, 297 

TacSat-2 satellite, 338,  339 

Vessel Tracking Project, 286, 289–290, 293 

which ships to worry about,  286 , 287, 290 

Young calling for architecture, 294 

See also  ocean surveillance 

Maritime Information Exchange Model (MIEM), 

297 

maritime laser communications, 260–262,  261 

Maritime Law Enforcement Information Network 

(MLEIN), 335 

Maritime Seize and Interdiction Experiment 

(MARSIE), 295 

Maritime Tactical Operations Group (MTOG), 335 

Mark, Hans, 189 

Martin.  See  Glenn L. Martin Company 

Martin, Albert J., 236 

Martin Marietta Company 

Glenn L. Martin as precursor, 247 

Titan boosters in place of Space Shuttle, 247–248 

Titan III booster, 184, 188 

Maryland Natural Resources Police, 334–335 

masers, 217 

Mashiko, Susan K., 277 

MASTER (Maritime Automated Super Track 

Enhanced Reporting),  286 , 296–297 

as Sealink Advanced Analysis, 296–297 

Materials Science and Technology Division, 

349 –350 

Matheson, Jim, 176–177 

“matrix management” parallel payload assembly, 

160 

MATT.  See  Multi-Mission Advanced Tactical 

Terminals 

Mattaino, Joe, 309 

Mayo, Reid,  87, 130 

Advanced Projects Office head, 240 

briefing CIA on Program C, 182 

briefing Navy on Poppy ship surveillance, 179 

briefing Programs A and B, 183 

BuWeps funds for NRL ELINT, 150 

Countermeasures Branch, 86– 87 

“Development of Ocean Surveillance Capability,” 

182 

direction finding systems, 89 

electronic countermeasures receiver, 103, 104 

ELINT conception at Howard Johnson’s, 

113–114, 152, 188 

first intelligence-gathering payload, 15 

first marriage in NRL chapel, 86,  87 

GRAB 2 launch, 145 

GRAB 2 program, 146 

GRAB activation, 134–136,  135 

GRAB data collection engineering evaluation, 

136 

GRAB data collection personnel training, 136 

GRAB ELINT station setup, 130 434 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

GRAB frequency range wider, 141 

GRAB secrecy, 98,  134 , 377 

GRAB secrecy at launch,  134 

GRAB station wagon transport, 133 

Lorenzen ocean surveillance protocols, 184 

Navy tour of Poppy lab, 182 

periscope-mounted radar detector, 104, 113 

Poppy 7 launch, 189, 287 

Poppy data made useful, 168–169 

Poppy for monitoring SALT, 189 

Poppy for ocean surveillance, 178, 181 

Poppy ground segment development, 180 

Poppy leading project engineer, 156, 161 

Poppy pitch to Office of Space Systems, 172 

satellite-based projects in Electronic Warfare 

Division, 170 

S-band intercept receiver in space, 113–114 

Soviet radar sensing from space, 113–114 

on Sputnik, 104 

Tattletale, 118, 119, 121 

McCaskill, Thomas, 204, 205 

McCoy Crystal company, 132 

McDonald, Michael D., 327 

McDonnell-Douglas company, 39 

McElroy, Neil, 124–125 

McLucas, John L., 186 

McMillan, Brockway, 165 

McNamara, Robert 

Air Force as space systems authority, 144 

DoD cost-mindedness, 144 

GRAB briefing, 144 

National Reconnaissance Program, 147 

resigning, 177 

McRay, Phillip R.,  97 

MDA.  See  maritime domain awareness 

MDR radios for TRE, 312 

mechanical pencils as design tools, 248 

Mechanical Systems Branch (Code 7734), 247, 

250 

memory unit, solid-state,  168 , 378 

Mengel, John 

Minitrack system, 65, 69, 70, 196.  See also 

Minitrack system 

NAVSPASUR design, 379 

space reconnaissance satellite approval, 117 

Vanguard Tracking and Guidance Branch, 69 

“A Method for Reaching Extreme Altitudes” 

(Goddard), 19 

Mexico struck by U.S. missile,  38 –39 

Microelectronics and Photonics Test Bed (MPTB), 

348 

micropound thrusters, 166–167, 184 

microsats, 309, 390 

Microwave Imager Sounder (MIS), 277–278, 280, 

359–360 

microwave remote sensing 

Microwave Imager Sounder, 277–278, 280, 

359–360 

microwave radiometer, 275 

soil moisture measurement, 276, 359 

Windsat goal,  274 , 275 

Windsat spaceborne polarimetric microwave 

radiometer, 276, 359 

microwaves 

space solar power for Earth, 358–359 

U-PRAM sunlight-to-microwave module,  352 ,

359 

Middour, Jay, 65, 78 

Mideast crisis and Poppy, 287–288 

Midway Research Center (MRC), Virginia,  271 

blue, 100-foot radomes, 5,  271 , 361 

name origins, 360–361 

NCST facilities, 9 

Optical Test Facility, 255, 257,  271 . See also 

Optical Test Facility 

role of, 255 

satellite calibration facility, 360–361 

TiPS tracking and ranging, 270,  271 

Miller, John M., 54, 55 

Miller, William,  226 

Minitrack system,  72 

Bendix as subcontractor, 67 

“Beyond Vanguard” report, 106, 108 

Blossom Point, Maryland,  72, 73 , 196, 197 

calibrating antenna, 196–197 

capabilities of, 71–72, 196 

Easton development, 65, 69, 70, 170, 195, 196, 

197 

Easton National Medal of Technology, 226 

Explorer 1 satellite launch, 76 

global network operational, 71, 72 

GRAB tracking, 134 

IGY satellite launch proposal, 65, 71 

name meaning, 71 

NASA ownership, 93–94 

NAVSPASUR basis,  72 , 79,  137 . See also 

NAVSPASUR 

principles behind, 70–71, 196 

radar-emitting counterparts, 115, 197–198 

team members, 4, 65, 69, 70, 170, 195, 196, 197 

Vanguard solar cells and, 196 

Vanguard Tracking and Guidance Branch, 69, 

70–72 

Minotaur 1 booster TacSat launches,  339 

Minotaur IV+ booster TacSat-4 launch,  340, 342 ,

344 

Minuteman InfraLynx Communications Systems 

(MICS), 334 

MIS (Microwave Imager Sounder), 277–278, 280, 

359–360 

Misner, Robert D. 

as Communications Science Division branch 

head, 188 

GRAB 2 program, 146 

GRAB analog signals to digital, 139 

GRAB data analysis, 138, 139, 142 

GRAB data analysis challenge, 140, 142 

Intercept and Signal Processing Branch head, 435 INDEX 

170 

Minitrack development, 170 

Radio-Countermeasures Sound Recorder-

Reproducer, 90 

signals processing expert, 90 

Missile Defense Agency (MDA), 7 

Missile Range Instrumentation Ship, 88,  89 

MiTEx satellites, 278,  279 

MIT’s Lincoln Laboratories, 236, 250 

MIT’s Radiation Laboratory, 85 

Mnemonics company, 313 

Mobile Communications Vehicle (MCV), 334 

Mobile User Objective System (MUOS), 343–344 

modem for radios to receive satellite data, 305 

Modular Sensor System (MSS), 294–295 

modulating retroreflectors, 260–262,  261 

Moffett, Lloyd W. 

Harlfinger new Poppy head, 180 

Moffett Index for data flow, 185–186 

naval space assets champion, 179 

Poppy against Soviet naval threat, 181, 182 

Montgomery, John 

Director of Research, 280, 332 

InfraLynx for hurricanes, 332 

on Lorenzen effecting change, 88 

NCST sponsor diversification, 280 

moon 

Aitken Basin at south pole, 266–267 

“Beyond Vanguard” report,  105 

calibration of Minitrack antenna, 197 

Clementine mapping, 7, 265,  266 , 347 

Clementine origins, 263– 264 . See also 

Clementine project 

Communication Moon Relay, 137 

Goddard flash powder rocket, 19,  105 

Lunar Prospector, 267 

Moonbounce project,  114 , 116,  140 , 164, 374 

multispectral image of,  266 

polar ice, 266–267 

retroreflectors on, 259 

Moonbounce project,  114 , 116,  140 , 164, 374 

Moorer, Thomas, 177, 178, 181 

Morgan, Bruce,  330 , 332–333 

“mouse farts,” 166–167 

“moveable head disk” (1.5-megabyte), 183 

Multi-Mission Advanced Tactical Terminals 

(MATT),  306 

BMATT (Briefcase),  306 , 321 

Matthew Rogers homage, 315 

On-Board Processor, 314 

Radiant Hail, 321–322 

TRE miniaturized for aircraft, 315– 316 

Multiple Satellite Dispenser (MSD),  289, 306, 381 

industry partners for, 237 

launch of,  289 

LIPS (Living Plume Shield), 307–312,  310, 

311, 381 

Shuttle Launch Dispenser based on, 247 

Upper Stage satellite, 278 

Wilhelm design leadership, 186, 247, 278,  289 ,

382 

multispectral image of lunar surface,  266 

museums.  See  exhibits on NRL campus 

Musk, Elon, 338 

MV-22 Osprey aircraft SRP demo, 363 

MX rocket program redundancy, 53 

N

NASA (National Aeronautics and Space 

Administration) 

Apollo success increasing hardware costs, 186 

Deep Space Network for Clementine, 265, 

266–267 

establishment of, 2, 3, 79, 93 

IMAX film “3D Sun,” 356 

ISS Interim Control Module, 267–269,  268 

Jet Propulsion Lab operation, 34 

Lunar Crater and Observation Satellite, 267 

Lunar Prospector, 267 

Mengel in tracking and guidance, 69 

Minitrack system transferred to, 93–94 

NASA-Vanguard Division, 94 

Nimbus flywheel to control yaw, 175 

NRL personnel to, 2, 3, 79, 80, 83, 93–94, 375 

NRL vs. Army IGY satellite proposals, 65 

Shuttle/Titan Launch Dispenser, 247–249, 250 

soldering school, 158 

space debris, 364–365 

Space Shuttle Challenger explosion, 222–223, 

247, 249, 250 

space shuttle for GPS satellites, 223 

space shuttle retrieving LDEF, 249–250 

space shuttles paused post-explosion, 247, 249 

space solar power for Earth, 358–359 

SPHERES sensor-equipped “assistants,” 367 

Theoretical Division, 93 

TiPS Program telemetry system, 270 

Vanguard launches, 79, 93, 94 

See also  International Space Station 

National Academy of Engineering inducting 

Wilhelm, 373 

National Academy of Sciences 

IGY committee for scientist experiments, 68 

on NRL in space technology development, 

243–244 

Vanguard tracking via telescope, 69 

National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics 

(NACA), 2 

National Aeronautic Association (NAA), 225,  226 

National Aeronautics and Space Act (1958), 3, 93 

National Bureau of Standards 

rocket research, 35, 37 

time transfer tests, 206 

National Defense Research Committee (NDRC) 

Lorenzen networking with, 85 

as model for Office of Naval Research, 87 

renamed Office of Scientific Research and 

Development, 87 436 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

National Institute of Standards and Technology. 

See  National Bureau of Standards 

National Inventors Hall of Fame inducting Easton, 

226,  227 

National Medal of Technology to Easton, 226 

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 

(NOAA), 260,  355 

National Polar Orbiting Environmental Sensor 

System (NPOESS), 276, 277 

National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) 

broom closet meeting, 231–232 

establishment of, 125–126, 347 

HTSSE sponsor,  349 

National Reconnaissance Program, 147 

NCST role, 243 

NRL ABM ELINT approval, 172, 175 

NRL-NRO relationship, 269–270, 358–359, 384 

NRL shifted to support role, 232–235, 238, 

243–244, 248, 280–281, 301 

NRL shift from satellites to data, 304 

ocean surveillance from space, 177 

as Office of Missiles and Satellite Systems, 147, 

155 

Office of Space Systems as, 171–172 

Pioneer of National Reconnaissance to Wilhelm, 

373 

Poppy and Soviet ABM/AES systems, 171 

Poppy augmentation for ocean surveillance, 186 

Poppy probationary status, 187–188 

Poppy program effects of establishment, 155 

Poppy program epitaph, 189 

Poppy retool funding denied, 165 

Potts as historian, 115 

press conference for satellite, 272 

Program A as Air Force, 155 

Program B as photoreconnaissance, 156 

Program C as Navy ELINT, 148, 156 

Program D as Strategic Air Command, 156 

reorganization within, 168 

Sea Launch and Recovery funding, 389 

STB cost-effective delivery, 162 

Vandenberg renovation for Atlas F boosters, 216 

Vietnam War funding squeezes, 181 

Wilhelm on Atlas boosters, 382 

National Reconnaissance Program (NRP) 

Bay of Pigs debacle, 151 

creation of, 147 

data analysis for Soviet ABM sites, 147 

NRL ELINT oversight, 151 

Poppy units finding signals of interest, 181 

Program C as Navy’s program, 148 

National Science Foundation, 87 

National Security Agency (NSA) 

ABM ELINT credited to Poppy, 182 

automated data processing progress, 148 

COMINT coordination, 143 

computers new and more powerful, 159, 184 

“Development of Ocean Surveillance 

Capability,” 182 

ELINT control, 117, 122, 143 

ELINT data format challenges, 170 

GRAB data analysis, 139, 141, 146, 147 

GRAB data final reports, 148 

GRAB data tapes from huts, 130, 146 

GRAB tape digitization, 142 

Lorenzen ocean surveillance protocols, 184 

Lorenzen tour of Poppy operations, 175–176 

MATTs certified, 316 

NRL-NSA joint task on data processing, 184 

Poppy data from huts, 165 

Poppy data handling, 156, 159 

Poppy data made useful, 168–169 

Poppy data overwhelming, 175 

Poppy data quality, 164 

Poppy data tape handling, 184 

Tattletale final approval, 120 

“turn down the gain,” 139, 175 

National Security Council, 55, 66 

National Security Space Office, 358 

“national technical means,” 5 

National Technical Processing Center (NTPC) 

as Army-Navy Electronic Evaluation Group, 90 

ELINT handoff to National Security Agency, 

122 

establishment of, 102 

GRAB data analysis, 138, 139 

Tattletale satellite approval, 116, 120 

Naval Air Systems Command (NAVAIR) 

Astronautics Division disestablished, 210 

Bureau of Weapons into, 176, 204 

passive ranging Pentagon demo, 205 

reorganization and review, 176–177 

Timation funding, 204 

Naval Center for Space Technology (NCST; Code 

8000),  6, 8 

2001 fifteenth anniversary, 327 

C4ISR connecting to NRL roots, 302.  See also 

C4ISR 

C4ISR technology to industry,  306, 307 

code directory for “Naval Space Technology 

Center,”  240 

Departments of, 9, 243, 285, 384 

device miniaturization, 305, 307, 315,  320 , 321, 

362, 382 

Dwyer as acting director, 285, 392 

expertise diversity, 8–9, 239, 252, 263, 280, 

309–310, 348,  349 , 359, 385 

expertise in homeland security, 7, 303– 306, 

307 , 327–328 

facilities overview,  8, 9, 350–351 

formation,  6, 239– 242, 240 , 383–384 

formation and siting, 241– 242 , 373, 384 

formation per Navy Space Policy, 240–241, 

383–384 

funding, 241, 243–244 

funding for C4ISR, 305 

funding from TENCAP, 303 

funding tour and Windsat, 274 437 INDEX 

Hellrich as Associate Director, 242–243 

LACE as first major project,  254 . See also  Laser 

Atmospheric Compensation Experiment 

logo,  6, 242 

mission, 240 

Optical Test Facility, 255.  See also  Optical Test 

Facility 

“orbiting peripherals” mindset, 5.  See also 

“orbiting peripherals” 

personnel supporting programs, 347, 367, 373 

projects can get canceled, 354, 357–358 

research overview, 9–10 

Russian Space Agency tour, 268 

satellite building decline, 280 

Schaub as Director,  249 , 269, 341, 392 

shift from satellites to data, 238–239, 303–306, 

314–315 

shift to support role, 248, 253, 273–274, 276, 

278, 280–281, 301 

slogan, 10 

sponsor diversification, 249, 250, 278, 280–281, 

347, 353, 361 

sponsor expectations, 322 

sponsor relationships changing, 303–304 

TLD as largest structure built, 249 

two major projects at once, 250 

Wilhelm as Chief Systems Engineer, 243 

Wilhelm as Director, 4,  226 , 242, 272,  372 –373, 

384, 395 

Wilhelm as Director retirement, 4, 285, 371, 

373, 392 

Naval Earth Map Observer (NEMO), 353–354 

Naval Electronics Laboratory (NEL), 72 

Naval Electronics Systems Command 

(NAVALEX) 

Naval Ocean Systems Center, 312 

Poppy program, 231 

into Space and Naval Warfare Systems 

Command, 312 

Naval Experimental and Research Laboratory, 2. 

See also  Naval Research Laboratory 

Naval Gun Factory, 37 

Naval Intelligence Command, 179, 182 

Naval Intelligence Support Center, 290 

Naval Material Command (NAVMAT), 187, 231, 

241 

Naval Missile Facility, Point Arguello.  See 

Vandenberg Air Force Base 

Naval Ocean Systems Center (NOSC), 312, 315 

Naval Operations for Research and Development, 

116, 120 

Naval Research Laboratory (NRL),  1, 8, 22, 320, 

330 

1st electronic reconnaissance satellite, 15, 99, 

104–105, 106, 113–114,  134 , 195, 377.  See 

also  GRAB; Tattletale 

100th satellite launched, 301, 341, 347, 373, 

390 

accomplishments listed for reviews, 177, 179 

approach to Space Age, 34, 94 

chapel on campus, 86 

code directories,  171, 240 

Collier Trophy for GPS, 225– 226 

currently,  8

device miniaturization, 305, 307, 315,  320 , 321, 

362, 382 

establishment,  1, 2, 7– 8, 11, 58 

exhibits.  See  exhibits on NRL campus 

expertise diversity, 8–9, 40, 42, 252, 309–310, 

348,  349 , 359, 375, 385 

expertise historical knowledge, 390 

expertise in ELINT, 150, 302, 383 

funding, 8, 58–59, 100, 243–244 

funding via working capital model, 8, 25, 58–59, 

105, 234 

GPS development, 1, 5, 6, 225– 226 . See also 

GPS (Global Positioning System) 

Hulburt first civilian director, 45 

IGY satellite launch winner, 65–66.  See also 

Vanguard program 

Labstracts  campus newsletter, 351 

mission,  8, 11 

Naval Center for Space Technology formation, 

6, 239– 242, 240 . See also  Naval Center for 

Space Technology 

“orbiting peripherals” mindset, 5.  See also 

“orbiting peripherals” 

organizational charts,  171, 240 

patents, 21,  22, 227 , 260, 342 

personnel supporting programs, 347, 367, 373 

personnel to NASA, 2, 3, 79, 80, 83, 93–94, 375 

Physical Review  paper on propagation, 18 

projects can get canceled, 354, 357–358 

radar importance, 15, 70.  See also  radar 

radar patent, 21,  22 . See also  patents 

Report 5097.  See  “Beyond Vanguard” report 

robotics lab, 363–364.  See also  Laboratory for 

Autonomous Systems Research 

Satellite Techniques Branch formation,  4–5, 95. 

See also  Satellite Techniques Branch 

shift from satellites to data, 234, 238–239, 

303–306, 314–315 

shift to supporting role, 232–235, 238, 243–244, 

248, 253, 278, 280–281, 301 

sponsor diversification, 249, 250, 278, 280, 347, 

353, 361 

tension over rocket building, 53–54 

Viking 4 launch at sea,  54 –55 

Viking 7 altitude record, 56 

Viking high-altitude pictures, 56– 57, 58 

Naval Research Laboratory Electronic Digital 

Computer (NAREC), 140, 142 

Naval Scientific and Technical Intelligence Center, 

141 

Naval Security Group (NSG) 

Cuban Missile Crisis, 156 

“Development of Ocean Surveillance 

Capability,” 182 438 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

ELINT for field support, 180 

GRAB 1 management, 136 

GRAB data tapes from huts, 130 

Lorenzen ocean surveillance protocols, 184 

Lorenzen working with, 89 

Morgan’s father an officer with, 330 

National Technical Processing Center 

co-location, 102 

Poppy field station operations, 156 

Poppy for ocean surveillance, 183, 185 

Poppy ground stations for ocean surveillance, 

186 

post-Poppy ELINT architecture, 189 

space reconnaissance satellite approval, 115, 117 

Naval Space Surveillance System.  See 

NAVSPASUR 

Naval Space Technology Center,  240 –241, 242.  See 

also  Naval Center for Space Technology 

Naval Weapons Laboratory 

NAVSPASUR handoff to,  198 

Timation orbit tracking, 204, 206, 207 

Naval Weapons Technology Department, 290 

Navigation Satellite Executive Steering Group.  See 

NAVSEG 

Navigation Technology Satellites (NTS),  215, 218 

Atlas F booster, 213–214, 216–217 

clock thermo-electric devices, 220 

innovations from, 220–222 

NTS-1 approval, 213 

NTS-1 atomic clocks, 214, 215, 217 

NTS-1 launch, 210, 216–217 

NTS-1 payload, 214– 215 

NTS-2 in GPS orbit, 215–216, 217 

NTS-2 launch, 216, 217– 218 

NTS-2 test bed, 217–219,  218 , 237 

NTS-3 maser, 217 

NTS-3 never happened, 217, 219 

stabilization systems,  215 , 221–222 

NAVLEX.  See  Naval Electronics Systems 

Command 

NAVSAT name, 195.  See also  Transit satellites 

NAVSEG (Navigation Satellite Executive Steering 

Group) 

formation of, 208 

NRL vs. Air Force proposals, 208–210, 212–213 

satellite final configuration, 220 

NAVSPASUR (Naval Space Surveillance System), 

137, 198 

calibration of, 199 

capabilities of, 80, 115, 197,  198 , 199–200 

construction of, 197– 198 

Dodecapole 1 calibration satellite, 166,  167 , 199 

Easton insight for, 197 

Easton National Medal of Technology, 226 

for ELINT satellite tracking, 148–149 

funding from ARPA, 197 

geolocation via atomic clocks, 200 

Minitrack origins, 72, 79, 115,  137 , 197,  198 

orbital trajectories in single pass, 199–200 

payloads for calibration via shapes, 199 

plotting beam structure, 379 

Poppy intercept localization help, 179 

Poppy support for at-sea ship locations, 180 

SURCAL 1 “Buckshot” launch,  149 –150, 379 

SURCAL 2 “calibration” jamming, 159 

SURCAL 3 calibration satellite, 160 

SURCAL 4 calibration satellite, 167 

SURCAL for calibration, 167,  372 , 378–379 

tracking success,  137 

Wilhelm and calibration device,  372 

NAVSTAR GPS (Navigation Satellite Timing and 

Ranging Global Positioning System) 

atomic clock problems, 219 

NAVSTAR name, 211, 212 

Rockwell GPS satellites, 216, 217, 219, 222, 223 

See also  GPS (Global Positioning System) 

Navy 

“Buckshot” five-satellite launch,  149 –150, 157, 

379 

Easton GPS demonstration, 206 

Edison suggesting Navy invention factory, 7–8 

ELINT for military operation support, 234 

GRAB continuation funding, 141 

HTSSE sponsor,  349 

IGY launch won by NRL, 65 

Lorenzen briefing on NRL technologies, 179 

Naval Experimental and Research Laboratory, 2 

NRL mission, 8 

Poppy ELINT capabilities, 179–180, 181, 

182–183 

Poppy for ocean surveillance, 183, 185.  See also 

ocean surveillance 

Poppy lab tour, 182–183 

Sea Launch and Recovery, 385–386, 388 

Space Policy, 124, 241, 383–384 

space readiness personnel, 126 

TENCAP for ELINT not new, 303 

Transit system for navigation, 219 

“The Navy in the Space Age,” 124 

Navy Meritorious Civilian Service Award to 

Wilhelm, 373 

Navy Navigation Satellite System (NAVSAT), 195. 

See also  Transit satellites 

Navy Space Projects Office (PM-16; PME 106) 

broom closet meeting, 231 

Poppy program, 231 

Special Projects Office, 231 

sponsor of satellite navigation system, 210 

Navy Superior Civilian Service Award to Bielecki, 

290 , 293 

NCST.  See  Naval Center for Space Technology 

near-real-time intelligence data,  173 –174, 288 

Multi-Mission Advanced Tactical Terminals,  316 

Nesmeyanov, A. N., 64 

Newell, Homer 

Army competition for IGY launch, 64–65 

Rocket Sonde Research Section head, 45, 52 

transfer to NASA, 94 439 INDEX 

V-2s for upper atmosphere research, 29 

Viking 1 launch, 52 

Viking for ballistic missiles, 52–54 

Viking program possibilities, 55 

New Orleans, Louisiana, InfraLynx, 332–333 

new UV, 42– 43 

New York City Fire Department (FDNY), 328–329 

New York Times  on Tattletale, 122–123 

Nimbus satellites, 175 

9/11/2001.  See  September 11, 2001, attacks 

Nitze, Paul, 179–180 

Nixon, Richard M., 181 

Nobel Prize to Karle and Hauptman, 2 

Norton and Ralph tethered,  270 , 271 

NovaSol Dual Mode Optical Interrogator,  261 , 262 

Nozette, Stuart 

Bistatic Radar Experiment of moon, 266 

Clementine Deputy Mission Director, 263 

Clementine origins, 263– 264 

selling government secrets, 267 

NRL.  See  Naval Research Laboratory 

NRL Electronic Intelligence Satellite, 115.  See also 

Tattletale satellite 

NRL Precision Orbital Transfer Vehicle, 278.  See 

also  Upper Stage 

NRO.  See  National Reconnaissance Office 

NRO Launch 8 (NROL-8), 272–273 

NRP.  See  National Reconnaissance Program 

NSA.  See  National Security Agency 

NTS.  See  Navigation Technology Satellites 

nuclear weapons 

ballistic missile delivery, 50 

Cuban Missile Crisis, 157 

detection of tests, 106, 222 

GPS satellite nuclear sensors, 222 

GRAB data and U.S. bomber success, 151–152 

InfraLynx for ICBM movements, 334 

Krause to nuclear weapons testing, 45, 52 

Polaris missile launch while submerged, 137 

SALT signed, 189 

Strategic Air Command radar detection, 102 

Strategic Defense Initiative, 249 

Stratojet and Stratofortress nuclear bombers, 139 

submarine communication, 106–107 

Transit satellite guidance, 121, 122 

See also  ICBMs 

Nurnberger, Michael 

TacSat-4 antenna, 341 

TacSat-4 antenna patent,  342 

O

Oberlin, Edgar G., 20 

Oberth, Hermann, 19 

ocean surveillance from space 

authority chain, 184 

“Development of Ocean Surveillance 

Capability,” 182 

friend or foe identification, 180–181 

GPS time dissemination for, 225 

Leonard requesting satellites for, 177, 285, 

286–287 

as national intelligence objective, 181, 186 

naval space assets prioritized, 179 

not in Intelligence Board ELINT, 185 

NRL revolutionizing MDA, 285.  See also 

maritime domain awareness 

as operational military system, 289 

Poppy augmentation for, 186, 187 

Poppy for, 179–184, 285 

Poppy for Navy field support, 179–180, 182, 185, 

186 

Poppy for ocean and ABM surveillance, 186 

Poppy shipborne emitter surveillance, 176, 

178–179, 285, 287 

Soviet naval presence in Mediterranean, 177, 

287, 289 

Soviet radar migrating to sea, 176, 287 

See also  maritime domain awareness 

O’Connor, James, 163–164 

Office of Chief of Naval Operations (OPNAV) 

“Beyond Vanguard” report, 100 

passive ranging Pentagon demo, 205 

Tattletale final approval, 118, 119 

Transit co-launch with Tattletale, 122 

Office of Defense Preparedness (DoJ), 331–332 

Office of Missiles and Satellite Systems, 147, 155 

Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI) 

change of leadership, 146 

first two-ball launch, 155 

Frost in Tattletale approval, 118, 119 

GRAB ABM complex discovery, 150 

GRAB Project Director, 148 

Lorenzen partnership with, 88, 90 

Naval Intelligence Support Center to, 290 

NRL ELINT expertise, 150 

NRL ELINT satellite program priority, 143 

Poppy 4 delivery late, 163 

Poppy lacking advocate, 170 

Seawatch database, 296 

space reconnaissance satellite approval, 115 

Tattletale final version submitted, 118 

Tattletale sattelite signal analysis, 117 

Office of Naval Research (ONR) 

administrating IGY NRL launch, 66 

GPS retroreflectors for clock monitoring, 260 

laser communications, 260–262,  261 

Lorenzen hiring countermeasure staff, 163–164 

National Defense Research Committee as model, 

87 

Naval Earth Map Observer, 353 

NRL funding control, 58 

Office of Research and Invention into, 50–51 

Orbiter satellite funding, 65 

robotics funding, 366 

Sea Launch and Recovery funding, 386, 388 

space reconnaissance satellite approval, 115 

TacSat-4 funding, 280, 341 

Viking for ballistic missiles, 52–53 440 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Office of Research and Invention (ORI), 50–51 

Office of Scientific Research and Development 

(OSRD), 87 

Office of Space Systems, 171–172 

O’Grady, Scott F., 223 

O’Hara, Jim, 220 

Okean 75 Soviet military exercise, 289 

Omelek Island TacSat-1 non-launch,  338 

On-Board Processor (OBP), 314 

online.  See  Internet 

“open skies” precedent of IGY, 66 

Operationally Responsive Space (ORS) program 

description of, 336–337, 357 

funding, 357–358 

TacSat-1 momentum, 357 

TacSat sponsor, 338,  340 , 357 

Operation Desert Shield, 317–318, 322 

Operation Desert Storm 

GPS use, 223 

software definable radio, 317– 318 

optical communications.  See  laser communications 

Optical Sciences Division, 252, 260 

Optical Test Facility (OTF) 

one-meter photon-catching telescope, 255, 257 

overview of, 255,  271 

optical tracking 

Optical Test Facility mission, 255 

retroreflector array for laser-based, 214– 215 ,

219 

of Vanguard, 69–70 

See also  laser tracking 

Optics Division, 39– 40 , 45 

Orbital Sciences company,  339, 340, 342 

Orbiter satellite (Army), 65 

“orbiting peripherals” mindset, 5, 234, 238, 281, 

301–302 

NRL and C4ISR, 302, 303, 328, 385 

NRL organizational changes, 288–289 

Page returning to NRL, 376 

See also  C4ISR 

ORS.  See  Operationally Responsive Space 

ORS Phase III Standardized Bus, 341 

over-the-horizon laser communication, 258, 293 

Owens, Raymond, 118 

ozone concentration measurements, 45 

P

Packard, David, 185, 186 

Page, Robert Morris 

Ad Hoc Committee on Rocket, Satellite, and 

Space Research, 94 

radar funding by Congress, 83 

radar of shorter wavelength, 84 

satellites as orbiting peripherals, 376 

Tattletale final presentation rehearsal, 119 

Palma, Robert,  254 , 309 

Parkinson, Bradford W. 

GPS historical account coauthor, 211 

GPS technology meeting, 212–213 

NAVSTAR GPS head, 211 

NAVSTAR name, 211 

Transit funds to GPS satellites, 219–220 

passive attitude control of LIPS,  311 

passive ranging, 200, 204– 206 , 218 

explanation, 201–202 

patents 

modulating retroreflector technology, 260 

radar, 21,  22 

TacSat-4 antenna,  342 

Timation Satellite Navigation System,  227 

pencils as design tools, 248 

Penn, Dan,  254 

Pentagon.  See  Department of Defense 

perigee kick motor, 236, 237 

peroxide fuel component, 52, 67 

Peterkin, Ernest, 236–237 

Petit, Dave, 314 

Phillips, Jerry 

Improved Data Modem, 317 

Joint Combat Information Terminal, 320–321 

software definable radio, 319 

TADIXS-B, 314 

White House Communications Agency credit, 

333–334 

Phoenix component harvesting, 366–367 

PhotoFlight company, 292 

photoreconnaissance 

3-D battlefield renderings, 321 

confirming ELINT signals of interest, 188 

Cuban Missile Crisis, 156 

IMINT (imagery intelligence), 109, 116 

maritime domain awareness limitations, 234 

as Program B under NRO, 156 

Physical Review  paper on radio wave propagation, 

18 

Pioneer of National Reconnaissance award to 

Wilhelm, 373 

Plasma Physics Division, 258, 328 

Pleasance, Lyn, 265 

Point Arguello.  See  Vandenberg Air Force Base 

Polaris missile submarines 

Cuban Missile Crisis, 157 

geolocation via satellite Doppler shift, 195 

launch while submerged, 137 

Soviet radar defense system, 147 

Transit first positional fix, 195 

Transit satellite guidance, 122, 124, 141, 195 

Poloskov, Sergei, 73 

Poppy program,  158, 160, 169, 187 

achievements of, 170, 172, 180, 182 

Analog to Digital Data System, 174 

augmentations for ocean surveillance, 186, 187 

clock-bearing payloads,  202 

closed down, 189–190, 216, 234, 235 

computer upgrade, 172–174,  173 , 183 

data backlog degaussed, 175 

data collection success, 164 

data handled by NSA, 156 441 INDEX 

data made useful, 166, 168–169 

data processing protocols, 159 

data processing slow, 159, 176 

data processing sneaker-net, 179 

data quality, 164–165, 166 

declassification,  169 , 187 , 190, 285, 288, 301 

first two-ball launch, 155,  158 , 159 

funding, 170, 172, 175 

funding for Poppy 7 cost overruns, 186– 187 

funding for Titan III sturdiness, 188 

funding saved by unit in action, 181 

GRAB program as, 151, 287 

gravity gradient stabilization of antennas, 

162–163, 166 

ground station and Poppy 7 failure, 288 

ground station antenna upgrades, 168 

ground station ocean surveillance, 176, 178 

ground stations for ocean surveillance, 185, 186 

ground stations impressive, 175–176, 181 

HULTEC “hull-to-emitter-correlation,” 287 

huts, 155, 158–159 

huts and data quality, 165, 166 

huts and Poppy 4 low-power signals, 167 

huts operators’ foreign spouses, 159 

huts processing and disseminating data, 165–166 

huts reporting signals of interest, 159–160, 175, 

178 

huts under Naval Security Group, 156 

huts with Scripted Emitters, 361 

Lorenzen as technical director, 156 

Lorenzen pitch to Office of Space Systems, 

171–172 

magnetic recording of data, 165, 167 

“matrix management” parallel assembly, 160 

Mayo as leading project engineer, 156, 161 

Mideast crisis, 287–288 

Navy enthusiasm for ELINT, 179–180, 181 

Navy field support, 179–180, 182, 185, 186 

Navy tour of lab, 182–183 

NRO establishment effects, 155 

ocean and ABM surveillance both, 186 

ocean shipborne emitter surveillance, 176, 

178–179, 285, 287 

ocean surveillance, 179–184, 285 

planned launches, 151 

Poppy 1 launch, 159 

Poppy 2 launch, 152,  158, 160 –161 

Poppy 2 significant ELINT, 161 

Poppy 3 data value, 166 

Poppy 3 launch, 162, 166 

Poppy 3 satellite,  169 

Poppy 3 testing, 162 

Poppy 4 construction, 163 

Poppy 4 launch, 166–167 

Poppy 4 low-power signals, 167 

Poppy 4 planning, 162 

Poppy 5 computer upgrade, 172–174,  173 

Poppy 5 enhanced ABM detection, 172–173 

Poppy 5 launch, 174–175 

Poppy 5 launched with Timation,  202 , 204 

Poppy 5 plans, 167, 170 

Poppy 5 twilight phase, 287 

Poppy 6 display for Navy, 182 

Poppy 6 launch, 184 

Poppy 6 launched with Timation 2,  207 

Poppy 6 novel seaborne intercepts, 184 

Poppy 6 plans, 174, 175 

Poppy 6 subsystem failures, 288 

Poppy 7 as last,  187 , 188–189, 287 

Poppy 7 augmentation for ocean surveillance, 

186– 187 

Poppy 7 launch, 189, 287 

Poppy 7 plans, 174 

Poppy 7 shut off, 190 

Poppy 7 Soviet naval ELINT, 288 

as Program C under NRO, 156 

redundancies against stuck switch, 187 

SALT monitoring, 189 

security measures, 159 

shipborne emitter surveillance, 176, 178–179, 

285, 287 

Siss Zulu name for ground stations, 175, 176 

solid-state memory unit,  168 , 378 

Soviet ABM/AES systems, 171, 172, 287 

Soviet naval activity monitoring, 182 

Soviet radar migrating to sea, 176, 287 

three-axis stabilization, 175, 184 

Titan III redesigns, 184, 188 

as top secret, 5 

as two-ball configuration, 155,  158 , 159 

Porter, Richard R., 28 

postcards for skip distances, 14 

Potts, Ronald L. 

at briefing on Program C to CIA, 182 

on Electronic Countermeasures System, 102 

ELINT data analysis challenge, 147 

on ELINT friend or foe, 181 

on GRAB 2 data mother lode, 150 

on Lorenzen countermeasures, 90 

on Lorenzen jamming radio-guided bombs, 86 

on Lorenzen networking leadership, 88 

on Lorenzen’s view of effectiveness metrics, 

169 

on magnetic recording advances, 102 

on Mayo care of ground stations, 178 

on Mayo spy satellite insight, 113 

on NRL ELINT paper, 101 

on NRL ELINT success,  152 

on Poppy ELINT capabilities, 180 

on Poppy units finding signals of interest, 181 

on Soviet new radar installations, 133 

on Speakman reunion with Lorenzen, 185 

as spy satellite insider, 115 

on Tattletale alerting Soviets, 122 

Powers, Gary, 133, 139, 377 

Precision Direction Finder (PDF), 294 

Predator UAV and Copperfield, 362 

Presidential Distinguished Rank Award to 442 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Wilhelm, 373 

presidents of the United States 

Bush, George H. W., 317 

Bush, George W., 226, 333 

Clinton, Bill, 7, 266 

Johnson, Lyndon, 74 

Kennedy, John F., 144, 148, 156–157 

Nixon, Richard M., 181 

Reagan, Ronald, 249 

Roosevelt, Franklin D., 87 

Truman, Harry S., 73 

See also  Eisenhower, Dwight D.; White House 

President’s Science Advisory Committee (PSAC) 

friend or foe ship identification, 180–181 

Lorenzen and Mayo pitching Poppy, 172 

Poppy ground station upgrades, 167 

two-satellite configuration, 155 

Price, Charles W. 

ground station antenna upgrades, 168 

Poppy communication huts, 158–159, 180 

Poppy engineer supervisor, 161 

Poppy ground stations for ocean surveillance, 

186 

son George at NRL, 174, 291, 360 

Tattletale communications huts, 121, 129, 

132–133 

Tattletale ground unit antenna, 118–119 

Price, George 

Charlie’s son, 174, 291, 360 

hiring Huffine,  360 

solid-state receiver electronics, 174 

Space Systems Technology Department head, 

291 

Program 435 name for Transit, 195 

“Program 749” concept, 181 

Program A (NRO) 

as Air Force, 155 

briefing on Poppy ELINT, 183 

Program B (NRO) 

as Central Intelligence Agency, 156 

confirming ELINT signals of interest, 188 

Cuban Missile Crisis, 156 

Mayo briefing on Poppy ELINT, 183 

Program C (NRO) 

Air Force ELINT overlap, 181 

briefing about Program C to CIA, 182 

Dix as consultant, 186 

Dix as Satellite Techniques Branch head, 161 

GRAB payoff, 152 

history of per NRO, 190 

as Navy ELINT programs, 148, 156, 231 

Navy losing control of, 232 

NRL as consultants to industry, 232–234, 238 

Poppy 5 digital data processing, 172 

Poppy as only component, 231 

Poppy probationary status, 187–188 

Poppy retool funding denied, 165 

post-Poppy ELINT architecture, 189 

Potts as historian, 182 

reorganization and re-briefing on Poppy, 176 

Vietnam War funding squeezes, 181 

Program D (NRO) as Strategic Air Command, 156 

Program Development Office, 248 

Programming Automatic Processing System (PAPS), 

189 

projects can get canceled, 354, 357–358 

Project Vanguard.  See  “Beyond Vanguard” report; 

Vanguard program 

propulsion via ions, 272,  273 

Proximity Operations Testbed,  365 

pseudo random noise (PRN) ranging signal, 214, 218 

Pulsed Sensor Array of LACE, 252 

pulse repetition frequency of radar data 

initial analysis to reveal, 138 

Poppy huts reporting unusual, 159–160 

Project Eyestrain, 140 

vessel identification using, 291 

Pulstar, 361 

punch cards 

Gorday’s electrical drawing program, 157 

GRAB data to, 139, 142 

Purdy, Bill,  270–271 

Q

Quality Assurance (QA), 158 

Quarles, Donald, 64, 102, 143 

quartz clocks into satellites,  202 –203, 204,  207 , 208, 

214 

R

Rabin, Herbert 

Research for Space Science and Technology head, 

233, 240 

Spacecraft Technology Center head, 288 

Space Science and Technology Directorate head, 

381 

Rabinovich, William, 260, 262 

radar (radio detection and ranging) 

3-D visualization of, 321 

Army Signal Corps Laboratory work, 35 

Bistatic Radar Experiment of moon, 266–267 

Crusade 2000 exercise, 294 

Cuban Missile Crisis, 156 

Easton work on, 196 

ELINT satellite for identifying, 106 

ferrets for analysis of, 102 

German Athos detectors, 103 

GRAB 2 data mother lode, 150 

GRAB data analysis, 130, 138 

GRAB sensors, 99, 136 

high-frequency surface wave radar, 294 

jamming, 84–85, 288 

Krause work on,  21 –23,  22 , 196 

Lorenzen shorter wavelength version,  84 

Lorenzen wartime innovations, 85 

low Earth orbit satellite signals and, 313 

Mayo electronic countermeasures receiver, 103 

Mayo insight for space reconnaissance, 113–114 443 INDEX 

NAVSPASUR development, 115, 197– 198 

NRL building-top antennas, 21–23,  22 

NRL’s greatest strength, 15, 70 

patent for, 21,  22 

periscope-mounted radar detector, 104 

Poppy against Soviet, 151, 171, 172, 287 

radar tracking system by RCA, 70 

Soviet defenses against ballistic missiles, 147 

Soviet Gage and Token installations, 113,  116 ,

120 

Soviet Galosh and Gammon installations, 171 

Soviet new installations via U-2 data, 133, 147 

Soviet systems migrating to sea, 176, 287 

Soviet tracking of U-2 plane, 133 

Tattletale detection of Soviet, 113,  116 , 120, 

125 

Taylor and Young discovery, 15 

Track While Scan Radar, 294 

Vanguard tracking, 69, 70.  See also  Minitrack 

system 

Radar Division, 351,  352 , 359 

RADARSAT satellite, 294 

Radiant Hail, 321–322 

radiation hardening of electronics, 347–348, 

362–363 

radio astronomy, 34 

Radio Communication Security Branch (Radio 

Division), 196 

Radio Corporation of America.  See  RCA 

Radio-Countermeasures Sound Recorder-

Reproducer, 90 

Radio Division 

Communications Security Section, 23–26, 29 

Gebhard as director,  11 , 100 

Miller as superintendent, 54, 55 

mission, 11 

Physical Review  paper on propagation, 18 

Radio Communication Security Branch, 196 

short-wavelength, high-frequency, 12– 13 ,

14–15 

skip distance phenomenon, 12– 13 

skip distance postcards, 14 

Taylor as director,  11 –12 

upper atmosphere effects, 11, 12– 13 . See also 

upper atmosphere research 

radio frequency (RF) spectrum,  17 

Bistatic Radar Experiment of moon, 266 

commercial transistors for amplification, 163 

crystal size and frequency, 132 

elemental to NRL, 254–255 

German device for measuring angles, 103 

Joint Combat Information Terminal, 320–321, 

322–323 

Joint Tactical Radio System, 322–324 

laser immunity to countermeasures versus, 261 

laser ranging vs. RF, 255 

low-frequency submarine communication, 

106–107, 149, 160, 162, 379 

microwave radiometer difficulty, 275 

RFID tracking of firefighters, 329 

side tone ranging vs. pseudo random noise, 218 

software definable radio, 319 

SOLRAD transmitters, 96 

U-PRAM sunlight-to-microwave module,  352 ,

359 

Vanguard IGY-assigned frequency, 71, 74, 132, 

196–197 

radio-guided bomb countermeasures, 85–86 

radios receiving satellite data, 305 

radio tracking of Vanguard, 70– 72 . See also 

Minitrack system; radar (radio detection and 

ranging) 

Radio Wave Propagation Group, 34 

radomes of Midway Research Center, 5,  271 , 361 

Ralph and Norton tethered,  270 , 271 

RAND Corporation, 115–116 

Ratcliffe, Louis T.,  97 

Raynor, William (Bill),  343 , 344 

RCA (Radio Corporation of America) 

Astro-Electronics Division, 207 

maser development, 217 

radar of shorter wavelength, 84 

radar tracking system, 70 

weather satellite launch failure, 216–217 

Reaction Motors, Inc., 51–52, 53 

reaction wheel stabilization, 221–222 

Reagan, Ronald, 249 

real-time interrupts vs. batch processing,  173 

real-time relay of signals 

C4ISR as, 301 

Maryland bridge security, 334–335 

near-real-time intelligence data,  173 –174, 288, 

316 

On-Board Processor, 314 

Poppy data processing bottleneck, 288 

Poppy ground stations, 175–176, 181 

Poppy lab tour by Navy, 183 

robotic control in orbit, 366 

Redstone rockets 

Explorer 2 satellite launch, 77 

Vanguard can’t use Cape Canaveral, 67–68 

Reed, Anne 

Electro-Optics Technology Section head, 255, 257 

laser communications, 255–256 

laser ranging, 256, 257 

maritime laser communication,  261 

NCST systems perspective, 262–263 

Optical Test Facility, 257 

Revolutionary Imaging Technology, 258–259 

Tether Physics and Survivability Experiment, 263 

references, bibliography, sources, 395–411 

Regan, Mike, 291 

Regeon, Paul 

Geographos rendezvous, 265 

Laser Atmospheric Compensation Experiment, 

254 

multispectral mapping of moon, 265,  266 

Regulus missile submarine launched, 56 444 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

relativity and clocks, 210 

Remote Sensing Division 

microwave data to wind speeds, 275–276 

Microwave Imager Sounder, 277 

Windsat, 274, 275 

Windsat spaceborne polarimetric microwave 

radiometer, 276 

Report 5097.  See  “Beyond Vanguard” report 

Research and Development Board (RDB; DoD) 

military vs. research, 58 

Viking development support, 54 

Viking for ballistic missiles, 53 

Research for Space Science and Technology, 233, 

240 

retroreflectors 

Advanced Systems Technology Branch, 259 

on GPS satellites, 259–260 

LACE spacecraft, 252, 254, 259 

laser communication, 260–262,  261 

modulating retroreflectors, 260–262,  261 

on the moon, 259 

NTS-1 satellite, 214– 215 

NTS-2 satellite, 219 

SpinSat, 258 

TiPS Ralph and Norton, 271 

Revolutionary Imaging Technology (RIT), 258–259 

RF.  See  radio frequency 

RF Active Systems Section, 266 

RFID (radio frequency identification) system, 329 

riding list for firefighter tracking, 329 

Robert J. Collier Trophy, 225– 226 

Roberts, Robert 

Army Airborne Command and Control System, 

328 

InfraLynx for ICBM movements, 334 

Maryland bridge security, 334–335 

Tactical Technologies Development Lab head, 

328 

White House Communications Agency, 333 

Robertson, Reuben, 65 

robotics 

Proximity Operations Testbed,  365 

robotic space tow trucks,  364 –367,  365, 391 –392 

satellite servicing,  365 –367 

See also  Laboratory for Autonomous Systems 

Research 

Rocketdyne company, 386– 387 

Rocket Research Branch 

Army competition for IGY launch, 64–65 

creation of, 55 

Viking as guided missile, 55–56 

Viking-based satellite launcher, 65 

rocket science 

early visionaries, 19 

Goddard liquid-fueled rocket launch, 19 

Hermes project, 28, 49–50 

Hulburt pursuing for NRL, 19–20 

NASA nearly killing, 3–4 

NRL personnel to NASA, 2, 3, 79, 80, 83, 93–94, 

375 

satellite launchers, 3.  See also  satellites 

V-2 rockets for research, 2, 20, 21, 29,  36 , 243 

Rocket Sonde Research Section (RSRS; Radio 

Division) 

Aerobee rocket, 39, 44, 49 

formation of, 33 

Krause leaving, 45, 52 

mission, 33–34 

Newell as head, 45, 52 

NRL tension over rocket building, 53–54 

personnel to Goddard, 93 

satellite launch not in reach, 49 

sonde definition, 33 

Upper Atmosphere Rocket Research Panel, 35 

V-2 launches by Army, 34–35,  36 , 37– 39 , 38, 

40 

V-2 spectrograph for UV research, 41– 43 

V-2 sun-following spectrographs, 43–44 

Viking rockets, 39, 49, 50– 51 . See also  Viking 

rockets 

Rockoons, 49 

Rockwell Collins company, 219 

Rockwell International 

Collier Trophy for GPS, 225– 226 

GPS satellites, 216, 217, 219, 222, 223 

HTSSE into ARGOS, 350 

NTS-2 component test,  218 

pseudo random noise signal assembly, 218 

reaction wheel stabilization, 221–222 

Roe, Mike,  268 

Rogers, Matthew 

MATT acronym homage, 315 

TADIXS-B for FLEETSATs, 313–314 

Roosevelt, Franklin D., 87 

Rose, Vincent,  169 

GRAB activation, 134–136,  135 

GRAB construction secrecy, 129 

GRAB data collection engineering evaluation, 

136 

GRAB frequency range wider, 141 

HTSSE, 350 

Lorenzen ocean surveillance protocols, 184 

periscope-mounted radar detector, 104 

Poppy 3 satellite,  169 

Poppy 7 launch, 189, 287 

Poppy antenna design, 163 

Poppy program payload, 161 

Satellite Techniques Branch, 96 

Tattletale design and specifications, 118 

Rosen, Milton,  50 

Aerobee rocket, 39 

rmy competition for IGY launch, 64–65 

Jet Propulsion Lab apprenticeship, 34,  50 

Rocket Research Branch formation, 55 

transfer to NASA, 94 

V-2 difficulties, 37 

V-2s for upper atmosphere research, 29 

Vanguard project, 45, 196 445 INDEX 

Viking rocket, 39, 45,  50 , 196.  See also  Viking 

rockets 

Rovinski, Robert, 162 

Royal Observatory, 207 

rubidium-vapor atomic clocks, 214–215, 217, 219 

Russia 

Institute for Precision Instrument Engineering, 

260 

ISS service module, 267–269,  268 

Russian Space Agency and NASA heads, 268 

Sea Launch collaboration with Boeing, 389 

tour of NCST, 268 

See also  Soviet Union 

Rustan, Pedro L., 264, 265 

S

SALT (Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty), 189 

Salt Lake City, Utah, InfraLynx,  331 –332 

Samos program 

Air Force ELINT satellites, 116, 151 

Canes not duplicating, 125 

delays and Soviet radar installations, 133 

photoreconnaissance program, 124, 151 

Tattletale jeopardizing, 122, 123 

value over Canes, 124 

SAMS (surface-to-air missiles), 156 

San Diego, California, InfraLynx, 332 

Sapp, Earl, 188 

SATCOM.  See  communications satellites 

“A Satellite and Space Vehicle Program for the Next 

Steps Beyond the Present Vanguard Program.” 

See  “Beyond Vanguard” report 

satellite-based navigation.  See  GPS (Global 

Positioning System); Transit satellites 

satellite communication.  See  communications 

satellites 

satellite communications vehicles,  330 –331 . See also 

InfraLynx 

satellites 

1st electronic reconnaissance satellite, 15, 99, 

104–105, 106, 113–114,  134 , 195, 377.  See also 

GRAB; Tattletale 

1st satellite Sputnik, 3, 73–74, 197 

1st U.S. satellite, 76, 77, 100 

100th NRL satellite launched, 301, 341, 347, 373, 

390 

“Buckshot” five-satellite launch,  149 –150, 157, 

379 

calibration of, 360–361 

cheapsats and smallsats, 309, 354 

commercial transistors for amplification, 163 

cost of first reconnaissance satellite, 114 

eight-satellite launch, 166–167 

exhibit hall on NRL campus,  98, 215 . See also 

exhibits 

Explorer 1 as U.S. first, 76, 77, 100 

five-satellite launches,  149 –150, 157, 160–161, 

221, 379 

“freedom of space” and surveillance, 66 

“grapefruit satellite,”  78 , 93 

gravity gradient stabilization, 162–163.  See also 

gravity gradient stabilization 

International Geophysical Year, 63– 67, 64 . See 

also  Vanguard program 

International Scientific Radio Union, 63 

jamming and spoofing, 107, 223–224, 225 

launches controlled by ARPA, 122 

Low Frequency Trans-Ionospheric, 107 

master clock synchronization via, 207–208 

micropound thrusters, 166–167, 184 

Multiple Satellite Dispenser, 186.  See also 

Multiple Satellite Dispenser 

NCST satellite construction on decline, 280 

nuclear weapons tests detection, 106, 222 

oldest space object, 78, 93 

“open skies” precedent of IGY, 66 

as “orbiting peripherals,” 5.  See also  “orbiting 

peripherals” 

radiation hardening of electronics, 347–348, 

362–363 

robotic servicing,  365 –367 

satellite-based navigation, 97–98, 195.  See also 

GPS (Global Positioning System) 

Satellite Techniques Branch formation,  4–5.  See 

also  Satellite Techniques Branch 

Sentry/Corona film recovery, 101, 143, 147 

seven-satellite launch, 174–175, 202,  207 

Shuttle Launch Dispenser, 247 

space debris.  See  space debris 

spin stabilization, 216 

Sputnik 1 as first, 3, 73–74, 197 

standard satellite bus, 340–341, 344, 357 

three-axis stabilization, 175, 184 

three-satellite launch, 145– 146 

tracking.  See  tracking space objects 

two-ball configuration, 148, 155, 158, 159 

Upper Stage propulsion system, 278 

Vanguard program, 63– 67 . See also  Vanguard 

program 

Satellite Techniques Branch (STB),  4, 97, 152 

“Buckshot” five-satellite launch,  149 –150, 157, 

379 

BuWeps funds for NRL ELINT, 150 

Clementine, 6–7.  See also  Clementine project 

contributions of,  4–5 

Dix as head,  161 , 170–171, 379 

early satellite possibilities, 3 

first intelligence-gathering payload, 15,  134 . See 

also  GRAB; Tattletale 

formation of,  4–5, 95, 96 

GRAB 1 secrecy,  98 

GRAB 2 launch, 145 

GRAB advancements and legacy,  152 

GRAB data storage, 141 

GRAB two-satellite configuration, 148 

innovations in processes, 157–158 

“matrix management” parallel assembly, 160 

metallic ribbon antennas, 162 446 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Multiple Satellite Dispenser, 186, 237,  381 . See 

also  Multiple Satellite Dispenser 

NRL organizational hierarchy,  171 

Poppy 4 delivery late, 163 

Poppy 5 ABM enhancement, 172 

Poppy cost-effective delivery, 162 

Poppy flywheel to control yaw, 175 

Poppy stuck switch expense, 187 

science and space technology split, 380–381 

Sections of, 171 

soldering school, 158 

SOLRAD Hi, 381 

SOLRAD vs. Canes/GRAB, 129 

to Spacecraft Technology Center, 233, 240, 288, 

383 

under Space Systems Division, 188, 381, 383 

staff at formation, 96 

staff during Poppy program, 162, 171 

staff when Wilhelm joined, 376 

staff when Wilhelm made head of, 380 

Timation as GPS basis, 202–203, 381 

Titan III redesigns, 184 

Vanguard project, 3, 59.  See also  Vanguard 

program 

Votaw as head, 4,  95 –96, 159,  161 

Wilhelm as head,  171 , 188, 199, 202, 233,  372 ,

379–380 

Wilhelm under Votaw, 95–96, 199, 375–376 

Saturn 5 rocket and WD-40 lubricant, 361 

S-band intercept receiver 

GRAB 1, 136 

periscope-mounted radar detector, 104, 113 

radar reconnaissance from space, 113–114 

Schade, Henry A., 29, 33 

Scharpf, Bill, 255, 259 

Schaub, John,  249 , 254 

Budweiser as reward, 253 

on challenges of new sponsor, 250 

joining Mechanical Systems Branch, 247 

Laser Atmospheric Compensation Experiment, 

250,  251 –252, 253,  254 

marital priorities, 251–252 

Microwave Imager Sounder, 277–278 

NCST Director,  249 , 269, 341, 392 

on NCST diversity of expertise, 280 

as NRL at NRO dealing with NRL, 272 

on NRL shift to support role, 248, 253, 276 

NRO Launch 8 press conference, 272 

NRO liaison for NCST, 269, 272 

one test over slew of analyses, 248 

Shuttle Launch Dispenser, 247, 248 

Spacecraft Engineering Department head, 247, 

249 , 269, 341 

Spacecraft Engineering Department leader, 247, 

273 

on TacSat-4 antenna, 341 

Windsat nightmare to success, 273– 274 , 276–277 

Schmidt, John, 387 

Schooley, Allen H., 119 

Schwarzkopf, Arnold, 223 

“Scientist Who Mistook Himself for a Spy,” 267 

Scoville, Herbert P., 120 

screw propeller, 204 

Scripted Emitter, 361 

SDIO.  See  Strategic Defense Initiative 

Organization 

SDR.  See  software definable radio 

SDRP (Software Definable Radio Payload),  306 .

See also  software definable radio 

Sea Launch and Recovery (SEALAR),  387 

Air Force Advanced Launch System versus, 388 

aluminum vehicle, 388 

barge static test launches,  387 –388 

BLUE follow-on killed, 389 

ending, 389, 390 

funding, 386, 388, 389 

hybrid fuel motors, 389 

Navy liberation for launches, 385–386, 388 

recovery designs, 386, 389 

Rocketdyne X-3 engines, 386– 387 

Truax Engineering vehicle, 386– 387 , 388 

V-2 towable capsule similarity, 27,  28 , 385, 387 

Sea Launch collaboration, 389 

sea level monitoring, 260 

Sealink Advanced Analysis (S2A), 296–297 

Seawatch database, 296 

Secchi, Father Angelo, 355–356 

SECCHI-COR2 (Sun Earth Connection Coronal 

and Heliospheric Investigation Coronagraph), 

355–356 

SED.  See  Spacecraft Engineering Department 

Seddon, J. Carl, 55–56 

SEI (Specific Emitter Identification), 291–292 

Senasack, H. Edward, 269, 274 

Senate Armed Services Committee, 388 

Senate Preparedness Committee, 73–74 

“sensor-to-shooter” C4I technology ethic, 

304–306, 307, 328, 331, 347 

Sentry/Corona program 

film recovery program, 101, 143, 147 

NRL Tattletale versus, 116 

Program B of NRO, 156 

September 11, 2001, attacks 

“everything has changed,” 327, 328 

homeland security role, 7, 303– 306, 307 

maritime defense initiative, 290, 294 

Maryland bridge security, 334–335 

NCST fifteenth anniversary, 327 

NYC communications infrastructure,  330–331 

NYC firefighter tracking, 329 

satellite communications vehicle,  330 . See also 

InfraLynx 

unmanned aerial vehicles, 361–362 

White House communications, 327 

World Trade Center tour, 324 

Severns, James, 311 

Sheets, Mack 

as Communications Science Division branch 

head, 188 447 INDEX 

Emitter Location Branch head, 170 

high frequency direction finding, 164 

Shepherd, Skip, 309 

shipborne emitter surveillance, 176, 178–179, 285, 

287.  See also  ocean surveillance 

ships fitted with ECM equipment, 178–179 

Shoemaker, Gene, 266, 267 

short radio pulse communication, 23 

short-wavelength, high-frequency radio, 12– 13 

skip distances, 14 

Short Wavelength Adaptive Techniques (SWAT), 

252 

Shover, Sam, 96 

Showers, Donald Mac, 146 

side tone ranging (STR) signal, 214, 218 

SIGINT (signals intelligence) 

ABM signals first detected by Poppy, 182 

Bielecki work,  290 

ELINT and COMINT within, 100.  See also 

ELINT (electronic intelligence) 

friend or foe ship identification, 180–181 

Lorenzen ensconcing himself in, 86, 89 

Misner signals processing expert, 90 

NRO shift from NRL to contractors, 280 

Program A of NRO, 155 

SIGINT Overhead Reconnaissance 

Subcommittee, 176, 182, 183, 185 

Soviet naval threat, 234 

USS  Pueblo  captured, 177 

Single Integrated Operational Plan (SIOP), 106 

Siss Zulu, 175, 176 

skip distance phenomenon, 12– 13 

Physical Review  paper on propagation, 18 

postcards to track, 14 

smallsats, 309 

smart phone GPS applications, 225 

Smith, Carl Harrison, 50 

Smith, William S., 12 

Smithsonian Astronomical Observatory (SAO), 69 

Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space 

Museum,  75 

SMO (Support for Military Operations), 180, 185 

sneaker-net file delivery, 179 

Snodgrass, Richard, 37 

software definable radio (SDR),  306, 318 

Integrated Communication, Navigation, 

Identification and Avionics program, 319 

Joint Combat Information Terminal, 320–321, 

322–323 

Desert Storm, 317– 318 

as Software Reprogrammable Payload,  306, 360 ,

362–363 

waveforms accommodated, 319 

Software Reprogrammable Payload (SRP),  306, 

360 , 362–363.  See also  software definable radio 

soil moisture measured remotely, 276, 359 

Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), 356 

solar flares, 355–356 

solar power 

LIPS 3 tests,  311 –312 

NTS-2 nickel-hydrogen batteries, 219 

space solar power for Earth, 358–359 

Tether Electrodynamic Propulsion Cubesat 

Experiment,  391 

Timation 1 solar arrays, 204 

U-PRAM sunlight-to-microwave module,  352 ,

359 

Vanguard 1 as first solar powered, 78 

solar radiation.  See  sun’s radiation 

Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory (STEREO), 

355–356 

soldering school, 158 

Valsi crimp connections, 158 

Solid State Devices Branch, 348 

solid-state memory unit,  168 , 378 

SOLRAD satellites,  97, 98, 134, 237, 238 

collaborative effort with GRAB, 235 

first scientific payload since staff transfer, 195 

GRAB as secret payload,  6, 98 , 129, 131,  134 ,

141, 235, 376–377 

keeping GRAB alive, 131 

launch failures adding up, 151, 378 

NCST logo,  6

solar radiation, 96,  98 , 131 

solid-state memory unit,  168 , 378 

SOLRAD 1/GRAB 1 launch, 96–98, 133– 134 ,

195, 235, 376 

SOLRAD 2/“GRAB 2” launch, 141, 235 

SOLRAD 3 communication channel, 149 

SOLRAD 3/GRAB 2 launch, 145– 146 

SOLRAD 3/GRAB 2 satellite,  146, 161 

SOLRAD 3/GRAB 3 “Buckshot” launch, 

149 –150, 157, 379 

SOLRAD 4/GRAB launch, 150, 157, 235 

SOLRAD 6/Poppy 2 launch, 160 

SOLRAD 7A/Poppy 3 launch, 162 

SOLRAD 7B/Poppy 4 launch, 166 

SOLRAD 9 launch,  236 

SOLRAD 10 launch saved, 235–236 

SOLRAD 11/Hi,  236–237 , 381 

SOLRAD 11/Hi as last, 235, 236 

SOLRAD 11/Hi launch,  237, 238 

SOLRAD Transfer System, 236 

Wilhelm RF transmitters, 96 

“solving the problem once” 

CuF2 evolvable to “future-proof,” 362–363 

Joint Tactical Radio System, 323 

Software Reconfigurable Payloads, 362–363 

sonde definition, 33 

Sound Division, 11–12 

sources, bibliography, references, 395–411 

Soviet Union 

ABM ELINT from Poppy, 182 

ABM sites driving ELINT, 83, 147–148, 375–376 

collapse of, 267, 347 

Cuban Missile Crisis, 156–157 

electronic order of battle, 288 

ELINT satellites of their own, 140, 285 448 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

EOSAT surveillance of U.S., 285 

“freedom of space” and surveillance, 66 

Gage and Token radar installations, 113,  116 , 120 

Galosh and Gammon ABM/AES, 171 

German V2 engineer cooperation, 27 

GRAB 2 radar data mother lode, 150 

GRAB huts for reconnaissance, 129– 130 

GRAB missions authorized, 137 

GRAB spying on, 15, 136, 138 

ICBM race, 52 

International Geophysical Year, 3, 63–64 

Iron Curtain, 88 

Mideast crisis, 287 

mocking Vanguard, 75, 78 

Moonbounce project,  114 , 116,  140 , 164, 374 

naval anti-ship missiles and ICBMs, 234 

naval modernization, 179 

naval presence in Mediterranean, 177, 287, 289 

naval showcase in exercise, 289 

naval threat ELINT, 181, 185 

Poppy 6 novel seaborne intercepts, 184 

Poppy communication huts, 159 

Poppy for ship surveillance, 183–184, 186, 285, 

287 

radar systems migrating to sea, 176, 287 

Red Army border maneuvers, 179 

SALT signed, 189 

space reconnaissance accusations, 140 

space reconnaissance flyover, 115–119 

space reconnaissance insight by Mayo, 113–114 

space reconnaissance satellite, 114, 118–119 

Sputnik 1 as first satellite, 3, 73, 197 

Sputnik 2 launch, 74 

U-2 shot down, 133, 139, 377 

U-2 sighting new radar installations, 133, 147 

Space and Missile Defense Command Battle 

Laboratory, 341 

Space and Missile Systems Center (SMC; Air 

Force) 

Sea Launch and Recovery, 389 

SSULI data for space weather models, 356 

Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO; 

Air Force), 155 

Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command 

(SPAWAR) 

Naval Electronics Systems Command into, 312 

NCST formation, 239, 243 

unclassified space acquisition programs, 243 

Windsat project, 276 

Space Applications Branch 

as Advanced Space Precision Navigation and 

Timing Branch, 219 

Beard as head, 259 

Space Clock Development Program, 211– 212 ,

219, 222 

Space Development Program, 222 

Timation tracking data into computer, 204 

Space Applications Division, 177 

Space Clock Development Program 

Beard atomic clock oversight, 211– 212 , 219, 222 

formation of, 219 

NRL for clock testing and certification, 206, 222 

Spacecraft Engineering Department (SED; Code 

8200) 

Beal as head, 243, 384 

International Space Station service module, 

267–269,  268 

LIPS, 307–312,  310, 311 

Microwave Imager Sounder, 277–278 

Naval Earth Map Observer, 353–354 

as NCST division, 9, 243, 247 

satellite building decline, 280 

Schaub as head,  249 , 269, 341 

Schaub as leader, 247 

Senasack as head, 269, 274 

tether experiment jettisoned, 272–273 

Windsat nightmare to success, 273– 274 , 276–277 

workforce management, 278 

Spacecraft Technology Center (Code 7040) 

branches of, 383 

LIPS, 307–312,  310, 311 

NCST formation, 239 

NRL shift to supporting role, 238–239 

Rabin as head, 288 

Satellite Techniques Branch to, 233, 240, 288, 383 

to Space Systems Division, 383 

team members, 239 

Wilhelm as head, 233, 240, 307, 383 

space debris 

graveyard orbit, 365, 366–367 

halo, 10n16, 199, 364–365, 391–392 

harvesting and re-using, 366–367 

LIPS shield not debris, 308,  311 

robotic space tow trucks,  364 –366,  365, 391 –392 

tether-based clean-up system, 272, 373,  391 –392 

Tether Electrodynamic Propulsion Cubesat 

Experiment,  391 

Space Electronics Systems Development Branch, 

351 

Space Exploration Initiative (SEI), 264 

space hardening of electronics, 347–348, 362–363 

space junk.  See  space debris 

Space Science and Technology Directorate, 239, 381 

Space Science and Technology Division (Code 

7000), 288 

Space Science Division 

Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory, 355–356 

Special Sensor Ultraviolet Limb Imager, 352– 353 ,

354– 355 , 356 

Space Shuttle 

Challenger explosion, 222–223, 247, 249–250 

Endeavour deployment of ANDE,  257 

GPS satellite launch, 223 

paused post-explosion, 247, 249, 250 

retrieving LDEF, 249–250 

Shuttle/Titan Launch Dispenser, 247–249, 250 

space solar power for Earth, 358–359 

Space Station.  See  International Space Station 449 INDEX 

Space Surveillance System.  See  NAVSPASUR 

(Naval Space Surveillance System) 

Space Systems and Technology Division, 242 

Space Systems Development Department (SSDD, 

Code 8100) 

Derieux as leader, 328 

Dwyer as head, 285, 304, 392 

Eisenhauer as head, 243, 301,  302 , 360, 384, 385 

HTSSE,  349 –350 

as NCST division, 9, 243, 285 

Program Development Office, 248 

Space Systems Division (Code 7700) 

Aerospace Systems Division folded into, 242 

Lorenzen as head, 188, 239, 381 

Mechanical System Branch, 247 

Naval Center for Space Technology formation, 

239 

Satellite Techniques Branch into, 239–240, 381, 

383 

space technology programs, 188 

Space Systems Technology Department (SSTD) 

Bielecki on ship identification,  290 –291 

George Price as head, 291 

Hammarstrom as head, 243, 384 

as NCST division, 243 

Spacetac Inc. solid-state memory unit,  168 , 378 

Space Technology Development Corporation 

(STDC), 353–354 

Space Technology Experiment (STEx) 

Advanced Tether Experiment, 272–273 

Electric Propulsion Demonstration Module, 272, 

273 

launch, 272 

as NRO publicly announced satellite, 272 

Space Test Program (DoD-wide) 

SOLRAD 11 launch, 236 

Windsat project, 273, 276 

Space Tracking and Data Network (STADAN), 

93–94 

Space Vehicles Directorate (Air Force), 339 

SpaceX (Space Exploration Technologies), 338, 

389 

SPASUR.  See  NAVSPASUR 

SPAWAR.  See  Space and Naval Warfare Systems 

Command 

Speakman, Edwin 

Countermeasures Branch, 88 

direction finding systems, 89 

Lorenzen reunion, 185 

Special Projects Office (NAVLEX; SPAWAR 

004-5) 

Betterton as head, 231–233,  232 

Collier as head, 238, 248, 303 

NRL processing its ELINT data, 303 

NRL shifted to support role, 232–235, 238 

SPAWAR designation, 248 

Special Projects Section (Radio Division) 

Lorenzen radar of shorter wavelength,  84 

radio-guided bomb countermeasures, 85–86 

Special Sensor Ultraviolet Limb Imager (SSULI), 

352– 353 , 354– 355 , 356 

data for weather models, 356 

Specific Emitter Identification (SEI), 291–292 

UK Coast Guard data correlation, 292 

Spectra 1000 fiber for tether, 270 

Spencer, David, 276 

SPHERES (Synchronized Position Hold, Engage, 

Reorient Experimental Satellites), 367 

SpinSat, 258 

spin stabilization of satellites, 216 

spoofing communications 

“Beyond Vanguard” report, 107 

GPS technologies, 223 

Soviet radar, 288 

Spriggs, James, 120 

Spudis, Paul, 266 

Sputnik 

burned up in atmosphere, 199 

Hagen learning of, 73 

Sputnik 1 as first satellite, 197 

Sputnik 1 for calibrating Minitrack, 197 

Sputnik 1 launch, 3, 73–74 

Sputnik 2 launch, 74 

tracking via Hybla Valley DF installation, 

103– 104 

“spy in the sky satellite,” 115–116 

spy satellites 

“Beyond Vanguard” report, 104–105, 106, 

107–109,  108 

GRAB 1 as first, 15, 99,  134 , 195, 377.  See also 

GRAB 

See also  intelligence, surveillance, and 

reconnaissance (ISR); Tattletale 

spy scientist, 267 

SRP.  See  Software Reprogrammable Payload 

SSDD.  See  Space Systems Development 

Department 

SSULI.  See  Special Sensor Ultraviolet Limb 

Imager 

stamp commemorating International Geophysical 

Year,  64 

standard satellite bus (TacSat-4), 340–341, 344, 

357 

“Standard Bus Stout” microbrew, 358 

Starfire Optical Range, 256 

State Department 

Canes final approval, 125 

“chop chains” for GRAB data management, 

136–137 

Tattletale final approval, 120 

STB.  See  Satellite Techniques Branch 

Stehling, Hank, 211 

Stencil, Paul,  268 

STEREO (Solar Terrestrial Relations 

Observatory), 355–356 

Stewart, Homer, 64 

Stewart Committee, 64, 65 

Stewart Warner Electronics company, 374–375 450 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

STEx.  See  Space Technology Experiment 

Story Finder ELINT system, 361–362 

Straits of Dover and Gibraltar, 292 

Strategic Air Command (SAC) 

ELINT for bombing routes, 288 

GRAB data analysis, 142, 143, 145, 146 

as Program D of NRO, 156 

radar intelligence importance, 102, 139 

Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) 

LACE, 249–250, 347 

laser ranging work, 256 

Reagan vision of, 249 

Soviet Union collapse, 267 

Strategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO) 

into Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, 263 

Clementine project, 7, 263, 384 

LACE, 249–250, 253,  254 , 384 

LACE plus video of rocket plumes, 251 

NRL sponsorship, 249, 250,  251 

“Star Wars” mission, 249 

Stratofortress nuclear bomber, 139 

Stratojet nuclear bomber, 139 

Stromberg-Carlson Company, 90 

Stump Neck, Maryland, Moonbounce project,  114, 

140 

submarines 

Cuban Missile Crisis, 157 

geolocation via satellite Doppler shift, 195 

jamming communication with, 107 

low-frequency communication, 106–107, 149, 

160, 162, 379 

periscope-mounted radar detector, 104, 113 

Polaris launch while submerged, 137 

Soviet naval threat, 234 

Transit first positional fix, 195 

Transit guidance explanation, 195 

Transit satellite guidance, 121, 122, 124, 195 

SUCCESS Radios,  306 

On-Board Processor, 314 

sun’s radiation 

disproportionately extreme UV, 45 

extreme UV radiation, 41–42,  43 , 44–45 

first Lyman-alpha measurements, 44 

radiation hardening of electronics, 347–348 

radio transmission effects, 45 

SECCHI-COR2 project, 355–356 

SOLRAD 1 satellite, 96,  98 , 131 

SOLRAD 11 satellite, 237 

thermoluminescence research, 44–45 

U-PRAM sunlight-to-microwave module,  352 ,

359 

UV spectrograph research,  40–43 

Viking 4 launch,  54 

Super Bowl InfraLynx, 332 

superconductivity, 348–350,  349 

Supply Division, 310 

Supply Services Division, 269 

SURCAL (Surveillance Calibration) satellites 

NAVSPASUR calibration, 167, 199, 378–379 

SURCAL 1 “Buckshot” launch,  149 –150, 379 

SURCAL 1 built by Wilhelm, 199, 378–379 

SURCAL 2 satellite, 159 

SURCAL 3 satellite, 160 

SURCAL 4 satellite, 166, 167 

Symmetrics Industries, 316, 317 

synchronization of clocks, 201– 202 , 206, 207–208 

LACE clock, 253 

via GPS, 225 

System Engineering Laboratory,  173 , 178 

Systems Development Section (Code 7032), 240, 

289 

Systems Directorate InfraLynx antenna, 333 

Systems Integration Section,  171 , 351 

T

TACAN (Tactical Air Navigation), 319 

TacSats (Tactical Satellites),  306, 338, 339, 340, 

342, 343 

Integrated Systems Engineering Team, 341 

Operationally Responsive Space (ORS), 

336–337 

sponsors, 338,  340 , 341 

TacSat-1 and ORS, 357 

TacSat-1 Copperfield 2 unit, 363 

TacSat-1 dry run, 337– 338 , 357 

TacSat-2 Copperfield 2 unit, 338,  339 , 363 

TacSat-2 launch,  339 , 357 

TacSat-2 Target Indicator Experiment, 338 

TacSat-3 launch, 339, 357 

TacSat-4 antenna, 341– 343, 342 

Tacsat-4 as 100th satellite launched, 301, 341, 

347, 373, 390 

TacSat-4 COMMx,  342 , 357 

TacSat-4 “COMMx Bitter,” 358 

TacSat-4 experimental, 280, 341, 344 

TacSat-4 launch,  340, 342,  347 

TacSat-4 put to use, 341, 357 

TacSat-4 “Standard Bus Stout,” 358 

TacSat-4 standard satellite bus, 340–341, 344, 

357 

TacSat-4 UHF technologies, 340 

tactical applications of space capability 

C4ISR technology to industry, 305– 306, 307 .

See also  C4ISR 

Navy focus, 234 

“orbiting peripherals” mindset, 5.  See also 

“orbiting peripherals” 

Poppy data, 179–181, 182, 185, 186.  See also 

ocean surveillance 

tactical data into users’ hands, 305, 312–313 

Tactical Exploitation of National Capabilities 

Office, 303–304, 315, 336 

Tactical Electronic Warfare (TEW) Division, 188, 

291–293 

Tactical Exploitation of National Capabilities 

(TENCAP) Office, 303–304, 315, 336 

Tactical Operations Center (TOC), 318 

Tactical Receive Equipment (TRE),  306 451 INDEX 

Integrated Broadcast System, 314 

LIPS signals received, 313 

Multi-Mission Advanced Tactical Terminal, 

315– 316 

On-Board Processor, 314 

tactical data into users’ hands, 305, 312–313 

TADIXS-B broadcast format, 313–314 

TRE and Related Application (TRAP),  306 ,

314, 315 

Tactical Recovery of Aircraft Personnel, 223 

Tactical Technologies Development Laboratory 

(TTDL), 328,  330 

Tactical Terminals and On-Board Processor, 314 

TADIXS-B (Tactical Data Information Exchange 

Subsystem B), 313–314 

TRE and Related Application, 314 

Target Indicator Experiment (TIE), 338 

Tattletale satellite 

antenna for ground unit, 118–119 

antennas for payload, 121 

approval, 114, 115–118, 119–120, 121, 123–124 

approval for Canes project, 124–125, 126 

ARPA launch vehicle, 117, 119, 120, 121 

ARPA two-satellite launch, 121–122, 125 

“Beyond Vanguard” report, 104–105, 106, 

107–109,  108 

Bureau of Ordnance co-launch, 126 

“Canes” instead of “Tattletale,” 122–123.  See 

also  Canes security system 

construction of, 114, 118–119, 120–121, 124 

cost of, 116, 117 

design and specifications, 118 

funding for, 117, 126 

as Galactic Radiation Experiment Background, 

123, 129.  See also  GRAB 

huts for communication, 117, 119, 121 

huts for GRAB communication, 129– 130 ,

132–133, 134–136,  135 

Mayo’s insight, 113–114, 152, 188 

as NRL Electronic Intelligence Satellite, 115 

Soviet detection of, 122, 124, 125 

Soviet radar installations, 113,  116 , 120, 125 

“Tattletale” name, 115 

U.S. Intelligence Board oversight, 117 

See also  GRAB 

Taylor, Albert Hoyt (Doc) 

Krause for physics,  21 

Lorenzen support from, 85 

Physical Review paper on propagation, 18 

radar discovery, 15 

radar funding by Congress, 83 

radar patent, 21,  22 

as Radio Division director,  11 

short-wavelength, high-frequency radio, 12– 13 

skip distance propagation patterns, 14 

TCPED (tasking, collection, processing, 

exploitation, distribution) of data, 288 

Technical Operations Group (Naval Intelligence) 

Lorenzen and Mayo on, 156 

Lowrance establishing, 156 

Program C as Navy NRO, 148, 156 

Program C Poppy funding denied, 165 

Technical Operations Group (Naval Security Group), 

136 

telescopes 

Baker-Nunn, 69 

cosmic ray, 38 

one-meter photon-catching, 255, 257 

Revolutionary Imaging Technology, 258–259 

TRTEL transportable telescope, 258 

Vanguard optical tracking, 69 

TENCAP (Tactical Exploitation of National 

Capabilities) Office, 303–304, 315, 336 

TEPCE (Tether Electrodynamic Propulsion Cubesat 

Experiment),  391 –392 

terrorism.  See  September 11, 2001, attacks 

Tether Electrodynamic Propulsion Cubesat 

Experiment (TEPCE),  391 –392 

Tether Physics and Survivability Experiment (TiPS), 

270, 271 

launch, 272 

as NCST diversity of skills example, 263, 271 

NRO Launch 8 tether experiment, 272–273 

Ralph and Norton,  270 , 271 

STEx tether experiment, 272–273 

tether-based debris clean-up system, 272, 373, 

391 –392 

tether generating power,  270 , 272 

tether physics and vulnerability,  270–271 

tracking and ranging, 263, 270,  271 

Texas Instruments company, 219 

theory of relativity and clocks, 210 

thermal vacuum chamber “Big Blue,” 9,  251 , 252, 

351 

thermo-electric devices (TEDs) for clocks, 220 

thermoluminescence systems, 44–45 

Thomas, Linda 

geodetic laser ranging, 259–260 

laser-based imaging, 259 

laser communication, 260–262, 261 

Optical Testing Facility, 255 

retroreflectors on GPS satellites, 259, 260 

Thor Able Star rocket 

“Buckshot” launch into the sea,  149 –150, 379 

carrying first spy payload, 195 

ELINT satellite instead of Transit, 147–148 

failures adding up, 151, 378 

SOLRAD 1/GRAB 1–Transit 2A launch, 96–97, 

134, 195 

SOLRAD 2/GRAB 2–Transit 3A launch, 141 

SOLRAD 3/GRAB 2–Transit 4A launch, 145– 146 

Thor Agena D booster 

Able Star failure recovery, 378 

phased out, 184, 213, 381, 385 

Poppy 2 launch,  160 –161 

Poppy 3 launch, 162 

Poppy 4 launch, 166–167 

Poppy 5 launch, 174–175, 204 452 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

Poppy 6 launch, 184, 207 

thrust via ions, 272,  273 

Timation (time transfer and navigation) satellites, 

202, 207, 215, 218 

Atlas F boosters for GPS, 213–214, 216–217 

clock thermo-electric devices, 220 

Easton development, 195–196 

gas gauge and Clementine, 390 

GPS basis, 177,  202 –203, 213, 381 

gravity gradient stabilization,  202 , 215 , 221 

innovations from, 220–222 

master clock, 206 

passive ranging Pentagon demo, 204– 206 

patent for,  227 

range-intercept charts, 204–205,  206 

temperature control, 220–221 

Timation 1 crystal clock,  202 –203, 204, 208 

Timation 1 launch,  202 , 204, 221 

Timation 2 “fixed” crystal clock, 203 

Timation 2 launch, 203,  207 

Timation 3A (NTS-1) approval, 213 

Timation 3A (NTS-1) atomic clocks, 214, 215, 

217 

Timation 3A (NTS-1) launch, 210, 216–217 

Timation 4 (NTS-2), 217–219,  218 , 237 

Timation 4 (NTS-2) in GPS orbit, 213, 215–216, 

217 

Timation 4 (NTS-2) launch, 216, 217– 218 

time-transfer tests, 206, 207–208, 217 

time synchronization 

as GPS component, 1, 6, 201– 202 , 206–208, 225 

master clock, 6, 206 

synchronization of clocks, 201– 202 , 206, 

207–208, 225 

synchronization of LACE clock, 253 

time transfer tests, 206, 207–208, 217 

commercial applications, 225 

TiPS.  See  Tether Physics and Survivability 

Experiment 

Titan II booster Clementine launch, 265 

Titan III booster 

expensive, 213, 381–382 

greater thrust, sturdier satellites, 188, 381–382 

SOLRAD 11 launch, 236 

Thor Agena replacement, 184, 213, 381, 385 

Titan IV booster 

in place of Space Shuttle, 247–248, 249 

Tether Physics and Survivability Experiment, 

270 

Titan Launch Dispenser, 248, 249 

Titan Launch Dispenser (TLD) 

Interim Control Module from, 268 

Multiple Satellite Dispenser origins, 247, 268 

Shuttle/Titan Launch Dispenser, 247–249, 250 

Titov, Gherman, 150 

TLD.  See  Titan Launch Dispenser 

“To Boldly Fly What Has Never Been Flown 

Before,” 10 

space solar power as, 359 

Toftoy, Holger, 28–29 

Tordella, Louis, 175–176 

Tousey, Richard,  40 

Lyman-alpha measurement, 44 

thermoluminescence systems, 44–45 

UV background,  40 , 41 

V-2 sun-following spectrographs, 43–44 

V-2 UV spectrographs,  40–43 

Vanguard optical tracking, 70 

Towsley, Robert,  311 

LIPS 3 work,  311 , 312 

Tether Physics and Survivability, 270, 271 

Towsley maneuver, 312 

Tracking and Guidance Branch, 69, 71 

tracking space objects 

goniometer tracking of Sputnick, 103– 104 

GRAB/SOLRAD, 134 

laser-based vs. RF, 255.  See also  laser tracking 

and ranging 

Midway Research Center,  271 . See also  Midway 

Research Center 

optical tracking of Vanguard, 69–70 

radar emitting at Minitrack sites, 115 

radar tracking of Vanguard, 69, 70– 72 . See also 

Minitrack system 

retroreflector array for laser-based, 214– 215 , 219. 

See also  retroreflectors 

TiPS Ralph and Norton, 270,  271 

See also  NAVSPASUR (naval space surveillance 

system) 

Track While Scan (TWS) Radar, 294 

TRANET (Transit Network) tracking system, 204, 

207 

transistorization 

commercial transistors for amplification, 163 

first solid-state memory unit,  168 , 378 

Minitrack oscillator, 71 

Poppy recorders, 159 

Poppy solid-state receivers, 174 

satellites shifting from vacuum tubes, 163 

SOLRAD/GRAB transmitters, 132, 133, 377 

Tattletale satellite, 118 

vacuum-tube-based computers, 70, 140 

vacuum tubes in radar system, 22 

Vanguard I satellite, 78 

Wilhelm’s career, 377 

Transit satellites,  134 

Burueau of Ordnance, 122, 126 

closed down, 219 

co-launch with Tattletale, 121–122, 125, 126 

ELINT satellite launched instead, 147–148 

first satellite-based navigation system, 195 

funding, 219–220 

geolocation via Doppler shift, 195 

names for, 195 

Polaris missile submarine guidance, 121, 122, 

124, 141, 195 

Transit 1A launch, 122 

Transit 1B launch, 133 453 INDEX 

Transit 2A–GRAB 1 co-launch, 96, 131, 

133– 134 , 195 

Transit 2A navigation satellite, 195 

Transit 3A–GRAB 2 co-launch, 141 

Transit 4A–GRAB 2 co-launch, 145– 146 

Trident missile tracking, 220 

transmitter frequency and crystal size, 132 

TRAP (TRE and Related Application),  306 , 314, 

315 

Travel Office, 310 

TRE (Tactical Receive Equipment),  306 

data into users’ hands, 305 

development of, 312–313 

Integrated Broadcast System, 314 

LIPS signals received, 313 

Multi-Mission Advanced Tactical Terminal, 

315– 316 

On-Board Processor, 314 

TADIXS-B broadcast format, 313–314 

TRE and Related Application,  306 , 314, 315 

Trexler, James 

Mayo S-band intercept receiver in space, 114 

Moonbounce project,  114 , 116,  140 , 164, 374 

space-based communications, 170 

space reconnaissance satellite approval,  116 

Tattletale approval, 120 

Tattletale construction, 118 

Trident missiles, 220 

Trident Warrior exercise, 262, 341 

Triton missile, 56 

TRTEL (transportable telescope), 258 

Truax, Robert, 386 

Truax Engineering, Inc. (TEI), 386 

Truman, Harry S., 73 

TRW Corporation, 236, 349 

Tsiolkovsky, Konstantin, 19, 64 

TTNT (Tactical Targeting Network Technology), 

319 

Tucker, Samuel, 66 

Tudor, Geoff, 263–264 

“turn down the gain,” 139, 175 

Tuve, Merle, 18, 19–20 

two-ball satellite configuration, 148, 155,  158 , 159 

U

U-2 photoreconnaissance spy planes 

3-D battlefield renderings, 321 

Canes project implications, 123 

Cuban Missile Crisis, 156 

new Soviet radar installations, 133, 147 

as Program B of NRO, 156 

shot down over Soviet territory, 133, 139, 377 

unmanned aerial vehicles replacing, 321 

UAVs.  See  unmanned aerial vehicles 

UCIM.  See  Universal Communication Interface 

Module 

UH-60 Blackhawk helicopters,  320 

to Army Airborne Command and Control 

System, 319–321,  320 

C4ISR component systems, 322–323 

UHF (ultra-high-frequency) communication 

satellite tracking not required, 313 

software definable radio, 319 

TacSat-4 function,  340 

Tactical Receive Equipment, 313 

ULCER (Uplink Command Encoder Receiver), 

306 , 308 

Ultraviolet Plume Instrument (UVPI), 251 

ultraviolet (UV) radiation 

extreme UV radiation, 41–42,  43 , 44–45 

fadeouts and Lyman-alpha, 41–42 

radio transmission effects, 45 

SOLRAD satellite sensors,  98 , 235, 237 

spectrographs on V-2s, 41– 43 

SSULI, 352– 353 , 354– 355 , 356 

thermoluminescence to measure, 44–45 

Tousey background,  40 , 41 

Ultraviolet Plume Instrument, 251 

UV spectrum, 41, 42– 43 

United Kingdom Coast Guard site, Dover, 292 

United Launch Alliance company,  353 

U.S. Air Force.  See  Air Force 

U.S. Army.  See  Army 

U.S. Coast Guard.  See  Coast Guard 

U.S. Department of Defense.  See  Department of 

Defense 

U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), 

323–324 

U.S. Intelligence Board (USIB) 

Dulles of CIA running, 117 

mission, 117 

ocean surveillance missing from ELINT, 185 

Poppy for ships vs. radar, 181, 182, 185 

SIGINT Overhead Reconnaissance 

Subcommittee, 176 

Soviet ABM/AES intelligence needed, 171 

Tattletale/Canes satellite approval, 123 

U.S. Naval Observatory (USNO) 

clock accuracy, 201 

master clock, 6, 206 

time transfer tests, 206, 207 

USNS  Hayes , 88 

USNS  Howard O. Lorenzen , 88,  89 

U.S. Navy.  See  Navy 

U.S. presidents.  See  presidents of the United States 

USS  Davis , 25 

USS  George Washington , 137 

USS  Iwo Jima , 333 

USS  Jones , 25 

USS  Midway , 313 

USS  Monitor , 206 

USS  New Jersey , 178–179 

USS  Norton Sound , 54 –55 

USS  Pillsbury , 25 

USS  Pope , 25 

USS  Pueblo , 177 

USS  Semmes , 84 

Universal Communication Interface Module 454 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

(UCIM),  306 , 336,  337 

unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) 

1920s radio-controlled aircraft, 23 

Copperfield, 362 

CuF2 software reprogrammable, 362–363 

replacing U-2 aircraft, 321 

software definable radio into, 360, 363 

See also  guided missiles 

Uplink Command Encoder Receiver (ULCER), 

306 , 308 

upper atmosphere research 

Laser Atmospheric Compensation Experiment, 

249– 254, 251 

rocketry visionaries, 19–20 

rockets for, 33, 34.  See also  Rocket Sonde 

Research Section 

Seddon adaptation of instruments, 55 

skip distance phenomenon, 12– 13 

skip distance postcards, 14 

SSULI, 352– 353 , 354– 355 , 356 

SSULI data for weather models, 356 

Tuve probing, 18 

V-2 instrumentation by NRL, 37,  38 

V-2 launches by Army, 35,  36 , 37– 39, 38, 40 

V-2 Panel, 35, 52 

V-2 rockets for NRL, 2, 20, 21, 29, 243 

V-2 sun-following spectrographs, 43–44 

V-2 UV spectrographs,  40–43 

Vanguard 3 satellite, 79 

Viking 1 launch, 52.  See also  Viking rockets 

X-radiation effects confirmed, 98 

See also  ionosphere 

Upper Atmosphere Rocket Research Panel 

(UARRP), 35, 52, 54 

Upper Stage satellite,  279 

accomplishments,  279 –280 

launch,  279 

launch preparations, 278– 279 

MiTEx satellites, 278,  279 

as NRL Precision Orbital Transfer Vehicle, 278 

sponsors, 278 

U-PRAM (Photovoltaic DC to RF Antenna 

Module),  352 , 359 

USNO.  See  U.S. Naval Observatory 

U.S.S.R.  See  Soviet Union 

UV.  See  ultraviolet (UV) radiation 

V

V-2 rockets,  36 

Army launch difficulties, 37– 39 , 42 

Army launches, 34–35,  36 , 37– 39, 38, 40 

Army launch instrumentation by NRL, 37,  38 

German engineer cooperation, 27, 38 

German towable capsule plan, 27,  28 , 385, 387 

Mexico struck by,  38 –39 

for NRL research, 2, 20, 21, 29,  36 , 196, 243 

spectrographs for UV research,  40–43 

sun-following spectrographs, 43–44 

thermoluminescence systems, 44–45 

Upper Atmosphere Rocket Research Panel, 35 

vacuum tube–based technology 

computers, 70, 140 

radar system, 22 

satellites to transistors, 163 

Wilhelm’s career, 377 

Valsi, Joe, 158 

van Allen, James 

Explorer 1 and radiation belts, 100 

Injun satellites, 145– 146, 149 –150 

Rockoons, 49 

Van Allen radiation belts 

Explorer 1 data, 100 

Injun satellites, 145– 146, 149 –150 

Vanguard 3 satellite radiation detectors, 79 

Vandenberg Air Force Base, California,  160 

Atlas liquid-fuel booster pad, 216–217 

GPS launch site to Cape Canaveral, 220, 223 

LIPS 1 launch, 310 

LIPS 3 launch, 310– 311 

Multiple Satellite Dispenser launch,  289 

NRO Launch 8 launch, 272 

Poppy 5 launch, 174–175 

Poppy 6 launch, 184 

Poppy 7 launch, 189, 287 

Poppy launch facility, 159,  160 

SOLRAD/GRAB launch, 150 

SSULI sensor launches, 354, 356 

Timation 3A (NTS-1) launch, 216–217 

Timation 4 (NTS-2) launch, 216, 217– 218 

Vanguard program,  68 

achievements of, 78, 79–80, 83, 94 

cost of program, 94 

frequency assigned by IGY, 71, 74, 132, 196–197 

Hagen as project director, 66 

Hagen’s ordeals, 66–68,  67 , 73–77,  75, 76 ,

100–101 

International Geophysical Year, 3, 65–66, 196 

launch site preparation, 67–68 

liquid fuel, 67 

Minitrack system, 4,  72 , 196.  See also  Minitrack 

system 

NASA launches, 79, 93, 94 

NCST logo,  6

NRL divisions crossed, 66 

NRL winning IGY launch, 65–66 

objectives, 66 

optical tracking, 69–70 

personnel to NASA, 2, 3, 79, 80, 83, 93–94, 375 

radar tracking, 69, 70– 72 . See also  Minitrack 

system 

Rosen launch vehicle development, 45 

satellite launch vehicles (SLVs), 69, 79 

Sputnik 1 launch, 73–74 

Tracking and Guidance Branch, 69.  See also 

Minitrack system 

TV-0 and TV-1 launches, 72–73 

TV-0 through TV-5 test vehicles, 68–69 

TV-2 launch, 74 455 INDEX 

TV-3 as satellite launch vehicle, 74– 75, 76 

TV-3BU launch, 76–77, 101 

TV-3 fireball of failure, 3, 74– 75, 76 , 83, 100 

TV-3 satellite, 74– 75 

TV-4 Vanguard 1 launch,  77–78 

TV-5 launch, 78–79 

Vanguard 1 satellite,  77–78 , 93 

Vanguard 1 satellite oldest space object, 78, 93 

Vanguard 2 satellite, 79 

Vanguard 3 satellite, 79 

Vanguard Computing Center, 72,  73 

Viking test vehicles leading to, 59, 68 

See also  “Beyond Vanguard” report 

Van Loo, Gordon,  97 

Vessel Tracking Project (VTP),  286 

Bielecki award for development,  290 , 293 

Bielecki’s background, 289–291,  290 

Chokepoint Monitoring System, 292,  293 , 361 

maritime domain awareness foundation, 293–295 

Maritime Law Enforcement Information 

Network, 335 

MASTER MDA system,  286 , 296–297 

Specific Emitter Identification, 291–292 

UK Coast Guard data correlation, 292 

Vietnam War 

electronic countermeasure needs, 170, 178–179 

funding squeezes, 181 

Viking rockets,  51 

aluminum frame, 50, 51 

ballistic missile applications, 52–54, 55–56 

cost per, 57 

full static firing test, 51–52 

funding for development, 54, 55 

gimbaled engine, 50,  51 , 52 

as guided missiles, 55–56 

Minitrack system, 65 

as Neptune, 49 

NRL tension over rocket building, 53–54 

orbit reentry simulation, 53 

Rosen as project director, 39, 45,  50 , 196 

TV0 and TV1 test vehicles, 59, 68, 72–73 

TV3 launch, 59, 69.  See also  Vanguard program 

Vanguard built on, 67.  See also  Vanguard 

program 

Viking 1 launch, 52 

Viking 4 launch at sea,  54 –55 

Viking 7 altitude record, 56 

Viking 10 aerial film, 56– 57 

Viking 11 cosmic ray detectors, 57 

Viking 12 high-altitude pictures, 57,  58 

Visible Sensor Array of LACE, 252 

von Braun, Wernher,  383 

autograph,  383 

Fairchild vice president, 216 

as German V-2 rocketeer, 64–65 

Jupiter C missile satellite launch, 76 

Redstone missile, 67–68, 77 

visiting Wilhelm’s laboratory, 382– 383 

Votaw, Martin (Marty),  95, 97, 161 

BuWeps funds for NRL ELINT, 150 

commercial COMSAT,  95 , 161, 379 

Easton and NAVSPASUR calibration, 199 

first intelligence-gathering payload, 15 

Poppy launch facilities, 159 

radar antennas and radio frequency systems,  95 

resurrecting space technology operation, 4, 

95 –96, 375 

Satellite Techniques Branch head,  95 –96, 159, 

161 

SOLRAD dual purpose satellite, 131, 199 

SOLRAD vs. Canes/GRAB, 129 

Tattletale construction, 119, 120–121 

transfer to NASA then back to NRL,  95 

Vanguard TV-3 satellite, 74 

Wilhelm hired by, 4, 95–96 

Wilhelm interview with, 375 

W

WAC Corporal rocket, 34, 49–50, 58 

Wakelin, James, 151 

Wald, Bets, 140 

Wald, Bruce,  125 

Analog to Digital Data System, 174 

automated signal processing, 140 

career at NRL, 89, 124,  125 

Communications Science Division head, 188 

ELINT digital data format, 145 

ELINT satellite tracking, 148–149 

on goniometer, 103 

GRAB 2 program, 146 

GRAB data analysis challenge, 138, 140, 142, 

145 

GRAB NAREC digital processing, 142 

GRAB output magnetic recording, 129–130 

Huff-Duff work, 89, 114 

on Lorenzen success with people, 89 

memoir-in-the-works, 396 

Poppy architecture overhaul, 165 

Poppy data made useful, 166, 168–169 

Poppy data processing protocols, 159 

retirement, 89 

risk of Canes satellite detection, 124, 125 

S-band intercept receiver unit in space, 114 

Wallops Island Space Flight Facility, Virginia,  339 

Walsh, John, 211 

Wangler, James, 313–314 

Warner, John, 183 

WD-40 lubricant, 361 

Web sources of NRL history, 400–402.  See also 

Internet 

Westinghouse, 349 

Whalen, Brian,  268 

White House 

Explorer 1 launch, 76 

International Geophysical Year satellite launch, 

63 

Lorenzen as presidential appointee, 88 

Mobile Communications Vehicle, 334 456 NRL AND THE SPACE AGE 

photoreconnaissance delays, 178 

rearmament over research, 55 

Sept. 11 communications difficulties, 327 

Sputnik 1 launch, 73 

spy satellite launch approval, 118 

Vanguard briefing miscommunication, 74 

Vanguard objectives, 66 

White House Communications Agency, 

333–334 

Wilhelm explaining Multiple Satellite 

Dispenser,  289 

See also  presidents of the United States 

White House National Space Council, 263 

White Sands, New Mexico 

Air Force 621B program, 214 

General Electric launch contract, 35 

Low Power Chemical Laser, 252 

radar tracking by Army, 70 

V-2 hardware shipped to, 29 

V-2 launch difficulties, 37– 39 , 42 

V-2 launches by Army, 34–35,  36 , 37– 39, 38, 

40 

Vanguard can’t use, 67–68 

Viking rocket launches, 39, 52, 56 

Wide-Aperture Circularly Disposed High 

Frequency Radio Direction Finder,  104 

Wilhelm, Peter G.,  160, 169, 226, 289, 372, 383 

admiration for, 373, 380 

Atlas F booster instead of Titan, 213–214, 

216–217, 381–382 

awards received, 96,  226 , 373 

background, 95, 374–375, 382 

Betterton on shift from NRL, 233, 280 

briefing Navy on NRL ELINT, 179 

on calibrating Minitrack antenna, 196, 197 

Clementine saved, 390 

clock thermo-electric devices, 220 

on Cold War speed of action, 198 

Collier Trophy for GPS,  226 

on Dix as best engineering teacher, 161 

on Dwyer managing technology demonstration, 

297 

on Easton GPS Aha! moment, 200 

on GPS framework meeting, 212 

on GPS Interstate 295 test, 203 

on GPS jamming, 223–224 

on GPS satellites, 209, 210 

on GPS time-transfer tests, 207 

gravity gradient stabilization, 221, 222 

on Joint Chiefs’ navigation requirements, 208 

LIPS 3 launch, 310– 311 , 312 

on Lorenzen as boss, 381 

on Lorenzen as father of ELINT, 375, 381 

Lorenzen ocean surveillance protocols, 184 

Multiple Satellite Dispenser, 186, 247, 278, 

289 , 382 

Multiple Satellite Dispenser to transponder, 

307–308 

NAVSPASUR beam receiver, 379 

NAVSPASUR calibration satellites, 199 

on NAVSPASUR second fence, 199 

Navy tour of Poppy lab, 182, 183 

NCST Chief Systems Engineer, 243 

NCST Director, 4,  226 , 242, 272,  372 –373, 384, 

395 

NCST Director retirement, 4, 285, 371, 373, 

392 

on NRL as site of NCST, 242, 384 

NRL career, 4, 95–96, 371–373,  372 , 374, 392 

on passive ranging from satellites, 201–202 

Poppy 3 satellite,  169 

Poppy 5 ABM enhancement, 172 

Poppy 5 chief designer, 175 

Poppy 5 praise from Hammarstrom, 172 

Poppy 7 additional funds, 186– 187 

Satellite Techniques Branch, 95–96, 375–376 

Satellite Techniques Branch head,  171 , 188, 

199, 202,  372 , 379–380 

Satellite Techniques Branch systems design, 

162 

Sea Launch and Recovery, 385–390,  387 

solid-state memory unit,  168 , 378 

SOLRAD 1/GRAB 1 painter’s ladder antenna, 

377–378 

SOLRAD/GRAB hidden payload, 96, 98, 99, 

132, 202,  372 , 376–377 

SOLRAD/GRAB hidden payload truth, 99, 377 

SOLRAD/GRAB transistor testing, 132, 133, 

377 

SOLRAD/GRAB transmitters, 96, 131–132, 

135, 141 

Spacecraft Technology Center head, 233, 240, 

307, 383 

on stabilization systems, 162–163, 221, 222 

SURCAL satellite construction, 199, 378–379 

TacSat-4 as 100th launch, 390 

tether-based debris clean-up system, 272, 373, 

391 –392 

Tether Electrodynamic Propulsion Cubesat 

Experiment,  391 –392 

on time transfer tests, 207–208 

Titan III redesigns, 184 

von Braun visit to laboratory, 382– 383 

Votaw hiring, 4, 95–96, 199 

Votaw interviewing, 375 

on Windsat microwave radiometer, 275 

on Windsat value,  274 –275 

Wilson, John R. (“Smoke”), 386, 388 

Wilson, Tom, 354 

Windsat project,  274 

Air Force Coriolis satellite carrying, 276 

data value, 276, 359 

funding, 273, 276 

goal of,  274 –275 

life expectancy exceeded, 276, 277 

microwave data to wind speeds, 275–276 

Microwave Imager Sounder as follow-on, 359 

microwave radiometer difficulties, 275 457 INDEX 

nightmare to success, 273– 274 , 276–277 

spaceborne polarimetric microwave radiometer, 

276 

sponsors, 273, 276 

wind vector measurement,  274 –275 

Winfrey, Vance, 96 

Winkler, James,  160, 236, 383 

clock thermo-electric devices, 220 

on Gorday’s electrical drawings, 157 

on gravity gradient stabilization, 162 

High-Temperature Superconductivity Space 

Experiment, 350 

LIPS 3 launch, 310– 311 

LIPS 3 problems,  311 –312 

LIPS fabrication innovations, 309 

LIPS spacecraft manager, 308,  311 

LIPS teamwork, 309– 310 

memoir by, 395, 400 

NCST shift to support role, 248 

on parallel payload assembly, 160 

Program Development Office head, 248 

SOLRAD 9 payload,  236 

SOLRAD 10 launch saved, 235– 236 

SOLRAD 11 mission,  236 –237 

STB telemetry systems, 162 

Tether Physics and Survivability,  270 

Titan Launch Dispenser, 249 

on Valsi’s crimp over solder, 158 

von Braun visit to laboratory,  383 

Winter Olympics (2002) InfraLynx,  331 –332 

Withrow, William Edgar,  130 

GRAB activation, 134–136,  135 

GRAB data collection engineering evaluation, 

136 

Poppy communication huts, 159, 161 

transmitting interrogation antennas, 168 

WNW (Wideband Network Waveform), 319 

Worden, Pete, 263–264 

working capital fund model 

first electronic reconnaissance satellite, 105 

jamming German guided missiles, 25 

NRL currently, 8, 58–59 

NRL funding vulnerability, 234 

World Trade Center, New York, 324.  See also 

September 11, 2001, attacks 

WS-117L space reconnaissance (Air Force) 

cost of, 116, 117 

Scoville at Tattletale final approval, 120 

Tattletale plannning discussion, 115–116 

Wullenweber goniometer, 103 

Wyatt, Theodore, 121 

X

X-rays 

radiation hardening of electronics, 347–348 

radio transmission effects, 45 

SOLRAD satellite sensors,  98 , 235, 237 

SOLRAD solid-state memory,  168 , 378 

thermoluminescence to measure, 44–45 

Vanguard 3 satellite sensors, 79 

Y

Yang, Daniel, 295 

You, Piseyroth, 295 

Young, John, 294 

Young, Leo C. 

high-frequency radio, 13 

radar discovery, 15 

radar patent, 21,  22 

Yuen, Joe, 96 

Yuma Proving Ground, Arizona, 219 

Z

Zedd, Michael, 273 

Zumwalt, Elmo R., Jr., 187
