Title: Clinton Versus Trump: A Content Analysis of Framing and Gender Stereotypes in Newspaper Coverage of the 2016 Presidential General Election

URL Source: https://arch.astate.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1517&context=all-etd

Published Time: Mon, 19 May 2025 16:13:31 GMT

Markdown Content:
Arkansas State University Arkansas State University 

# ARCH: A-State Research & Creativity Hub ARCH: A-State Research & Creativity Hub 

Student Theses and Dissertations 

4-27-2018 

# Clinton Versus Trump: A Content Analysis of Framing and Gender Clinton Versus Trump: A Content Analysis of Framing and Gender 

# Stereotypes in Newspaper Coverage of the 2016 Presidential Stereotypes in Newspaper Coverage of the 2016 Presidential 

# General Election General Election 

Kimberely A. Blackburn Arkansas State University , kimberel.blackbur@smail.astate.edu 

Follow this and additional works at:  https://arch.astate.edu/all-etd 

Part of the  Social Influence and Political Communication Commons 

Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 

Blackburn, Kimberely A., "Clinton Versus Trump: A Content Analysis of Framing and Gender Stereotypes in 

Newspaper Coverage of the 2016 Presidential General Election" (2018). 

Student Theses and 

Dissertations . 518. 

https://arch.astate.edu/all-etd/518 

This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by ARCH: A-State Research & Creativity Hub. It has been 

accepted for inclusion in Student Theses and Dissertations by an authorized administrator of ARCH: A-State 

Research & Creativity Hub. For more information, please contact  mmcfadden@astate.edu .CLINTON VERSUS TRUMP: A CONTENT ANALYSIS OF FRAMING AND GENDER STEREOTYPES IN NEWSPAPER COVERAGE OF THE 2016 PRESIDENTIAL GENERAL ELECTION Kimberely A. Blackburn A Thesis presented to the faculty of Arkansas State University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of MASTER OF MASS COMMUNICATION ARKANSAS STATE UNIVERSITY May, 2018 Approved by Dr. Mary Jackson Pitts, Thesis Advisor Dr. Lillie Fears, Committee Member Prof. Sandra L. Combs, Committee Member ii ©2018 Kimberely A. Blackburn ALL RIGHTS RESERVED iii ABSTRACT Kimberely A. Blackburn CLINTON VERSUS TRUMP: A CONTENT ANALYSIS OF FRAMING AND GENDER STEREOTYPES IN NEWSPAPER COVERAGE OF THE 2016 PRESIDENTIAL GENERAL ELECTION This paper explores how gender stereotyping occurs in major U.S. elections by identifying the commonly used adjectives and descriptors used to describe Hillary Clinton versus Donald Trump in their respective campaigns for the 2016 presidential election. Numerous scholars have studied how gender stereotyping affects women. Previous literature suggests male candidates receive the vast majority of press coverage, but women are typically described in more stereotypically “female” terms in regard to their character and personality, while male candidates are often described in male terms. Previous research also shows the distinction between “harder” political issues which are considered more male and the “softer” female issues. To explore this phenomenon, newspaper articles were content analyzed to determine trends regarding descriptors used to describe Clinton versus Trump. Although the sample showed Clinton's name tied more frequently to issues than Trump, the data still suggested gender stereotypes are used to describe political candidates. iv DEDICATION This thesis is dedicated to my parents, Raymond and Jerry Dean Guffey Blackburn who did not live long enough to see me finish, but never stopped believing I could. vACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Many people must be thanked for their support and assistance throughout this project. First, I would like to thank my chair, Dr. Mary Jackson-Pitts for her tireless efforts from before this project even began. Her feedback, support, advice, and humor aided me in, not only completing this thesis, but believing I could finish. Also, I would like to thank members of my committee, Dr. Lillie Fears and Prof. Sandra L. Combs. Both of you helped to mold me into the journalist and researcher I am today. I could not have finished graduate school without you. Thank you. There are also many faculty members from throughout the Arkansas State University Media and Communication Departments that supported me through this endeavor. Be it advice, research, helping me talk through concepts, or just believing in me, the efforts put forth by them made this project possible. Thank you: Dr. Osa Amienyi, Dr. Manu Bhandari, Dr. Mike Bowman, Mr. Alex Brown, Mr. Mike Doyle, Dr. Gil Fowler, Ms. Renette McCargo, Mr. Larz Roberts, Mrs. Sarah Mayberry Scott, Dr. Ron Sitton, and Dr. Gabriel Tait. vi TABLE OF CONTENTS 

List of Tables………......………………………………………………………………viii CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………………….…1 Statement of Purpose……………………………………………………………………...4 Justification………………………………………………………………………………..5 II LITERATURE REVIEW…………………………………………………..…...8 History of Women in Politics……………………………………………..8 Coverage of the 2015-2016 Presidential Contest………………………...11 Donald Trump……………………………………………………………12 Hillary Clinton…………………………………………………………...13 Theoretical Framework…………………………………………………..15 Gender Stereotypes………………………………………………………15 Strategic Stereotype Theory……………………………………………...18 Framing Theory………………………………………………………….20 Research Questions………………………………………………………23 III METHODOLOGY.……………….…………………………….....................25 IV RESULTS........……...…………...…………………………………………...36 V DISCUSSION....………………………………………………………………61 vii APPENDIX………………………………………………………………………………74 REFERENCES…………………………………………………………………………..76 viii LIST OF TABLES 1. Issues Mentioned Within All Articles By Frequency, Percentages, and Candidate…..46 1CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION Throughout the media’s coverage of political campaigns, framing using gender stereotypes have existed. Women are often expected to display their stereotypical gender-specific qualities while also having enough “masculine” qualities to be seen as a viable candidate for office. Gender stereotyping goes far beyond this; however, it often bleeds into the very issues the media covers for each candidate (Kahn, 1992). Although the economy and domestic relations are often the very issues in which voters are concerned, they are often not covered in regard to female political candidates. Issues such as healthcare and education are often covered instead (Kahn & Goldenberg, 1991). 

Gender became a major variable in the 2016 presidential election. Hillary Clinton 

became the first female presidential candidate to run for a major party when she accepted 

the Democratic Party’s nomination for president on July 27, 2016. No stranger to politics, 

Clinton served as First Lady when her husband Bill was elected as president in 1993. She 

also served as Secretary of State under former President Barack Obama and was the first 

woman elected to a New York Senate seat (Center for American Women and Politics, 

2016). 2

Running under the campaign slogan “I’m with Her,” Clinton championed herself 

as an advocate for families and children (Clinton, 2016) and repeatedly proved herself to 

be fierce competition for all who ran against her. Although winning the popular vote by 

more than 2.5 million votes (Wasserman, 2017), Clinton was still bested with 232 

electoral compared to Donald Trump’s 306 (New York Times, 2017f). While Clinton did 

not become the first woman president of the United States, she is regarded as a trailblazer 

for women in politics. This historic event was unprecedented in that the media was prompted to compare a woman and her qualifications for president with her male counterpart. Even though she was in the lead for most of the campaign, Clinton still received the pressure of the gender stereotyping’s microscope (Gibbons, 2016). Heidi Przybyla of USA Today (2016) reports women are often expected to be more honest than men. The flip side of this coin is when she is viewed as being dishonest; the outcry is fierce. Although a study found Clinton’s false campaign sayings to be 47 percent lower than her eventual opponent in the general election, Donald Trump, poll results showed many found her to be just as dishonest (Blake, 2016). A study performed by the Pew Research Center (2015) shows a steady increase of women serving in public office from the first female congressman Jeannette Rankin of Montana who was first sworn into Congress in 1917. A study completed by the Center for American Women and Politics (2016) reveals a 42 percent increase in women running in Congressional races in the past decade, and there are currently 88 women serving in Congress and 21 women serving in the Senate (Manning, 2017). Although the number of 3women in Congress has increased dramatically, they are still outnumbered by their male counterparts. 

The status of women has changed dramatically since the beginning of the 

woman’s suffrage movement; however, Fowler & Lawless (2009) observe media’s 

treatment of female candidates is still criticized by many who have run. “From 

Photoshopped pictures of a rifle-toting Sarah Palin in an American-flag bikini doing the 

rounds on the Internet to hearing pundits criticize everything about Hillary Clinton--from 

her tears in the New Hampshire to her haircuts or the color of her pantsuits--it's been 

glaringly obvious that women are treated differently than men” (Fuller, 2008, p. 4). 

Media coverage of political elections has been subject to framing with the lens of 

gender stereotypes since women first began running for public office. While many often 

mention agenda setting in newspapers’ coverage of political elections, i.e., telling the 

reader what to think about regarding the campaign, framing is often used as well. 

Coverage of female political candidates is often framed in terms of how a woman is 

traditionally expected to behave. Research has shown media coverage from legacy media 

outlets, i.e., newspaper, television, and radio, have focused on gender stereotyping in 

their coverage of political campaigns. Common gender stereotyping includes five main 

areas: 1) the amount of coverage, 2) appearance, 3) behavior, 4) marital status and family, 

and 5) "female" political issues. 

First of all, a female political candidate historically received less coverage than 

men. Not only do studies show coverage of women to be lacking, they also appear in a 

lesser amount of headlines than males (Heldman, Carroll, & Olson, 2005; Dolan, 2010; 4

Kittilson & Fridkin, 2008). The second focus is on the appearance of a candidate. Special 

attention is given to the female candidate’s hair, makeup, and dress. Special attention is 

often placed on how much the outfit is reported to have cost (Heldman, Carroll, & Olson, 

2005; Morrish, 2010). Third, is the behavior of the candidate. For many, a woman should 

still behave as a lady stereotypically should (Johnson, Murphy, Zewdie, & Reichard, 

2008). Examples include gentleness and sex appeal (Fowler & Lawless, 2009). Fourth, a 

female candidate’s marital status and family situation are often mentioned more than a 

man’s (Kahn & Goldenberg, 1991; Major & Coleman, 2008), and fifth, women are often 

associated with “gentler” issues. Kahn & Goldenberg (1991) observe that female issues 

often include education and healthcare while “male” issues include domestic relations 

and the economy. In addition, previous literature has shown the media's coverage of 

women is often considered less serious than coverage of male candidates (Heldman, 

Carroll, & Olson, 2005; Dolan, 2010; Kittilson & Fridkin, 2008). 

Statement of Purpose 

The researcher conducted a content analysis of newspaper articles published in the legacy print media to determine the differences between how Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump were portrayed during the 2016 presidential general election. Specifically, the researcher examined articles published in "The New York Times," "The Washington Post," "The Wall Street Journal," the “Chicago Tribune," and the “Los Angeles Times" from September 5 until November 8, 2016. 5Understanding the frames set forth by the media will provide a framework that can be used by candidates when making campaign decisions in the future. Even as social media allows candidates to frame and set their own agenda, largely bypassing traditional media gatekeepers, the legacy media agenda continues to influence politics in the United States. Research shows the influence newspapers have in forming public opinion. 

Justification 

The media’s portrayal of a presidential candidate and their subsequent agenda setting has an impact on how the public votes (Kittilson & Fridkin, 2008; Miller, Peake & Boulton, 2010). Candidate coverage has been examined for years. Lazersfeld, Berelson, & Gaudet (1944) first examined the impact of the media on the public in the 1940 presidential election. What they found was media does influence how people perceive candidates but public opinion leaders influence as well when they consume media content and then convey that information to those who respect their opinion. Dolan (2010) argues traditional gender stereotypes impact the public's perception of both male and female candidates. The researcher shows male candidates were perceived to be more capable of dealing with terrorism (a traditionally male political issue) and female candidates more capable to deal with education and healthcare (traditionally female issues). In addition, male candidates are vied as being more assertive and females more compassionate, both keeping with traditionally held gender stereotypes. 6Kittilson & Fridkin (2008) observe gender stereotypes are used in the media’s portrayal of candidates running for public office. Stereotypes include not only coverage on a candidate’s personal appearance, but also issues in which candidates are associated. Research shows issues commonly known as male issues include the economy and domestic relations, while education and healthcare are more associated as female issues (Heldman, Carroll, & Olson, 2005; Dolan, 2010; Kittilson & Fridkin, 2008). While prior research also shows a woman may receive less media coverage than a man (Washburn & Washburn, 2011), this was not the case with Hillary Clinton’s 2008 bid for the Democratic nomination. Miller, Peake & Boulton (2010) found while Clinton received more than her fair share of coverage, much of it showed her as “secretive and calculating” (p. 182). Literature also suggests in her 2016 presidential bid, Clinton received criticism with media outlets describing her as unnecessarily angry. Throughout her campaign, coverage reported accusations of Clinton shouting in her attempts to bring up political issues (BBC News, 2016). For example, Bernie Sanders, Clinton's opponent in the Democratic primary, said during a Democratic debate "all the shouting in the world" would not end gun violence (Jones, 2015). Several media outlets reported this exchange as sexist (Hartmann, 2016; Newton-Small, 2016). As Lopez (2016) noted, "It turned out this was a typical line from Sanders when it comes to gun policy, but it still looked a bit too much like a man yelling down a woman on the debate stage (para. 4). Others, however, did not view this exchange as sexist and noted this was a typical line from Sanders (Kaplan, 2015; Hartmann, 2015). Clinton's volume was a source of debate 7throughout her campaign. Several members of the media responded negatively on social media during her acceptance speech advising she should yell less and smile more (Wing, 2016; Hall & Nashrulla, 2016; Inocencio Smith, 2016). Candidates spend millions of dollars trying to impact the frames used by the media. This money is often collected from the voting public in addition to political action groups. According to the Federal Election Commission (2016), individuals made more than $1.3 billion in contributions in the 2016 presidential campaign. Super political action committees, or organizations that are allowed to raise unlimited funds for corporations (Kreig, 2012). They raised an additional $204 million for Clinton and an additional $79 million for Donald Trump (Federal Election Commission, 2016). Hillary Clinton raised more than $600 million for her presidential campaign with another $800 million in donations from committees and super PACs according to reports filed with the Federal Election Commission. Donald Trump raised over $300 million with another $600 million raised by committees and Super PACS (Washington Post, 2016). In the 2016 election, the actual number of women eligible to vote exceeded 115 million, more than 7 million more than eligible males (US Census Bureau, 2016). Of those who voted in the general election, 54 percent of Clinton’s voters were women and 41 percent of Trump’s voters were women. Additionally, history shows women have been more likely to turn out to vote. The Center for American Women and Politics (2016) reports 73.7 million women voted in the 2016 election, an increase of over 2 million from 2012. 8CHAPTER II 

LITERATURE REVIEW In examining the literature for this study, several points of interest emerged. This review of existing literature will begin with a brief history of women who entered the race for president of the United States and continue through a closer examination of the media coverage into past political contests. Finally, Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump, both candidates in the 2016 presidential general election will be briefly discussed followed by a discussion of the theoretical framework of gender stereotypes and the media’s framing of political coverage. The purpose is to better understand how the legacy media portrayed Hillary Clinton against her male counterpart, Donald Trump, using print articles published during the 2016 general election. 

History of Women in Politics 

Although Hillary Clinton is credited as being the first woman nominated for president by a major party (Collinson & Lee, 2016), the first announcement from a woman running for president occurred in 1870. Victoria Woodhull, running against Ulysses S. Grant, became a pioneer for women navigating the political arena (Finneman, 2015). Portrayed as both an advocate for women’s right and an object of spectacle, Woodhull had a talent for drawing attention to her political issues (Jones, 2009). Ray (2001) observes the fascination with Woodhull, “as a visible public amalgamation of the 9woman and the citizen, as a performative creation of a new being, the New Woman, who inspired both hope and fear” (p. 46). Woodhull's run is considered even more significant because it occurred before women had even been granted the right to vote. However, being a pioneering suffragette, Woodhull argued women had the right to vote under the Constitution's Privileges and Immunities Clause before the House Judiciary Committee. Even after the Supreme Court ruled against the issue in 1871, some women showed up to vote in the 1872 election and were arrested for doing so (Bohanan, 2016). Attempting to unite the gender and racial equality movements, Woodhull helped form the Equal Rights Party and named Frederick Douglass to her campaign as vice-president. However, Douglass did not wish to associate himself with the campaign (Bohanan, 2016; Peterson, 2017). Although over one hundred women have vied for the highest office in the United States (Finneman, 2015), The Center for Women and Politics (2016) lists only fourteen as significant. This list includes Woodhull, Clinton, and three recent and well-known Republican candidates, Elizabeth Hanford Dole, Michele Bachmann and Carly Fiorina. Bohanan (2017) notes Belva Lee Lockwood, also running with the Equal Rights Party was the first woman to appear on official ballots with her 1884 presidential bid. She received historical acclaim four years prior as the first woman admitted to practice before the Supreme Court of the United States (Radeska, 2016). Lockwood began her activism early on as Dannett (1971) notes. "When Belva was twenty-four, she began teaching in her native town, where she had her first lesson in 10 the inequality of salaries established by the school code: she earned $8 a week while male teachers were paid twice as much or more. 'I kicked to the school trustees,' she is quoted as saying, 'I went to the wife of the Methodist minister. The answer I got opened my eyes and raised my dander: 'I can't help you; you cannot help yourself for it is the way of the world'" (p. 41). Shirley Chisholm, the first black woman elected to Congress in the United States, ran in the 1972 Democratic presidential primary where she earned 152 votes. When discussing the Convention, Chisholm noted, "You can go to that Convention and you can yell, 'Women power! Here I come!' You can yell, 'Black power! Here I come!' The only thing those hard-nosed boys are going to understand at that Convention: 'How many delegates you got?'" (Bohanan, 2017, para. 26). The first elected female of an ethnic minority, Patsy Matsu Takemoto Mink ran in the 1972 Democratic primary in Oregon. Patsy Takemoto Mink served the state of Hawaii in the House of Representatives before winning 2 percent of the vote in 1972 (Center of Women and Politics, 2016; Bohanan, 2017). Also included is Lenora Fulani, the first woman to have her name on the ballot of every state. “Representing the New Alliance Party, known for its "black-led, multiracial, pro-gay, and pro-socialist" stance, Fulani in November smashed another record, receiving 225,000 votes--the most ever for a female presidential candidate in a general election” (Wiley, 2017, p. 41). Two women of note have also run in the vice president slot in major parties. Geraldine Anne Ferraro was picked by presidential candidate Walter Mondale in his 1984 bid on the Democratic ticket. The first female Republican vice-presidential candidate, 11 Sarah Palin, ran with John McCain in 2008 (Center for American Women in Politics, 2016). 

Coverage of the 2015-2016 Presidential Contest 

Having both Hillary Clinton running in the Democrat primary and Carly Fiorina running for the Republican nomination may have increased how many perceive gender in the media's portrayal of presidential campaigns, but coverage into their campaigns was hardly without gender bias (Dittmar, 2016). Throughout the campaign, statements made about and by male candidates were designated "locker-room" statements. Arguably the best well known would be in regard to the 2005 recording of a conversation between Donald Trump and Billy Bush. The conversation, in which Trump was recorded as saying "he could 'grab' women by the genitals because he's a television star" (Newman, 2017, para.2) was released August 2016 and quickly dismissed by many as "locker-room talk" (para.5). June 2015 held another example when Senator Mark Kirk was reported characterizing Republican candidate Lindsay Graham as a "bro with no ho" (Bump, 2015, para. 2). Also in 2015, Republican candidate Mike Huckabee said, in regard to transgendered women being allowed to use ladies' locker room, he wished he had been told he could have "felt like a women" in order to be allowed to shower with girls (Bradner, 2015, para. 2). Although the before mentioned instances, although widely covered by the legacy media, directly came from the candidates themselves, instances also were generated by 12 the media itself. A 2015 New Yorker cover portrayed male candidates in a locker room, omitting Fiorina with Clinton only allowed to peek through the door (Hemingway, 2015). Anderson (2017) argues Clinton struggled with a gendered double bind that pits media coverage of her as both a frontrunner and a first-time candidate. While in the past women running for President have been largely thought of as a symbolic gesture than a true contender, Clinton was designated as a frontrunner. However, Clinton also received negative media coverage. The New York Post printed a political cartoon in which a donkey was holding a crown over an inpatient Clinton's head. Bernie Sanders, her opponent in the Democratic primary appears to place himself between the crown and Clinton's head. Many thought this was the publications attempt to encourage voters to "stop the coronation" (Anderson, 2017, p. 530). 

Donald Trump 

A newcomer to the political scene, Donald Trump shocked many by winning the Republican nomination for the 2016 general election (Rafferty, 2016). Known for being a real estate mogul and reality star (Biography, 2017), Trump has earned a household name across the nation. Born the son of real estate mogul Fred Trump in 1946, Trump (1987) notes while he wanted to work in real estate, he wanted grander than his father's rent-controlled buildings in Queens, New York. Although Trump first registered to vote as a Republican in 1987, he has changed his political affiliation five times since October 1999, when he switched his affiliation to the Democrat party. His last change was back to the Republican party in 2012 (Chasmar, 2015). 13 

Hillary Clinton 

Politics has been an integral part of Hillary Clinton’s life. She was a Republican who worked on Barry Goldwater's failed, presidential bid. After enrolling at Wellesley College, Clinton said she came to realize her political beliefs were no longer in line with the Republican Party and stepped down as president of Young Republicans. She continued assisting in other's political campaigns including the 1968 Democratic primary campaign of Eugene McCarthy. However, she still did not wish to run for public office, choosing to stay politically involved in other ways. "I did not imagine then that I would ever run for office, but I knew I wanted to participate as both a citizen and an activist. In my mind, Dr. [Martin Luther] King and Mahatma Gandhi had done more to bring about a real change through civil disobedience and non-violence than a million demonstrators throwing rocks ever could" (Clinton, 2013, p. 37). Clinton met her future husband in 1970 while they were attending Yale Law School. She writes in her 2003 memoirs a fellow student was attempting to persuade Bill Clinton to write for a student publication when she noticed he kept looking at her. That prompted her to introduce herself and they married in 1975. She became the first lady of Arkansas, thereafter, and then the first lady of the United States. As the first lady of the United States, her husband asked her to lead healthcare reform. Clinton attempted to reform healthcare but failed after being unable to get a Congressional vote (Clinton, 2003; Goldstein, 2016). Clinton (2003) writes she believes part of the failure lay in her underestimating "the resistance [Clinton] would meet as First Lady with a policy agency” (p. 248). 14 However, as Goldstein (2016) observes, this failure helped mold Clinton into the more cautious politician she soon became. "The 21 months from the dawn to the demise of the Clinton health plan showed the first lady as the Washington neophyte that she was, overvaluing her own ideas, misreading power relationships, crusading for a complex plan that would have disrupted many Americans' health care. She has not attempted anything as daring again" (Goldstein, 2016, para. 5). Clinton began her official political career February 2000 when she formally declared her candidacy for Senator representing New York, a seat she won November 7, 2000, after a campaign waged against her many viewed as negative by four-term New York Congressman Rick Lazio (Clinton, 2003; New York Times, 2000). Clinton achieved history as the first woman to ever hold that position in New York. She served eight years and worked with other New York lawmakers to get federal aid to rebuild after the 9/11 terrorist attacks in 2001. She also introduced an act which required drug companies to research how their medicines impacted the lives of children (Amadeo, 2017). Clinton ran for the Democratic nomination in 2008 but lost to President Barack Obama. Shortly thereafter, President Obama appointed Clinton as Secretary of State in 2009 where she took the lead on several issues including, the Trans-Pacific partnership (Dwoskin & Lakshmanan (2013), a free trade agreement between the United States and eleven countries that border the Pacific Ocean (Amadeo, 2017). Clinton also pushed for United Nation imposed sanctions on Iran (Carroll, 2015) and called for the raid on Osama bin Laden's Pakistani compound (Clinton, 2014; Amadeo, 2017). 15 Clinton formally declared her candidacy for the 2016 presidential Democratic primary April 12, 2015 (Chozick, 2015). She fought against a host of challengers. Her biggest challenge was from Senator Bernie Sanders, but in the end, she prevailed and received the Democratic nomination for president in July of 2016. She became the first woman ever to be nominated by a major party to run for president in the presidential general election (Healy & Martin, 2016a). Clinton’s media coverage has been a quandary of sorts. Typically, research has shown female politicians are framed in more of a feminine light than their male counterparts (Kittilson & Fridkin, 2008). However, as Dimitrova & Geske (2009) observe, the media often portrays Clinton as aggressive, a personality trait more commonly associated as masculine. In fact, after Clinton was observed in tears while campaigning for the 2008 New Hampshire primary, media outlets seemed unsure of how to cover the seemingly unheard of phenomena (Breslau, 2008). 

Theoretical Frameworks Gender Stereotypes 

Goldstein-Schultz (2016) observes stereotypes as thoughts children learn from birth. Lippman (1921) observes stereotypes are often used as a substitute for thought. One can allow the culturally defined stereotype to determine our thoughts on a particular idea without putting in a great amount of thought. Kittilson & Fridkin (2008) theorize thoughts based on stereotypical information will remain until contradictory characteristics emerge. Gender stereotypes involve perceptions of personality traits or domestic roles assigned to a specific gender (Planned Parenthood, 2018). The media 16 often employ the use of gender stereotypes in its framing of political coverage (Dolan, 2009). A plethora of research shows how a female political candidate's appearance is commented upon more often than her male counterpart (Gordon, Shafie, & Crigler, 2003; Fowler & Lawless, 2009; Hayes & Lawless, 2015). Gordon et al. (2003) found participants were statistically more likely to mention the appearance of the female candidate versus the male in their experiment measuring the effects of negative political advertising. In addition to this, the mentions of the female candidate's appearance were more likely to be negative while most of the comments on the male candidate's appearance were gaged to be of a neutral tone. "The difference in the rate of negative comments is striking: while five out of eighty participants made negative comments about the male candidate's appearance, twenty-one out of eighty participants made negative participants made negative comments about the female candidate's appearance. Participants did not like her hair and thought she was 'dowdy' and 'not very powerful looking'" (Gordon et al., 2003, p. 42). In addition, the researchers found comments regarding the male candidate's appearance often seemed to impact participant's comments on his character, i.e., "young, well-kempt and full of promises" (Gordon et al., 2003, p. 43), comments on the female's appearance were on that alone, not bleeding into her character. Fowler & Lawless (2009) observe the female candidate in their study received more than 81 percent more coverage on personal traits (including appearance, mannerisms, personality, and marital and parental status) than the male candidates. 17 Female politicians are often held to the standard of traditionally female personality traits in media coverage that often has an effect on a voter. As Huddy & Terkildsen, (1993) explore, the higher the level of political office, the more characteristics that are stereotypically male, i.e., aggressive and demanding, were needed in order to adequately perform the responsibilities of said office. In addition, the researchers found voters participating in their experimental study were more likely to vote for a candidate possessing stereotypically male characteristics than stereotypically female characteristics. Prior research into gendered personality traits categorize stereotypically male traits as including tough, dominant, leader, and competitive; while more stereotypically female traits include: soft, nurturing, weak, and sensitive (Kittilson & Fridkin, 2008). While sometimes beneficial to women candidates, i.e., Kahn (1992) found participants described female candidates are more honest, it can also be detrimental as the same study found male candidates were considered to have more leadership abilities. A study into media coverage of gubernatorial candidates showed 450 articles with mentions of female candidates versus 249 for male candidates in the same time period (Fowler & Lawless, 2009). Gender stereotyping does not simply rely on personality traits. Political issues are often characteristics as “male” and “female” issues (Huddy & Terkidsen, 1993; Dolan, 2009; Heldman, Carroll, & Olson, 2005; Kittilson & Fridkin, 2008). While male candidates are more associated with “hard” issues, e.g., the economy or domestic relations, females are often associated with “softer” issues such as healthcare or education. Scholars have identified such male issues as including 1) the economy, 2) 18 taxes, 3) domestic relations, 4) employment, and 5) defense. Female issues include 1) education, 2) healthcare, 3) gay rights, 4) gender equality, and 5) care of the elderly (Kittilson & Fridkin, 2008). Research has shown the media is more likely to publish female candidates’ stances on stereotypically female issues. Kittilson & Fridkin (2008) found only 24 percent of articles have a woman candidate’s opinion on a male issue versus 42 percent for male candidates. The same study showed 76 percent of articles showed the woman’s stance on female issues. Kahn (1992) found, “Differences in coverage of male and female incumbents lead participants to believe that the male incumbent is more viable, a stronger leader, and better able to deal with military (stereotypically male) issues (p. 508). In a survey conducted by Dolan (2009), she observed 53.6 percent of participants felt as if a woman politician would be better with education (a stereotypically female issue) and 52.2 percent of participants felt as if a man would be more effective at tackling terrorism (a stereotypically male issue). Prior research also shows the amount of coverage is often greater for a male candidate in the United States than for a female. Kittilson & Fridkin (2008) show how in the United States, where the majority of coverage focus on “male” issues, “continues to be significantly more common for male candidates than for female candidates” (p. 383). 

Strategic Stereotype Theory 

Fridkin and Kenney (2014) created the Strategic Stereotype Theory to explore how politicians strategically use gender stereotypes to emphasize strengths while diminishing characteristics in various forms of communication to strengthen their chance 19 of political success. They contend political candidates are forced by existing gender stereotypes to use said stereotypes in certain situations in order to increase the possibility of their political success. Communication generally falls within two dimensions: communal which is seen as a concern for the welfare of others and agentic, described as more assertive and controlling (Fridkin & Kenney, 2014). “The communal and agentic norms are so pervasive that they produce dilemmas for women and men who pursue careers and jobs requiring that they act differently from the prescribed norms” (Fridkin & Kenney, 2014, p. 16). Gender stereotypes do not portray women as effective leaders. The reason being males are often thought to have such agentic characteristics with communal characteristics often assigned to women. Traditional gender stereotypes mandate what many view as appropriate behaviors for men and women. The Strategic Stereotype Theory hypothesizes female politicians employ the use of traditional gender stereotypes by focusing on traditionally male characteristics in some settings while emphasizing traditionally female in others, depending on the need at hand (Fridkin & Kenney, 2014). However, the theory depends on the media to project the strategically chosen stereotypes employed by the politician. A failure of legacy media to frame the politician using the strategically chosen stereotype often changes the voting public’s perceptions of said political candidates. The researchers observe political messages melding with existing gender stereotypes resonate with existing media who often use the same traditional gender stereotype framing. The result often becomes the media reinforcing of these messages and citizen acceptance (Fridkin & Kenney, 2014). 20 The researchers also observe media outlets will interpret messages through existing gender stereotype frames. Because of this, they theorized candidates will largely focus on issues complementing existing gender stereotype frames. They theorize this for two main reasons. One, they observe male and female political candidates often focus on broadcasting their stances on a different set of issues and politicians conform to this from fear of possible damage caused to their political career. 

Framing Theory 

In examining the media's coverage of female politicians, a closer look at the framing theory must be used. First developed by Erving Goffman (1974), who observed human nature as applying recognizable events to what he described as primary frameworks. Primary frameworks apply what could be determined to be meaningless facets of a situation to a known schema, or one's stored knowledge from prior situations. Known schemas are determined by a variety of sources, including one's culture, belief system, and the belief of divine intervention. Thus, what were once meaningless facets of information become consequential (Goffman, 1974). The organization of said primary frameworks varies widely. Goffman (1974) determined some to be organized with a list of rules and labels and others with no apparent organizational manner. However, Goffman discussed primary frameworks as being organized in what he described as natural and social manners. A natural frame happens with no interference by humans while a social frame can be altered. Goffman (1974) describes social frameworks as providing, "background understanding for events that incorporate the will, aim, and controlling effort of an intelligence, a live agent, the 21 chief one being the human being" (p. 22). Unlike natural frameworks, social frameworks can be impacted by human behavior. One uses motive and intent to determine which particular social framework is applied for understanding (Goffman, 1974). DeFleur (2010) observes framing was originally known as the frame in which a photographer could see through the lens of their camera. In its essence framing, “implies that a person apprehends with his or her senses some depicted feature or features of reality in media content and experiences persona; and subjective meanings for what is being apprehended” (DeFleur, 2010, P. 345). Entman (1993) describes framing as a device used to, "describe the power of a communicating text (p.51). Framing serves several purposes within the communication process. They 1) define problems, i.e., they help determine action along with the benefits contained, 2) diagnose causes, i.e., identify the problem's cause, 3) make moral judgements, i.e., the effects of the problems, and 4) suggest remedies, i.e., offer possible resolutions to said problems (Entman, 1993). Thus, the framing theory explains how media's coverage is presented to its audience. Certain issues are highlighted by the story's creator and other issues are diminished in balance (Severin & Tankard, 2010; Bryant & Oliver, 2002, Entman, 1993). Frames can come from a variety of sources. One such source is the use of culturally defined symbols. Often employed for use with framed information, symbols often help to increase the possibility of salience within an understanding of the media. How and if media consumers understand and remember information is often directly impacted by frames. They also determine how consumers appraise and act upon such information (Entman, 1993). Framing often comes from the news values sought by journalists to 22 determine what is newsworthy. News values include the timeliness of an issue, its impact on the community, ongoing news events, the conflict caused, news of an unusual nature, a story's proximity to the community, and an individual's prominence (Sitton, 2005). Framing can be observed in numerous ways. Sitton (2004) observes while print media relies on the descriptive words in an article to frame the ideas contained, framing in broadcast media “can be understood to be the action images accompanying the news; e.g. pictures of oil-covered animals when describing the Exxon Valdez incident” (p.28). Severin & Tankard (2010) recognize framing, “may also have more subtle—and powerful—and powerful influences on audiences than bias in news stories” (p. 278). Framing is, not only, used in political news coverage, but often sought after by candidates. Because frames bring some elements of reality to light while dimming others, political candidates seek after certain frames, often in competition with their competitors (Entman, 1993). This political framing can have a great impact on how the political contest is waged. Entman (1993) observes "framing in this light plays a major role in the imprint of power – it registers the identity of actors or interests that competed to dominate the text" (p. 55). Attempting to use this competition to their advantage, competing media outlets often use both the same and different frames in their political coverage in order to attract consumers (Entman 1993). Media outlets use frames in the form of news values to determine the "newsworthiness" of their stories. These news values, including 1) the timeliness of the event, 2) the impact the news event has or could have on the community, 3) the type and amount of conflict existing between the various parties, 4) the currency of the event, i.e., 23 is it an ongoing situation?, 5) if and how the news event is unusual in compared to other possible local news stories, 6) the proximity of the event, i.e., how close to one's community the event occurred, and 7) the prominence of the individuals involved (Sitton, 2004). Often framing comes in how the media highlights one news value and diminish another. Framing comes in many forms, many of which carry both positive and negative attributes. In the case of Elizabeth Dole’s bid for president was framed with the “first woman” frame that emphasized the groundbreaking nature of the candidacy (Heldman, Carroll, & Olson, 2000). Severin & Tankard (2000) discuss frames are at times defined by those in power and then picked up by the news media. For an example, the authors cite Communist news framed used within the administration of Ronald Reagan. The administration defined the Communist frame that was then used in media coverage. Research Questions In summary, The study asks three research questions and proposes two hypothesis: R1) What are the differences between the amount of newspaper coverage published for Clinton and Trump? R2) What are the differences between the issues covered for Clinton and Trump? R3) What are the emerging themes on how the legacy media portrayed Clinton and Trump? 24 

H1) Media are reframing the female narrative in politics. 

H 2) Media are framing female candidates with masculine terms. 25 CHAPTER III METHODOLOGY The purpose of this study is to better understand how the legacy print press portrayed Hillary Clinton against her male counterpart, Donald Trump, using print articles. To examine the print media’s coverage of the 2016 Presidential General Election, the researcher employed a multi-methodology analysis of newspaper articles printed in The New York Times, The Washington Post, the Chicago Tribune, the Los Angeles Times, and The Wall Street Journal from September 5 until November 8, 2016. Newspapers were chosen based on circulation rates of more than three million for The Times (Ember, 2017), 63 million for The Washington Post (Moses, 2016), 2.3 million for The Wall Street Journal (Statista, 2016), 2.45 million for the Chicago Tribune (Statista, 2017a), and 2.36 million for the Los Angeles Times (Statista, 2017b). Also considered was the large online circulation rates. Pew (2017) notes The New York Times added more than 500,000 digital subscriptions in 2016, The Wall Street Journal added more than 150,000, and the Chicago Tribune added more than 100,000, a 76% increase. Wimmer and Dominick (2014) suggest the content analysis is a useful tool in measuring content characteristics of media. The content analysis allows one to make inferences regarding the content of material already in print. 

Population and Sample 26 The date collection was from September 5 to November 8, 2016. Separate searches were conducted on ProQuest Central for hard news and editorial columns using the search terms “Hillary Clinton” or “Donald Trump.” The search resulted in 3,865 hard news articles and 429 editorials. A random sample of 150integers was obtained from random.org, a random number generator. After the articles were numbered, the random sample of 150 hard news articles and 150 editorials was obtained. The researcher then examined the sample to ensure all newspapers were represented in the random sample. A random sample allows for generalization to the total population of articles. The researcher then noted on each article if the article was hard news or editorial. This was done with the category ProQuest Central assigned each article determined by the placement of the articles in each publication. The researcher also determined which candidate each article mentioned. Some articles were determined to be about both candidates. In this case, the researcher assigned two sample numbers to the article, one for each candidate. This resulted in a sample size of 299 .

In order to examine content contained within newspaper coverage in regard to the amount of coverage and issues discussed, a code sheet was developed (see appendix). Two independent coders were trained to code the articles. During two different sessions, the coders worked with the researcher to understand the codebook and the instructions that went along with the codebook. Taking a selected set of news articles and editorial articles, the researcher asked the coders to apply the codebook to the articles after the training. Using Cohen's kappa intercoder reliability formula (Cohen, 1968), coder reliability was 82.0 percent for the instrument. 27 Demographic material was collected on each article with information regarding, where the article was published, the gender of the writer, information about the headline, and information about the photograph accompanying the article. Additionally, articles were classified as either a news article or an editorial. To answer RQ1, the coders were asked to determine if the candidate was mentioned in the article's headline and if the candidate's photo was published with the article. Using a mixed-methods approach the remaining research questions and hypotheses were addressed using qualitative analysis. The content analysis allowed the researcher to analyze pre-determined issues or concerns, but the qualitative allowed the researcher to analyze emerging themes in the published articles. Photo captions were examined using textual analysis in order to determine the major themes emerging from the photo captions published with the articles contained within the sample. The photos published with each article were not available. Photo captions were examined using textual analysis in order to determine the major themes emerging from the photo captions published with the articles contained within the sample. Themes found in previous literature were sought within the photo captions. Such themes were how the candidates were presented, e.g., personality traits, age, appearance, clothing, makeup, and hair; spouse and familial mentions; and issues related to their stances on issues. The researcher also remained open to emerging themes not listed above. From the emerging themes rose captions such as: endorsements, speeches, tax returns, debates, Bill and Hillary Clinton's relationship, voters, real estate, 28 and republican support. To answer RQ2, issue categories were developed by using subject matters that fall 

under the United States Cabinet positions. Thus, categories included agriculture, interior, 

commerce, justice, defense, labor, education, state, energy, transportation, health and 

human services, homeland security, veteran affairs, housing and urban development, 

treasury, women issues, gay issues, racial issues, and voting rights issues. 

The agriculture category involves American farming programs and food safety. 

Information related to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), programs related to 

helping the American farmers and ensure food safety for consumers would fall under this 

category. The USDA aids in distributing price supports and “other subsidies to farmers, 

inspecting food processed at agricultural facilities, working to expand overseas markets 

for U.S. agricultural products, providing financing to expand job opportunities and 

improve housing, utilities, and infrastructure in rural America, and providing food 

assistance and nutrition education” (Wallechinsky, 2016a, para. 1). 

Issues related to the United States interior will be the second category issue. 

interior involves areas in the United States that are responsible “for programs that 

manage America's natural resources and preserve its environment, stewardship of U.S. 

lands, waters, and species of the United States so that the country can enjoy its natural 

beauty while also exploiting the precious minerals and fossil fuels contained within the 

Earth. Any topic area related to National Parks and other government-designated 

sanctuaries, enforcement laws protecting threatened species of fish and animal life, 

management of key water supplies that Western urban centers and farmers rely on, 29 

monitor mining activities and implement programs affecting Native American and 

Alaskans, including tribal gambling operations” (Wallechinsky, 2016l, para. 1) 

The commerce category involves all issues on American businesses. It also 

involved the promotion of U.S. exports and trademarks or patents. This category includes 

any “Made in America” issue. The commerce category includes all issues related to 

gathering “economic and demographic data to measure the health and vitality of the 

economy, promotes U.S. exports, enforces international trade agreements, and regulates 

the export of sensitive goods and technologies. Commerce also issues patents and 

trademarks, protects intellectual property, forecasts the weather, conducts oceanic and 

atmospheric research, provides stewardship over living marine resources, develops and 

applies technology, measurements and standards, formulates telecommunications and 

technology policy, fosters minority business development, and promotes economic 

growth in distressed communities” (Wallechinsky, 2016b, para. 1). 

The justice category is any and all issues that involve federal laws or the 

prevention of crime, including terrorism. “Key figures and agencies that perform these 

duties include the FBI, DEA, US Marshals, US Attorneys and the Attorney General of 

the United States. DOJ employs more than 100,000 attorneys, special agents, other law 

enforcement personnel and various staff” (Wallechinsky, 2016i, para. 1) This category 

also includes any and all issues involving the federal prison system, but does not include 

legal or illegal immigration. 

The defense category involves any issue involving the four branches of the armed 

services: Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines. This category also involves “multiple 30 

sub-agencies that produce everything from weapons and supplies for military units to 

intelligence on foreign threats” (Wallechinsky, 2016c, para. 1). 

The labor category contains any issue involving the work force including the 

federal minimum wage and working conditions. It includes the administration of “federal 

labor laws covering workers' rights to safe and healthful working conditions, a minimum 

hourly wage and overtime pay, freedom from employment discrimination, unemployment 

insurance, and other income support" (Wallechinsky, 2016j, para. 1). 

Education is any and all issues regarding the education of the American public 

including public and private schools and higher education. It also involves the funding for 

educational programs. “With this funding comes a variety of federal rules and 

requirements that schools and colleges must meet in order to be eligible. The 

department’s elementary and secondary programs annually serve more than 14,000 

school districts and some 56 million students attending more than 100,000 public schools 

and 34,000 private schools. Department programs also provide grant, loan, and work-

study assistance to nearly 11 million postsecondary students” (Wallechinsky, 2016d, 

para. 1). 

The state category is all issues involving domestic and foreign relations. This 

category involves the promotion of “American foreign policy throughout the world. This 

task involves a multitude of issues ranging from trade and commerce to cultural interests 

to security measures. Employing diplomats and career Foreign Service personnel, the 

State Department interfaces with representatives of foreign governments, corporations, 

non-governmental organizations and private individuals” (Wallechinsky, 2016k, para. 1). 31 

Energy is all issues of fuel production, including drilling and alternative fuel 

sources. The energy category also involves “the implementation of policies regarding 

nuclear power, fossil fuels, and alternative energy sources. This category includes all fuel 

drilling related issue. The DOE promotes scientific and technological innovation in all of 

the aforementioned energy sectors and is charged with the environmental cleanup of the 

national nuclear weapons complex” (Wallechinsky, 2016e, para. 1). 

Transportation issues are issues involving the nation’s roads and highways and all 

other forms of travel, including by air and sea. This category also includes the billions of 

dollars in federal grants each year to state and local authorities to help improve 

transportation programs throughout the country" (Wallechinsky, 2016n, para. 1). 

Health and Human Services involve all issues involving the health of the 

American public including health and welfare programs. This category also includes 

implementing the nation’s biggest health care programs (Medicare and Medicaid), 

preventing the outbreak and spread of diseases (Centers for Disease Control and 

Prevention) and funding some of the most important medical research in the world 

(National Institutes of Health), among other programs” (Wallechinsky, 2016f, para. 

1).This does not include veteran’s healthcare. 

Homeland Security involves any issue “ensuring the safety and security of the 

United States from both man-made and natural disasters. Created in the aftermath of the 

Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, DHS has largely focused on federal preparations to deal with 

terrorism while managing other duties related to border security, customs, and emergency 32 

management, among others" (Wallechinsky, 2016g, para. 1). This category includes any 

issue involving legal and illegal immigration. Veteran Affairs is any issue involving “American veterans and their dependents with healthcare services, benefits programs and access to national cemeteries. VA employs more than 250,000 people at hundreds of medical centers, nursing homes, benefits offices and national cemeteries throughout the country. The department carries out its duties through three main administrative divisions: Veterans Benefits 

Administration; Veterans Health Administration; and National Cemetery Administration” 

(Wallechinsky, 2016o, para. 1). 

Housing and Urban Development is any issue involving housing needs for the 

nation. This issue includes any HUD related program intended “to increase 

homeownership, support community development and increase access to affordable 

housing free from discrimination. The agency enforces a swath of federal housing laws, 

operates mortgage-supportive initiatives and distributes millions of dollars in federal 

grants” (Wallechinsky, 2016h, para. 1). 

Issues related to the Treasury involved the implantation of the US government’s 

fiscal policies and maintaining the overall soundness of the US economy. The Treasury 

Department oversees the collection of all federal taxes and accounts for all monies in the 

federal system. It also manages the printing or engraving of US coins and paper currency, 

and any borrowing performed by federal agencies (including the national debt). Another 

key duty is monitoring banks and savings institutions which Treasury officials audit and 

take action on in cases of bank failures”. This category includes any tax related issue. 33 

Women issues are any issues involving women including birth control, Planned 

Parenthood, and the wage gap. 

The gay issue category includes any gay rights issue including marriage equality. 

The racial category includes any issue mentioning race, including Black Lives 

Matter, candidates campaigning for specifically minority voters, meeting with minority 

leaders, and specific mentions of white voters. 

Voting rights issues including any issues mentioning a citizen or non-citizen’s 

right to vote. Issues were categorized as being either male or female using previous literature. Typically male issues fell under the 1) interior; 2) commerce; 3) justice; 4) defense; 5) labor; 6) state; 7) homeland security; 8) veteran affairs; and the 9) treasury (Kittilson & Fridkin, 2008 ). Typically female issues fell under the 1) agriculture; 2) education; 3) energy, 4) health & human services; and the 5) housing & human development (Kittilson & Fridkin, 2008). To answer research question three, the researcher conducted a thematic analysis on the sample searching for themes relating to the candidates' appearance, spouse, family, and descriptions of their personality traits and behavior. To determine themes related to the candidates' appearance, the researcher conducted a thematic analysis for mentions of the candidate's clothing, hairstyles, and makeup choices, the researcher also searched for mentions of Clinton's pantsuits and Trump's hairstyles. While mentions of these specific descriptors were analyzed, the researcher left open the possibility to discover other emerging themes in regard to the 34 candidate's appearance. Also analyzed was if the candidate’s age was mentioned and how it was described, i.e., elderly, old, youthful, young, and middle-aged. In looking for themes relating to the candidates' spouses and families, the researcher searched the articles for mentions of their marital status, spouses, and familial mentions. Also, mentions of the candidate being described in family terms, e.g., grandmother, grandfather, wife, husband, mother, father, sister, and brother were noted. In consideration of the prominence of both candidates’ spouses, the researcher defined spouse mention as if the spouse was mentioned in direct correlation to the candidate’s campaign, e.g., Former President Bill Clinton explained his wife’s stance on certain political issues. Finally, the researcher conducted a thematic analysis for stereotypically male and female personality traits. Personality traits were defined using a plethora of literacy and a list on Planned Parenthood's website (Gordon et al., 2003; Fowler & Lawless, 2009; Planned Parenthood, 2017). Typically male personality traits were non-emotional, passive, independent, aggressive, tough or thick skinned, competitive, experienced, strong, active, self-confident, hard, rebellious, reliable, motivated, and assertive; and female emotional, sensitive, quiet, graceful, innocent, weak, nurturing, self-critical, flirtatious, soft, accepting, compassionate, understanding, and shrill. A list of descriptors was compiled and then categorized by traditional gender stereotypes as being positive or negative male or female themes. The categories were determined by existing literature (Fowler & Lawless, 2009; Planned Parenthood, 2018 ).35 Although the researcher began the thematic analysis with existing themes as determined by previous literature, she was open to other emerging themes. From the emerging themes rose captions such as: personal relationships, dishonesty, relations with other countries and races, and health. “Data will be measured using frequencies, percentages, and t-test. The test of significance is set at p < .05.” 36 CHAPTER IV RESULTS The random sample of news articles consisted of 35 articles from The New York Times, 44 articles from The Washington Post, 21 articles from the Los Angeles Times, 21 articles from the Chicago Tribune, and 29 articles from The Wall Street Journal for a total of 150 news articles. The researcher was unable to find as many articles marked as editorials on ProQuest Central. Because of this, the random sample of editorials resulted in 67 editorials from The New York Times, 64 editorials from The Washington Post, 12 editorials from the Los Angeles Times, and 6 editorials from the Chicago Tribune. After coding, the researcher discovered and removed a duplicate article from The New York Times resulting in a final editorial sample of 149. There were no editorials found from The Wall Street Journal. The final sample size for all articles was 299. Fifty-seven of the news articles were written by men, 35 were written by women, 23 news articles were written by members of both genders sharing a byline, and 13 news articles did not specify the author. Sixty-three of the editorials were written by men, 31 by women, 4 articles were written by members of both genders, and 51 editorials did not specify an author. Of the final sample of 299 articles, 121 were written by men, 81 by women, 27 articles were written by authors of both genders, and 70 articles did not specify a gender. 37 Research question one asked the differences between the amount of newspaper coverage published for Clinton and Trump. To answer that question, articles were coded for the number of articles that mention each candidate, and if the candidate is featured in the headline or photo in that accompanied said article. Articles written solely about Clinton comprised 14.6% of the sample and articles solely about Trump had 28.6% of the articles written about him. Articles containing both candidates comprised 56.1% of the sample (where n=299). Also, in 13.3% of articles, Clinton's name appears in the headline without Trump’s and in 3.7% about her, Clinton is featured in the accompanying photograph (n=41). Thirty-eight point two of articles written feature Trump's name in the headline without Clinton’s and in 7.3% of the articles written about him, Trump is featured in the accompanying photograph. Both Clinton and Trump’s names appear in 15.0% of headlines and they are both featured in 3.0% of accompanying photographs. Forty-two photo captions were identified by the coders. Twelve were published with New York Times news articles, five with New York Times editorials. Nine were included with news articles published in the Chicago Tribune, three with Chicago Tribune editorials. Ten were published with Los Angeles Times news articles, three with Los Angeles Times editorials. No photo captions were identified with any articles published in The Washington Post and The Wall Street Journal. Two news articles published in The New York Times were coded as having photo captions, but the researcher was unable to find such captions included with provided articles (Parker, 2016; Chozick, 2016a). One photo caption was used in two articles. one 38 a New York Times editorial (Poniewozik, 2016) and the other with a Chicago Tribune news article (Guskin & Clement, 2016). Six articles included two photos and captions including: two New York Times news articles, three Los Angeles Times news articles, and one Chicago Tribune news article. Three Los Angeles Times article included four captions. All sources included in results are from articles included in sample. 

Endorsements 

Three photo captions were included in the sample that included endorsements for Clinton. “Senator Bernie Sanders Stressed His Support for Hillary Clinton On Monday in Lebanon, N.H., As He Held a Rally for Her” (Alcindor, 2016), GABRIELLE GIFFORDS, a former congresswoman from Arizona, and her husband, Mark E. Kelly, with Hillary Clinton in Cincinnati. Clinton has been campaigning hard in swing state Ohio and long-red Arizona" (Melanie & Memili, 2016). Singer Andra Day greets Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton last week during a fundraiser in San Francisco. Clinton also attended an event that featured Elton John" (Megerian & Memoli, 2016). Other captions that included endorsements also included comments made against Trump. “President Obama, in Philadelphia On Tuesday, Called Hillary Clinton "Steady and True" and Said the Race Was Not a "Reality Show" (Davis, 2016), " Michelle Obama commanded the spotlight in New Hampshire with her takedown of GOP nominee Donald Trump" (Parsons & Megerian, 2016), "PRESIDENT OBAMA, campaigning for Hillary 39 Clinton, addressed Donald Trump's lewd comments about women" (Bierman & Halper, 2016). One endorsement caption included former Miss Universe Alicia Machado, who had been very vocal against Trump. She alleged he publically called her fat and often accompanied her to the gym in which she was often photographed while exercising. "HILLARY CLINTON is joined by former Miss Universe Alicia Machado at a rally in Dade City, Fla. "Florida can decide who our next president is," Clinton assured the crowd in the notoriously divided state" (Melanie & Mason, 2016). 

Speeches 

Several captions included information about speeches and appearance's made by both candidates. Examples of Clinton's appearances included: "Hillary Clinton After Her Arrival in Cleveland for Campaign Appearances On Friday. She Was Scheduled to Speak in Pittsburgh and Philadelphia On Saturday" (Douthat, 2016), "CLINTON VOWED to work "for everybody. People who vote for me. People who vote against me" (Barabak, 2016). One caption included both comments about a speech and an implied endorsement. "HILLARY CLINTON had strong support from the first family and her family in Philadelphia. At a stop in Pittsburgh, she asked the crowd, "Will we be coming together as a nation or splitting further apart?" (Barabak, 2016). One caption in regard to a speech also mentioned Clinton's fundraising efforts. Speeches and appearances made by Clinton comprised captions including: “Hillary 40 Clinton at a Fund-Raiser in New York City This Month. She has Raised More Money Than Donald J. Trump, Mostly From Rich Donors.” (Martin, 2016b). Three captions included information regarding Clinton's stances on issues, including defense and state, “HILLARY CLINTON said she admits she backed the Iraq war but at least regrets voting for it. She spent much of her time addressing issues surrounding her use of private email as secretary of State” (Megerian & Finnegan, 2016); treasury, "Hillary Clinton, Arriving for the Recent National Baptist Convention in Kansas City, Mo., has Unveiled a Tax Plan Whose Increases Would Fall Almost Entirely On the Wealthiest" (Stewart, 2016a); and race-related issues, "HILLARY CLINTON visits North Carolina, where polls show a close race with Donald Trump. The black vote could be key to her winning the battleground state" (Megerian, 2016b). One speech caption mentions Clinton's comments regarding Trump, “HILLARY CLINTON excoriated Donald Trump for propagating an "outrageous lie [about President Barack Obama’s place of birth]" (Decker, 2016). Another caption addressed this same issue without mentioning Clinton, “EVEN AFTER President Obama produced this copy of his birth certificate showing he was born in Honolulu, Trump pursued his "birther" campaign, until Friday” (Decker, 2016). " Examples of Trump's appearances and speeches include: “Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump greets supporters outside Trump Tower in New York on Saturday. "Certainly has been an interesting 24 hours!" he tweeted” (Peoples & Colvin, 2016), “Donald J. Trump On Friday in the Oval Office Replica at the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Museum in Grand Rapids, Mich” (Healy & Haberman, 2016b), “Republican 41 presidential nominee Donald Trump addresses the Polish National Alliance during a campaign swing through the Chicago area Wednesday” (Pearson, 2016), “Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump, who has courted the "powerful" Christian voting bloc, speaks during a church service Sept. 3 at Great Faith Ministries in Detroit” (Wilhelm, 2016), "DONALD TRUMP speaks in King of Prussia, Pa. Pennsylvania is one of the bluer states on his wish list" (Melanie & Mason, 2016), " Donald J. Trump at the New Trump International Hotel in Washington On Friday. 'Nice Hotel,' He Said at a News Conference There" (Martin, 2016a), "DONALD TRUMP campaigns in Manchester, N.H., with his family and running mate Mike Pence, second from left. At a rally in Florida, he told his supporters, "I'm not a politician. My only special interest is you" (Barabak, 2016). Also mentioned was Clinton’s comments regarding Trump’s supporters. Chozick (2016b) notes “Hillary Clinton Speaking at a Fund-Raiser at Cipriani in New York On Friday. Her Comments About Many of Donald Trump's Supporters Caused a Backlash.” One caption mentioned an appearance made by Trump also mentioned his comments against Machado. “DONALD TRUMP, in Grand Rapids, Mich., also went on Twitter in the wee hours to further criticize former Miss Universe Alicia Machado. Republican strategists worry that such attacks may alienate key voting blocs” (Barabak & Finnegan, 2016). Four captions made reference to Trump's stance on key issues, including veteran affairs, “Above, the Republican Presidential Candidate, Donald J. Trump, at a Meeting 42 with Spouses of Military Veterans On Tuesday in Virginia Beach. Left, Mr. Trump with the Attorney General of Florida, Pam Bondi, Before Speaking at a Campaign Event in Tampa On Aug. 24” (Eder & Twghey, 2016), "DONALD TRUMP at a January fundraiser for veterans in Des Moines. The event faces new scrutiny" (Demick, 2016); and race-related issues, "DONALD TRUMP campaigns with Gov. Scott Walker in Altoona, Wis., after visiting Michigan and Pennsylvania. Trump hopes to inspire working-class whites in Rust Belt states that haven't voted GOP since the 1980s" (Melanie & Memoli, 2016); state, “DONALD TRUMP brushed off his coziness with Russian President Vladimir Putin and repeated widely discredited claims about sexual assault in the military and his position on the Iraq war at the time” (Megerian & Finnegan, 2016); and homeland security, DONALD TRUMP'S reaction to the North Carolina firebombing was disturbing" (Boot, 2016). 

Tax Returns 

The subjects of four captions were in regard to Trump's tax returns, “Donald J. Trump, the Republican Nominee, On Tuesday at a Bakery in the Little Havana Neighborhood of Miami. He has Refused to Release His Income Tax Returns” (Eder & Cohen (2016). Many Voters Are Asking: How Much Did Donald J. Trump Pay in Taxes?" (Stewart, 2016b). " a Trump Event in Chicago. Questions Are Being Raised About the Republican Nominee's Finances" (Stewart, 2016a). "DONALD TRUMP, at a campaign rally Wednesday in Henderson, Nev., claimed nearly a billion dollars in business losses on his 1995 tax returns" (Skelton, 2016). 43 Two captions mentioned other politician's relationship with taxes. " Mitt Romney, the Republican Nominee in 2012, and His Wife, Ann, Were Revealed to Have Had a Low Effective Tax Rate" (Eder & Cohen (2016), "AS GOVERNOR, Ronald Reagan avoided state income taxes for just one year that we know about" (Skelton, 2016). 

Debates 

Both candidates were mentioned in regard to debates, " Donald Trump hit a new low Sunday in his debate with Hillary Clinton" (Zorn, 2016), "The Harlem Tavern in New York During the Debate. Donald J. Trump Seemed to Act As a Candidate and a Future Media Mogul" (Guskin & Clement, 2016; Poniewozil, 2016)), "HILLARY CLINTON leaves White Plains, N.Y., for Las Vegas for the final presidential debate" (McManus, 2016). "While Donald Trump tries to rebound from the debate, Hillary Clinton has enjoyed a re-energized candidacy" (Lederman & Lucey, 2016), " DONALD TRUMP'S face tells the story of Monday's debate" (Daum, 2016), "Carly Solon, 26, Watched the Debate Wednesday Night at Row House, a Bar and Restaurant in Manhattan" Healy & Martin, 2016). One caption mentioned accusations made within the debate, "at their Their Debate Wednesday, Donald J. Trump Called Hillary Clinton "a Liar On so Many Different Ways." She Said He Would Be a "Puppet" of Vladimir Putin If Elected" (Healy & Martin, 2016). 

Bill and Hillary Clinton 

Captions regarding sexual harassment allegations against Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton past law career, " and cases she defended in her law career, " DONALD TRUMP 44 with Kathy Shelton and Paula Jones, who accused Bill Clinton of sexual harassment in 1991." As a defense lawyer, Hillary Clinton represented a man accused of raping Shelton when she was 12" (Megerian, 2016a). Also included was a caption in regard to the Clinton's power, and her stance on issues, “Bill and Hillary Clinton, shown in 1999, have always been about maintaining their hold on power” (Kass, 2016). 

Voters 

Other photo captions featuring Clinton included other lawmakers asking her to help with voter turnout, "Representatives G. K. Butterfield of North Carolina, Left, and James E. Clyburn of South Carolina Called On Hillary Clinton to Fund Turnout Efforts Down the Ballot. 'She May Be in a Good Place, but I Don't Think the Party Is in a Good Place yet,' Mr. Clyburn Said" (Martin, 2016c); and regarding voter enthusiasm " Voters cast ballots in Miami even as enthusiasm is said to be in short supply for Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump" (Guskin & Clement, 2016). 

Real Estate 

There was one mention of Trump’s real estate business contained within the photo captions. “The Trump International Hotel, Washington D.C. Is Set to Open Next Week, Six Blocks from the White House. Donald J. Trump, the Republican Presidential Nominee, and His Daughter Ivanka Oversaw the Project, Which Involved Renovating the Historic Old Post Office Building” (Mahler, 2016). 

Brexit 45 Also included was Trump's thoughts on Britain's vote on if they leave the European Union, "I THINK it's going to be 'Brexit' plus, plus, plus," Trump said, referring Britain's vote to exit the EU" (Barabak, 2016). 

Republican Support 

Three caption mentions Trump's thought on support within the Republican Party, "DONALD TRUMP, responding to the party rift, said, "It is so nice that the shackles have been taken off me and I can now fight for America the way I want to" (Bierman & Halper, 2016), " PAUL RYAN, the House speaker, distanced himself from Trump and released his caucus from any obligation to support the nominee" (Bierman & Halper, 2016), " JOHN McCAIN pulled his support for Trump, who in turn accused the Arizona senator of being "very foul-mouthed" (Bierman & Halper, 2016). 

Other Subjects 

Other mentions for both candidates included: Actors that portrayed both candidates on "Saturday Night Live" were also mentioned in one caption, "Donald Trump (Alec Baldwin) and Hillary Clinton (Kate McKinnon) opened "SNL's" 42nd season Oct. 1" (Chicago Tribune, 2016); memes, artwork that often appears on social media, "Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has been an inspiration for many political memes" (Miranda, 2016), "Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, shown in 2011, has also brought artists and amateurs into the political arena" Miranda, 2016). Research question two asked the differences between the issued covered for Clinton and Trump. Factoring in articles in which both candidate's stances on particular 46 issues were found resulted in no significant differences for any issues. However, there were some issues in which a larger sample could have resulted in significance. The frequency of Clinton's name being tied to issues relating to commerce, justice, and homeland security was higher than mentions of Trump in those areas (see Table 1). Also, Clinton's overall stances on women and race-related issues were higher than Trump's (see Table 1). The researcher also found Clinton's stand-alone stances were more likely to be reported than Trump's stand-alone stances. Instead, Trump's stances on issues were mostly reported in addition to Clinton's. Table 1 details all affirmative responses found by the coders regarding if a candidate's stance on an issue was noted in an article. 

Table 1 

Issues Mentioned Within All Articles By Frequency, Percentages, and Candidate 

Hillary Clinton n=44 Donald Trump n=86 Both Candidates n=163 

Freq. / Percentage Freq. / Percentage Freq. / Percentage 

Agriculture 0 / 0.0 1 / 0.3 0 / 0.0 

Interior 12 / 4.0 1 / 0.3 5 / 1.7 

Commerce 25 / 8.3 7 / 2.3 18 / 6.0 

Justice 20 / 6.6 2 / 0.7 24 / 8.0 

Defense 12 / 4.0 3 / 1.0 8 / 2.7 

Labor 13 / 4.3 4 / 1.3 6 / 2.0 

Education 10 / 3.3 1 / 0.3 6 / 2.0 47 

State 18 / 6.0 2 / 0.7 27 / 9.0 

Energy 4 / 1.3 2 / 0.7 1 / 0.3 

Transportation 3 / 1.0 1 / 0.3 0 / 0.0 

Health & Human Services 12 / 4.0 2 / 0.7 11 / 3.7 

Homeland Security 28 / 9.3 6 / 2.0 39 / 13.0 

Veteran 3 / 1.0 1 / 0.3 0 / 0.0 

Housing & Urban Development 3 / 1.0 1 / 0.3 0 / 0.0 

Treasury 16 / 5.3 4 / 1.3 21 / 7.0 

Women 12 / 4.0 2 / 0.7 9 / 3.0 

Gay 3 / 1.0 1 / 0.3 0 / 0.0 

Racial 33 / 11.0 8 / 2.7 36 / 12.0 

Voting 9 / 3.0 1 / 0.3 3 / 1.0 

Research question four asked what are the emerging themes on how the legacy media portrayed Clinton and Trump. Although the researcher entered into the thematic analysis searching for themes relating to traditional gender stereotypes based on previous literature, certain themes used in describing the candidates also emerged. 

Personal Relationships 

The most common subject of which either candidate was mentioned was in regard to sexual harassment allegations made against Trump. He was described in some articles as a sexual predator. Examples include: "For some it is taxes, abortion or immigration, for many it is simply Clinton hatred that allows them to justify supporting a candidate who also stands for torture, reckless war, unchecked greed, hatred of women, immigrants, refugees, people of color, people of 48 disabilities. A sexual predator, a business fraud, a liar who runs on a promise to destroy millions of immigrant families and to jail his political opponent" (New York Times, 2016e, para. 5), "[Trump] stands condemned by his own words as a sexual predator" (Krugman, 2016b, para. 2). The Washington Post (2016k) reports " … The Post obtained an published video footage in which Trump boasts about subjecting women to sexual assault. If you are a 'star' like he is, Trump says in the video, you can 'grab them by the [vagina]'" (para. 5). Trump was also described as having committed sexual, Sullivan (2016) reports "One of the women alleges that Trump grabbed her breasts and tried to put his hand up her skirt during a flight more than three decades ago, The New York Times reported. Another says he kissed her on the mouth outside an elevator in 2005, according to the same report A third woman says Trump groped her rear end at his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida 13 years ago, the Palm Beach Post reported. The fourth, then a People magazine reporter, says Trump kissed her without her consent when the two were alone in 2005 right before an interview she was about to conduct with Trump and his wife (para. 2). Other examples include: "Trump has "been accused by 11 women of sexual assault or other unwelcome advances" (Friedman, 2016, para. 3). " … who boasts of sexual assault and whom 17 women have publically accused of improper behavior" (Kristof, 2016b, para. 18). The Washington Post (2016r) "Over the weekend, Donald Trump did what he always does when things goes south for him. He walked away. He announced he is not the man at 70 he had been at 59 when he had boasted of sexual assault, and he pledged 'to be a better man tomorrow" (The Washington Post, 2016i, para. 1). "As Trump has been 49 falling behind in the polls, following the release of an audiotape in which he bragged about sexually assaulting women, his rhetoric has become more and more incendiary" (Boot, 2016, para. 5) Other specific words used in describing Trump's alleged behavior included sexism. "His racism and sexism were apparent from the beginning of his campaign" (Krugman, 2016a, para. 3). "On Monday night, those women got to see Mrs. Clinton stand up to that common hazard of working while female: the sexist blowhard, the harasser" (New York Times, 2016c, para. 4). Bruni (2016b) notes what voters would say if Clinton won the election, "They'd be saying that sexism like [Trump's] is intolerable" (para. 10). "There are many better reasons to oppose Donald Trump than his rampant sexism" (Washington Post, 2016b, para. 1). Also mentioned were reports of allegations that Trump sexual assaulted women; and grope, "This week Newt [Gingrich] was in the news once again when he for into a vigorous tussle with Megyn Kelly on Fox, about whether the media was devoting too much time to the Trump groping issue. Gingrich accused Kelly of being 'fascinated with sex, and you don't care about public policy" (Collins, 2016b, para. 19) "Likewise, Fairey's Obama 'Hope' poster has been remade in countless guises – including, most recently, one that shows Trump's face in red, white and blue with the single word 'Grope'" (Miranda, 2016, para. 26, "[Trump] maintains that all the women who have accused him of groping or making other unwanted sexual advances are lying, saying improbably, 'Nobody has more respect for women than I do. Nobody.'" (para. 17). 50 Two articles described Trump as having a pattern of assault. "In recent days, Trump has sneered at the looks of a woman who accuses him of sexual assault, denigrated the appearance of Hillary Clinton … " (Washington Post, 2016o, para 1); having attacked women. Worn (2016) reported In the first 15 minutes, the candidates dispatched the issue of Trump's enthusiastic and vulgar description of his sexually predatory habits in the 2005 video released Friday, a scandal that dominated pre-debate media coverage" (para. 26). Also mentioned were three articles in says Trump insulted women, Parsons & Megerian (2016) reports Michelle Obama, while campaigning for Clinton "had been working on the [New Hampshire] address for weeks, incorporating her growing concern about the Republican presidential nominee's many insults of women into a polemic that drew from her own experiences of being verbally abused on the street and ogled at work" (para. 2); insulting former Republican Presidential candidate Carly Fiorina’s appearance. The Washington Post (2016f) reported, "And women, of course, matter primarily for their looks, 'Look at that face! Would anyone vote for that?' Trump said of primary rival Carly Fiorina. His subsequent backpedaling reinforced the retro point: Fiorina, Trump acknowledged, was a 'beautiful woman' after all" (para. 14); accusing a former Miss Universe of gaining weight. In reporting the first presidential debate, The Washington Post (2016g) notes, "And thanks to Hillary Clinton for the assist: By using the first debate to bring up the case of a Miss Universe who, Trump decided, had put on too much weight, the Democratic nominee unleased the ugly inner Donald – the man whom the candidate and his handlers have been trying to hide" (para. 2). 51 One article said Trump degraded women. The Washington Post (2016i) notes " … the Donald Trump who went vile on Megyn Kelly and who has called women 'dogs' and 'pigs' and who berated a former Miss. Universe for gaining weight and made a tabloid spectacle of his extramarital affair with Marla Maples … " (para. 3). There were also several mentions of “locker room talk" and "boys will be boys." Examples include: "Almost every politician in my experience sooner or later blames the media messengers for an unwelcome message. As the polls and various embarrassments, such as the 'Access Hollywood' tape of his 'locker room' talk about molesting women, bring more bad news, the media provide a one-size-fits-all scapegoat for his woes" (para. 2). Vozzella, 2016 reported Corey A. Stewart, At-Large Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of Prince William County, Virginia said, " … Trump had 'acted like a frat boy, as a lot of guys so'" (para. 7) in regard to a 2005 video of Trump speaking about groping women. Roberts (2016) reports "Here's how much better women 'gets it' from Trump: In the notorious 'Access Hollywood' tape from 2005, he boasts about' grabbing' women by their lady parts/ Trump has been shrugging it off, calling it 'locker room banter.' His surrogates insist that all 'normal' men talk this way" (para. 4). "Mr. Trump dismissed his boasting of sexually predatory behavior as 'locker room talk'" (Washington Post, 2016h, para. 9). 

Dishonesty 

One theme emerged in describing both candidates. Several articles use descriptors suggesting Clinton and Trump as being dishonest. "Whether for Trump or Clinton, neither side can fathom what compels the other. In this duplex of horrors, Clinton is a 52 corrupt, lying, hypocritical career politician and Trump is a sleazy, lying, narcissistic, autocratic (alleged) sexual predator" Washington Post, 2016n, para. 5). Specific ways in which Trump was described include liar, lying, and dishonest. Examples include: Egan, (2016) noted "I would tell my sister and all like-minded souls to look at whether Trump has tried to live by the Ten Commandments. He's consistently violated at least eight of them, from worshipping the God of Mammon to running up the biggest 'pants on fire' liar score of any presidential candidate in history" (para. 6). "Mr. Trump Alternated between rambling statements and grandiose boasts when he wasn't lying" (New York Times, 2016a, para. 1). (Krigman, 2016) Wahl, Cutler, & Forbes (2016), students at Liberty University responded to President Jerry Falwell's endorsement, "Trump's flagrant dishonesty, consistent misogyny and boastful unrepentance made many of us feel the need to publically express disagreement with President Falwell's endorsement (para.2). Kristof (2016a) observes "For my part, I've never met a national politician as ill informed, as deceptive, as evasive and as vacuous as Trump" (para. 20). In regard to false claims of New Jersey Muslims celebrating the September 11 th terrorist attacks and neighbors of the San Bernardino shooters failing to report bombs, The Washington Post (2016q) notes, "Both claims are false; Mr. Trump nevertheless repeats them and uses them to justify unjustifiable policy, such as banning Muslim immigration" (para. 4). (Washington Post, 2016q), a fraudster, "A fraudster who seems a racist … " (Kristof, 2016, para. 18). Two articles state Trump has "flip-flopped." "[Trump] has flip-flopped 138 times by one count, who lies every five minutes by another … " (Kristof, 2016b, para. 18). 53 "The standard words for campaign mishaps – 'flip-flop,' 'retreat,' 'walk-back' – simply do not apply to this candidate's spirals through unreality" (New York Times, 2016b, para. 4). Other specific terms used were: fraud, "Though some Republicans tried to draw parallels between Laureate and Trump University, the real estate seminar company founded by Trump that faces multiple fraud investigations, Laureate is a different sort of business" (Helderman & Michelle, 2016, para. 45); and denier, Leonhardt (2016) and others describing Trump as "an unrepentant denier of reality" (para. 13). "Mr. Trump refuses to acknowledge these truths, presumably because he believes that his best shot at the White House is to insist that the economy is in terrible shape and that he alone can fix it" (New York Times, 2016d, para. 3). Two articles in this category specifically mention his business dealings “Mr. Trump has repeatedly denounced global warming as a ‘hoax,’ although a golf course he owns in Ireland is citing global warming in seeking to build a protective wall against a rising sea” (New York Times, 2016, para. 17). Eder (2016) notes an inquiry New York's attorney general opened. "We have been concerned that the Trump Foundation may have engaged in some improprieties" (para. 3). Specific terms used in describing Clinton include: as dishonest, but "not more dishonest than other politicians" (Faludi, 2016, para. 2); having done things that were sneaky and wrong (Kristof, 2016); and less honest than Trump. "A CNN/ORC poll this month found that by a margin of 15 percentage points, voters thought Donald Trump was 'more honest and trustworthy' than Hillary Clinton" (Kristof, 2016b, para. 5). 54 One article mentioned dishonesty within the Clinton Foundation, Helderman & Michelle (2016) notes "The Clintons' Laureate connection emerged as a campaign issue earlier this summer, when Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump charged that Hillary Clinton 'laundered money' to her husband by funneling tens of millions of dollars in federal grants to Laureate while she was secretary of state" (para. 39). Two articles mention how voters perceive her to be dishonest. "In the case of [Clinton's] recent bout with pneumonia, her supporters worry that refusal to disclose an illness until a video surfaced of a near-collapse would further the perception of dishonesty and create a fresh opening for Trump" (Decker, 2016, para. 22). Blow (2016) observes "But one of the great ironies of this election is that America's first female president may be viewed by many as the country's most invalid president, hanging under the specter of suspicion, mistrust and illegitimacy” (para. 2). One article mentions Also mentioned was coverage of Trump's remarks of possible criminal activity. "[Trump] alleged the FBI was 'investigating how Hillary Clinton put the office of secretary of State up for sale in a violation of federal law' – an assertion that goes well beyond anything the bureau is known to be doing" Memoli & Bierman, 2016, para.13). 

Spouse Coverage 

Previous research suggested media coverage mentions a female political candidate's spouse more than their male counterpart’s spouse (Kahn & Goldenberg, 1991; Major & Coleman, 2008). The researcher found several mentions of Clinton's husband, most in regard to the allegations of sexual misconduct when he was president. " … the 55 Donald Trump who issued a casting call for the alleged victims of Bill Clinton … " (Washington Post, 2016i, para. 3), "Before the debate, he lined up women who claimed they were victims of Bill Clinton's sexual misdeeds and posted a video of their meetings, with poor audio, on Facebook. Sixteen minutes into the debate, Trump invoked Bill Clinton's infidelities" (Washington Post, 2016j, para. 8), "Trump's other defense was, essentially, that however much of a misogynistic lout he might be, Bill Clinton is worse" (Washington Post, 2016k, para. 10), "Trump repeated his defense — it was mere “locker room talk” — and, after some hesitation, went on the offense by accusing Clinton of “viciously” attacking women who had accused her husband of sexually abusive behavior" (Worn, 2016, para. 27). Mentions also included coverage of Trump's comments regarding Bill Clinton's impeachment hearings "[Trump] reminded everyone that Bill Clinton was impeached – because, he said, 'everyone forgets'" (Johnson, 2016a, para. 42). Healy & Haberman (2016) notes, "Asked specifically about his affair with Ms. Maples when he was married to Ivana Trump, Mr. Trump said: I don't talk about it. I wasn't president of the United States. I don't talk about it. When you think of the fact he was impeached, the country was in turmoil, turmoil, absolute turmoil. He lied about Monica Lewinsky and paid a massive penalty" (para. 13). Also, noted was how the impeachment hearings damaged the Republican Party. "Republicans learned a lesson. 'It was a huge blunder,' said Scott Reed, a GOP strategist, recalling the party's 1998 midterm debacle and the sympathy that the attacks on Bill 56 Clinton engendered for the president and then-First Lady Hillary Clinton" (Barabak & Finnegan, 2016, para. 2). Comments also included Bill Clinton accepting payment for speeches. "Further, [Clinton] and her husband, former president Bill Clinton, are not the first to cash in on the speech circuit, but they have done so on an unprecedented and unseemly scale (The Washington Post, 2016m, para. 6). "The simultaneity of Bill Clinton's post-presidency with Hillary Clinton's public service and, if she has her way, pre-presidency poses particular problems about the intersection of his paychecks with her government work" (Washington Post, 2016a, para. 10). There were also a few mentions of Bill Clinton accompanying his wife to a political event. "And on Monday, a full slate of Democratic stars plans to join forces in Philadelphia for a final push of Clinton's candidacy. Joining her, the campaign says, will be Obama, first lady Michelle Obama, and Bill and Chelsea Clinton" (Wagner, Sullivan, & Phillip, 2016, para. 37). "On Thursday they announced that the campaign's closing rally Monday night would feature not only Clinton, her husband and daughter but [Barack] Obama and the first lady (Memoli & Bierman, 2016, para. 23). The media outlets mentioned Trump's wife Melania a few times, mostly when she attended an event with him. " … Trump sat with his wife at the Alfred E. Smith Memorial Foundation Dinner to participate in the long-standing tradition of political candidates roasting each other" (Johnson, 2016b, para. 14). One significant article featured her wardrobe choice to a Presidential debate. After a tape was released of her 57 husband saying he grabbed women by her genitalia, Melania wore a blouse featuring what is known as a "pussy bow" (Dowd, 2016). 

Relations with Other Countries and Races 

The next most frequently covered topic was comments made about Trump regarding other races. Specific terms used included: racist, Kristof (2016b) notes when describing Trump, "A fraudster who seems a racist … " (para. 18), "[Trump] also mocked an African-American pastor who had just welcomed him to church, and again referred to Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, who once said she had Native American roots, as 'Pocahontas'" (Martin, 2016a, para. 9); and racial profiling, The Washington Post (2016c) reported Trump's comments on how to approach terrorism, "'knock the hell out of 'em' – and maybe use racial profiling" (para. 6). There were also articles which reported Trump was trying to keep minorities from voting. " "The prospect of Trump-induced violence on or after Election Day – he has directed his supporters to monitor polling place, a recipe for conflict – seems to be growing" Washington Post, 2016p, para. 11). “ … encouraging his supporters to watch the polls in ‘certain areas,’ a move that many worry could amount to voter intimidation, particularly in minority neighborhoods” (Blow, 2016, para. 16). Media outlets also reported Trump’s comments on immigrants from Mexico. “They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists” (The Washington Post, 2016l, para. 2). "The real Trump has been before the citizenry ever since he announced his candidacy in a rambling jeremiad that blamed Mexico for 'sending' 'rapists' to the United States as illegal immigrants" (Washington Post, 2016e, para. 5). 58 

Health 

One theme that emerged for Clinton pertained to her health. Typically, this theme emerged from the media outlets reporting on allegations made by Trump and others in the Republican party. Roberts (2016) reported Trump's supporters referring to Clinton as, "[Clinton's] frail, sick, perhaps suffering from Parkinson's or epilepsy or vascular dementia or dysphasia or a rogue blood clot. (para. 11). "Clinton does have allergies that sometimes send her off into fits of coughing. There's also a video of her tripping and being helped up by a flight attendant – an incident that seems to be what [Rudy] Giuliani is referring to when he says she had to be 'lifted onto airplanes'" (Collins, 2016a, para.6). Outlets also mentioned Clinton's reluctance to be completely transparent about her health. Decker (2016) reported on Trump's stated concerns about "[Clinton's reluctance to be fully transparent about her health" (para. 3). 

Personality Traits 

The researcher did not find many traditional gender stereotypes used within the article in describing Clinton and Trump. 

Trump 

Trump was often described as a bully. In regard to Trump's performance during the GOP primary debates, Bruni (2016a) reports "He mocked his rivals in the manner of a schoolyard bully (para. 17). Trump was also described as a misogynistic man, Mason & Carcamo (2016) reported on former Miss Universe Alicia Machado's comments on Trump. "He's a misogynistic man. He considers women to be inferior to him. That is the reality" (para. 29); and boastful. Healy & Martin (2016b) notes "Mr. Trump defended 59 himself by boasting about his business success and said the country would be well served if it was run in the fashion of his company" (para. 46). Trump was often described by his supporters in typically male-dominated terms. "Trump's supporters call him an 'alpha male'; they use 'dominant,' 'hard-driving' and other unsubtly phallic adjectives" (Roberts, 2016, para. 11). Trump was described as sensitive, "And [Trump] accused the news media of being unfair to him, a claim that Mr. [Bill] O'Reilly agreed with – to a point. 'In some cases,' Mr. O'Reilly said, 'you are too sensitive" (Haberman, 2016a, para. 8-9); and feisty, traditionally female term in a New York Times editorial. "Now here stands Mr. Trump, feisty from his runaway Republican primary victories and ready to the first Presidential debate, scheduled for Monday night, with Hillary Clinton" (Thayer, 2016, para. 3). 

Clinton 

Articles suggested Clinton was "a great leader," former Miss Universe Alicia Machado said, "I think she's very capable" (Mason & Carcamo, 2016, para. 31); determined. "[Michelle Obama] has made the case for Mrs. Clinton's determination" (Haberman, 2016b, para. 6); and intelligent. "Almost six weeks ago we enthusiastically endorsed Hillary Clinton for president, calling her 'an experienced, thoughtful and deeply knowledgeable public servant' while warning that Republican opponent Donald Trump was a 'thin-skinned demagogue who is unqualified and unsuited to be president" (Los Angeles Times, 2016, para. 1). Clinton was mentioned as being tough, a typically male term. Chozick (2016c) notes Michelle Obama's comments during a campaign speech in Charlotte, North 60 Carolina. "Hillary Clinton is tough. I've watched get when she gets knocked down – she doesn't complain. She doesn't cry foul" (para. 2). 

Other Stereotypes 

She was also described as being depicted in a political cartoon with male genitalia. “ … a cover image of a grinning Hillary, her skirt billowing up as in the old Marilyn Monroe photo, to reveal male briefs bulging with a penis. Across her legs ran the headline: ‘Hillary’s Big Secret’” (Faludi, 2016, para. 10). Coverage of a meme showing Clinton doing a shimmy, a stereotypical female move also emerged (Miranda, 2016). 61 CHAPTER V DISCUSSION The 2016 Presidential race was historic in nature. It offered a political candidate who was the first female nominated for president by a major party. It established a traditional politician versus one who was new to the political arena. It establishes between two very strong characters, one who had been in the public eye for decades because her husband had been the President for eight years following being Governor of Arkansas for 11 years. The other, Donald Trump, had a long history of being in the public eye because of his television experiences and his monetary worth. This study looked into several factors in regard to the 2016 Presidential General Election. Although the researcher mainly looked into what traditional gender stereotypes were used as framing by the legacy print media, other factors and themes emerged as well. Traditionally a female political candidate receives less coverage than her male counterparts, is featured in fewer headlines and photographs, has only stances on certain issues covered, and is described using different terms. In addition, her appearance and spouse are covered more than a man. A small portion of this study looked at how the candidates were presented in printed articles using qualitative methods. More specifically, this study looked at gender stereotypes in legacy print media coverage. 62 In terms of the amount of coverage, Trump did have more coverage than Clinton. Although they both were featured in 56.1% of the sample, articles mentioning Trump comprised 14% more articles than Clinton when said articles were written solely about one candidate. In addition, headlines feature Trump 38.2% of the time compared to Clinton's 13.3% when the articles feature only one candidate. Both candidates were featured in 15% of the articles. All of these percentages follow along with previous research in which the male candidate receives more coverage than women. However, what should be stressed is Trump brought much of this coverage upon himself with his comments and social media posts. Because Trump had very little political experience prior to running for president, he approached the campaign from a different way than traditional politicians. The researcher notes Trump comes more from a standpoint of entertainment and personal promotion. Thus, he sought out media attention and it should come as no surprise he received more of the article's coverage and headlines. Trump was also featured in 3.6% more photo captions in which one candidate was solely mentioned. Although many of the photo captions were of appearances made by both candidates, the detail included provided more information than one would originally think. One caption implied the media outlet printed older photos of Clinton. For example, the Chicago Tribune printed a photo of Clinton with her husband in 1999. As previous research suggests the media focuses on a woman's appearance more than a man, the researcher finds it interesting a 19-year-old photograph of the now 70-year-old Clinton was chosen over readily available more current photographs. However, the majority of 63 photographs featuring Clinton were focused on her campaign, be it appearances and speeches she gave, or endorsements. A few of the photo captions seemly showed framing. For example, a caption on President Obama contains negative thoughts he shared about Trump. In addition, a caption accompanying a photo of First Lady Michelle Obama speaks of her attacking Trump in a campaign speech. The before mentioned caption accompanying a 19-year-old photograph of Bill and Hillary Clinton speaks of their desire to keep power. Such headlines suggest the author expressed their viewpoints within the captions themselves. It should be noted all three examples came from captions published with news articles, not editorials. Captions regarding Trump, however, contained much more than his appearances. Six were in reference to his refusal to release his tax return. The researcher finds this surprising considering this was not determined to be a major theme contained within the articles themselves. Because Trump refused to release his tax returns, the first presidential candidate to do so in 40 years (Disis, 2017), it would not have been surprising to see this contained within the bulk of the articles. Another surprising factor in the captions was the lack of references to sexual harassment claims against Trump. Because this was a major theme contained within the articles, the researcher expected to see more references contained within the photo captions. However, the only captions found was Trump's stance on sexual harassment in the military, and it also referenced Trump's alleged relation with Russia and his stance on 64 the Iraq war. It should be noted former Miss Universe Alicia Machado was mentioned appearing with Clinton. Machado made headlines with her criticism of Trump after he said she had gained weight and often accompanied her to the gym (Barbaro & Twohey, 2016). Expected was the result of finding Clinton's husband mentioned more than Trump's wife. This result seemingly indicates what is found in previous research (Kahn & Goldenberg, 1991; Major & Coleman, 2008). However, what does not align with previous research is the manner in which Bill Clinton was mentioned. Much of the media's coverage of Bill Clinton came from comments made from Trump himself. As more accusations of sexual misconduct against Trump came to light, Trump attempted to deflect such media attention to previous allegations made against Bill Clinton. Media outlets reported a press conference help by Trump prior to a debate where he appeared with women who made sexual harassment accusations (Megerian, 2016a). Trump also mentioned impeachment hearings because he maintained some had forgotten (Johnson, 2016a, para. 42). While traditional gender stereotypes maintain coverage of female political candidates contain more coverage of their husbands and families than their male counterpart, these mentions were not traditional. However, it must be stressed while previous research included coverage of a woman's presidential candidate, Clinton's case was quite different. Not only was she the first woman to be nominated by a major political party to run for president, but her husband had also served two terms as president. This is an anomaly from prior research. 65 Prior research is consistent in showing how media coverage of issues are different for a man than a woman in a political contest. In this study, however, no significant different was shown. Often when one candidate's stance on an issue was mentioned, the other was also mentioned. However, there were a few issues normally associated with a man in which Clinton is mentioned frequently. Issues related to money and taxes are traditionally more male issues (Kittilson & Fridkin, 2008), but Clinton was mentioned in regard to commerce issues 25 times by herself and 18 times in addition to Trump. That compares to Trump only being mentioned 7 times by himself and 18 times in addition to Clinton. Also, in regard to issues involving treasury issues, Clinton was mentioned 16 times by herself compared to Trump's 4 times. There were 21 references mentioning both candidates. The researcher infers a positive sign from this data. The fact media outlets discussed Clinton's stance on financial issues broke from traditional gender stereotypes and seemed to suggest future coverage of women will contain such coverage as well. Other traditionally male issues were associated with Clinton as well. She was also associated with issues relating to homeland security (traditionally a male issue) in 28 articles in addition to the 39 articles she shared with Trump. Trump was only singly mentioned 6 times. This is also encouraging to the researcher. Although often the coverage of such issues is not considered positive, the fact they are being discussed in regard to both women and men suggests a possible slight change in the media's framing of political contest. 66 Clinton was also mentioned 18 times, compared to Trump's 2 times in regard to state department issues. Considering Clinton's service as Secretary of State, this is not surprising. They were both covered in regard to this issue 27 times. The researcher also does not find this surprising considering the amount of coverage into Trump's comments regarding Clinton's lost emails. Education has long been associated with women and the data supports this assumption. Clinton's stances on education-related issues were noted 10 times compared to Trump's one mention. Six articles mentioned both candidate's stances on this issue. After examining the photo captions attached to all the articles in the sample, the researcher concluded it would be prudent for future studies to examine the actual photos in order to further determine how the candidates were presented. However, the captions provided much information to examine and discuss. Possibly the least surprising outcome of the study into the issues was of the racial category. Both candidate's stances on race-related issues were mentioned in 36 articles. Because Trump being labeled a racist became a major theme in the articles, the author did not find this surprising. Clinton often responded to these allegations in her attacks of Trump as well. When considering the emerging themes on how Clinton and Trump were presented revealed some seemingly surprising results, however, on closer examination, the results aligned themselves with much of the mass media coverage from the election. Much of the major themes came from comments made by the candidates and their supporters about their competitor. Also emerging were themes relating to allegations 67 made against the candidates by third-parties. Because these comments, attacks, and allegations received much media attention, it came to no surprise to the researcher they became major themes within the sample. Traditionally, male and females are described with gender-specific personality traits, but this sample received little coverage into personality types. Clinton was mentioned as being tough, which is traditionally a male term; and Trump was mentioned as being sensitive and feisty, traditionally female terms. However, these examples were sparse. One article noted Trump is often described using usually male terms often by his camp. This was the only note on this matter the researcher found on this matter. The researcher finds this to be a positive note. Gender-specific personality terms are often broken by members of both genders. Not only can men be sensitive, but women can also be tough. The researcher did find two examples of very specific gender stereotypes describing Clinton within the sample. Coverage of a meme created showing Clinton shimmying, and a cartoon showing Clinton in a Marilyn Monroe stance attempting to hide evidence of having a penis under her dress. Although the researcher does not find this surprising, it lends itself to prolonging traditional gender stereotypes which hold women cannot be tough and must act feminine. Many of themes that emerged in regard to Trump came from comments made by the man himself. Whether these comments came from speeches, interviews, or social media, Trump proved himself capable of staying in the media's eye. It remains to be seen 68 if some of Trump's comments were intended to cause media scrutiny in order to stay in the public eye. One of the largest themes was the presentation was of Trump's personal relationships. Although examples were presented in the results, the researcher stresses there were many more examples of such contained within the sample. All examples could not be included for sheer lack of space. Although as previously noted, one would think coverage of the issues would be more prominent, upon reflection, this theme is not surprising. The reason brings to mind past accusations of presidential candidates and sexual misconduct. While the researcher maintains not all political candidates have been proven guilty of sexual misconduct and not all claims made about the subject have been proven true, there are a plethora of connections between powerful subjects of both genders and accusations of sexual harassment exist. One must only look past the 2016 Presidential election to the “Me too” movement to see many examples. Because one’s life is intimately examined by the media when they announce a run for president, any past indiscretions (implied or otherwise) will ultimately be found and published. Because Trump openly apologized for comments made during a 2005 recording obtained and released by The Washington Post of Trump’s comments regarding his behavior toward women (Burns, Haberman, & Martin, 2016), he opened his life up further for media scrutiny toward the matter. This resulted in more women coming forward claiming he behaved inappropriately toward them. Furthermore, when Trump began expressing concerns it was not him featured on the tape (Haberman & Martin, 69 2016), more media scrutiny was applied. Later, when some (including Trump) attempted to downplay the situation by expressing their view that all men speak in this manner at times, i.e., “locker room talk,” media coverage increased even further. Each time a new allegation or denial was released, the subject gained more attention. Media outlets report there are as many as nineteen women who came forward with allegations. That in addition to the tape and subsequent denials and explanations turned the subject into a media circus. Therefore, it comes as no surprise this was a major theme found in the sample. Another major theme contained within the sample that correlates with known campaign coverage is a racist theme. Many quotes in the sample also refer to him as a racist. This is also not surprising when one looks at the campaign coverage. Trump made headlines early on in the campaign by declaring he intended to build a wall between the southern border and Mexico. He also said he intended to force Mexico to pay for said wall (CBS, 2016). These statements seemed to strike a nerve with many. Although not everyone deemed this statement as racism - poll results show 37 percent of Americans want a wall, (Savransky, 2017), Trump's comments regarding Mexico sending rapists across the border (CBS, 2016), provided soundbites many used to show what they called his racist tendencies. Also adding to the outrage was Trump's comments regard racial profiling after a 

shooting in an Orlando nightclub linked to Muslim extremists. "'I think profiling is 

something that we're going to have to start thinking about as a country,' Trump told 

CBS’s Face The Nation" (Stephenson, 2016). More examples exist, for example, he also 70 

evoked stereotypes while mimicking Asian businessmen in a speech and announced he 

intended to create a travel ban which would prevent all immigrants from specific Middle 

Eastern countries from entering the United States (CBS, 2016). Again, comments such as 

these provide media fodder and suggest this would become a theme within the sample. Another major theme was one of Clinton's health. Trump's camp released an advertisement in October 2016 showcasing questions voters should ask about Clinton's health and stamina (Kludt, 2016). The ad shows Clinton coughing, having to be helped up the stairs, and fainting at a 9/11 anniversary event. This helped prompt national concern about her ability to lead the United States due to health concerns. Her camp released a statement the month before this ad aired stating she had pneumonia and fainted at the anniversary event due to being dehydrated and becoming too hot. The statement also states her prolonged cough is due to allergies and pneumonia (Golshan, 2016). Trump also questioned both Clinton's physical and mental health in a speech delivered on October 1, 2016, where he imitated her stumbling to her vehicle after leaving the anniversary event and also publically questioned her mental state in a rally held August 6, 2016 (Diamond, 2016). Because of all this media attention brought to the issue by Trump and his supporters, it came to no surprise to the researcher this was a major theme contained within the articles. Typically, presidential candidates release documents relating to their health during the campaign, Clinton did so on September 14 (Merica, 2016). However, the release did not stop Trump and his supporters from bringing more light to the issue. 71 As found in previously discussed themes, if a presidential candidate brings an issue up repeatedly, it will garner media attention. This study makes two hypotheses. The first one states the media are reframing the female narrative in politics. To test this, the researcher compared the number of times Clinton's stance on issues were mentioned versus Trump's. Issues were categorized using previous literature. Typically male issues fell under the 1) interior; 2) commerce; 3) justice; 4) defense; 5) labor; 6) state; 7) homeland security; 8) veteran affairs; and the 9) treasury (Kittilson & Fridkin, 2008 ). Typically female issues fell under the 1) agriculture; 2) education; 3) energy, 4) health & human services; and the 5) housing & human development (Kittilson & Fridkin, 2008). Clinton was mentioned more frequently for issues categorized as male throughout the sample. Although it was not statistically significant, her name was tied to issues relating to commerce, justice, state, and homeland security was higher than mentions of Trump in those areas. In the case of a larger sample, these issues may have achieved significance. Clinton's name was also tied to issues relating to interior, defense, labor, veteran affairs, and treasury more frequently than Trumps. Clinton's name was also tied more frequently to all but one of the issues categorized as female. The only exception was agriculture in which Trump received the only mention. Because Clinton's issue stances (male and female) were mentioned more frequently then Trump, this suggests the media's framing of issues in regard to traditional gender stereotypes are changing. Therefore, this hypothesis is supported. 72 In regard to the second hypothesis for this study, there is simply not enough evidence to support it to be true. Throughout this study, the researcher was pleased to note a lack of traditional gender stereotypes within the sample of the legacy media's coverage. Most coverage in regard to issue coverage crossed gender lines and allowed for the stances of both candidates regardless of gender. Although personality traits were not used as much as in previous campaign coverage, the few mentioned seemed to cross gender lines. However, this comprised a small part of the campaign coverage. Most coverage, not only came from statements made by the candidates themselves but seemed to constitute more "mudslinging" than the actual discussion of issues. Also factored in were allegations made by outside sources and allegation made by Trump against Clinton's husband. The majority of coverage from within the sample came from these factors. Also, it must be stressed that although Clinton portrayed in stereotypical (and sometimes offensive) female terms were few and far between, the examples still show traditional gender stereotypes are still held by many in the media. Because of this, the researcher simply did not find enough evidence of Clinton being described in male terms to support this hypothesis. Ultimately, this study did not turn out how the researcher expected. More issue coverage was expected. However, when one looks at the candidates themselves, and the volatile nature of this campaign, the results do not seem as unexpected as previously thought. The researcher does maintain more study could be done on the topic of gender stereotypes and this campaign specifically. 73 Suggestions for future study include how gender stereotypes exist in the legacy media on lower level campaigns, e.g., local or state campaigns. It would be interesting to compare coverage of local elections from different parts of the United States as covered by local newspapers. One could also compare coverage from the United States to coverage from other countries that have a woman leader, e.g., Germany and Great Britain. In regard to the 2016 Presidential General Election, one could also look at the coverage from broadcast television, from broadcast radio, and from news sites found solely online. It would also be interesting to look at coverage found on social media, including the candidates own social media feeds. Also, one should look at photographs printed within legacy media during the campaign and analyze them in addition to the photo captions as the researcher has done. Another study could be done to compare how differently the candidates are presented in news versus editorial articles. In regard to stereotypes in general, suggested future research could include a look at how candidates of different races are portrayed in the media, be it print, broadcast, online, or social media. Photographs of said races could be analyzed to answer questions about racial stereotypes. It would be interesting to compare how women and men of different races are portrayed in the media as well as those who identify as a gender of which they were not born. Many studies could be done on the issue of all stereotypes in political coverage. 74 APPENDIX 

Coding Instructions 

You will be coding a collection of articles. Please code each one individually. Please read each article and answer each of the following questions. 

Missing the code book with explains of all variables. Coding Instrument 

Content Analysis: 1. What was the author’s gender? 1) Male_____ 2) Female_____ 3) Both ________ 4) Not Specified________ 2. Who was featured in the headline printed with article? 1) Clinton____________ 2) Trump _____________ 3) Not specified______________ 3. Who was featured in the photo printed with article? 1) Clinton____________ 2) Trump _____________ 3) Not specified______________ 

Issues: 

• What issues were discussed in the article? (Answer yes or no to all of the issues that apply) 4. Agriculture ___(1) Yes ___(2) No 5. Interior ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 6. Commerce ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 7. Justice ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 8. Defense ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 9. Labor 75 ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 10. Education ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 11. State ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 12. Energy ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 13. Transportation ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 14. Health and Human Services ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 15. Homeland Security ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 16. Veteran Affairs ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 17. Housing and Urban Development ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 

18. Treasury ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 19. Women’s Rights ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 20. Gay Rights ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 21. Racial Issues ____(1) Yes ____(2) No 22. Voting Rights ___(1) Yes ____(2) No 76 REFERENCES 

Amadeo, K. (2017, November 22). Trans-Pacific partnership summary, pros and 

cons. The Balance. Retrieved from https://www.thebalance.com/what-is-the-trans-

pacific-partnership-3305581. 

Alcindor, Y. (2016, September 6). Despite Sander's urging, die-hards resist Clinton: 

(National Desk). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Amadeo, K. (2017, October 30). What has Hillary done? 14 major accomplishments. The 

Balance. Retrieved from https://www.thebalance.com/hillary-clinton-s-accomplishments-

4101811. 

Anderson, K. V. (2017). Presidential pioneer or campaign queen? Hillary Clinton and the 

first-timer/frontrunner double bind. Rhetoric & Public Affairs, 20 (3), 525-538. 

Anderson, K. V. (2002). From spouses to candidates: Hillary Rodham Clinton, Elizabeth 

Dole, and the gendered office of U.S. president. Rhetoric & Public Affairs, 5 (1), 105-132. 

Baer, D. L. (1993). Political parties: The missing variable in women and politics 

research. Political Research Quarterly, 46 , 547. 

Barabak, M. Z. (2016, November 8). Election 2016; Voters urged to make to make 

history; Candidates give their last arguments. Los Angeles Times. 

Barabak, M. Z., & Finnegan, M. (2016, October 1. The nation; latest Trump tactic 

worries GOP; The party fears its nominee is playing into Clinton's hands by bringing up 

her husband's cheating. Los Angeles Times. 

Barbaro, M., & Twihey, M. (2016, September 27). Shamed and angry: Alicia Machado, a 

Miss Universe mocked by Donald Trump. The New York Times. Retrieved from 

https://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/28/us/politics/alicia-machado-donald-trump.html. 

BBC News, (2016 March, 16). US elections 2016: Hillary Clinton sparks sexism 'shouting' row. BBC News. Retrieved from http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-35820350. 

Besova, A. A., & Cooley, S. C. (2009). Foreign news and public opinion: Attribute 

agenda-setting theory revisited. Ecuid Novi: Journalism Studies. 30 , 219-242. 77 78 

Biography. (2017). Donald Trump. Biography.com. Retrieved from 

https://www.biography.com/people/donald-trump-9511238. 

Blake, A. (2016, July 25). 4 brutal poll numbers that greet Hillary Clinton at the 

Democratic National Convention. The Washington Post. Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/07/25/4-brutal-poll-numbers-

that-greet-hillary-clinton-at-the-democratic-national-

convention/?utm_term=.8b890cbce7cd. Blow, C. M. (2016, October 31). Emails, genitalia and the F.B.I.: Commentary. New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Bohanan, R. (2016, July 25). 12 women who ran for president before Hillary. Huff Post .

Retrieved from https://www.huffingtonpost.com/rebecca-bohanan/12-women-who-ran-

for-pres_b_11172668.html. 

Boot, M. (2016, October 18). Nazi echoes in Trump’s tweets. Los Angeles Times 

Bradner, E. (2015, June 3). Huckabee: I wish I could've identified as female in high school gym. CNN Politics. Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2015/06/02/politics/mike-huckabee-transgender-caitlyn-jenner/index.html. 

Bruni, F. (2016a, September 25). The first face-off: Commentary. New York Times, Late 

Edition (East Coast). 

Bruni, F. (2016b, October 26). Clinton’s resounding mandate: Commentary. New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Bryant, J., & Oliver, M. B. (2002). Media Effects: Advances in Theory and Research. 

Florence, KY: Routledge. 

Bump, P. (2015, June 11). The mysterious etymology of Mark Kirk’s ‘bro with no ho’ comments. The Washington Post. Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2015/06/11/the-mysterious-etymology-of-mark-kirks-bro-with-no-ho-comments/?utm_term=.ed640de382f8. 

Carroll, L. (2015, November 23). Hillary Clinton says she helped usher Iran to the 

negotiating table. Politifact . Retrieved from http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-

meter/statements/2015/nov/23/hillary-clinton/hillary-clinton-says-she-helped-usher-iran-

negotia/. 

CBS. (nd). 30 of Donald Trump's Wildest Quotes. CBS News. Retrieved from 

https://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/wild-donald-trump-quotes/. 79 

Center for American Women and Politics. (2016). Center for American Women and 

Politics . Retrieved from http://www.cawp.rutgers.edu/. 

Center for American Women and Politics. (2017). Gender differences in voter turnout. 

Center for American Women and Politics. Retrieved from http://www.cawp.rutgers.edu/sites/default/files/resources/genderdiff.pdf. 

Chicago Tribune. (2016, October 17). Donald Trump calls 'SNL' sketch 'hot job'. Chicago Tribune. 

Chozick, A. (2015, April 12). Hillary Clinton announces 2016 presidential bid. The New 

York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/13/us/politics/hillary-

clinton-2016-presidential-campaign.html. 

Chozick, A. (2016a, September 10). Hillary Clinton takes aim at North Korea, then at 

Donald Trump: (Politics). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Chazick, A. (2016b, September, 11). Republicans pounce as Clinton denigrates many of Trump's backers: (National desk). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Chozick, A. (2016c, October 7). Michelle Obama, the closer for Clinton: (National 

Desk). Clinton, H. (2003). Living History. New York, NY: Scribner. Clinton, H. (2014). Hard Choices: A Memoir . New York, NY: Simon and Shuster. 

Clinton, H. (2016). Hillary for America . Retrieved from http: 

https://www.hillaryclinton.com/. 

Cohen, J. (1968). Weighted kappa: Nominal scale agreement provision for scaled 

disagreement or partial credit. Psychological Bulletin, 70 (4), 213-220. 

Collins, G. (2016a, September 10). Sexism: Let’s deconstruct Donald: Commentary. New 

York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Collins, G. (2016b, October 27). The dark days of Donald: Commentary. New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Collinson, S., & Lee, M. J. (2016, July 26) Clinton nomination puts the biggest crack in glass celling. CNN . Retrieved from http://www.cnn.com/2016/07/26/politics/democratic-

convention-roll-call-day-two/ 80 Dannett, S. G. (1971). Belva Ann Lockwood, feminist lawyer. The Courier, 8 (4), 40-50. Davis, J. H. (2016, September 14). Obama urges his backers to help Clinton and ignore 'nonsense': (National Desk). Daum, M. (2016, September 29). Trump's 'dumbsplain debate. Los Angeles Times. 

Decker, C. (2016, September 17). Election 2016; analysis; Tripped up again by his own 

words. Los Angeles Times. 

DeFleur, M.L. (2009) Mass Communication Theories: Explaining Origins, Processes, 

and Effects. Routledge: Florence, KY. 

Demick, B. (2016, October 4). Trump Foundation told to stop raising money; New York's 

attorney general says the mogul's charity is not registered in the state. Los Angeles. 

Diamond, J. (2016, October 2). Trump brings up Clinton's health, questions if she's 'loyal' 

to Bill. CNN Politics. Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2016/10/01/politics/donald-

trump-hillary-clinton-health/index.html. 

Dimitrova, D., & Geske, E. (2009). To cry or not to cry: Media framing of Hillary 

Clinton in the wake of the New Hampshire Primary. International Communication 

Association, 1 , 1-22. 

Dittmar, K. (2016). Campaigning while female. Ms, 26 (1), 24. 

Disis, J. (2017, April 17). All the things Donald Trump has said about releasing his tax 

returns. CNN Money. Retrieved from http://money.cnn.com/2017/04/17/news/donald-

trump-tax-returns/index.html. 

Dolan, K. (2009). The impact of gender stereotyped evaluations on support for women candidates. Political Behavior, 32 (1), 69-88. 

Douthat, R. (2016, October 23). The dangers of Hillary Clinton. New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Dowd, M. (2016, October 12). Solving the riddle of the Slovenian Sphinx and the pussy 

bow: Commentary. New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Druckman, J. N., & Nelson, K. R. (2003). Framing and deliberation: How citizens' 

conversations limit elite influence. American Journal of Political Science, 47 , 729-745. 

Dwoskin, E., & Lakshmanan, I. A. R. (2013, January 10). How Hillary Clinton created a 

U.S. business-promotion machine. Bloomberg Technology . Retrieved 81 

from https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-01-10/how-hillary-clinton-created-

a-u-s-business-promotion-machine. 

Eder, S. (2016, September 14). New York investigating Trump nonprofit: (National Desk). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Eder, S., & Cohen, P. (2016, September 28). After comments about taxes, new clamor to show returns: (National desk). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Eder, S., & Twohey, M. (2016, September, 7). Trump donation his latest brush with fund riles: (National desk). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Egan, Y. (2016, October 28). A final plea to Trump’s America: (Op-Ed). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Ember, S. (2017, February 2) New York Times Co.’s Decline in Print Advertising Tempered by Digital Gains. The New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/02/business/media/new-york-times-q4-earnings.html?_r=0. 

Embry, A., Padgett, M. Y., & Caldwell, C. B. (2008). Can leaders step outside of the 

gender box? An examination of leadership and gender role stereotypes. Journal of 

Leadership & Organizational Studies, 15 (1), 30. 

Entman, R. M. (2007). Framing bias media in the distribution of power. Journal of 

Communication, 57 (1), 163-173. 

Eargle, L. A., Esmail, A. M., & Sullivan, J. M. (2008). Voting the issues or voting the 

demographics? The media’s construction of political candidates credibility. Race, Gender 

& Class, 15 (3), 8-21,23-25,28-31. Faludi, S. (2016, October 30). How Hillary Clinton met Satan: (Op-Ed). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Federal Election Commission. (2016). Federal Election Commission . Retrieved from http://www.fec.gov. 

Finneman, T. (2015). Press Portrayals of Woman Politicians, 1870s—2000s: From “Lunatic” Woodhull to “Polarizing” Palin. Lanham, MA: Lexington Books. 

Fowler, L. L., & Lawless, J. L. (2009). Looking for sex in all the wrong places: Press 

coverage and the electoral fortunes of gubernatorial candidates. Perspectives on 

Politics, 7 , 519-536. 82 Friedman, T. L. (2016, October 26). Trump, alien to all that’s great: Commentary. New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Fridkin, K., & Kenney, P. The Changing Face of Representation: The Gender of U.S. 

Senator and Constituent Communications. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 

Fuller, B. (2008). Election shows this generation of women that sexism is still 

alive. Advertising Age, 79 (34), 4-4,90. 

Gibbons, S. J. (2016). Clinton watch: Special scrutiny for female nominee. Media Report 

to Women, 44 (3), 1-3. Goffman, E. (1974). Frame analysis . New York, NY: Harper & Row. 

Goldstein, A. (2016, August 25). After healthcare missteps a chastened Hillary Clinton 

emerged. The Washington Post. Retrieved from 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/after-health-care-missteps-a-chastened-hillary-

clinton-emerged/2016/08/25/2d200cb4-64b4-11e6-be4e-

23fc4d4d12b4_story.html?utm_term=.b708587960b8. 

Goldstein-Schults, M. M. (2016) The living gender curriculum: Helping FCS students 

analyze gender stereotypes. Journal of Family & Consumer Sciences, 108 (3), 53-62. 

Golshan, T. (2016, September 13). How Hillary Clinton's health passed from an online 

conspiracy theory to a mainstream debate. Vox. Retrieved from 

https://www.vox.com/2016/9/12/12888498/hillary-clinton-health-conspiracy. 

Gordon, A., Shafie, D. M., & Crigler, A. N. (2003). Is negative advertising effective for 

female candidates? An experiment in voters' uses of gender stereotypes. The Harvard 

International Journal of Press/Politics, 8 (3), 35-53. Guskin, E., & Clement, S. (2016, November 2). Poll: Race nearly tied with a week to go. 

Chicago Tribune. 

Haberman, M. (2016a, October 13). Donald Trump recalls his attack dog from the primaries: Donald Trump: (Politics). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Haberman, M. (2016b, October 28). Michelle Obama to join Hillary Clinton at North Carolina rally: (Politics). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Hamburger, T., & Narayanswamy, A. (2016, May 21). Clinton campaign's money 

machine dominates Trump and Sanders in latest FEC reports. The Washington Post. 

Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-83 

politics/wp/2016/05/21/clinton-campaigns-money-machine-dominates-trump-and-

sanders-in-latest-fec-reports/?utm_term=.993e20ee4e1f. 

Hayes, D., & Lawless, J. L. (2015). A non-gendered lens? media, voters, and female 

candidates in contemporary congressional elections. Perspectives on Politics, 13 (1), 95-

118. Healy, P., & Haberman, M. (2016, October 1). Clintons' marriage is Trump's new line of attack: (National desk). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Healy, P., & Martin, J. (2016a, July 26). Democrats make Hillary Clinton a historic nominee. The New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/27/us/politics/dnc-speakers-sanders-clinton.html. 

Healy, P. & Martin, J. (2016b, October 20). Trump won't say if he will accept election's 

result: (National desk). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Helderman, R., & Michelle, Y. H. L. (2016, September 5). Inside Bill Clinton's nearly 

$18 million job as 'honorary chancellor' of a for-profit college: The former president's 

contract showed how his charity work overlapped with the Clinton' private ad public 

Lives. The Washington Post. 

Heldman, C., Carroll, S. J., & Olson, S. (2005). "She brought only a skirt": Print media 

coverage of Elizabeth Dole's bid for the republican presidential nomination. Political 

Communication, 22 , 315-335. Hemingway, M. (2015, May 27). Latest New Yorker cover erases women, minorities from GOP field. The Federalist . Retrieved from http://thefederalist.com/2015/05/27/latest-new-yorker-cover-erases-women-minorities-from-gop-field/. Huddy, L., & Terkidsen, N. (1993). The consequences of gender stereotypes for women candidates at different levels and types of office. Political Research Quarterly, 46 , 503-525. Jeongsub, L. (2011). Intermedia agenda settings and news discourse. Journalism Practice. 5, 227-244. Johnson, J. (2016, October 3a). As news of Trump's taxes breaks, he goes off script at a rally in Pennsylvania. A none-sentence critique goes far off topic for GOP nominee. The Washington Post. 

Johnson, J. (2016, October 23b). The mood shifts for Trump on trail. The Washington Post .84 

Johnson, S. K., Murphy, S. E., Zewdie, S., & Reichard, R. J. (2008). The strong, sensitive 

type: Effects of gender stereotypes and leadership prototypes on the evaluation of male 

and female leaders. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 106 (1), 

39-60. Jones, J. (2009), Breathing life into a public women: Victoria Woodhull's defense of women's sufferage. Rhetoric Review, 28 (4) 352-369. 

Kahn, K. (1992). The role of gender stereotypes in U.S. senate campaigns. Journal of 

Politics (54). 497-517. 

Kahn, K. F., & Goldenberg, E. N. (1991). Women candidates in the news: An 

examination of gender differences in U.S. senate campaign coverage. Public Opinion 

Quarterly, 55 , 180. Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1984). Choices, values, and frames. American Psychologist , 39 (4), 341-350. Kass, J. (2016, October 5). Did Hillary and Bill pave the way for the Donald? Chicago Tribune. 

Kittilson, M. C., & Fridkin, K. (2008). Gender, candidate portrayals, and election campaigns: A comparative perspective. Politics & Gender, 4 , 371-392. Kludt, T. (2016, October, 11). Trump targets Clinton's health in new ad. CNN Politics. Retrieved from (Kahn & Goldenberg, 1991; Major & Coleman, 2008). 

Kranish, M., & Fisher, M. (2016, September 8). The inside story of how 'The Apprentice' rescued Donald Trump. Fortune. Retrieved from http://fortune.com/2016/09/08/donald-

trump-the-apprentice-burnett/. 

Kranish, M., & O'Harrow, R. (2016, January 23). Insude the government's racial boas case against Donald Trump's company, and how he fought it. The Washington Post. 

Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/inside-the-governments-racial-bias-case-against-donald-trumps-company-and-how-he-fought-it/2016/01/23/fb90163e-bfbe-11e5-bcda-62a36b394160_story.html?utm_term=.99bb13d6c426. Krieg, G. J. (2012, August 9). What is a Super PAC? A short history. ABC News .Retrieved from http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/OTUS/super-pac-short-history/story?id=16960267. 

Kristof, N. (2016a, September 15. When a crackpot seeks office: Commentary. New York 

Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 85 Kristof, N. (2016b, November 6). Reasons to say: ‘I’m with her’: Commentary. New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Krugman, P. (2016a, October 24). It’s Trump’s party: Commentary. New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Krugman, P. (2016b, November 4). Who broke politics?: Commentary New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Lawrence, R. G., & Rose, M. (2009). Hillary Clinton's Race For The White House: 

Gender Politics And The Media On The Campaign Trail. Lynne Rienner Pub: Boulder, 

CO. Lawrence, R. G., & Rose, M. (2011). Bringing out the hook: Exit talk in media coverage of Hillary Clinton and past presidential campaigns. Political Research Quarterly, 64 ,870-883. Lederman, J., & Lucey, C. (2016, September 30). Clinton's foe resurrects husband's sex scandal: Dem nominee details what she would do if elected. Chicago Tribune. 

Lee, J., & Lim, Y. (2016). Gendered campaign tweets: The cases of Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump. Public Relations Review. 42 , 849-855. Leonhardt, D. (2016, October 25). Dear republican voters … : Commentary. New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Lippman, W. (1921). Public Opinion. New York, NY: Free Press. 

Los Angeles Times. (2016, November 2). Campaign 2016; Those 'October surprises'; The 

Podesta leaks and the Comey letter are merely distractions, despite Trump's assertions. 

Los Angeles Times. 

Mahler, J. (2016, September 8). Win or lose, Trump will be in capital (with a new hotel): 

National desk. New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Major, L. H., & Coleman, R. (2008). The intersection of race and gender in election 

coverage: What happens when the candidates don't fit the stereotypes? The Howard 

Journal of Communications, 19 , 315-333. 

Mason, M., & Carcamo, C. (2016, September 28). The nation; female, latina and anti-

Trump; the GOP nomonee's treatment of former Miss Universe Alicia Machado could 

hurt him on two fronts. Los Angeles Times. 86 

Manning, J. E. (2017, February 17). Membership of the 115 th Congress: A 

profile. Congressional Research Service. Retrieved 

from http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2914&context=ke 

y_workplace. 

Martin, J. (2016a, September 18). Anything-goes campaign an alarming precedent: 

(News Analysis). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Martin, Jonathan. (2016b, September 22). Clinton struggles to replicate Obama's small-

donor success: (National Desk). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Martin, Jonathan. (2016c, October 25). Clinton urged to send cash to aid congressional 

races: (National Desk). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

McAdams, D. P. (2016) The mind of Donald Trump. Atlantic , 317 (5), 76. 

McManus, D. (2016, October 19). What Clinton needs to do tonight. Los Angeles Times. 

Megerian, C. (2016a, October 10). Presidential debate; Trump brings up Bill Clinton's 

past; Just before the nominee appears in front of the press with the former president's 

accusers. Los Angeles. 

Megerian, C. (2016b, October 24). The nation; Clinton fights apathy among black voters; 

In North Carolina, she speaks bluntly about racial problems in an effort to raise turnout. 

Los Angeles. 

Megerian, C., & Finnegan, M. (2016, September 8). Election 2016; Clinton and Trump 

seek vets' support; Presidential Nominees find themselves on the defensive in forum on 

military issues. Los Angeles Times. 

Megerian, C., & Memoli, M. A. (2016, October 17). Big bucks no small part of Clinton 

run: Unlike Trump, she relies heavily on wealthy donors. Chicago Tribune .

Melanie, M. A., & Memoli, M. A. (2016, November 2). Election 2016; Trump places 

long-shot bet to overturn electoral map. Los Angeles Times. 

Memoli, M.A., & Bierman, N. (2016, November 4). As election nears, foes focus on 

flaws. Chicago Tribune. 

Merica, D. (2016, September 15). Clinton campaign releases new health information. 

CNN Politics Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2016/09/14/politics/clinton-

campaign-releases-new-health-information/index.html. 87 

Miller, M.K., Peake, J.S., & Boulton, B.A. (2010). Testing the Saturday Night Live 

hypothesis:Fairness and bias newspaper coverage of Hillary Clinton’s presidential 

campaign. Politics & Gender, 6 , 169-198. Miranda, C. A. (2016, November 3). A meme movement: In a wild presidential campaign, viral visuals are tops in capturing the imagination of the electorate. Chicago Tribune. 

Morrish, J. (2010). Pantsuits, lipstick, and the oval office: The role of reporter's gender 

differences in the media's portrayal of female political candidates campaigning for 

president of the United States (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest 

Dissertations & Theses Global: Social Sciences. (193350119). Moses, L. (2016, July 12). How The Washington Post grew digital subscriptions 145 

percent. Digiday. Retrieved from http://digiday.com/media/washington-post-grew-

digital-subscriptions-145-percent/. 

Neuman, S. (2017, December 4). Billy Bush: 'Of course' it's Trump's voice on "Access 

Hollywood' tape. NPR. Retrieved from https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-

way/2017/12/04/568255700/billy-bush-of-course-its-trumps-voice-on-access-hollywood-

tape. 

New York Times. (2000, November 8). Hillary Clinton elected to Senate from New York. The New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2000/11/08/politics/hillary-clinton-elected-to-senate-from-new-york.html. New York Times. (2016, July 5). 2016 Delegate Count and Primary Results. The New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/us/elections/primary-calendar-and-

results.html. 

New York Times. (2016a, September 9). A debate disaster waiting to happen: (Editorial). 

New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

New York Times, (2016b, September 17). Mr. Trump’s birther nonsense: (Editorial). 

New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

New York Times. (2016c, September 28). An everywoman moment: Commentary. New 

York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

New York Times. (2016d, November 5). Mr. Trump’s denial of economic reality: (Editorial). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 88 New York Times. (2016e, November 6). Imagining the country on Nov. 9: (Editorial). 

New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

New York Times. (2017f, February 10). Presidential election results: Donald J. Trump wins. The New York Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/elections/results/president. 

Page, C. (2016, October 31). Is Trump the victim of a media conspiracy? Please. Chicago Tribune. 

Parker, A. (Donald Trump says Hillary Clinton doesn’t have 'a presidential look': (Politics). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Parsons, C., & Megerian C. First lady builds star power: As Clinton surrogate, Michelle Obama emerges as moral authority. Chicago Tribune. 

Pan, Z., & Kosicki, G. M. (1993). Framing analysis: An approach to news 

discourse. Political Communication, 10 (1), 55-75. 

Pearson, R. (2016, September 29). Trump resumes Clinton attach: Protesters greet 

republican during Chicago-area stops. Chicago Tribune. 

Penn State (2018). Cohen's kappa statistic for measuring agreement. PennState Eberly 

College of Science. Retrieved from 

https://onlinecourses.science.psu.edu/stat509/node/162. Petrow, S. (2016, October 9). Bad debate behavior shows we have lost the art of discourse: Out candidates interrupt, talk over each other and seemingly don’t listen – they’re setting a terrible example for the rest of us. The Washington Post. 

Pew Research Center. (2015). Women and Leadership . Retrieved from 

http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2015/01/14/chapter-1-women-in-leadership/. 

Pew Research Center. (2017, June 1). Despite subscription surges for largest U.S. newspapers, circulation and revenue fall for industry overall. Pew Research Center. 

Retrieved from http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/06/01/circulation-and-revenue-fall-for-newspaper-industry/. 

Peoples, S., & Colvin, J. (2016, October 9). Defiant Trump: 'I will never drop out': 

Backlash deepens as more in GOP disavow nominee. Chicago Tribune. 

Planned Parenthood. (2018). What are gender roles and stereotypes?. Planned 

Parenthood.org. Retrieved from https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/sexual-

orientation-gender/gender-gender-identity/what-are-gender-roles-and-stereotypes. 89 Poniewozik, J. (2016, October 21). Was that a presidential debate or a pitch for an edgy Trump channel?: (National Desk). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Przybyla, H. M. (2016, September 6). On honesty issues, Hillary Clinton fights own 

missteps,gender stereotypes. USA Today . Retrieved from 

http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/elections/2016/09/06/hillary-clinton-trust-

female-candidates-president-trump/89339494/. 

Rafferty, A. (2016, July 19). It's official: Trump wins GOP presidential nomination. NBC 

News. Retrieved from https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/trump-set-

become-gop-s-official-presidential-nominee-n612616. 

Ritchie, J. (2013). Creating a monster: Online media constructions of Hillary Clinton 

during the democratic primary campaign, 2007-8. Feminist Media Studies, 13 (1), 102-

119. Roberts, D. (2016, October 11). Masculinity’s in a sorry state. Los Angeles Times. 

Robertson, T., Froemling, K., Wells, S., & McCraw, S. (1999). Sex, lies, and videotape: 

An analysis of gender in campaign advertisements. Communication Quarterly, 47 , 333-

341. 

Savransky, R. (2017, July 31). Rasmussen poll: Most don't wan't border wall. The Hill. 

Retrieved from http://thehill.com/homenews/administration/344631-rasmussen-poll-

most-dont-want-border-wall. 

Scheufele, D. A., & Tewksbury, D. (2007). Framing, agenda setting, and priming the 

evolution of three media effects models. Journal of Communication, 57 (1), 9-20. Severin, W. J., & Tankard, J. W. (2001). Communication theories: Origins, methods, and uses in the mass media. New York, NY: Longman. 

Shoop, T. J. (2006). Madam president: A content analysis and media effects approach to 

investigating news media coverage of female presidential primary candidates (Doctoral 

dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global: Social Sciences. 

(304976411). 

Sitton, R. W., (2004) News values (ticcupp!). Comm-Stop. Retrieved from 

https://ronsitton.wordpress.com/reporting/news-values/ 

Sitton, R. W. (2005). Framing by media and social movement organizations: cross-cultural prestige press coverage of the Kyoto Protocol. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from the University of Tennessee, Knoxville. 90 

Skelton, G. (2016, October 6). Capitol journal; Trump, Reagan share just tax dodging. 

Los Angeles Times. 

Statista. (2016). Leading multiplatform print media websites in the United States in August 2016, based on market share of visits. The Statistics Portal. Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/statistics/203948/us-market-shares-of-selected-video-and-

multimedia-websites/. 

Statista (2017a) Number of readers of the Chicago Tribune in the United States from Spring 2008 to spring 2017 (in millions). Statista. Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/statistics/230450/readers-of-the-chicago-tribune-sunday-edition/ 

Statista (2017b) Number of readers of the Los Angeles Times (LA) in the United States from Spring 2008 to spring 2017 (in millions). Statista. Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/statistics/229749/readers-of-the-los-angeles-times-la-daily-

edition/. 

Stephenson, E. (2016, June 20). Trump weighs in on racial profiling. IOL. Retrieved from https://www.iol.co.za/news/world/trump-weighs-in-on-racial-profiling-2036283. Stewart, J. B. (2016a, September 16). Clinton plan for taxes is expansive but complex: (Business/Financial Desk). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Stewart, J. B. (2016b, September 30). Keep the returns, Trump; Just give us a few figures: (Business/Financial Desk). New York Times, Late Edition (East Coast). 

Strutt, S. M. (1994). Framing feminisms: Feminist critiques of patriarchal news 

media (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global: 

Social Sciences. (304150841). Sullivan, S. (2016, October 13). Women accuse Trump of forcible groping and kissing. 

The Washington Post. 

Thayer, E. (2016, September, 25). Why Donald Trump should not be president. The New York Times. 

Trump, D. (1987). Trump: The Art of the Deal . New York, NY: Random House. Trump, D. (2016). Make America Great Again. Retrieved from https://www.donaldjtrump.com. 

United States Census Bureau. (2016). United States census bureau . Retrieved from 

http://www.census.gov/?url=http%3A/www.census.gov/. 91 

Vozzella, L. (2016, October 25). Va. democrats aim to make 2017 governor's race all 

about Donald Trump: With Trump4gov.com democrats link GOP gubernatorial hopefuls 

to Trump. Washington Post. 

Wagner, J., Sullivan, S., & Phillip, A. (2016, November 5). In final appeals, focus on 

turnout. The Washington Post. 

Wahl, D., Cutler, P., & Forbes, A. (2016, October 26). Vote for Christian values, not for Trump. The Washington Post. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016a). Department of Agriculture. All Gov. Retrieved from 

http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-

agriculture?detailsDepartmentID=568. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016b). Department of Commerce. All Gov. Retrieved from 

http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of commerce?detailsDepartmentID=566. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016c). Department of Defense. All Gov. Retrieved from 

http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-defense?detailsDepartmentID=569. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016d). Department of Education. All Gov. Retrieved from 

http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-education?detailsDepartmentID=584. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016e). Department of Energy. All Gov. Retrieved from 

http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-energy?detailsDepartmentID=565. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016f). Department of Health and Human Services. All Gov. Retrieved 

from http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-health-and-human-

services?DepartmentID=570. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016g). Department of Homeland Security. All Gov. Retrieved from 

http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-homeland-

security?detailsDepartmentID=571. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016h). Department of Housing and Urban Development. All Gov. 

Retrieved from http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-housing-and-urban-

development?detailsDepartmentID=572. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016i). Department of Justice. All Gov. Retrieved from 

http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-justice?detailsDepartmentID=573. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016j). Department of Labor. All Gov. Retrieved from 

http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-labor?detailsDepartmentID=574. 92 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016k). State Department. All Gov. Retrieved from 

http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-state?detailsDepartmentID=575. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016l). Department of Interior. All Gov. Retrieved from 

http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-the-

interior?detailsDepartmentID=576. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016m). Treasury Department. All Gov. Retrieved from 

http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-the 

treasury?detailsDepartmentID=577. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016n). Department of Transportation. All Gov. Retrieved from 

http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-

transportation?detailsDepartmentID=578. 

Wallechinsky, D. (2016o). Department of Veterans Affairs. All Gov. Retrieved from 

http://www.allgov.com/departments/department-of-veteran-

affairs?detailsDepartmentID=567. 

Wasburn, P. C., & Wasburn, M. H. (211). Media coverage of women in politics: The curious case of Sarah Palin. Media, Culture & Society, 33 , 1027-1041. Washington Post. (2016a, September 7). Cashing in on presidential prestige: The Clintons’ rapaciousness raises questions about what to expect from our former presidents. 

The Washington Post. 

Washington Post. (2016b, September 8). Trump and Priebus’ sexism show the challenges Clinton will face – even if she wins: Reminders that the gender playing field isn’t even yet. The Washington Post. 

Washington Post. (2016c, September 19. After the weekend’s attacks, Clinton acted like a leader. Trump did not.: The diverging reactions said a lot about the candidates and their ability to serve as president. The Washington Post. 

Washington Post. (2016d, September 19). A vote for Trump is a vote for climate 

catastrophe: The Republican nominee can’t wait to rip up the agreements we need to help 

fight carbon emissions. The Washington Post. 

Washington Post. (2016e, September 25). It’s beyond debate that Donald Trump is unfit to be president: Monday’s event can’t change the GOP nominee’s lengthy record on unpresidential words and deeds. The Washington Post. 93 Washington Post. (2016f, September 30). Most people grow out of middle school. Not Donald Trump: Do we really want a childhood bully in the Oval Office?. The Washington Post. 

Washington Post. (2016g, October 2). Trump’s last tweet?: His latest outburst makes it cleat that he is far too nasty to run the country. The Washington Post. 

Washington Post. (2016h, October 10). A new low, even for Donald Trump: With his campaign sinking and Republican office holders urging him to withdraw, he decides that his best response is to snarl. The Washington Post. 

Washington Post. (2016i, October 10). Trump files for moral bankruptcy. The Washington Post. 

Washington Post. (2016j, October 10). At the second presidential debate, a Trump at odds with everyone and everything: It was a very different GOP nominee who showed up on Sunday night. The Washington Post. 

Washington Post. (2016k, October 10). Trump can’t stop his campaign’s death spiral: Only one candidate last night actually debated. The Washington Post. 

Washington Post. (2016l, October 13). The closing argument against Donald Trump: For 16 months, Washington Post columnists and contributors have been making the case against him. The Washington Post. 

Washington Post. (2016m, October 13). Hillary Clinton for president. The Washington 

Post. 

Washington Post. (2016n, October 14). Don’t be afraid. Be worried.: The decisiveness 

and acrimony of this election season will be difficult to stanch. The Washington Post. 

Washington Post. (2016o, October 17). Trump spirals into ideological psychosis: The Republican candidate has managed to defy even the lowest expectations. The Washington Post. 

Washington Post (2016p, October 17). The Trump Demogogon devours Raul Ryan: GOP leaders try to harness the power of parallel universes to stop him, but their nominee is eating them alive. The Washington Post. 

Washington Post. (2016q, October 19). Trump is rigging the election: No matter who wins, America loses: Mr. Trump’s indifference to facts creates an alternate reality that threatens democracy. The Washington Post. 94 Washington Post. (2016r, October 20). Donald Trump, spoiled brat in chief: His contempt for democracy shows that he needs a timeout. The Washington Post. 

Wasserman, D. (2017, January 3). 2016 popular vote tracker. The Cook Political Report. 

Retrieved from http://cookpolitical.com/story/10174. 

Wiley, F. (2017). Before Hillary. American History, 51 (6), 34-41. Wilhelm, H., (2016, September 30). Attention, Christians: Trump should not be 'our jerk'. 

Chicago Tribune. 

Wimmer, R. D. (2010). Mass Media Research: An Introduction . Independence, KY: Cengage-Wadsworth. Worn, E. (2016, October 11). Depth charge: Trump formally lends his voice to the ‘lock her up!’ chant. Chicago Tribune. 

Zeldes, G. A., & Fico, F. (2005). Race and gender: An analysis of sources and reporters 

in the networks' coverage of the 2000 presidential campaign. Mass Communication & 

Society, 8 , 373-385. 

Zorn, E. (2016, October 11). Depth charge: Trump formally lends his voice to the 'Lock 

her up!' chant. Chicago Tribune. 95
