Title: 

URL Source: https://www.hsgac.senate.gov/wp-content/uploads/Mislabeled-as-a-Threat_Public_Report-2.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 04 Nov 2024 13:24:12 GMT

Markdown Content:
2

TABLE OF CO NTE NTS 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 4

II. FI NDI NGS OF FACT A ND RECOMME NDATIO NS ................................ ...................... 6

III. INTRODUCTIO N ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 9

IV. GOVER NME NT SCREE NING ACTIVITIES HAVE EXPA NDED SIG NIFICA NTLY 

OVER THE PAST 20 YEARS ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 9

A. Today’s Terrorist Watchlist was Established in the Aftermath of 9/11 ................................ .................. 10 

B. How the Terrorist Watchlist Works ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 11 

C. Government Watchlisting and Screening Activities Have Expanded Significantly ............................... 14 

1. Expansion of the Government Watchlisting ................................ ................................ ............................... 14 

2. Expansion of TSA and CBP Screening at Airports and Ports of Entry ................................ ...................... 16 

D. In 2023, TSA and CBP Subject U.S. Citizens to Additional Screening for at Least 22 Different 

Reasons ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 19 

1. TSA Conducts Additional Screening Based on at Least 10 Screening Lists and Processes ...................... 19 

2. CBP Conducts Additional Screening Based on at Least 10 Other Lists, Processes and Inspections ......... 24 

3. Additional Screening Can Be Prompted for a Least 2 Other Reasons Separate from the Terrorist 

Watchlist ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................. 28 

V. AGE NCIES HAVE USED OPAQUE PROCESSES TO ADD U.S. CITIZE NS TO THE 

TERRORIST WATCHLIST ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 28 

A. Watchlist -Related Screening can have Severe Impacts on U.S. Citizens ................................ ................. 28 

B. U.S. Citizens have been Misidentified as Matching the Watchlist During Screening Activities ........... 29 

C. Groups Have Concerns about Agencies Using the “Reasonable Suspicion” Standard to Add U.S. 

Citizens to the Terrorist Watchlist ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 30 

D. The Extent to Which the Terrorist Watchlist Is Shared outside the Federal Government is Unclear . 31 

VI. U.S. CITIZE NS HAVE BEE N SUBJECTED TO ADDITIO NAL SCREE NING OR 

TRAVEL RESTRICTIO NS WITH LITTLE I NFORMATIO N OR RECOURSE ............. 32 

A. DHS Generally Does Not Tell Travelers Why They Are Subjected to Additional Screening as Part of 

the Redress Process ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 32 

B. DHS Now Tells U.S. Persons if They Are on the No-Fly List, after a Court Found the Previous 

Redress Process Violated Individuals’ Due Process Rights ................................ ................................ ............... 35 

C. Multiple Courts have found the Current Redress Process is Constitutional, but Legal Challenges are 

Ongoing ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 35 

VII. WIDESPREAD DISCRIMI NATIO N ALLEGATIO NS EXACERBATE CO NCER NS

ABOUT TSA A ND CBP SCREE NING ACTIVITIES ................................ ............................ 38 3      

> A. TSA Receives Thousands of Discrimination Complaints Each Year About Its Screening Practices ... 38
> B. CBP Currently Faces Ongoing Litigation and an Internal Review Spurred by Religious
> Discrimination Accusations ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 39

VIII. OVERSIGHT OF TERRORIST WATCHLIST A ND SCREE NING ACTIVITIES 

HAS BEE N FRAGME NTED, PREVE NTI NG A COMPREHE NSIVE A ND CO NSISTE NT

INDEPE NDE NT ASSESSEME NT ................................ ................................ ........................... 40 

IX. CO NCLUSIO N ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 41 4

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

After the September 11, 2001 attacks, Congress swiftly took action to better protect the 

nation against the threat of terrorist attacks. The federal government subsequently established 

one comprehensive “terrorist watchlist, ” which federal agencies continue to use to identify 

known and suspected terrorists. In addition to the terrorist watchlist, Congress and the executive 

branch expanded traveler screening at airports and other ports of entry to combat threats of 

terrorism and other security risks. A portion of the screening is driven by the terrorist watchlist, 

but the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and Customs and Border Protection (CBP) 

screen travelers for other reasons as well. Today, U.S. travelers may be screened for at least 22 

different re asons. While redundancy is a valuable security tool, g iven the similarity between 

some of these reasons, there is a likelihood of unnecessary duplication , and repeated and 

unwarranted screening can have profound impact s on Americans. It can also spread limited 

national security resources out broadly rather than ef fectively target changing threats. 

For years, individuals and community groups have expressed concern with the reach of 

the federal government’s terrorist watchlist and frustration with repeated screenings at airports 

they believed were driven by individuals’ inclusion on the terrorist watch list . While protecting 

Americans from the threat of terrorist attacks is paramount, potential abuse and/or lack of 

meaningful redress for wrongful screening by our government risks eroding Americans’ civil 

rights and civil liberties. To date, absent a few limi ted court rulings following lawsuits 

challenging the constitutionality of government screening practices and several privacy impact 

assessments , the executive branch has revealed hardly any information about what watchlists it 

maintains, who is included, and why or how those lists are used . In addition, the executive 

branch has not revealed what agencies and private sector entities have access to this data and 

how that information is used. Many Americans are left in the dark as they continue to be 

repeatedly pulled aside to be interviewed and searched during travel , and in some cases, 

prevented from flying, resulting in harms ranging from embarrassment, to loss of employment 

opportunities , or even wrongful arrest. 

At the direction of U.S. Senator Gary Peters, Chairman of the Senate Homeland Security 

and Governmental Affairs Committee, majority committee staff examined existing authorities 

and current uses for the terrorist watchlist and other reasons individuals may receive additional 

screening (sometimes referred to as secondary inspection or enhanced screening) while traveling. 

The report finds that , in some cases , intentionally redundant layers of screenings associated with 

the terrorist watchlist and other government screening practices may be subjecting U.S. citizens 

to avoidable and unnecessary harm . Additionally, the report finds that the federal government 

lacks safeguards necessary to prevent potential discrimination and the redress process established 

to re solve travelers’ concerns about screening problems and other travel issues does not provide 

actionable information or assistance . A s a result, Americans misidentified or subjected to 

discrimination do not have meaningful options to resolve concerns. 

In a necessary attempt to protect our country from terrorist threats, the federal 

government has created a system so opaque and complicated it is difficult for U.S. citizens to 

understand. Certain communities —Muslim, Arab , and South Asian Americans in particula r—

claim they have been unfairly targeted. Keeping our country safe and our screening systems 5

targeted and effective , while simultaneously giving innocent people a path out of never -ending 

screenings requires a clear understanding and holistic review of government screening systems to 

ensure specific individuals and communities are not unfairly and unnecessarily targeted and a 

substantive redress process exists. More information about the executive branch’s watchlisting 

and redress processes needs to be shared with the public. And the federal government must 

create a more effective redress system to sufficiently protect Americans ’ civil rights and liberties .

This will ensure that the government’s limited counterterrorism resources are best spent on 

protecting Americans. 

A watchlist that is not properly maintained , coupled with unnecessarily duplicative 

screening practices that are not frequently assessed for their effectiveness is a risk to our national 

security . I t may not reflect the latest threats, it could overextend limited security resources that 

should be focused on the best ways to protect Americans , and it breaks the trust with innocent 

Americans who get caught up in this net with no way out . The goal s of this report and its 

recommended reforms are to strengthen our national security and ensure our screening systems 

are effectively addressing the serious terror threats we face. 

Congress and the executive branch must work together to ensure that processes to protect 

the United States from future terrorist attacks and other security threats more effectively meet 

their intended goals without inflicting an undue burden on the traveling public. Federal agencies 

that use or oversee watchlist data need to improve transparency with the public and Congress. 

Finally, Congress should ensure sufficient constitutional protections and oversight mechanisms 

are in place to guide executive branch actions . These steps will strengthen our national security 

by instilling confidence that government practices that protect Americans eliminate unnecessary 

redundancies and effectively use limited resources while also balanc ing Americans’ civil 

liberties. 6

II. FI NDI NGS OF FACT AND RECOMME NDATIO NS

FI NDI NGS OF FACT 

1.  There are at least 22 different mechanisms that might lead Americans to receive 

additional screening at airports and other ports of entry or be denied the ability to 

travel. Some of these reasons may be derived from the terrorist watchlist, but they may 

also be related to agencies’ other security measures , including their agriculture, 

immigration, health, and law enforcement missions , as well as at the discretion of a

primary screening officer. In fact, as of 2019, U.S. citizens and lawful permanent 

residents make up less than 0.5% of the terrorist watchlist , and therefore screening is 

more likely to be for reasons other than inclusion in the terrorist watchlist. When it 

comes to TSA, for example, the vast majority of pre -determined screenings are the result 

of random selection. 

2.  The size of the terrorist watchlist has increased dramatically . As of November 2022, 

there are approximately 1.8 million records in the terrorist watchlist , up from 150,000 in 

2004. 

3.  The executive branch watchlists more than just terrorists. The Terrorist Screening 

Center (TSC) manages the Threat Screening System (TSS) which maintains records in 

multiple datasets including terrorist screening, military detainee, transnational -organized 

crime, and additional datasets . Additionally, the terrorist watchlist includes individuals 

who are relatives or associates of known or suspected terrorists , and individuals it 

suspects of being terrorists but does not have enough supporting evidence to list as 

terrorists .

4.  Non -government al entities have access to terrorist watchlist data. Executive branch 

agencies share terrorist watchlist information with state, local, Tribal, and foreign 

partners. Additionally, federal agencies have given over 500 entities in the private sector ,

such as police and security forces of colleges, hospitals, and prisons, access to a subset of 

the terrorist watchlist for law enforcement purposes .

5.  The executive branch is not holistically assessing whether discrimination is 

occurring across the full screening enterprise . TSA and CBP screen travelers under 

different authorities and for different reasons, yet individuals experience their travel 

process as a whole. Although each component assesses the privacy and civil liberties 

impacts of different aspects of their screening systems, n either TSA nor CBP collect data 

to assess whether there are individuals and groups that face repeated screening because of 

the agencies’ layered approach .

6.  The redress process is not transparent. The Department of Homeland Security 

Traveler Redress Inquiry Program (DHS TRIP) does not provide individuals with 

information about why they are experiencing additional screening or if their application 

for redress will affect their status on the terrorist watchlist , nor does it provide Congress 

with information on how many errors, corrections, or revisions are made as a result of 7

redress efforts . Combined with the multiple reasons people might receive additional 

screening, travelers who apply for redress are left with little understanding of what they 

will experience the next time they travel or whether redress worked. 

RECOMME NDATIO NS

1.  Ensure Full Accountability of the Watchlist Enterprise : Due to the scope of the 

terrorist watchlist , its opacity, the lack of oversight, and its impact on the lives of 

Americans and l awful permanent residents included on the list, Congress should request 

the relevant Inspectors General conduct a coordinated , full -scope review of the watchlist 

enterprise, including a quality assurance review of nominations and examination of 

information sharing practices. 

2.  Reform the Redress Process : Congress should require the Secretary of the Depart ment 

of Homeland Security (DHS) to provide Congress with a plan to meaningfully reform the 

redress process. This plan should ensure there is a real path for U.S. citizens and lawful 

permanent residents to seek redress from the watchlist and other screening processes, 

improve transparency, and build confidence in the screening and redress processes. 

Further, to make sure this plan balance s national security with civil liberties as well as 

integrate s feedback from the public , the Secretary should develop the new redress process 

in coordinatio n with representatives of impacted communities .

3.  Establish a Screening and Watchlisting Council : Congress should create a Screening 

and Watchlisting Advisory Council at DHS composed of government and non -

governmental representatives to advise the Secretary on the development, 

implementation , modification, and oversight of screening, watchlisting, and redress 

policies and processes at DHS . This council would create a venue for ongoing dialogue 

between relevant government representatives and members of communities impacted by 

DHS policies as well as outside experts. 

4.  Holistically Track Screening Activities : Congress should direct DHS to begin tracking 

all additional screenings by both TSA and CBP in a systematic manner across the 

screening enterprise , including the reasons for screenings, and whether they impact 

specific individuals and communities . DHS should provide annual reports to Congress 

outlining the full number of screenings each year, broken down by reasons for screening, 

individuals screened, and whether , in tracking this data, DHS uncovers discrimination or 

disproportionate impacts on specific individuals or communities. This would allow both 

DHS and Congress to assess the impact screenings across the enterprise have on groups 

and individuals and whether the redundancy DHS has built into the system also leads t o

discrimination. 

5.  Terrorist Screening Center Should Annual ly Report to Congress : The Terrorist 

Screening Center (TSC) should provide to all relevant congressional committees the 2023 

Watchlisting Guidance and any new version each time it is updated as well as annually 

report the types of records contained within the Threat Screening System (TSS) and the 

entities that use information contained therein (e.g. list of executive branch departments 8

and agencies, law enforcement entities, and private sector entities).  Furthermore, 

Congress should direct the TSC to analyze records in the TSS against the new 

Watchlisting Guidance and provide an annual report with the number of records added, 

edited, and removed to all relevant congressional committees. 

6.  Evaluate Constitutional Protections : Congress should consider whether existing 

watchlist and screening activities have sufficient constitutional protections for individuals 

who are subjected to them by conducting oversight and exploring legislation . Congress 

should also authorize the DHS Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties and direct it to 

review all relevant TSA and CBP policies to determine whether sufficient safeguards are 

in place . Additionally, Congress should direct the Government Accountability Office to 

evaluate the effectiveness and potential bias in CBP’s Tactical Terrorism Response 

Teams , which is one screening mechanism at airports and other ports of entry .9

III. INTRODUCTIO N

After the September 11, 2001 attacks , the federal government expanded screening at 

airports and other ports of entry to prevent and respond to threats of terrorism and other security 

risks , and consolidated and expanded the terrorist watchlist to list and identify known or 

suspected terrorist s. Various agencies are responsible for populating, vetting, and reviewing 

proposals for nominating, or adding , individuals to this list . Since this expansion, which was put 

in place over the last two decades, no terrorists have succeeded in bringing down a U.S. aircraft, 

although there have been continuing successful and unsuccessful plots abroad . But government 

screening and the terrorist watchlist also affect individuals, sometimes with profound personal, 

professional, and constitutional concerns. 

While each mechanism is intended to keep the country safe, certain communities , such as 

Muslim, Arab and South Asian Americans, report they continue to be subject to disparate 

screening during travel. It h as become a multi -generational issue with children now experiencing 

the same delays at airports and other egregious experiences , such as separation from family 

members and loss of employment opportunities , as their parents. Moreover, the American people 

have a general lack of understanding of the terrorist watchlist and screenin g activities , making 

both the experience of screening and the process of seeking remedy, also known as redress ,

much more challenging .

For these reasons, Senator Peters directed majority committee staff to examine how the 

terrorist watchlist functions , how it may impact individuals , and what, if anything, should be 

done to address undue burden s while maintaining the safety and security of the traveling public .

There are multiple, and sometime s unrelated, reasons why individuals may be subject to 

additional screening at ports of entry, particularly airports . As such, the report also discusses 

other government watchlists as well as a more expansive set of Transportation Security 

Administration (TSA) and U.S. Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) activities at airports and 

other ports of entry that may result in additional screening. 1

Much of the information contained in this report is publicly available but remains 

difficult to connect and understand . Majority committee staff spoke to relevant executive branch 

agencies to learn more about their watchlist and screening processes and incorporated 

information from those interviews. Some of this information has previously been restricted from 

release to the public and some agencies have failed to be fully responsive to requests for 

additional information . Specifically, both the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the 

Department of Homeland Security (DHS) failed to fully provide responsive documents and 

information that the committee requested. The committee intends to ensure that agencies are 

accountable to these requests and will continue to follow -up. 

IV. GOVER NME NT SCREE NING ACTIVITIES HAVE EXPA NDED 

SIG NIFICA NTLY OVER THE PAST 20 YEARS    

> 1U.S. Customs and Border Protection most often refers to this as secondary inspection , whereas the Transportation
> and Security Administration refers to this as enhanced screening. For simplicity in this report, all forms of this
> screening will be referred to as “additional screening.”

10 

A. Today’s Terrorist Watchlist was Established in the Aftermath of 9/11 

To protect the United States, Congress has instructed federal agencies to assess potential 

threats to domestic air transportation as well as implement methods to identify individuals 

known to pose a terrorism threat , continuously monitor threats, share information about such 

threats, and prevent the entry of terrorists into the United States. 2 In response to the failure to 

share information between agencies that may have helped stop the 9/11 terrorists from entering 

the United States or board ing airplanes on that day , the executive branch took steps to 

consolidate its approach to terrorist watchlisting and use of terrorist and suspected terrorist 

information in screening processes. 3

The terrorist watchlist, as it is commonly referred to and as it will be referred to in this 

report , is actually called the Terrorist Screening Dataset, which is managed by the Terrorist 

Screening Center (TSC). 4 The TSC , a multi -agency body administered by the FBI, manages the 

terrorist watchlist and the broader system in which it is housed, the Threat Screening System. 5

This watchlist , and the entit y that administer s it, are a consolidation of numerous watchlists and 

structures that pre -date 9/11 and were revised and reformed in the two decades that followed .

Two months following the 9/11 attacks , Congress established the Transportation Security 

Administration (TSA) to be responsible for the security of all modes of transportation, including 

airline travel and transferred screening responsibilities from the Federal Aviation Administration 

(F AA) to TSA. 6 Congress also made TSA responsible for establishing procedures for air carriers 

to identify travelers who may pose a threat, den y boarding , and notify law enforcement, where 

necessary. 7 The following year, Congress created DHS, and in 2003, President Bush issued a 

Presidential Directive instructing the Attorney General to establish an organization to consolidate 

the government's approach to terrorism screening and to provide for the appropriate and lawful 

use of suspected terrorist information in screening processes. 8

The National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States (also known as 

the 9/11 Commission ) found that at the time of 9/11 attacks, the FAA only had 12 people on its                          

> 2E.g., Aviation Security Improvement Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101 -604; Aviation and Transportation Security Act,
> Pub. L. No. 107 -71; Homeland Security Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107 -296.
> 3E.g., Homeland Security Presidential Directive -6: Directive on Integration and Use of Screening Information to
> Protect Against Terrorism (Sep. 16, 2003); Homeland Security Presidential Directive -11: Comprehensive Terrorist -
> Related Screening Procedures (Aug. 27, 2004).
> 4The Terrorist Screening Dataset (TSDS) was previously called the Terrorist Screening Database (TSDB). The
> TSDS is the U.S. government’s consolidated database comprised of identity records of those known to be or are
> reasonably suspected of being involved in terrorist activities, commonly referred to as the terrorist watchlist.
> Congressional Research Service, The Terrorist Screening Database and Preventing Terrorist Travel (R44678)
> (Nov. 7, 2016); Terrorist Screening Center response to the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee staff (Nov. 7, 2022), on file with Committee ; Terrorist Screening Center, Briefing with Senate Homeland
> Security and Governmental Affairs Committee staff (June 26, 2023).
> 5See Congressional Research Service, The Terrorist Screening Database and Preventing Terrorist Travel (R44678)
> (Nov. 7, 2016).
> 649 U.S.C. §114(d); Aviation and Transportation Security Act of 2001, Pub. L. No. 107 -71.
> 749 U.S.C. § 114(h)(3).
> 8Homeland Security Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107 -296; Homeland Security Presidential Directive 6: Directive on
> Integration and Use of Screening Information to Protect against Terrorism (Sep. 16, 2003).

11 

No Fly List despite calls on the Central Intelligence Agency and FBI to provide terrorist 

watchlist information four years earlier and was unaware of the State Department’s list of known 

or suspected terrorists .9 While some of the 9/11 terrorists were selected for additional screening, 

at the time, the only required additional screening was of their checked bags. 10 To remedy these 

shortcomings, and to carry out the President’s directive, in 20 03 , the Attorney General —acting 

through the Director of the FBI, and in coordination with the Secretary of State, the newly 

created position of Secretary of Homeland Security, and the Director of Central Intelligence —

created the TSC. 11 The TSC was tasked with maintaining a consolidated terrorist watchlist – then 

known as the Terrorist Screening Database. 12 Moreover, the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism 

Prevention Act of 2004, as amended, directed TSA to develop an advanced passenger 

prescreening system and assume from aircraft operators the responsibility of matching passenger 

information to the No Fly and Selectee Lists. 13 

B. How the Terrorist Watchlist Works             

> 9National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, The 9/11 Commission Report: Final Report of
> the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States , pg. 83 (July 22, 2004).
> 10 See Id . at pg. 1 -4.
> 11 Terrorist Screening Center, Memorandum of Understanding on the Integration and Use of Screening Information
> to Protect Against Terrorism (Sep. 16, 2003).
> 12 Department of Justice, Office of Inspector General, Audit of the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Management of
> Terrorist Watchlist Nominations (Audit Report 14 -16) (Mar. 2014).
> 13 Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004, Pub. L. No. 108 -548.

12 

For someone to be placed on this watchlist, the government must nominate that 

individual to be included. The U.S. embassies, consulates, and intelligence and law enforcement 

agencies responsible for making these nominations do so by proposing individuals known or 

reasonably suspected to be terrorists , as well as others, to the terrorist watchlist 14 According to 

the FBI, 

A known terrorist is: 

an individual whom the U.S. government knows is engaged, has been engaged, or 

who intends to engage in terrorism and/or terrorist activity, including an 

individual (a) who has been charged, arrested, indicted, or convicted for a crime 

related to terrorism by U.S. government or foreign government authorities; or (b) 

identified as a terrorist or member of a d esignated foreign terrorist organization 

pursuant to statute, Executive Order, or international legal obligation pursuant to a 

United Nations Security Council Resolution. 15 

A suspected terrorist is: 

an individual who is reasonably suspected to be, or has been, engaged in conduct 

constituting, in preparation for, in aid of terrorism and/or terrorist activities based 

on an articulable and reasonable suspicion. 16 

In testimony before Congress, in 2014, former TSC Director Christopher Piehota stated 

that an individual’s inclusion in the terrorist watchlist must not be based solely on hunches, 

guesses, First Amendment protected activity, or identifying factors such as race, ethnicity, 

national origin, or religious affiliation. 17 According to the Government Accountability Office 

(GAO ), if an agency determines a nexus to terrorism no longer exists, it must provide 

information to remove the individual from the terrorist watchlist , consistent with Homeland 

Security Presidential Directive -6 (HSPD -6) -Directive on Integration and Use of Screening                            

> 14 Individuals are included in the terrorist watchlist when there is a reasonable suspicion the individual is known or
> suspected to have en gaged in terrorist activities. To meet this “reasonable suspicion standard,” nominating agencies
> must rely on articulable intelligence and rational inferences to provide an objective factual basis to believe an
> individual is a known or suspected terrorist. Congressional Research Service, The Terrorist Screening Database and
> Prevent Terrorist Travel (R44678) (Nov. 7, 2016); Terrorist Screening Center, Frequently Asked Questions (Apr.
> 11, 2016) .
> 15 Terrorist Screening Center, Frequently Asked Questions (Apr. 11, 2016) .
> 16 Congressional Research Service, Terrorist Databases and the No -Fly List: Procedural Due Process and Other
> Legal Issues (R43730) (Jul y27, 2016); Terrorist Screening Center ,Frequently Asked Questions (Apr. 11, 2016 );
> Federal Bureau of Investigation response to the Senate Homeland and Governmental Affairs Committee staff (Oct.
> 13, 2023), on file with Committee .
> 17 House Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee on Transportation Security, Testimony Submitted for the
> Record of Director Christopher Piehota, Terrorist Screening Center, Hearing on Safeguarding Privacy and Civil
> Liberties While Keeping our Skies Safe , 113th Cong. (Sep. 18, 2014) (H. Hrg. 113 -86 ).

13 

Information to Protect Against Terrorism .18 However, the FBI told the majority committee staff 

this requirement does not appear in HSPD -6. 19 

The information contained in the terrorist watchlist includes identifying information that 

helps the government conduct screening activities such as background checks, passport reviews, 

and visa applications. 20 In accordance with underlying policies and authorities, t he primary U.S. 

government agencies that use a subset of the terrorist watchlist and broader Threat Screening 

System are: 

• Department of Homeland Security (DHS), including: 

o TSA for transportation security; 

o CBP for screening travelers at ports of entry and individuals encountered 

between ports of entry; 

• the FBI for restricted dissemination in the National Crime Information Center for 

domestic law enforcement screening; 

• the Department of State for passport and visa screening; and 

• the Department of Defense for base access screening. 21 

The TSC regularly reviews and audits the terrorist watchlist to ensure it contains accurate 

and timely information. 22 The process to remove terrorist watchlist records is similar to the 

nomination process in that removal forms are submitted and reviewed prior to import into the 

terrorist watchlist, thereby removing the record. 23  

> 18

Government Accountability Office, Terrorist Watchlist: Routinely Assessing Impacts of Agency Actions since the 

December 25, 2009, Attempted Attack Could Help Inform Future Efforts (GAO -12 -476) (May 2012); Homeland 

Security Presidential Directive -6: Directive on Integration and Use of Screening Information to Protect against 

Terrorism (Sep. 16, 2003).  

> 19

Federal Bureau of Investigation response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

majority staff (Oct. 13, 2023), on file with Committee.  

> 20

Congressional Research Service, The Terrorist Screening Database and Preventing Terrorist Travel (R44678) 

(Nov. 7, 2016).  

> 21

Some federal and local agencies can see the known or suspected terrorist record in the National Crime Information 

Center when screening job applicants. Federal Bureau of Investigation response to the Senate Homeland Security 

and Governmental Affairs Commi ttee staff (Oct. 13, 2023), on file with Committee ; Terrorist Screening Center, 

Frequently Asked Questions (Apr. 11, 2016); Congressional Research Service, The Terrorist Screening Database 

and Prevent Terrorist Travel (R44678) (Nov. 7, 2016) ; Department of Homeland Security response to Senate 

Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee majority staff (Dec. 14, 2023), on file with Committee . 

> 22

Terrorist Screening Center, Frequently Asked Questions (Apr. 11, 2016).  

> 23

Department of Justice, Office of Inspector General, Audit of the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Management of 

Terrorist Watchlist Nominations (Audit Report 14 -16) (Mar. 2014). 14 

C. Government Watchlist ing and Screening Activities Have Expanded Significantly 

1. Expansion of the Government Watchlisting 

Growth in Size 

Since the consolidation of the government’s approach to terrorism screening after the 

9/11 attacks , the number of records added to the terrorist watchlist has grown significantly. Th e

Department of Justice (DOJ) Inspector General testified before Congress that in April 20 04 ,

shortly after the TSC was established, the database included approximately 150,000 records. 24 

As of November 2022, t here are approximately 1.8 million records ; U.S. citizens and lawful 

permanent residents ma de up less than 7,000 of those records (less than half a percent of the total 

records in the terrorist watchlist) .25 Because multiple records may relate to one individual, the 

actual number of individuals in the terrorist watchlist is fewer than the number of records. 

Regardless, this growth reflects a significant change. 

Growth in Categories 

Additionally, over the course of its existence, the terrorist watchlist has further expanded 

in to categories beyond known and suspected terrorists. These categories include “exception 

records” which may include information about r elatives, associates, or others closely connected 

with known or suspected terrorists , as well as endorsers and inciters of terrorism, whose precise 

terrorist support activity is unknown. 26 Exception records do not meet the same minimum 

standard for inclusion required for other records in the terrorist watchlist and are used primarily 

to determine the admissibility of individuals trying to enter the United States .27 The exceptions 

records might also be used for other reasons too, such as background screenings for TSA 

credentials like Transportation Worker Identification Credential (TWIC) , which is for workers 

who need access to certain maritime facilities and vessels .28  

> 24

Terrorist watchlist records only include “terrorist identifiers” such as name and date of birth. Until the government 

can confirm those identifiers are connected to one individual, they remain separate records in the terrorist watchlist. 

Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, Testimony Submitted for the Record of 

Inspector General Glenn A. Fine, Department of Justice, Hearing on Watching the Watch Lists: Building an 

Effective Terrorist Screening System , 110 th Cong. (Oct. 24, 2007) (S. Hrg. 110 -621); House Homeland Security 

Committee, Subcommittee on Transportation Security, Testimony Submitted for the Record of Director Christopher 

M. Piehota, Terrorist Screening Center, Hearing on Safeguarding Privacy and Civil Liberties While Keeping Our 

Skies Safe , 113 th Cong. (Sep. 18, 2014) (H. Hrg . 113 -86).  

> 25

Terrorist Screening Center, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee staff 

(June 26, 2023); Terrorist Screening Center response to the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs 

Majority Committee staff (Nov. 7, 2022 ), on file with Committee . 

> 26

National Counterterrorism Center, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

staff (May 23, 2023); Terrorist Screening Center, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental 

Affairs Committee majority staff (Sept. 2 2, 2022); See also , Salloum v. Kable , Declaration of Jason V. Herring, 

(June 21, 2021), ECF 37 -1.  

> 27

Terrorist Screening Center, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee staff 

(June 26, 2023).  

> 28

Id. ; Transportation Security Administration, TWIC (https://www.tsa.gov/for -industry/twic ) (accessed July 27, 

2023). 15 

After the failed terrorist attack in 2009 by Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, also known as 

the “Underwear Bomber,” who attempted to detonate two high explosives and a syringe 

containing other chemicals on Northwest Airlines Flight 253, the watchlisting community 

reexamined its terrorist watchlisting procedures. 29 The government had failed to include 

Abdulmutallab on the terrorist watchlist and prevent him from boarding an airplane destined for 

Detroit, Michigan, despite having sufficient information to do so. Following the incident, the 

TSC updated its procedures to address gaps in information sharing and weaknesse s in the 

nominations process. The updated guidance increased the number of nominations received, 

subsequently resulting in an increase in the number of records within the terrorist watchlist after 

2010. 30 

In 2015, because of threats posed by transnational organized crime (TOC) and following 

President Obama ’s issuance of the “Strategy to Combat Transnational Organized Crime ,” the 

U.S. Attorney General broadened the TSC authority to extend watchlisting to include TOC 

actors, thereby further expanding government watchlisting. 31 CBP uses the TOC list for 

screening, and while TSA does not use it for airport screening, TSA does use the TOC list for 

credential vetting purposes .32 Moreover, in 2018 , the Attorney General also granted the TSC 

authority to maintain additional datasets. 33  

> 29

Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Underwear Bomber” Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab Pleads Guilty (Oct. 12, 

2011) (https://archives.fbi.gov/archives/detroit/press -releases/2011/underwear -bomber -umar -farouk -abdulmutallab -

pleads -guilty); Government Accountability Office, Terrorist Watchlist: Routinely Assessing Impacts of Agency 

Actions since the December 25, 2009, Attempted Attack Could Help Inform Future Efforts (GAO -12 -476) (May 

2012) . 

> 30

Id . Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Underwear Bomber” Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab Pleads Guilty (Oct. 12, 

2011) (https://archives.fbi.gov/archives/detroit/press -releases/2011/underwear -bomber -umar -farouk -abdulmutallab -

pleads -guilty); Government Accountability Office, Terrorist Watchlist: Routinely Assessing Impacts of Agency 

Actions since the December 25, 2009, Attempted Attack Could Help Inform Future Efforts (GAO -12 -476) (May 

2012) . 

> 31

Department of Justice, Attorney General Order No. 3548 -2015 (Aug. 2015).  

> 32

Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

majority staff (Dec. 7, 2023), on file with Committee.  

> 33

Federal Bureau of Investigation briefing and response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs 

Committee majority staff (Dec. 14, 2023) .16 

2. Expansion of TSA and CBP Screening at Airports and Ports of Entry 

Like the government’s terrorist watchlist activities, other screening activities at airports 

and other ports of entry have also expanded in the last twenty years. 34 Over time, TSA and CBP 

have come to rely on a growing number of lists and screening activities to accomplish their 

missions in securing the nation’s aviation system and borders as well as CBP’s other missions ,

including but not limited to those related to the terrorist watchlist. 35 Their multi -layered 

approaches include prescreening passengers prior to arrival at the airport against law 

enforcement and national security databases, including terrorist watchlist information , as well as 

screening at security checkpoints. 36 

For example, b eginning in December 2002, TSA deployed explosive detection systems 

across the country. 37 Then, following a plot to detonate liquid explosive s onboard multiple 

aircraft in 2006, TSA banned liquids , aerosols, and gels over 3.4 ounces from carry -on  

> 34

U.S. Customs and Border Protection most often uses the terms exams or inspections. However, for consistency, 

this report uses the term screening.  

> 35

E.g. Aviation and Transportation Security Act of 2001, Pub. L. No.107 -71 established the Transportation Security 

Agency (TSA) and transferred screening responsibilities from Federal Aviation Administration to TSA; Homeland 

Security Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107 -296 authorized the Department of Homeland Security; 49 U.S.C. § 

114(h)(3)(A) gave TSA the responsibility to establish procedures for air carriers to identify travelers who may pose 

a threat and if such an individual is identified, deny boarding and notify law enforcement.  

> 36

The Department of Homeland Security has also developed Trusted Traveler Programs, including Global Entry, 

NEXUS, SENTRI, and FAST, and TSA PreCheck®, which provide modified screening for preapproved members .

Department of Homeland Security, Trusted Traveler Programs (Dec. 1, 2023) ( https://www.cbp.gov/travel/trusted -

traveler -programs ).  

> 37

Transportation Security Administration, Transportation Security Timeline (https://www.tsa.gov/timeline) 

(accessed Mar. 7, 2023). 17 

baggage. 38 Around the same time, TSA implemented more stringent identity verification 

practices at screening checkpoints and began requiring travelers to remove their shoes as part of 

screening based on a continuing threat .39 

In 2009 , after the failure of the “Under wear Bomber,” CBP implemented a pre -departure 

system to push the borders out to the first point of foreign departure. 40 By 201 2, TSA fully 

implemented Secure Flight, a passenger pre -screening program , which compares passenger 

manifests to the No Fly, Selectee, and Expanded Selectee Lists. 41 Secure Flight replaced a n FAA 

system and TSA security directives that required airlines to conduct passenger watchlist 

matching using lists provided by the federal government. 42 

Following the publication of instructions to build a non -metallic bomb by Al Qaeda in the 

Arabian Peninsula in December 2014, TSA applied improvements to its deployment of 

Advanced Imaging Technology (AIT) , explosive detection systems, and pat -down procedures to 

enhance officer’s ability to detect concealed items .43 Then, in 2015, CBP began deploying 

Tactical Terrorism Response Teams (TTRTs) as an immediate counte rterrorism response 

capability at some ports of entry .44 In 2017, in response to information about overseas threats, 

TSA strengthened screening procedures requiring a passenger to remove personal electronic 

devices from their carry -on luggage. 45 

Since then, TSA has begun testing advanced technology such as facial recognition, 

enhanced advanced imaging technology, and computed tomography (CT) to automate 

identification processes and improve detection capabilities. 46 Similarly, CBP has implemented 

biometric facial comparison into entry processes and currently uses such technology at all U.S. 

international airports. 47 

Now, u pon arrival at a TSA checkpoint , typical standard screening may include a review 

of identification and travel information, x-ray or CT screening of accessible property (e.g., carry -                         

> 38 Transportation Security Administration, Transportation Security Timeline (https://www.tsa.gov/timeline)
> (accessed Mar. 7, 2023).
> 39 Id .
> 40 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 41 Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004, Pub. L. 108 -458.
> 42 See Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact Assessment for the Secure Flight Program (Aug. 9, 2007).
> 43 See Transportation Security Administration, Mission Hall Exhibit: Remembering the Past, Informing the Future
> (https://www.tsa.gov/sites/default/files/9003_layout_mission_hall_exhibit_the_evolution.pdf) (accessed May 4,
> 2023); Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee .
> 44 Clear v. CBP , Howard Decl., Exhibit F, Exhibit H (Feb. 21, 2021).
> 45 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 46 Transportation Security Administration, Transportation Security Timeline (https://www.tsa.gov/timeline)
> (accessed Mar. 7, 2023).
> 47 U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Say hello to the new face of efficacy, security and safety (Dec. 5, 2023)
> (https://www.cbp.gov/travel/biometrics).

18 

on luggage), and traveler screening via metal detector or AIT .48 DHS told the majority 

committee staff , t hese processes may generate alarms (i.e. a concern about the authenticity of 

identification documents provided, a potential prohibited item discovered in a bag, or an 

anomaly detected during AIT screening) that prompt additional screening. 49 According to DHS, 

alarms may also be generated randomly as part of unpredictable screening procedures. CBP 

screening at a port of entry also includes a review of identification and travel information and 

may include additional questioning .50 

Separately from these processes, use of law enforcement or security information 

including the terrorist watchlist may prompt additional screening of travelers or their 

belongings. 51 Additional screening by TSA may include a pat -down, explosive trace detection 

screening, and a more in -depth search of luggage. 52 Additional screening by CBP may include 

similar processes to TSA as well as a more extensive interview and further vetting against 

intelligence, law enforcement, and biometric databases .53 

With all of the additional screenings used by TSA and CBP, i ndividuals can be screened 

multiple times during a single trip or subjected to additional screenings for a combination of 

several reasons. Even if one reason is addressed, individuals may continue to be subjected to 

additional screening. DHS asserts that because TSA and CBP have unique missions and 

authorities, TSA checkpoints and CBP inspection stations remain distinct from each other in the 

airport. 54 A passenger who travels domestically will be screened by TSA but will not be screened 

by CBP, and an international passenger arriving from abroad at their final destination will be 

screened by CBP but will not be screened by TSA. 55 However, international passenger s arriving 

from most international locations and continuing their travel by air upon their arrival in the 

United States will be inspected by CBP to gain admission into the United States and then 

screened by TSA prior to continuing their domestic air travel. 56 Therefore, it is logical that such a 

traveler would experience both CBP and TSA screening and question why they were being 

screened multiple times by the U.S. gove rn ment.                         

> 48 Government Accountability Office, Aviation Security: TSA Should Assess Potential for Discrimination and Better
> Inform Passengers of the Compliant Process (GAO -23 -105201) (Nov. 7, 2022); Government Accountability Office,
> Land Ports of Entry: CBP Should Update Policies and Enhance Analysis of Inspections (GAO -19 -658) (Aug. 6,
> 2019).
> 49 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 50 Id .
> 51 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff ( Dec. 14 , 2023), on file with Committee.
> 52 Government Accountability Office, Aviation Security: TSA Should Assess Potential for Discrimination and Better
> Inform Passengers of the Compliant Process (GAO -23 -105201) (Nov. 7, 2022).
> 53 Id; Government Accountability Office, Land Ports of Entry: CBP Should Update Policies and Enhance Analysis
> of Inspections (GAO -19 -658) (Aug. 6, 2019).
> 54 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 55 Id ; 49 U.S.C. 44901(a -b)
> 56 Id.

19 

D. In 2023, TSA and CBP Subject U.S. Citizens to Additional Screening for at 

Least 22 Different Reasons 

1. TSA Conducts Additional Screening Based on at Least 10 Screening Lists and 

Processes 

TSA screens over 14 million travelers every week. 57 All aviation travelers must undergo 

security screening prior to entering the secure area of an airport and boarding an aircraft, and any 

passenger may be selected for additional screening. 58 According to DHS, TSA applies the same 

checkpoint screening procedures to all travelers designated for additional screening, regardless of 

whether the designation is due to terrorist watchlist status, random selection, or for other reasons, 

and boarding pass es do not indicate why someone has been selected. 59 DHS claims that a very 

small subset of travelers are designated for additional screening by Secure Flight and will see a 

“SSSS” or Secondary Security Screening Selection designation on their boarding pass. 60         

> 57 Department of Homeland Security, Preventing Terrorism Results (June 1, 2023)
> (https://www.dhs.gov/topic/preventing -terrorism -results).
> 58 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 59 Id.
> 60 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.

20 

Generally, n either the Transportation Security Officer nor the passenger knows why the SSSS is 

there, though it could be one of the several reasons described below. 

According to data provided by TSA, the vast majority of “SSSS” designations in recent 

years are due to random select ion. 61 TSA may also designate travelers for additional screening 

based on inclusion on the terrorist watchlist or other prescreening information .62 As part of its 

passenger vetting process, TSA uses the Secure Flight Program , a pre -screening program that 

compares passenger manifests submitted by an airline to information on the terrorist watchlist , as 

well as other lists maintained by TSA .63 TSA does not use non -terrorist related information from 

the Threat Screening System for airplane traveler pre -board screening. 64 

TSA ’s Secure Flight program implements three subsets of the terrorist watchlist: 

➢ No-Fly List. TSA uses the No -Fly List , a subset of the larger terrorist watchlist 

developed by the TSC for TSA’s screening purposes . Any individual, regardless of 

citizenship, may be included on the No Fly List when it is determined that the individual 

meets the criteria. 65 According to the TSC, the minimum information required to form a 

basis for inclusion on the No -Fly List is higher than for inclusion on the terrorist 

watchlist .66 Inclusion on the No -Fly List prohibits an individual from receiving a 

boarding pass and boarding a commercial aircraft that departs from or arrives in the 

United States or traverses U.S. airspace .67 

➢ Selectee List. TSA also uses the TSC’s Selectee List , another subset of the terrorist 

watchlist developed by the TSC .68 The criteria for inclusion on the Selectee List are not 

public. The Selectee List is used to perform additional screening on individua ls who may 

pose a threat . Individuals on the Selectee List are not prevented from boarding an aircraft 

but must receive additional screening at the TSA checkpoint .69 

➢ Expanded Selectee List. Additionally, TSA uses the Expanded Selectee List , for which 

DHS stated the criteria for inclusion is not public .70 According to a publicly available                    

> 61 Department of Homeland Security response to the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee staff (Dec. 12, 2023), o n file with Committee .
> 62 Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact Assessment Update for Secure Flight (DHS/TSA/PIA -018(i))
> (Apr. 19, 2019).
> 63 Secure Flight also identifies individuals on other watchlists maintained by the Federal Government. Department
> of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact Assessment Update for Secure Flight (DHS/TSA/PIA -018(i)) (Apr. 19,
> 2019).
> 64 Department of Homeland Security response to the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee staff (Dec. 12, 2023), o n file with Committee .
> 65 49 CFR. § 1560.105(b)(1).
> 66 Terrorist Screening Center, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee staff
> (June 26, 2023).
> 67 Congressional Research Service, The Terrorist Screening Database and Preventing Terrorist Travel (R44678)
> (Nov. 7, 2016).
> 68 Congressional Research Service, The Terrorist Screening Database and Preventing Terrorist Travel (R44678)
> (Nov. 7, 2016).
> 69 Id.
> 70 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.

21 

Congressional Research Service report, however, this list is based on all terrorist 

watchlist records not already on the No Fly or Selectee lists that include the first and last 

name and date of birth of an individual. 71 Individuals on the Expanded Selectee List are 

subject to additional screening. 72 

DHS told majority committee staff that TSA also relies on intelligence driven risk -based 

rules to increase efficiency and security effectiveness by allowing it to focus less on lower -risk 

travelers and more on higher -risk passengers or those about whom it has less information .73 TSA 

formulates rules to address unknown and partially identified threats. For example, travelers may 

match a rule based upon travel patterns matching intelligence regarding terrorist travel, upon 

submitting traveler information matching the information used by a partially identified terrorist, 

or upon submitting traveler information matching the information used by a known or suspected 

terrorist. DHS stated these rules are applied to a limited set of travelers who are designated for 

additional screening and may result in other operational responses, including deployment of 

Federal Air Marshal s to cover the flight to ensure security .74 

The rules used to create the lists described below are regularly audited by the DHS Office 

for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties (DHS CRCL ) and DHS’s Offices of Privacy and General 

Counsel as well as similar TSA offices .75 Individuals matching to these rules are not considered 

as known or suspected terrorists and are not nominated to the terrorist watchlist merely for 

falling within a security rule but may be nominated if they are involved in a security incident that 

supports such a nomination. 76 While individuals can stop matching a certain pattern or rule after 

a period of time, they may still match a separate pattern or rule, and so continue to get additional 

screening. 

➢ Silent Partner List . Silent Partner rules apply to international flights that are bound for 

the United States. 77 TSA uses Silent Partner as an indication that there may be an 

elevated risk that merits additional screening. According to TSA, matching to the Silent 

Partner list does not mean that the individual has or is suspected of engaging in terrorist                          

> 71 Congressional Research Service, The Terrorist Screening Database and Preventing Terrorist Travel (R44678)
> (Nov. 7, 2016).
> 72 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 73 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee ; See 49 U.S.C. § 44917(a)(10 -11); FAA Reauthorization Act
> of 2018, Pub. L. 115 -254, Sec. 1949(d)(2018), which calls on TSA to incorporate Silent Partner and Quiet Skies into
> the Federal Air Marshal Service’s risk -based scheduling methodology.
> 74 Id.; Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee majority staff (Dec. 13, 2023), on file with Committee
> 75 While statute calls for reviews every 120 days, these offices have reviewed the Transportation Security
> Administration's rules programs on a quarterly basis since implementation of the program. FAA Reauthorization Act
> of 2018, Pub. L. 115 -254, Sec. 1949(c )(2018); Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland
> Security and Governmental Affairs Committee majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 76 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee ;Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact
> Assessment Update for Secure Flight (DHS/TSA/PIA -018)(i)) (Apr. 19, 2019) .
> 77 Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact Assessment Update for Secure Flight (DHS/TSA/PIA -018)(i))
> (Apr. 19, 2019).

22 

activities. 78 Inclusion on the Silent Partner List is “based on aggregated travel data, 

intelligence, and trend analysis of the intelligence and suspicious activity.” 79 A traveler 

matching a Silent Partner rule will receive additional screening prior to their international 

inbound flight to the United States. Travelers remain on the Silent Partner List for the 

period of the international inbound flight .80 

➢ Quiet Skies List . Quiet Skies rules are a subset of Silent Partner rules linked to aviation 

security threat s within the United States .81 Travelers who match a Quiet Skies rule 

receive additional screening prior to flights within the United States for a period of time 

following international travel that matches the corresponding Silent Partner rule .82 The 

Quiet Skies List continually changes as travelers are added based on matches to a Quiet 

Skies rule and automatically removed upon matching the program’s defined removal 

thresholds , which are not public .83 

In addition , TSA implements three other lists based on its own aviation security 

authorities. 84 These lists include persons who “pose , or are suspected of posing , (1) a threat to 

transportation or national security, (2) a threat of air piracy or terrorism, (3) a threat to airline or 

passenger safety or (4) a threat to civil aviation security. ”85 According to DHS, these lists are 

separate from the TSC’s terrorist watchlist and allow TSA to take immediate action to mitigate 

threats pending further investigation or TSC watchlisting action and mitigate non -terrorist threats 

to transportation or national security posed by individuals not in the terrorist watchlist. 86 

Two of the lists may affect travel and are discussed below. The third list, the Security 

Notification List, includes individuals who may pose a threat to aviation security, but who do not 

warrant additional screening. 87 These individuals may seek to intentionally evade or defeat 

security measures or may attempt to disrupt the safe and effective completion of screening, such  

> 78

Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

majority staff (Dec. 1 4, 2023), on file with Committee . 

> 79

Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact Assessment Update for Secure Flight (DHS/TSA/PIA -018)(i)) 

(Apr. 19, 2019).  

> 80

Id .; Government Accountability Office, Aviation Security: TSA Coordinates with Stakeholders on Changes to 

Screening Rules but Could Clarify Its Review Processes and Better Measure Effectiveness (GAO -20 -72) (Nov. 

2019); Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs 

Committee majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee . 

> 81

Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee . 

> 82

Id .; Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact Assessment Update for Secure Flight (DHS/TSA/PIA -

018(i)) (Apr. 19, 2019).  

> 83

Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.  

> 84

Department of Homeland Security , Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs 

Committee Majority Staff (July 11, 2022).  

> 85

49 U.S.C. § 114(h); Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact Assessment Update for Secure Flight 

(DHS/TSA/PIA -018(h)) (July 12, 2017).  

> 86

Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee; Department of Homeland Security response to Senate 

Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee majority staff (Dec. 13, 2023), on file with Committee.  

> 87

Department of Homeland Security , Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs 

Committee Majority Staff (July 11, 2022). 23 

as individuals who assault TSA personnel during the screening process. Individuals on this list 

may not be referred for additional screening solely by virtue of their placement on this list, but 

TSA personnel may be given forewarning of their travel. 88 

On July 1, 2017, fewer than 20 individuals were included within these lists. 89 Although 

the number of assaults on TSA and airport/airline personnel have increased , as of October 1, 

2023, fewer than 200 individuals were identified on these lists .90 

➢ TSA Deny Boarding List. The Deny Boarding List includes individuals who meet 

criteria established by TSA that indicate the individual poses a threat warranting denial of 

boarding .91 People on this list will not be permitted to enter the sterile area of an airport 

or board aircraft .92 

➢ TSA Enhanced Screening List. The Enhanced Screening List includes individuals TSA 

believes pose or are suspected of posing a threat warranting additional screening or 

deployment of Federal Air Marshals to cover the flight to ensure security .93 Individuals 

on this list may be violent and subject to additional screening. 

TSA also implements other lists and alerts that are not exclusively based on security threats ,

which may result in additional screening or denial of boarding. 

➢ CDC Do Not Board List. TSA implements the Centers for Disease Control and 

Prevention (CDC) Do Not Board List. 94 CDC maintains the Do Not Board list to prevent 

individuals with serious communicable illnesses , such as tuberculosis, from traveling or 

being admitted into the United States. 95 Individuals on the Do Not Board List are  

> 88

Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee . 

> 89

Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact Assessment Update for Secure Flight (DHS/TSA/PIA -018(h)) 

(July 12, 2017).  

> 90

Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee . 

> 91

Department of Homeland Security , Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs 

Committee Majority Staff (July 11, 2022); Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security 

and Governmental Affairs Committee majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee . 

> 92

Id . 

> 93

Department of Homeland Security , Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs 

Committee Majority Staff (July 11, 2022); Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security 

and Governmental Affairs Committee majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee . 

> 94

The Do Not Board list is enforced by TSA for commercial air travel. Travelers on the Do Not Board list are not 

part of the No -Fly List. CDC has restricted travel for individuals with tuberculosis, multidrug -resistant tuberculosis, 

and measles, but restrictions can also be used for other contagious diseases. During 2020 -2022, CDC also restricted 

travel for individuals with COVID -19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, FAQs for Public Health Do Not 

Board and Lookout Lists (Jan. 28, 2022) (https://www.cdc.gov/quarantine/do -not -board -faq.html); Centers for 

Disease Control and Prevention, Travel Restrictions (Oct. 5, 2022) (https://www.cdc.gov/quarantine/travel -

restrictions.html).  

> 95

The CDC Do Not Board List includes individuals who are known or believed to be infectious with, or at risk for, a 

serious contagious disease that poses a public health threat to others during travel; and 1) the individual is not aware 

of diagnosis or not following public health recommendations; 2) the individuals is likely to travel on a commercial 24 

prevented from obtaining a boarding pass for any fight into, out of, or within the United 

States. 

➢ Airline Designations and Referrals . Individual a irlines maintain lists of individuals who 

are barred from future flights for violating contract -of -carriage terms, such as unruly 

behavior aboard an aircraft .96 Airlines and crewmembers may refer information about 

passengers who are unruly or who cause disturbances to TSA or the FAA for further 

investigation .97 Any referral to TSA does not, by itself, lead to an individual being denied 

boarding or being designated for additional screening by TSA. 98 According to DHS , TSA 

may review the information available regarding the incident and determine if the facts 

and circumstances warrant placement of the individual on a TSA list. 99 

➢ Random Selection. As stated previously, the vast majority of individuals are subject to 

additional screening by TSA on a random basis. For example, air travelers may receive 

additional screening based on random Secure Flight -generated selection or be designated 

for random selection at security checkpoints by screening technologies. 100 

2. CBP Conduct s Additional Screening Based on at Least 10 Other Lists, Processes and 

Inspections 

CBP enforces the customs, immigration, and agriculture laws of the United States and 

hundreds of other federal laws at the border, including laws related to deterring and preventing 

terrorists and terrorist weapons from entering the United States. In furth erance of this mission, 

CBP officers inspect persons and merchandise that are attempting to cross the U.S. border at 

ports of entry which includes airports, seaports, and land borders. For CBP, additional screening 

typically occurs after a traveler is refe rred by a CBP officer at a primary inspection area at a port 

of entry .101 CBP officers screen passengers to ensure they are admissible into the United States, 

and there are no national security concerns or violations of customs or other laws , such as the 

introduction of harmful plants or animals .

Given the multitude of laws that CBP enforces , including a variety of statutes and 

regulations on behalf of other agencies , DHS said there could be many reasons why an individual 

is referred for additional screening , and there may also be other locations within an airport or a                   

> flight involving the United States or travel internationally by any means; or 3) there is a need to issue a travel
> restriction to respond to a public health outbreak or to help enforce a public health order. Centers for Disease
> Control and Prevention, Travel Restrictions (Oct. 5, 2022) ( https://www.cdc.gov/quarantine/travel -restrictions.html ).
> 96 Congressional Research Service, Aviation Security Measures and Domestic Terrorism Threats (IF11731) (Jan. 15,
> 2021).
> 97 Id. ; Federal Aviation Administration, Unruly Passengers (https://www.faa.gov/unruly) (accessed Dec. 6, 2023).
> 98 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 99 Id.
> 100 Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact Assessment Update for Secure Flight (DHS/TSA/PIA -018(b))
> (Aug. 15, 2011); Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental
> Affairs Committee majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee .
> 101 Department of Homeland Security response to the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.

25 

reasonable distance from the U.S. border where an individual is stopped by CBP. 102 The 

additional lists and activities below are not derived exclusively from the TSC maintained 

terrorist watchlist , although some may use the terrorist watchlist as one input .

➢ Terrorist Watchlist. CBP applies additional scrutiny to the screening of individuals 

identified on the terrorist watchlist. 103 Terrorist watchlist information is transmitted from 

the TSC to DHS through the DHS Watchlist Service. 104 

➢ National Security Threat Actors List . According to DHS, CBP also receives additional 

information from the TSC beyond known or suspected terrorists, such as individuals who 

may pose a threat to national security and who do not otherwise meet the criteria for 

inclusion in the terrorist watchlist. 105 Such individuals may include those who have been 

officially detained in military operations, who are known or suspected of engaging with 

transnational organized crime, and who are identified as possible threats to national 

security. 106 Individuals who are identified as a National Security Threat Actors may 

receive additional screening. Additionally, CBP may take other appropriate actions, such 

as denying an Electronic System for Travel Authorization application. 107 

➢ CBP Rules -based Targeting Lists . CBP relies on its own data and rules -based processes 

to help officers identify unknown high -risk individuals by comparing travelers’ 

information against a set of targeting rules based on intelligence, law enforcement, and 

other information . As with Silent Partner and Quiet Skies Lists , the information is 

constantly changing, which affects who may match .108 CBP uses the passenger module of 

its Automated Targeting System (ATS) to help identify individuals who may require  

> 102

8 CFR § 287(a)(1) defines a reasonable distance as 100 air miles from the border; Department of Homeland 

Security response to the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee majority staff (Nov. 17, 

2023), on file with Committee.  

> 103

Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.  

> 104

Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact Assessment for the Watchlist Service (DHS/ALL/PIA -027(d)) 

(Jul. 10, 2020).  

> 105

Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.  

> 106

Id .; Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact Assessment for the Watchlist Service (DHS/ALL/PIA -

027(d)) (Jul. 10, 2020).  

> 107

House Subcommittee on Transportation and Protective Security, Testimony Submitted for the Record of CBP 

Office of Field Operations Executive Assistant Commissioner Todd Owen, Department of Homeland 

Security, Hearing on Raising the Standard: DHS’s Efforts to Improve Aviation Security Around the Globe , 115th 

Cong. (Sep. 26, 2017) (H. Hrg . 115 -28).  

> 108

Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee ; Government Accountability Office, Border Security: CBP 

Aims to Prevent High -Risk Travelers from Boarding U.S. - Bound Flights, but Needs to Evaluate Program 

Performance (GAO -17 -216) (January 2017); Government Accountability Office, Land Ports of Entry: CBP Should 

Update Policies and Enhance Analysis of Inspections (GAO -19 -658) (August 2019); Department of Homeland 

Security, Privacy Impact Assessment Update for the Automated Targeting Systems (DHS/CBP/PIA -006(e)) (Jan. 13, 

2023). 26 

additional screening .109 ATS cross -compar es traveling data with law enforcement and 

intelligence data (including the terrorist watchlist ) and patterns of suspicious activity 

identified in past investigations .110 ATS also uses predictive analytics to assist CBP 

officers in identify ing travelers for additional screening .111 As with TSA’s rules -based 

targeting, DHS’s Offices of General Counsel, Privacy, and Civil Rights and Civil 

Liberties, and CBP review the targeting rules to ensure they are relevant , in compliance 

with privacy , and do not excessively affect the traveling public. 112 

➢ Tactical Terrorism Response Team Interviews . CBP also deploys Tactical Terrorism 

Response Teams (TTRTs) made up of CBP officers who are specially trained and located 

at many ports of entry. 113 TTRTs are responsible for the examination of travelers 

identified on the terrorist watchlist as well as other travelers, their associates, or co -

travelers who arrive at a port of entry and are suspected of having a nexus to terrorist 

activity. 114 TTRTs work closely with analysts to use information derived from targeting 

and screening to mitigate threats. 115 TTRTs may handle additional screenings of travelers 

identified as potential counterterrorism and/or counterintelligence risk or otherwise 

decide to pull aside individuals they deem to pose a national security concern based on 

officers’ training, discretion, and experience. 116 

➢ Agricultur al Inspections. Together with or on behalf of other agencies , including U.S. 

Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, and Plant 

Protection and Quarantine, CBP conducts agricultural inspections by screening travelers 

and cargo for harmful pests, diseases, and other contaminates. 117 Individuals suspected of 

carrying such prohibited items may be referred for additional screening. 118 

➢ Immigration Inspections. In accordance with the Immigration and Nationality Act, CBP 

officers question travelers seeking to enter the United States to determine their  

> 109

Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact Assessment Update for the Automated Targeting System 

(DHS/CBP/PIA -0006(e)) (Jan. 13, 2017); Department of Homeland Security, 2019 Data Mining Report to Congress 

(Dec. 2, 2020).  

> 110

Department of Homeland Security, Privacy Impact Assessment Update for the Automated Targeting System 

(DHS/CBP/PIA -0006(e)) (Jan. 13, 2017).  

> 111

See Id; Department of Homeland Security, 2019 Data Mining Report to Congress (Dec. 2, 2020).  

> 112

Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.  

> 113

Members of TTRTs receive counterterrorism training. Government Accountability Office, Land Ports of Entry: 

CBP Should Update Policies and Enhance Analysis of Inspections (GAO -19 -658) (Aug. 2019); U.S. Customs and 

Border Protection, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee staff (Dec. 12, 

2022).  

> 114

Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee 

majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee . 

> 115

Id . 

> 116

Id .; U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs 

Committee staff (Dec. 12, 2022).  

> 117

Department of Homeland Security, Agriculture Inspections —Contaminated Products Fiscal Year 2021 Report to 

Congress (Oct. 19, 2021).  

> 118

Id .; U.S. Customs and Border Protection, The Agriculture Inspection Process (July 18, 2017). 27 

admissibility .119 CBP officers may conduct routine immigration inspections and search es 

of travelers and their belongings .120 Individuals suspected of being in admissible may be 

referred for additional screening. 

➢ Customs Inspections. CBP officers also conduct customs inspections to ensure 

prohibited or restricted items are not imported into the United States. 121 According to 

DHS, CBP conducts routine examinations for weapons, contraband, undeclared 

merchandise, and undeclared currency. 122 CBP also uses radiation detection technology 

to prevent the entry of potential nuclear or radiological threats. 123 As part of these 

inspections , CBP officers must also determine if duty or tariff are owed on items being 

imported into the country. 124 

➢ Law Enforcement Alerts . CBP officers can see and act on (including execute arrest 

warrants) law enforcement a lerts from CBP and other law enforcement agencies ,

including information pertaining to known criminals, individuals who may be engaging 

in illicit activity, and individuals subject to additional screening .125 

➢ CDC Public Health Lookout List. CBP manages the CDC Public Health Lookout List 

as a complement to the CDC Do Not Board List. 126 Individuals on the Public Health 

Lookout List are not necessarily prevented from travel; instead, this list prompts a public 

heath review prior to admittance into the United States. 127 Individuals are removed from 

this list once public health officials confirm the individual is no longer contagious 

(typically within 24 hours). 128 

➢ Other Federal Laws Enforced by CBP. CBP also enforces numerous other federal laws 

on behalf of other U.S agencies. For example, on behalf of the Department of the 

Treasury, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, CBP enforces the requirement to 

report currency or other monetary instruments that exceed $10,000 in total that are 

transported at one time from the United States to any foreign country, or into the United                            

> 119 A reasonable suspicion is generally required for non -routine or highly intrusive border searches. Congressional
> Research Service, Searches and Seizures at the Border and the Fourth Amendment (R46601) (Mar. 30, 2021); See
> Immigration and Nationality Act, Pub. L. No. 82 -414.
> 120 Id .
> 121 19 CFR § 162.6 ; Department of Homeland Security response to the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental
> Affairs Committee majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 122 Department of Homeland Security response to the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 123 Id.
> 124 Id .
> 125 Id. ; U.S. Customs and Border Protection, CBP Search Authority (June 30, 2023)
> (https://www.cbp.gov/travel/cbp -search -authority).
> 126 U.S. Customs and Border Protection enforces the Public Health Lookout List to ensure proper isolation or other
> public health management, as necessary. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, FAQs for Public Health Do
> Not Board and Lookout Lists (Jan. 28, 2023) (https://www.cdc.gov/quarantine/do -not -board -faq.html).
> 127 Id .
> 128 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Travel Restrictions to Prevent the Spread of Disease (Oct. 5, 2023)
> (https://www.cdc.gov/quarantine/travel -restrictions.html ).

28 

States from a foreign country. 129 CBP may refer a traveler for additional screening to 

verify the traveler is accurately reporting the amount of currency being moved or to 

confirm the traveler is not smuggling bulk cash. 130 

3. Additional Screening Can Be Prompted for a Least 2 Other Reasons Separate from 

the Terrorist Watchlist 

TSA and CBP also subject individuals for additional screening based on other internal 

processes. 

➢ Officer Discretion. TSA Transportation Security Officers may use their discretion to 

require an individual to undergo additional screening when there is an articulable basis 

for why the additional screening is needed to address a potential threat. 131 Additionally, 

because CBP’s primary screening is meant to be a short exchange, primary screening 

officers may send a traveler to additional screening at their discretion , consistent with law 

and policy .132 

➢ Canine Units. TSA and CBP leverage canine units at security checkpoints to screen 

passengers for explosives (TSA) and to detect and seize controlled substances or 

contraband (CBP). 133 If a canine unit flags an individual, they may be required to undergo 

additional screening to address the concern. 134 

V. AGE NCIES HAVE USED OPAQUE PROCESSES TO ADD U.S. CITIZE NS TO 

THE TERRORIST WATCHLIST 

A. Watchlist -Related Screening can have Severe Impacts on U.S. Citizens 

Si nce the creation of the centralized terrorist watchlist, countless Americans have been 

negatively impacted by the federal government’s use of the terrorist watchlist and related 

screening activities. Inclusion on the terrorist watchlist may result in an individual being 

detained, subjected to invasive searches, or even prohibited from flying . Courts have recognized 

that t he impact of being placed on the terrorist watchlist or any of its subset s can be severe . For 

instance, inclusion on the No Fly List, a subset of the terrorist watchlist, can result in “long -term                    

> 129 Government Accountability Office, Moving Illegal Proceed s: Challenges Exist in the Federal Government’s
> Effort to Stem Cross -Border Currency Smuggling (GAO -11 -73) (Oct. 2010).
> 130 Id .; U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Currency Reporting (June 2006)
> (https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/documents/currency_reporting.pdf) ;Department of Homeland Security
> response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file
> with Committee.
> 131 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee .
> 132 Department of Homeland Security, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee staff (Aug. 4, 2023).
> 133 See Transportation Security Administration, TSA’s National Explosive Detection Canine Program (Dec. 9, 2020)
> (https://www.tsa.gov/blog/2020/12/09/tsas -national -explosive -detection -canine -program); U.S. Customs and Border
> Protection, Canine Program (Aug. 4, 2022) (https://www.cbp.gov/border -security/canine -program).
> 134 Id.

29 

separation from spouses and children; the inability to access desired medical and prenatal care; 

the inability to pursue an education of [one’s] choosing; the inability to participate in important 

religious rites; loss of employment opportunities ; loss of government entitlements ; [and] the 

inability to visit family.” 135 Even for indiv iduals who are not barred from flying, the 

consequences of inclusion on the terrorist watchlist can be significant. 136 Individuals who are 

repeatedly subjected to lengthy or intrusive additional screening may feel frustration and 

humiliation leading to mistrust of the federal government. 137 Severe treatment such as subjecting 

young children and elderly family members to full -body pat downs and questioning about 

religious beliefs has deterred U.S. citizens from flying, leading to lost business opportunities and 

missed family gatherings and celebrations. 138 

B. U.S. Citizens have been Misidentified as Matching the Watchlist During 

Screening Activities 

Since the creation of the terrorist watchlist , individuals and advocacy groups have raised 

concern over misidentification s and resulting impacts . Elected officials , including former U.S. 

Senator Ted Kennedy and former U.S. Representative John Lewis, a nd even babies , have been 

stopped at airports because they shared biographical information with individuals on the terrorist 

watchlist .139 The risk of misidentification continues to be a problem, especially as the number of 

identities in the terrorist watchlist increases. This is further exacerbated by the fact the terrorist 

watchlist contains names from languages other than English for which there may not be a 

standardized transliteration. 140 This results in records with variations of the same name, thereby 

increasing the chance of an incorrect potential match . TSA told majority committee staff that 

internalizing terrorist watchlist matching at TSA through Secure Flight helps to minimize 

misidentification errors because TSA relies on additional information to verify identities .141 

Nevertheless, m isidentification s are of particular concern for the Muslim American 

community because alleged leaked versions of the terrorist watchlist show the overwhelming 

majority of names on the terrorist watchlist are Muslim .142 In amicus briefs in recent litigation, 

the Muslim American communit y raised concerns that t he number of common Arabic names                  

> 135 Kashem v. Barr ,941 F.3d 358 (9th Cir. 2019).
> 136 See Kariye v. Mayorkas , 650 F. Supp. 865 (C.D. Cal. 2022).
> 137 Id .
> 138 See El Ali v. Barr , 473 F. Supp. 3d 479, 496 -498 (D. Md. 2020); Kariye v. Mayorkas , 650 F. Supp. 865 (C.D.
> Cal. 2022) ; Memorandum from Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties, Department of Homeland Security to
> Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection Kevin McAleenan ,Religious Questioning at Ports of Entry –
> Multiple Complaints (Feb. 26, 2019).
> 139 'No -fly list' grounds some unusual young suspects: Similarly -named babies were barred , The Boston Globe
> (Aug. 16, 2005)
> (https://web.archive.org/web/20160305023816/http://www.boston.com/news/nation/articles/2005/08/16/no_fly_list_
> grounds_some_unusual_young_suspects/).
> 140 Department of Homeland Security, Report on Effects on Privacy and Civil Liberties: DHS Privacy Office Report
> Assessing the Impact of the Automatic Selectee and No -Fly Lists on Privacy and Civil Liberties as Required Under
> Section 4012(b) of the IRTPA of 2004 (Apr. 27, 2006).
> 141 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Dec. 12, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 142 Council on American -Islamic Relations, Twenty years Too Many: A Call to Stop the FBI’s Secret Watchlist (Mar.
> 2023).

30 

within the Muslim American communit y has led to a significant number of misidentifications. 143 

Further , in Sikh culture, most men share the same last name and most women the same last 

name , which may lead to excessive additional screening for members of this community .144 

As a result of misidentifications , an expanded set of people w ith no relationship to 

terrorist s or suspected terrorist activity are affected by the terrorist watchlist and the 

corresponding screenings , as well as the associated fear and frustration. Because the terrorist 

watchlist is so opaque and the ability to learn whether someone has been included on it is so 

limited , individuals do not understand why their travel difficulties are happening . In addition, 

once matched to the terrorist watchlist, an individual’s only recourse is to appeal to the 

government for redress, which as noted below, can be difficult and ineffective. Even if redress 

does work, the misidentifications can create a sense in certain communities that individuals are 

targeted for screenings more often than other communities. 

C. Groups Have Concerns about Agencies Using the “Reasonable Suspicion” 

Standard to Add U.S. Citizens to the Terrorist Watchlist 

Courts have held that t he government can add individuals to the terrorist watchlist based 

on a “reasonable suspicion” that they are a known or suspected terrorist. 145 For years, 

organizations like the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and the Brennan Center for 

Justice , have raised concerns about the use of the reasonable suspicion threshold. 146 According to 

federal government policy, “mere guesses or ‘hunches’ or reporting of suspicious activity alone 

are not sufficient to establish reasonable suspicion.” 147 

However, a 2016 ACLU report state s the reasonable suspicion standard can be met with 

“uncorroborated or even questionably reliable information and, on its face, does not require that 

it be more probable than not that an individual is involved in terrorism -related activities .” 148 

Addi tion al ly, becau se t his standard requires less evidence than is needed in other legal contexts, 

individua ls can remain on the te rrorist wa tchlist even if cha rge s against them are dismissed or 

they are fou nd no t guilty of terrorist activities in court .149 While a person may still meet the                        

> 143 Brief of Muslim Advocates as Amicus Curiae in Support of Respondents (Feb. 12, 2020), Tanzin v. Tanvir, 141
> S. Ct. 486 (2020).
> 144 Sikh Coalition, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee majority staff
> (October 2, 2021).
> 145 Kashem v. Barr ,941 F.3d 358 (9th Cir. 2019) (holding that the “reasonable suspicion standard satisfies due
> process.”).
> 146 E.g., American Civil Liberties Union, Trapped in a Black Box: Growing Terrorism Watchlisting in Everyday
> Policing (Apr. 2016); American Civil Liberties Union, U.S. Government Watchlisting: Unfair Process and
> Devastating Consequences (Mar. 2014); Brennan Center for Justice, Overdue Scrutiny for Watch Listing and Risk
> Prediction (Oct. 19, 2023).
> 147 House Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee on Transportation Security, Testimony Submitted for
> the Record of Director Christopher Piehota, Terrorist Screening Center, Hearing on Safeguarding Privacy and Civil
> Liberties While Keeping our Skies Safe , 113 th Cong. (Sep. 18, 2014) (H. Hrg. 113 -86).
> 148 American Civil Liberties Union, Trapped in a Black Box: Growing Terrorism Watchlisting in Everyday Policing
> (Apr. 2016), pg. 19.
> 149 Elhady v. Kable , 391 F. Supp. 3d 562, 569 (E.D. Va. 2019); Even Those Cleared of Crimes Can Stay on F.B.I.’s
> Watch List, The New York Times, (Sep. 27, 2011) ( https://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/28/us/even -those -cleared -of -
> crimes -can -stay -on -fbis -terrorist -watch -list.html ).

31 

criteria for inclusion on the terrorist watchlist , individuals can be left frustrated with their 

inability to prove their innocence if they remain on the terrorist watchlist even after being found 

not guilty of a crime .

According to the TSC, additions to the watchlist must not be based solely on an 

individual’s race, ethnicity, or religious affiliation, nor solely on beliefs and activities protected 

by the First Amendment. 150 However, the reasonable suspicion standard entails a significant risk 

of error because it does not require it be more probable than not that an individual is involved in 

terrorism -related activities ; therefore , the ACLU has alleged that the government likely uses 

conduct protected by the First Amendment to establish a reasonable suspicion .151 The ACLU 

claims that a leaked copy of the 2013 Watchlisting Guidance states that while First Amendment 

activity alone should not be the basis for nominating an individual to the terrorist watchlist, First 

Amendment -protected activity, such as a single social media post or anonymous letter, may be 

considered as part of the reason for inclusion. 152 The U.S. Government has not acknowledged the 

alleged leak of this guidance. 

Moreover, as noted above, not everyone identified on the terrorist watchlist meets the 

reasonable suspicion standard. As it has expanded to include exception records, the terrorist 

watchlist includes certain relatives and associates of known or suspected terrorists as well as 

individuals whose exact terrorist support activities are unknown. 153 These records are used 

primarily, though not exclusively, for immigration vetting .154 

D. The Extent to Which the Terrorist Watchlist Is Shared outside the Federal 

Government is Unclear 

Considering only a reasonable suspicion standard is needed for inclusion on the terrorist 

watchlist , and in the case of exception records not even that, it is all the more important that 

individuals have the opportunity to seek meaningful redress . However , i ndividuals seeking to 

contest their inclusion as unwa rranted , and advocacy groups supporting these individuals , have 

expressed concern about the scope of information sharing of the terrorist watchlist with entities 

outside of the federal government, the full extent of which is unknown , and how that sharing 

may also negatively impact certain communities and groups . Without this information , it is 

impossible for the public to fully understand all the ways the terrorist watchlist may impact them. 

Terrorist watchlist information is shared with state, local, and tribal governments and law 

enforcement agencies, and select international partners as well as certain private entities for 

screening purposes and to assist in the coordination of threat awareness, analysis, and          

> 150 Federal Bureau of Investigation, Terrorist Screening Center (https://www.fbi.gov/investigate/terrorism/tsc)
> (accessed Aug. 3, 2023) .
> 151 American Civil Liberties Union, Trapped in a Black Box: Growing Terrorism Watchlisting in Everyday Policing
> (Apr. 2016), pg. 19.
> 152 Id.
> 153 Terrorist Screening Center, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee staff
> (June 26, 2023); Terrorist Screening Center response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee majority staff (Nov. 7, 2022), on file with Committee .
> 154 Terrorist Screening Center, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee staff
> (June 26, 2023).

32 

response. 155 In 2019, the FBI reported sharing a subset of terrorist watchlist information with 

more than 18,000 state, local, county, city, university, and college, tribal, and federal law 

enforcement agencies and approximately 533 private sector entities. 156 

Although the Secure Flight program transferred passenger watchlist matching 

responsibilities from major air carriers to TSA, TSA continued to share watchlist information 

with regulated U.S. airports and U.S. aircraft operators that could not use Secure Flight or 

required terrorist watchlist access to supplement TSA’s employee vetting requirements. 157 In

2023, TSA finalized alternative methods to allow regulated parties to obtain watchlist matching 

results and cease all distribution of terrorist watchlist information. 158 

Even though the federal government puts in place security requirements and audit 

functions when granting private entities access to terrorist watchlist information and the practical 

security benefits this access may provide, t he vastness of terrorist watchlist information sharing 

raises concerns about how these non -U.S. government entities ensure privacy, human rights, civil 

rights, and civil liberties when using terrorist watchlist data in their counterterrorism and law 

enforcement efforts. It also leave s unanswered questions about other uses of the terrorist 

watchlist and whether individuals understand or are aware that a specific expe rience is caused by 

the terrorist watchlist and , if so, the best mechanism to seek redress. It may also cause 

individuals to speculate that the experiences they have might be caused by the terrorist watchlist, 

even if they may not be, because they do not have a full understanding of how the government 

shares terrorist watchlist information. 

VI. U.S. C ITIZE NS HAVE BEE N SUBJECTED TO ADDITIO NAL SCREE NING OR 

TRAVEL RESTRICTIO NS WITH LITTLE I NFORMATIO N OR RECOURSE 

A. DHS Generally Does Not Tell Travelers Why They Are Subjected to Additional 

Screening as Part of the Redress Process 

Individuals with questions regarding how to seek resolution on issues related to travel 

screening and the terrorist watchlist can pursue re dress through the DHS Traveler Redress 

Inquiry Program (DHS TRIP ). This program was developed to help individuals seek recourse                

> 155 See Federal Bureau of Investigations, Privacy Act of 1974; System of Records , 72 Fed. Reg. 47073 (Aug. 22,
> 2007) (proposed rule).
> 156 Elhady v. Kable, 391 F. Supp. 3d 562, 570 (E.D. Va. 2019). The TSC exports terrorist watchlist data to the
> National Crime Information Center (NCIC), and private sector entities that meet certain requirements can be granted
> access to the NCIC, including terrorist watchlist information. Types of these private entiti es with access to terrorist
> watchlist information through the NCIC include the police and security forces of private railroads, colleges,
> universities, hospitals, and prisons, as well as the law enforcement divisions of certain animal welfare organizations;
> information technology, fingerprint databases, and forensic analysis prov iders; and private probation and pretrial
> services that have been determined by the FBI to be authorized criminal justice agencies performing the
> administration of criminal justice, pursuant to 28 CFR Part 20.
> 157 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 158 Id .

33 

from difficulties during travel screenings .159 DHS TRIP receives approximately 16,000 -18,000 

redress requests each year. 160 

Once received, DHS TRIP coordinate s with other departments, agencies, and DHS 

components to review the case, including determining the source of the traveler’s screening 

issue , whether it is terrorist watchlist related, and if the issue can be rectified .161 After the review 

is complete , DHS TRIP will provide a final determination letter to the traveler .

For example , a plaintiff in the case Jibril v. Mayorkas , received a final determination 

letter which included the following: 

“DHS has researched and completed our review of your case. DHS TRIP can 

neither confirm nor deny any information about you which may be within federal 

watchlists or reveal any law enforcement sensitive information. However, we 

have made any corrections to our records that our inquiries determi ned were 

necessary, including, as appropriate, notations that may assist in avoiding 

incidents of misidentification.” 162          

> 159 See 49 U.S.C. §44926.
> 160 Department of Homeland Security, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee staff (May 31, 2023).
> 161 Department of Homeland Security, Step 2: How to Use DHS TRIP (Nov. 3, 2023) (https://www.dhs.gov/step -2-
> how -use -dhs -trip); Department of Homeland Security, Redress Control Numbers (Nov. 3, 2023)
> (https://www.dhs.gov/redress -control -numbers) .
> 162 Jibril v. Mayorkas , 20 F.4th 804, 8 10 -11 (D.C. Cir. 2021).

34 

This response neither confirms the reasons for their travel difficulties nor what, if any, 

changes were made to prevent them in the future. This response is likely similar to many letters 

received by those who apply for redress through DHS TRIP .163 

The determination letter may include a redress control number , which a n individual can 

include in future airline reservation s or present to screening officials as a unique identifier to 

help clarify their identity and conn ect to their redress case .164 In conjunction with TSA’s Secure 

Flight Program, airlines have modified their reservation systems to allow individuals with a 

redress control number to enter it into the reservation system. 165 However, a redress control 

number does not ensure additional screening will not occur in the future .

In fact, a redress control number is neither a guarantee that an individual was or was not 

on the terrorist watchlist , nor that that individual has now been removed , as the government does 

not share that information . Moreo ver, even if that individual was removed from the terrorist 

watchlist , that individual could be screened for one of the other reasons listed above the very 

next time they go to the airport .166 

Due to national security concerns, the government generally will not inform an individual 

of the reason they have received additional screening. DHS told the majority committee staff 

disclosure of terrorist watchlist status during the redress process to individuals who have not 

been denied boarding would be detrimental to transportation security and disclosure of any 

underlying derogatory information would cause additional harm. 167 According to DHS , such 

disclosure could provide known or suspected terrorists with information to help them evade 

security measures and gain access to the commercial aviation system to perpetrate attack s.168 

DHS also claimed , requiring disclosure of whether an individual is on the terrorist watchlist or 

the reason for their status could jeopardize ongoing counterterrorism investigati ons or 

intelligence activities. 169 

Because of the nontransparent nature of the process, the redress applicant has no idea 

whether they were ever on the terrorist watchlist or if their status ha s changed. The lack of 

acknowledgement of a change of status and repeat ed additional screening s for different reason s               

> 163 Ibrahim v. Dep't of Homeland Sec. , 669 F.3d 983, 988 (9th Cir. 2012) (“In a form letter, TSA responded to
> Ibrahim's request by explaining that ‘[if] it has been determined that a correction to records is warranted, these
> records have been modified.’ The letter did not state whether Ibrahim was, or w as not, on the No –Fly List or other
> terrorist watchlists.”).
> 164 Department of Homeland Security, Redress Control Numbers (Nov. 3, 2023) (https://www.dhs.gov/redress -
> control -numbers).
> 165 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 166 Department of Homeland Security, Step 3: Tracking Your Inquiry (Nov. 3, 2023) (https://www.dhs.gov/step -3-
> tracking -your -inquiry).
> 167 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 168 Id.
> 169 Id.

35 

creates the possibility of a breakdown in trust and communication between the government and 

those who experience this cycle. 

While many individuals seeking redress may suspect the treatment they received was due 

to inclusion on the watchlist, in a briefing with majority committee staff, TSA said that 98 

percent of redress requests are from individuals who are not on the terrorist watchlist. 170 

Additionally, as of 2019, U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents make up less than 0.5 

percent of the terrorist watchlist. 171 These statistics are consistent with the idea that there are 

many reasons for screening at airports beyond the terrorist watchlist , but individuals may be less 

familiar with the other reasons listed in the report. 

B. DHS Now Tells U.S. Persons if They Are on the No-Fly List, after a Court Found 

the Previous Redress Process Violated Individuals’ Due Process Rights 

Several legal challenges have contested the constitutionality of the government’s 

watchlist and redress practices . In 2014, a U.S. District Court in Oregon found the DHS TRIP 

process was “wholly ineffective” and lacked “any meaningful procedures” for c hallenging one’s 

placement on the No -Fly List. 172 The plaintiffs in this case were 13 U.S. citizens who were 

prevented from flying, resulting in extended separations from family, disruptions to education, 

and in one instance, the loss of veteran disability benefits. 173 Each of them submitted DHS TRIP 

complaints and received response letters that provided no information about their watchlist 

status, l eaving them without the ability to challenge their presumed inclusion on the No -Fly 

List. 174 The court found that the DHS TRIP process violated their constitutional due process 

rights and ordered the government to revise its redress procedures. 175 In 2015, DHS revised its 

procedures to allow U.S. Persons who are on the No -Fly List to receive confirmation of that 

status and some information about the reasons for inclusion. 176 Americans and lawful permanent 

residents may now dispute their placement on the No -Fly List. 177 

C. Multiple Courts have found the Current Redress Process is Constitutional, but 

Legal Challenges are Ongoing 

In recent years, multiple appeals courts have rejected due process challenges brought by 

individuals who have not been barred from flying, but who suspect they are on the terrorist 

watchlist due to treatment they received while traveling. 178 For example, in 2021, a group of 23                        

> 170 Department of Homeland Security, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee staff (May 31, 2023).
> 171 See Memorandum in Support of Defendant’s Motion for Summary Judgement at 7, Elhady v. Kable , 391 F. Supp.
> 3d 562 (E.D. Va. 2019).
> 172 Latif v. Holder , 28 F. Supp. 3d 1134, 1161 (D. Or. 2014).
> 173 Id . at pg. 1143 -1146.
> 174 Id . At pg. 1143 .
> 175 Latif v. Holder , 28 F. Supp. 3d 116 3. On appeal, the Circuit Court upheld the constitutionality of the revised DHS
> TRIP process.
> 176 Department of Homeland Security, Annual Performance Report for Fiscal Years 2015 -2017 at pg. 104.
> 177 See Id .
> 178 See Elhady v. Kable , 993 F.3d 208 (4th Cir. 2021); Ghedi v .Mayorkas , 16 F.4th 456 (5th Cir. 2021); Kashem v.
> Barr , 941 F.3d 358 (9th Cir. 2019); Abdi v. Wray , 942 F.3d 1019 (10th Cir. 2019); Beydoun v. Sessions , 871 F.3d
> 459 (6th Cir. 2017).

36 

U.S. citizens alleged their inclusion on the terrorist watchlist resulted in treatment ranging from 

repeated additional screening and delays, to being placed under arrest and interrogated for 

multiple hours. 179 However, in that case, Elhady v. Kable, the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals 

found that the impacts described did “not rise to the level of constitutional concern” as none of 

them had been barred from flying or prevented from entering the United States. 180 

Nevertheless , two district courts have recently found being barred from flying or entering 

the country is not necessary to challenge the constitutionality of the watchlist and redress 

procedures. In 2020, a Maryland district court recog nized due process rights are implicated 

“when watchlist status results in repeated, prolonged delays” that deter travel. 181 Several of the 

plaintiffs in the case tried unsuccessfully to seek a resolution through DHS TRIP. Based on their 

accounts, the court described the DHS TRIP procedures as providing “little to no opportunity to 

be heard, before, during, or after” being placed on the watchlist. 182 A district court in Michigan 

also recently allowed a case to proceed in which a U.S. citizen argues his suspected inclusion on 

the watchlist violated his right to due process. 183 Although the plaintiff was not barred from 

flying, he experienced “lengthy and intrusive interrogations ” every time he traveled, resulting in 

great economic harm to his business. 184 He also sought redress through DHS TRIP on several 

occasions , but “those efforts [went] nowhere.” 185 

Even though the government has said that individuals have been removed from the 

watchlist through DHS TRIP, during fiscal years 2018 through 2022 , 710 U.S. citizens and/or 

lawful permanent residents submitted DHS TRIP applications. 186 Of those , only five were 

removed from the No Fly List and 99 total were removed from the terrorist watchlist .187 Man y

individuals have complained the only effective way to get off the terrorist watchlist is to sue the 

federal government. 188                  

> 179 Elhady v. Kable , 993 F.3d 208, 215 -16 (4th Cir. 2021).
> 180 Id .at pg. 221.
> 181 El Ali v. Barr , 473 F. Supp. 3d 479, 508 (D. Md. 2020).
> 182 Id .at pg. 512.
> 183 Salloum v. Kable , 2020 WL 7480549 (E.D. Mich. 2020).
> 184 Id .at pg. *8.
> 185 Id .at pg. *3.
> 186 Federal Bureau of Investigation response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Oct. 13, 2023), on file with committee.
> 187 Id .
> 188 E.g. Congress Should Reform the Unconstitutional ‘Terrorism’ Watchlist , Medium (Mar. 2, 2022)
> (https://cairnational.medium.com/congress -should -reform -the -unconstitutional -terrorism -watchlist -9fd2a96509e6).

37 

Timeline of Notable Watchlist Cases 

• Jan. 2014 – In Ibrahim v. DHS , a California District Court found that the government 

violated the due process rights of a traveler who was mistakenly placed on the No -Fly List as 

a result of an FBI agent misreading a form. 189 As the court explained, that mistake “was no 

minor human error but an error with palpable impact, leading to the humiliation, cuffing, and 

incarceration of an innocent and incapacitated air traveler.” 190 The court ordered the 

government to review every government watchlist and database to ensure all records of the 

traveler’s mistaken No -Fly List designation were removed. 191 

• June 2014 – In Latif v. Holder , a n Oregon District Court found that the DHS TRIP process 

for individuals on the No -Fly List was unconstitutional, prompting DHS to revise the redress 

process. 192 Under the revised TRIP procedures, DHS will confirm a U.S. citizen or 

permanent resident is on the No -Fly List and provide some information about the reasons for 

inclusion. 193 

• Oct. 2019 – In Kashem v. Barr , the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the 

constitutionality of the revised DHS TRIP procedures. 194 

• Jan. 2021 – In Elhady v. Kable , the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals held that plaintiffs’ 

inclusion on the Selectee or Expanded Selectee Lists did not violate their due process rights 

and that the impacts of repeated enhanced screening did not “rise to the level of 

constitutional concern.” 195 

• Oct. 2021 – In Ghedi v. Mayorkas , the plaintiff alleged that he had been placed on the 

watchlist after refusing to be an informant for the FBI, and as a result experienced repeated 

“extreme burdens and hardship while traveling.” 196 The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals 

rejected the plaintiff’s due process claims, finding that additional burdens faced while 

travelling did not deprive him of his constitutionally protected right to travel. 197 

• Dec . 2021 – In Jibril v. Mayorkas , the District of Columbia Circuit Court of Appeals 

allowed a due process challenge to the watchlist and redress processes based on “extensive 

and intrusive security screenings” the plaintiffs experienced, which they alleged occurred due 

to inclusion on the Selectee Li st. 198 In 2023, the U.S. District Court for the District of 

Columbia dismissed the case based on ex parte, in camera review of an affidavit provided by               

> 189 Ibrahim v. DHS , 62 F. Supp. 3d 909 (N.D. Cal. 2014). The plaintiff, Dr. Ibrahim, was arrested and detained when
> she attempted to board a plane to travel to an academic conference in Hawaii and subsequently had her student visa
> revoked. As a result of the lawsuit, the government acknowledged that Dr. Ibrahim did not pose a threat to national
> security and admitted that sh e had been added to the No -Fly List by mistake.
> 190 Id . at pg. 927.
> 191 Id .at pg. 928.
> 192 Latif v. Holder , 28 F. Supp. 3d 1134, 1161 -62 (D. Or. 2014).
> 193 Id .
> 194 Kashem v. Barr , 941 F.3d 358 (9th Cir. 2019). This case was an appeal of the continued litigation following the
> 2014 District Court decision in Latif v. Holder .
> 195 Elhady v. Kable , 993 F.3d 208, 216 -21 (4th Cir. 2021).
> 196 Ghedi v. Mayorkas , 16 F.4th 456, 461 (5th Cir. 2021).
> 197 Ghedi v. Mayorkas , 16 F.4th 456, 461 (5th Cir. 2021).
> 198 Jibril v. Mayorkas, 20 F.4th 804, 807 (D.C. Cir. 2021).

38 

the government explaining that the plaintiffs are not on the watchlist.  In April 2023, the 

plaintiff appealed this decision and the review is ongoing. 199 

• June 2022 – In Fikre v. FBI , the plaintiff was removed from the No Fly List after initiating a 

due process challenge based on his inclusion on the list. 200 The Ninth Circuit Court of 

Appeals held that his claims could still proceed because “there is no reason to believe the 

government would not place [the plaintiff] on the list ‘for the same reasons that prompted the 

government to add him to the list in the f irst place.’” 201 In September 2023, the U.S. Supreme 

Court granted the government’s petition for certiorari and will hear the case in January 

2024. 202 

VII. WIDESPREAD DISCRIMI NATIO N ALLEGATIO NS EXACERBATE 

CO NCER NS ABOUT TSA A ND CBP SCREE NING ACTIVITIES 

A. TSA Receives Thousands of Discrimination Complaints Each Year About Its 

Screening Practices 

In addition to DHS TRIP redress applications , TSA receives numerous complaints and 

allegations of discrimination in its screening processes. 203 According to a GAO report, the TSA 

Contact Center received 34,542 civil rights and civil liberties complaints of discrimination from 

2016 to 2021. Of those filed, racial profiling or discrimination was the most cited basis for the 

complaint . Further, despite concerns, GAO found that TSA has not consistently collected data on 

the frequency individuals from certain religious and ethnic communities are referred for 

additional screening nor assessed whether its screening practices comply with the agency's anti -

discrimination policy. As a result, GAO has found that TSA has been unable to determine the 

extent to which discr imination occurs. 204 

Additionally, in 2013 and 2017, GAO reported TSA’s use of behavioral indicators to 

screen passengers was not backed by sufficient evidence to support their continued use to 

identify threats to aviation security .205 Since then , TSA h as integrated behavior awareness 

training into the standard duties of the T ransportation Security Officer workforce rather than 

fielding specific Behavioral Detection Officers. Further, in response to GAO recommendations, 

TSA integrated training on preventing racial, ethic, and religious profiling into its behavioral 

detection training. 206                  

> 199 Jibril v. Mayorkas , 2023 WL 2240271 (D.D.C. 2023).
> 200 Fikre v. FBI , 35 F.4th 762 (9th Cir. 2022).
> 201 Id. at 772.
> 202 Fikre v. FBI , 35 F.4th 762 (9th Cir. 2022), cert. granted , 2023 WL 6319658 (U.S. Sept. 29, 2023) (No. 22 -1178);
> U.S. Supreme Court Argument Calendar, Session Beginning Jan. 8, 2024
> (https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_calendars/MonthlyArgumentCalJanuary2024.pdf).
> 203 Government Accountability Office, Aviation Security: TSA Should Assess Potential for Discrimination and
> Better Inform Passengers of the Complaint Process (GAO -23 -105201) (Nov. 2022).
> 204 Id.
> 205 Government Accountability Office, Aviation Security: TSA Should Assess Potential for Discrimination and
> Better Inform Passengers of the Complaint Process (GAO -23 -105201) (Nov. 2022).
> 206 Government Accountability Office, Aviation Security: TSA Should Assess Potential for Discrimination and Better
> Inform Passengers of the Complaint Process (GAO -23 -105201) (Nov. 2022).

39 

TSA has also initiated actions to minimize discrimination. For example, TSA is 

implementing new procedures and is updating AIT algorithms which DHS assesses will reduce 

the rate of false positive alarms of transgender and gender -nonconforming travelers and travelers 

wi th religious head coverings .207 

B. CBP Currently Faces Ongoing Litigation and an Internal Review Spurred by 

Religious Discrimination Accusations 

In 2019, DHS CRCL provided recommendations to CBP based on an investigation of 

multiple allegations of religious insensitivity. These included allegation s that officers had, over 

the course of eight years, inappropriately asked questions about the religious practices and 

geographic or cultural origin of names of travelers during interviews , and that they were 

insensitive to objections to officers seeing photographs of female travelers without their religious 

head coverings .208 DHS CRCL recommended that CBP develop clear policy that bars CBP 

personnel from discriminating against travelers solely based on real or perceived religion as well 

as make clear the specific circumstances when personnel may take religion into account, and that 

CBP then train to that standard. 209 In response, DHS published a Fir st Amendment protected 

activities memorandum .210 Not long after DHS CRCL’s report , the ACLU filed a lawsuit against 

CBP on behalf of individuals who have claimed they were unfairly questioned by CBP about 

their religious beliefs .211 

In addition, DHS CRCL has opened an investigation into CBP’s TTRTs , as a result of 

discrimination complaints. The complaints include repeated and unnecessary screening as well as 

questioning about religious and political beliefs and participation in First Amendment protected 

activities. 212 Further, TTRTs were established to identify individuals who might be terrorists that 

were unknown to the system . T o date, U.S. citizens and legal permanent residents represent the 

largest population of individuals the teams have examined .213 Although this may indicate a focus 

on domestic terrorism, it also raises some questions about TTRT activities . While CBP awaits 

the results of DHS CRCL’s investigation, CBP should continue to take steps to minimize 

discrimination, similar to those processes TSA is implementing , as described above.             

> 207 Department of Homeland Security response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Nov. 17, 2023), on file with Committee.
> 208 For example, a male officer viewing an image of a female traveler without her hijab. Memorandum from Office
> of Civil Rights and Civil Liberties, Department of Homeland Security to Commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border
> Protection Kevin McAleenan, Religio us Questioning at Ports of Entry –Multiple Complaints (Feb. 26, 2019).
> 209 Id.
> 210 Memorandum from Acting Secretary McAleenan to All Department of Homeland Security Employees,
> Information Regarding First Amendment Protected Activities (May 17, 2019).
> 211 Kariye v. Mayorkas , 650 F. Supp. 3d 865 (C.D. Cal. 2022).
> 212 Memorandum from Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties, Department of Homeland Security to U.S.
> Customs and Border Protection, Concerning Tactical Terrorist Response Team (April 5, 2022).
> 213 Clear v. CBP , Howard Decl. Exhibit D, Exhibit H (Feb. 21, 2021); U.S. Customs and Border Protection response
> to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee majority staff (Dec. 21, 2022), on file with
> Committee .

40 

As mentioned previously, CBP looks at the potential impact of specific rules in its rules -

based targeting lists. When asked whether CBP tracks the impact of its screening practices on 

specific individuals or groups, CBP explained to committee staff that individual program offices 

or field offices track whether their policies or implementation is having an impact on specific 

individuals. 214 CBP does not, however, look at issues of the impacts of all their screenings 

combined on individuals and communities 215 

VIII. OVERSIGHT OF TERRORIST WATCHLIST A ND SCREE NING ACTIVITIES 

HAS BEE N FRAGME NTED, PREVE NTI NG A COMPREHE NSIVE AND

CO NSISTE NT INDEPE NDE NT ASSESSEME NT

Despite the expansion of the terrorist watchlist and screening activities, no single entity 

has conducted a comprehensive assessment of how the changes to government watchlisting 

authorities , in conjunction with all screening activities , impact the public. Although the 

departments and agencies that use and maintain the terrorist watchlist established the Watchlist 

Advisory Council (WLAC) to coordinate policies and procedures related to the terrorist 

watchlist , these actions only consider the p olicies and pr ocesses related to the terrorist watchlist 

and do not account for other screenings. 216 

Moreover, t his guidance is supposed to be reviewed by the WLAC every three years, but 

the guidelines may be modified more frequently if needed. 217 Nevertheless, the National 

Counterterrorism Center reported the 2018 Watchlisting Guidance was not updated until 

September 2023 .218 As a result, needed changes to nomina tion and removal procedures may not 

have been implemented in a timely manner. Furthermore, the details of these procedures, 

including changes to expand the identification and sharing of watchlist information, is not 

releasable to the public. Additionally, while the FBI reports that the TSC monitors the timeliness 

and quality of new nominations, deletions, and edits to the terrorist watchlist on a monthly basis 

and all nominations of U.S. citizens and legal permanent residents are internally audited every 

six months, these efforts provide little assurance as the results are not shared with the public. 219 

All of these efforts are internal oversight mechanisms with little to no transparency. 

Even though some external entities have also provided fragmented reviews of 

watchlisting and screening procedures , these reviews only looked at portions of the combined 

terrorist watchlist and screening enterprise . The Inspectors General at DOJ and the Intelligence 

Community have each carried out audits of the watchlisting processes at FBI and other agencies              

> 214 Department of Homeland Security, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee Staff (August 4, 2023).
> 215 Id .
> 216 National Counterterrorism Center, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee staff (May 23, 2023); See also Salloum v. Kable , Transcript of Matthew J. DeSarno (Apr. 9, 2018).
> 217 National Counterterrorism Center, Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
> Committee staff (May 23, 2023).
> 218 National Counterterrorism Center response to Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee
> majority staff (Sep. 29, 2023), on file with Committee .
> 219 Federal Bureau of Investigation, FY 2021 Authorization and Budget Request to Congress (Feb. 2020) ; Terrorist
> Screening Center , Briefing with Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee staff (June 26,
> 2023).

41 

under their purview .220 GAO has also conducted its own assessments, and the DHS Inspector 

General has examined aspects of DHS components’ work. 221 Nevertheless , these assessments did 

not examine the comprehensive impact these combined processes have on Americans. 

In addition, the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, an independent executive 

oversight agency, is currently examining the terrorist watchlist, particularly the standards used to 

place individuals on the terrorist watchlist and processes for nomin ations and removals. 222 

However, this board has not yet completed its review of the terrorist watchlist. Likewise, in 

2020, then -Ranking Member Peters requested GAO study the impacts TSA’s and CBP’s 

screening procedures have on communities of diverse backgrounds. 223 GAO provided the results 

of the TSA study in 2022. 224 

Further, because so many federal agencies are involved in the watchlisting and screening 

processes, no congressional committee has full oversight over the enterprise . Multiple 

committees oversee the watchlisting process from nominations to screening and redress. Some of 

these same committees also oversee TSA and CBP’s screening processes. Nonetheless , from the 

perspective of the traveling public, all of these programs together significantly impact their lives. 

IX. CO NCLUSIO N

The centralization of the terrorist watchlist and the expansion of its use , as well as the 

creation and growth of TSA and CBP’s screening processes , were implemented in response to 

9/11 and other failed terrorist attacks in its aftermath . This has resulted in a layered and , in some 

instances redundant , system to ensure the homeland , our borders, and our aviation system are 

protected from future terrorist attacks . However, m ore than twenty years after 9/11 , the issues 

described within this report underscore the need to reassess how these process es impact 

Americans and whether this redundancy and overlap experienced by Americans is the best use of 

resources to effectively address today’s threats . Action is needed now to increase transparency 

and ensure there is proper oversight of government watchlist ing and screening practices , as well 

as effective and fair redress processes regardless of what threats drive these practices in the 

future. We must also assess whether this redundancy is an effective use of limited resources and                       

> 220 E.g. Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General, Audit of the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s
> Management of Terrorist Watchlist Nominations (Audit Report 14 -16) (Mar. 2014); Department of Justice Office of
> the Inspector General, Audit of the Department of Justice Terrorist Watchlist Nomination Processes (Audit Report
> 08 -16) (Mar. 2008); Office of the Intelligence Community Inspector General, Annual Report (Jan. 30. 2009) .
> 221 E.g. Government Accountability Office, Terrorist Watch List Screening: Opportunities Exist to Enhance
> Management Oversight, Reduce Vulnerabilities in Agency Screening Processes, and Expand Use of the List (GAO -
> 08 -110) (Oct. 2007); Department of Homeland Security Office of Inspector General, DHS Has Controls to
> Safeguard Watchlist Data (OIG -22 -53) (Jul. 25, 2022) .
> 222 U.S. Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, Current Oversight Projects
> (https://www.pclob.gov/OversightProjects )(accessed Jun. 2, 2023) .
> 223 Letter from Senator Gary Peters to Comptroller General Gene Dodaro, Government Accountability Office (Nov.
> 18, 2020).
> 224 Government Accountability Office, Aviation Security: TSA Should Assess Potential for Discrimination and
> Better Inform Passengers of the Compliant Process (GAO -23 -105201) (Nov. 2022) .

42 

whether we have done a sufficient job of balancing national security with civil right and civil 

liberties. 

After reviewing government watchlisting and screening processes, committee staff 

concluded the following :

1.  Oversight is Disjointed . Although external entities have reviewed watchlisting 

procedures, oversight entities have not conducted a coordinated and full -scope 

assessment of the terrorist watchlist enterprise. As a result, the effectiveness of the 

system, quality of nominations, timeliness of removals , and information sharing practices 

has not been comprehensively evaluated. 

2.  Redress Options Are Insufficient. DHS TRIP serves as the primary mechanism for 

individuals to seek resolution for travel difficulties, including potential removal from the 

terrorist watchlist. However, agencies do not provide the individual with the reason they 

received additional screening, such as inclusion on the terrorist watchlist, because of the 

risk that disclosure may undermine security processes. Further , individuals seeking 

redress do so with little ability to advocate for themselves or avoid issu es in the future. 

Despite outreach efforts by DHS to better explain the process, the ongoing cycle of 

applying for redress , but continually being subjected to additional screening is breaking 

trust between the government and communities who have claimed they are being over -

screened and watchlisted. 

3.  Communities Have Diminished Faith in Government. Leaders in the Muslim, Arab 

American and South Asian communities, who believe that they bear the disproportionate 

brunt of this nontransparent watchlist and screening system, have shared concerns with 

the Committee that continued screening and the inability to seek real redress has broken 

trust between their communities and the federal government. Despite intermittent efforts 

by the federal government to do outreach, provide more transparency into the 

watchli sting process and into DHS screening practices, and build relationships, the 

patchwork nature of these efforts and the ultimate continued screening with no real 

redress has eroded trust and faith in government and institutions. 

4.  Layered Screening is Missing a Coordinated Approach . Government watchlisting has 

expanded in the last twenty -plus years in size and scope. The TSC is involved in 

watchlisting not only terrorists, but also individuals involved in transnational organized 

crime, the associates and family members of potential terrorists, as well as others. 

Moreover, both TSA and CBP have created their own layers of watchlisting and 

screening for security and for many other reasons. Today, there are at least 22 

mechanisms that may affect someone’s travel. Although this may reduce the likelihood 

that a potential threat is missed , the extent to which these efforts are coordinated across 

agencies is unclear . Furthermore, as the size of the watchlist and screening enterprise 

grows, so does the chance of misidentification, the need for additional resources, and the 

risk that existing limited resources may be spent on low risks, overlooking real threats. 43 

5.  Processes Lack Sufficient Transparency. Though not generally classified as national 

security information, the information about watchlisting and screening processes, 

including the Watchlisting Guidance, are categorized as sensitive security information or 

law enforcement sensitive and not public ly releasable. The complete lack of transparency 

makes oversight by Congress challenging and by civil society virtually impossible. While 

the executive branch must be able to keep some issues of national security secret in order 

to protect Americans, this opaqueness does not allow for a discussion of whether the 

system is working and whether there are individuals who are disproportionately harmed 

by its implementation. 

6.  Potential Discrimination Is Not Fully Analyzed. There is not a government -wide effort 

to assess whether this system of screening and watchlisting discriminat es against certain 

groups or quantify the comprehensive impact multiple, repeat ed screenings may have on 

specific individuals or communities. Outside groups , such as those representing Muslim, 

Arab, and South Asian Americans, have claimed certain communities and individuals are 

screened more than others; however, agencies do not maintain the data necessary to 

assess whether certain individuals or groups are disproportionally impacted. Without this 

data, Congress cannot provide sufficient oversight , government agencies cannot improve 

their practices, and communities continue to feel targ eted .

To address the lack of transparency surrounding the terrorist watchlist and travel screening 

activities and the potential harms caused by their redundancies, and to create a meaningful 

redress process for Americans unfairly impacted , Congress and the executive branch should 

implement the recommendations identified in the report. This Committee will continue to 

conduct oversight of the watchlisting and screening enterprises to ensure the executive branch 

address es the concerns raised and will work to make reforms to these systems.
