Title: How We Voted in 2022: A Topical Look at the Survey of the Performance of American Elections

URL Source: https://electionlab.mit.edu/sites/default/files/2023-05/How-We-Voted-In-2022.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 26 Jun 2024 20:06:40 GMT

Markdown Content:
Charles Stewart III 

# HOW WE VOTED IN 2022 

# A TOPICAL LOOK AT THE SURVEY OF THE 

# PERFORMANCE OF AMERICAN ELECTIONS ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Charles Stewart III is the Kenan Sahin Distinguished Professor of Political Science and the Director of the  MIT Elec -

tion Data and Science Lab .

The 2022 Survey of the Performance of American Elections was supported by the Election Trust Initiative. Judd Cho -

ate, Colorado Election Director, and Justin Roebuck, Ottawa County Clerk, provided valuable advice to the design of 

the survey, especially concerning new questions related to polling place disruptions, ballot tracking, and practices 

intended to increase confidence in elections. Claire DeSoi, Camilla Valerio, and the staff of the MIT Election Data 

and Science Lab were integral in bringing this report to life. 

# ABOUT THIS REPORT 

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this report do not necessarily represent the views or opin -

ions of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the Election Trust Initiative, or other organizations or individuals 

who provided advice for the 2022 survey or report. 

The MIT Election Data & Science Lab encourages dissemination of knowledge and research; this report may be re -

produced in whole or in part for non-commercial or educational purposes so long as full attribution to its authors is 

given. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

The Survey of the Performance of American Elections 

(SPAE) provides information about how Americans 

experienced voting in the most recent federal election. 

Conducted in every presidential election since 2008, 

the SPAE is the only national survey of election ad -

ministration that focuses on the process of voting and 

provides insights into the performance of elections in 

the individual states. 

In 2022, 10,200 registered voters responded to the 

survey, which was administered by YouGov—200 ob -

servations in each state plus the District of Columbia. 

The study was supported by the Election Trust Initia -

tive. 

Among the findings discussed in this report are the 

following: 

Voting by mail 

» The percentage of voters casting ballots by mail 

retreated to 32 percent, down more than 10 points 

from 2020 and more than doubling the fraction 

from 2016. The share of voters casting ballots on 

Election Day grew to 50 percent, from 31 percent 

in 2020. 

» Forty-six percent of Democrats, compared to 27 

percent of Republicans, reported voting by mail. 

This is down from 60 percent for Democrats and 

32 percent for Republicans in 2020. 

» The use of mail to return ballots that were mailed 

to voters rebounded in 2022 to 62 percent, com -

pared to 53 percent in 2020. Twenty-one percent 

of mail ballots were returned to drop boxes, which 

is virtually unchanged from 2020. 

» Almost five percent of voters who returned their 

ballot to a drop box reported seeing something 

disruptive, such as demonstrators, when they 

dropped off their ballot. 

» Forty percent of mail voters reported using online 

ballot tracking. 

In-person voting 

» The use of schools to vote in-person continued its 

decade-long gradual decline. 

» Average wait times to vote were roughly equal to 

the last midterm election for Election Day voters 

(6 percent waiting over 30 minutes compared to 

5 percent in 2020); they declined for early voters 

(4 percent reported waiting over 30 minutes com -

pared to 7 percent in 2020). 

» Ten percent of Election Day voters and 9 percent of 

early voters reported seeing something disruptive 

when they voted. The most common disruptions 

were voters talking loudly and voters in a dispute 

with an election worker or other voter. 

» Approximately 3 percent of in-person voters re -

ported seeing demonstrators outside their polling 

place claiming the election was fraudulent. 

Satisfaction with voting 

» Voters who cast ballots in person and by mail con -

tinued to express high levels of satisfaction with 

the process, as in past years. 

Reasons for not voting 

» The primary reported reason for not voting in 

2022 was not knowing enough about the choices 

(12.1 percent of non-voters), followed by not being 

interested (11.7 percent) and being too busy (9.8 

percent). 

Voter confidence 

» Measured across all voters, confidence that votes 

were counted as intended remained similar to past 

years. 

» The partisan gap in confidence that opened up in 

2020 closed somewhat in 2022, with the primary 

reason being Republicans becoming more confi -

dent. 

» Compared to 2020, the Democratic-Republican 

gap in state-level confidence declined significant -

ly in most states. Major exceptions were Pennsyl -

vania and Arizona. 

» Among Republicans, lack of confidence in wheth -

er votes were counted as intended at the state lev -

el was strongly correlated with whether Donald 

Trump won the respondent’s state and with the 

fraction of votes cast by mail in the state. 

Election security measures 

» Of a set of common security measures used by 

election officials, respondents were most aware 

of logic-and-accuracy testing and securing pa -

per ballots. One-third of respondents stated that 

election officials used none of the measures asked 

about. 

» Respondents stated that the security measures 

that would give them the greatest assurance about 

3

How We Voted in 2022 the security and integrity of elections were log -

ic-and-accuracy testing (74 percent), securing pa -

per ballots (74 percent), and post-election audits 

(72 percent). 

Fraud 

» Partisan attitudes about the prevalence of several 

types of vote fraud remained polarized in 2020, al -

though less so than in 2020. 

Reform 

» Requiring electronic voting machines to have 

paper backups, requiring a photo ID to vote, au -

tomatically changing registrations when voters 

move, requiring election officials to be nonpar -

tisan, and declaring Election Day a holiday were 

supported by majorities of both Democrats and 

Republicans. 

» Adopting automatic voter registration, moving 

Election Day to the weekend, and Election-Day 

registration are supported by a majority of respon -

dents, but not by a majority of Republicans. 

» Ranked-choice voting, conducting elections en -

tirely by mail, and allowing Internet voting were 

opposed by a majority of respondents but support -

ed by a majority of Democrats; hand-counting pa -

per ballots was opposed by a majority of respon -

dents but supported by a majority of Republicans. 

» Voting on cell phones was opposed by majorities 

of Democrats and Republicans. 

How We Voted in 2022 

4CONTENTS 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  3

INTRODUCTION  6

Mail ballot usage 

VOTING BY MAIL  7

The experience of voting by mail 

Returning mail ballots 

Disruptions at drop boxes 

Ballot tracking 

The in-person voting experience 

VOTING IN-PERSON  17 

Where people voted 

Wait times to vote 

Disruptions in polling places 

NOT VOTING  24 

CONFIDENCE IN THE ELECTION  25 

Confidence in one’s own vote vs. the county, state, and nation 

Partisan polarization of confidence in state and nation 

INCREASING THE SECURITY OF ELECTIONS  30 

FRAUD  32 

Partisan patterns in beliefs about fraud 

REFORM  35 

CONCLUSION  37 

METHODOLOGICAL NOTE  38 

5

How We Voted in 2022 INTRODUCTION 

The Survey of the Performance of American Elections 

(SPAE) provides information about how Americans 

experienced voting in the most recent federal election. 

Conducted in every presidential election since 2008 

and in the federal midterm elections of 2014 and 2022, 

the SPAE is the only national survey of election ad -

ministration that focuses on the process of voting and 

provides insights into the performance of elections in 

the individual states. 

In 2022, 10,200 registered voters—200 from every 

state and the District of Columbia—responded to the 

survey, which was administered by YouGov. The 2022 

SPAE was supported by the Election Trust Initiative. 

This document provides a look into some of the find -

ings from the survey. It is an update of the 2020 report, 

with one important difference. The 2020 report did 

not include results from the 2014 SPAE—the only one 

at the time that was administered during a midterm— 

and only included comparisons to the results from the 

presidential elections of 2008, 2012, and 2016. This 

report includes the 2014 results, to allow comparison 

with that midterm. In addition, a few items that ap -

pear on the SPAE also appear in the Cooperative Elec -

tion Study (CES). Where they are available, midterm 

results from 2010 and 2018 are also included using 

items from the CES. Finally, to provide long-term 

context about voter turnout and use of voting modes, 

we take advantage of the Voting and Registration Sup -

plement of the Current Population Survey, conducted 

by the U.S Census Bureau. 

More information about the SPAE, including the ques -

tionnaire and data, may be downloaded at the Harvard 

Dataverse. 1

The two biggest issues for election administration that 

affected the experience of voters when they cast their 

ballots were: 

» the echoes from the disruptions that occurred in 

2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and 

» threats of disruptions and violence in polling plac -

es that some feared, owing to threats that were 

aimed at election officials themselves.   

> 1The URL for the SPAE Dataverse is https://dataverse.har -
> vard.edu/dataverse/SPAE .

In addition, the security and accuracy of the electoral 

process has come under question from some quarters. 

Therefore, in this edition of the SPAE, we revisit some 

issues that were explored in the 2020 SPAE, notably, 

voting by mail, and add analysis of questions asked to 

gauge the degree to which voters experienced disrup -

tions when they voted. We also pay particular atten -

tion to voter attitudes about confidence in the system 

and shifting opinions about the prevalence of fraud 

and support for reforms. 

How We Voted in 2022 

6VOTING BY MAIL 

The 2020 election cycle saw the biggest and most dra -

matic shift in how Americans vote in American his -

tory. Because of permanent and temporary changes 

made to state election laws, emergency declarations, 

and voter concern about public health, the percentage 

of voters casting ballots by mail in 2020 doubled com -

pared to 2016. The 2022 election saw some backing off 

this surge, mostly by Democrats, but overall, voting by 

mail in 2022 was well ahead of the trend that had been 

established over the previous two decades. 

Mail ballot usage 

For the past three decades, the percentage of voters 

casting ballots in person on Election Day has declined, 

as more have cast ballots either in person before Elec -

tion Day or by mail. These changes, particularly re -

garding voting by mail, accelerated dramatically in 

2020, with the percentage of voters casting votes on 

Election Day dropping from 60% in 2016 to 31% in 

2020. 2 Ballots cast by mail nearly doubled, from 23% 

to 43%, while votes cast early and in person continued 

their steady pace upward. 

Election Day voting rebounded somewhat in 2022 

compared to 2020, as voting by mail and early in-per -

son voting declined a bit—mail balloting more than 

early voting. (The early voting decline in 2022 fits into 

the long-established pattern of early voting declining 

a bit compared to the previous presidential election.) 

Still, the overall usage pattern of mail ballots in 2022 

was more like 2020 than the pattern in the previous 

midterm election, 2018. 

2 Voting mode statistics in this subsection are taken from 

the Voting and Registration Supplement of the Current Pop -

ulation Survey. 

Voting Modes, 1996-2022 

Data sources: Census Bureau, Voting and Registration Supplement, 1996-2022 

7

How We Voted in 2022 The rebound in Election Day voting proceeded at 

different rates across the states, as did the transition 

from voting in-person to voting by mail. The following 

graph uses a ternary (or triplot) graph to describe the 

mix of voting modes in each state in 2020 and 2022, at 

least as reported in the SPAE. 3 The data tokens rep -

resent the mix of voting modes reported in 2022. The 

gray lines attached to the data tokens trace the path of 

each state back to where they were in 2020. Almost all 

the gray lines trace some path upward, although the 

states in the lower left-hand corner (universal vote-by- 

> 3Voters in states at the very top of the triangle all cast their
> ballots on Election Day. Voters in states at the lower left cor -
> ner all cast their ballots by mail. Voters in states in the lower
> right-hand corner all cast their ballots early in-person.

mail states) saw virtually no movement. 4 The bulk of 

states are seen moving on a path that is parallel to the 

axis that describes mail voting, which indicates voters 

in those states were primarily substituting mail ballot -

ing for Election Day voting. States such as Delaware, 

New Mexico, Georgia, and Kansas trace out primarily 

rightward paths, indicating shifts predominantly to -

ward early in-person voting.  

> 4The states that saw an estimated increase in the use of
> voting by mail in 2022 compared to 2020 were Colorado,
> Louisiana, Utah, and Washington.

Mix of Voting Modes Used by States, 2020 and 2022 

> Data sources: Census Bureau, Voting and Registration Supplement
> The data tokens represent the mix in 2022. The grey lines trace the path back to the mix in 2020.

How We Voted in 2022 

8Close examination of the triplot graph reveals clusters 

of states that had very similar vote-mode portfolios 

in 2022. The five states in the lower left-hand cor  -

ner of the plot saw at least 85 percent of ballots cast 

by mail (as reported by survey participants) and sin -

gle-digit percentages of voters using either in-person 

mode. These states—Washington, Oregon, Colorado, 

Hawaii, and Utah—can be called (fairly) pure “vote-

by-mail” states. The six states at the top of the graph 

saw at least 85 percent of ballots cast on Election Day 

and single-digit reports of early and absentee voting. 

These states—Alabama, Missouri, Mississippi, New 

Hampshire, Connecticut, and Oklahoma—can be 

called (fairly) pure “Election Day” states. There are no 

states that even approach pure early voting states. The 

six states in the trapezoid in the lower right—Arkan -

sas, Tennessee, North Carolina, New Mexico, Geor -

gia, and Texas—each saw between 46 percent and 60 

percent of ballots cast early and almost all the remain -

ing ballots cast on Election Day. (Only Georgia and 

New Mexico saw more than 10 percent of ballots cast 

by mail—11 percent and 13 percent, respectively.) 

These two maps help to visualize the geographic dis -

tribution of the decline of voting by mail from 2020 to 

2022. Prior to 2020, by far the greatest percentage of 

mail ballots were cast in the Western states. In 2020, 

voting by mail occurred at very high rates nationwide, 

with one major exception—the south-central part of 

the country, ranging from Texas up to Missouri and 

over to Tennessee. In 2022, the Mountain West and 

Pacific coast states continued with high levels of mail 

balloting, while the area of the country with low lev -

els—defined as fewer than 20% of voters—spread to 

include virtually all of the South (excepting Florida) 

and pockets of the upper Midwest and Northeast. In 

general, the upper tier of states also saw declines in 

voting by mail, although at levels that were signifi -

cantly greater than before 2020. 

Percentage of ballots cast by mail, 2020 

and 2022 

> Data sources: Census Bureau, Voting and Registration Supple -
> ment, 2020; SPAE, 2022

9

How We Voted in 2022 Finally, we examine the most politically important 

feature of the changing patterns of voting by mail: 

that related to party. The 2020 election saw the de -

velopment of a strong divide between Republicans 

and Democrats over the use of mail ballots, first at the 

elite level, and then at the grassroots. As the following 

graph shows, between 2008 and 2016 Democrats were 

Voting by mail, by party 

> Data sources: SPAE (2008, 2012, 2014, 2016, 2020, 2022); Cooperative Election Study (2010, 2018)

The experience of voting by mail 

A core feature of the SPAE is that it asks voters di -

rectly about their experience voting. With respect to 

voting by mail, the SPAE includes three key questions, 

which are reflected in the following graphs. In every 

iteration of the survey, mail voters have been asked 

whether they had any problems getting their absentee 

or mail ballots sent to them, if they had any problems 

marking their ballot, and how easy it was to follow all 

the instructions necessary to cast their ballot and re -

turn it to be counted. 

As the graphs below show, the experience of mail vot  -

ers in 2022 was similar to prior years. Ninety-nine per -

cent of mail voters stated there were no problems in 

getting their absentee or mail ballot sent to them, 99 

percent stated they encountered no problems marking 

or completing their ballot, and 82 percent said it was 

very easy to follow all the instructions necessary to 

cast their ballot and return it. In the end, 73 percent of 

voters by mail said they were very confident that their 

vote was counted as intended. 

slightly more likely to vote by mail than Republicans. 

However, this difference was primarily an artifact of 

which states had chosen to conduct their elections en -

tirely by mail. In 2020, the partisan gap in voting by 

mail opened up wide. In 2022, the gap closed some -

what, although this was primarily due more to Demo -

crats pulling back than Republicans. 

How We Voted in 2022 

10 Experience casting a mail ballot 

Were there any problems getting your absentee or 

mail-in ballot sent to you? 

Overall, how easy was it to follow all the instructions 

necessary to cast your ballot and return it to be 

counted? 

How confident are you that your vote in the General Election was counted as you intended? 

Did you encounter any problems marking or complet -

ing your ballot that may have interfered with your 

ability to cast your vote as intended? 

11 

How We Voted in 2022 Returning mail ballots 

An important issue that arose in the 2020 election 

was how best to return mail ballots. Historically, ex -

perience in vote-by-mail states had suggested that the 

most secure and convenient way for voters to return 

their mail ballots was through drop boxes provided by 

the election authority. In addition, controversy arose 

over the capacity of the United States Postal Service 

to deliver mail ballots in time to be counted in Novem -

ber. Election administrators responded by expanding 

opportunities to return ballots through modes other 

than the mail, and voters took them up on those op -

portunities. 

However, the use of drop boxes became politically con -

troversial, as did most features of mail-voting policy. 

This led some states to outlaw the use of drop boxes 

after 2020. It may also have led Republicans to be less 

likely to use drop boxes as a means of returning mail 

ballots. 

As the accompanying graph shows, although nearly 

half the mail ballots in 2020 were returned in person 

(down from 2016, when two-thirds of all mail ballots 

were returned through the Postal Service), the share 

of ballots returned by mail rebounded in 2022. One 

interesting detail about this rebound, however, is that 

the use of drop boxes did not decline in 2022. Instead, 

voters became less likely to report returning their bal -

lots at election offices or polling places. 

Of course, most of the country was new to the experi -

ence of voting by mail in 2020 and patterns of mail-bal -

lot return may have been different among those new to 

voting by mail compared to those who were old hands. 

It is instructive to compare how voters returned their 

ballots in the more long-standing vote-by-mail states 

of Colorado, Oregon, and Washington to the rest of the 

nation; the next two graphs show how voters in those 

three states returned their ballots compared to voters 

in the other states and D.C. 

How mail ballots were returned 

How We Voted in 2022 

12 How mail ballots were returned 

It is notable that drop box usage declined in both the 

long-standing vote-by-mail states and in all the other 

states. Indeed, drop box usage dropped more in the 

long-standing states (9 points) than in all other states 

(4 points), although in proportional terms, the declines 

were similar. 

Partisanship may have played a role in the return to 

the Postal Service as a mode to return mail ballots. 

In 2020, 58% of Republicans reported returning their 

mail ballots by mail, compared to 52% of Democrats. 

In 2022, these rates were 62% for both parties. Expla -

nations for these differences may include greater em -

phasis among Democratic campaigns to get mail bal -

lots returned in person in 2022 or, more likely, greater 

skepticism among Democrats about whether the Post -

al Service would deliver their ballots on time. 

13 

How We Voted in 2022 Disruptions at drop boxes 

Prior to the 2022 election, some election experts ex -

pressed concern that groups or lone individuals would 

intimidate voters coming to deposit their ballots at 

drop boxes or vote at polling places. Although there 

were isolated reports of disruptions at polling places, 

the consensus among observers was that voting went 

smoothly, despite these reports. Media reports and 

other attempts to compile lists of voter problems run 

into the obvious problem that they are anecdotal and 

rarely systematic. As a consequence, there is value to 

asking a representative sample of voters what they saw 

when they went to vote or drop off their ballot. 

To address this issue, the SPAE asked the following 

question of those who reported that they deposited 

their ballot at a drop box: “When you returned your 

ballot to a drop box, did you directly observe any of the 

following events taking place near the drop box?” The 

closed-ended response categories were these: 

» People peacefully holding signs or giving out liter -

ature in support of a candidate or ballot question. 

» Individuals or groups of people casting doubt on 

whether the election was fraudulent. 

» Individuals or groups of people seeming to chal -

lenge whether some people were properly drop -

ping off ballots. 

» Individuals or groups, other than police officers, 

carrying a gun. 

» Someone taking pictures of voters or election 

workers who did not seem to be a reporter. 

» Anything else that seemed disruptive. 

» Respondents were also allowed to report that they 

saw none of these things. 

Among those who responded to the question, two per -

cent stated that they saw people peacefully holding 

signs or giving out campaign literature, but nothing 

disruptive. Roughly one percent of drop-box returners 

saw someone carrying a gun, someone saying the elec -

tion was fraudulent, or someone challenging people 

dropping off ballots. Despite being frequently covered 

in the press, almost no one—only 0.2 percent of those 

who returned a ballot at a drop box—stated they saw 

someone, other than a reporter, taking pictures of peo -

ple returning ballots. Overall, 95.6 percent of those 

who returned ballots using drop boxes reported noth -

ing disruptive when they did so. 

The “other” category was the most frequently chosen 

response, by 1.7% of relevant respondents. Only six 

respondents chose the “anything else” response. They 

were invited to describe what they observed. Here are 

their quotes: 

» People sitting 30 feet away from drop box, library 

was closed at the time. 

» There was a sign that warned people not to carry 

guns within 100 ft of the building. 

» Stickers were stuck onto the drop portion bashing 

a candidate. 

» There was a guy wearing some sort of army type 

clothes standing around with his cell phone but he 

didn’t say anything to us and we left. 

» Closed circuit camera on the area. 

» Poll watcher in car, +30ft away. 

When you returned your ballot to a drop box, did you directly observe any of the follow -

ing events taking place near the drop box? 

How We Voted in 2022 

14 Ballot tracking 

The availability of online ballot tracking for those vot -

ing by mail has grown significantly over the past few 

elections. The availability of ballot tracking exploded 

during the 2020 election, paralleling the explosion of 

voting by mail. In 2022, almost every state offered by-

mail voters to track whether their mail ballot had been 

received for counting. 

In 2022, for the first time, the SPAE asked respondents 

who reported voting by mail, “Did you track your mail/ 

absentee ballot online or through text/email messag -

es?” Among respondents to this question, 40 percent 

said they used online ballot tracking. For respondents 

who reported they used ballot tracking, a follow-up 

question asked “Which of the following describe rea -

sons you chose to track your ballot? Choose all that 

apply.” The response categories were the following: 

» I was automatically signed up for ballot tracking. 

» I was concerned my ballot would be lost in the 

mail. 

» I wanted reassurance my ballot was received by 

the election authorities. 

» I wanted reassurance my ballot was counted by 

the election authorities. 

» I wanted reassurance my ballot would be received/ 

accepted before Election Day deadline. 

» I was concerned my ballot would be rejected. 

» I believed the 2022 election was too important to 

risk my ballot being rejected. 

» Other. 

» None of the above. 

The three most common reasons pertained to reas -

surance that the ballot was received, counted, and/or 

received before Election Day; 75.1 percent of respon -

dents chose one of these three reasons. 

Most respondents—60 percent—who reported vot -

ing by mail also reported that they did not use ballot 

tracking. These respondents were asked, “Which of 

the following describe reasons you chose not to track 

your ballot? Choose all that apply.” The reasons of  -

fered were the following: 

» I was not aware that I could track my ballot. 

» I fully trusted my ballot would be received and 

counted by the election authorities. 

» I did not feel comfortable tracking my ballot infor -

mation online or through text messages. 

» I felt confident my ballot would be received/count -

ed before the Election Day deadline. 

» I felt confident my ballot was correctly handled 

and would be accepted. 

» I did not care too much if my ballot was rejected. 

» I was worried my contact information would be 

used for non-election purposes. 

» Other 

» None of the above 

Which of the following describe reasons you chose to track your ballot? Choose all that 

apply. 

15 

How We Voted in 2022 Among those who reported not using online bal -

lot tracking, nearly one-third (32.7 percent) reported 

they were unaware that ballot tracking was available. 

Among the remaining non-tracking respondents, 82.9 

percent stated that they were either confident the bal -

lot was properly handled, confident the ballot would 

be received before Election Day, or trusted the ballot 

would be received on time to be counted. Very few re -

spondents reported discomfort that information used 

by ballot trackers would be improperly used. 

Which of the following describe reasons you chose not to track your ballot? Choose all 

that apply. 

How We Voted in 2022 

16 VOTING IN-PERSON 

Although the expansion of voting by mail was the 

most notable issue in election administration in 2020, 

voting in person remained important. Indeed, as pre -

viously noted, in-person voting rebounded in 2022. 

The challenge of voting in-person in 2020 and 2022 

can be split into three categories: people, places, and 

things. That is, responding to the demand for voting 

in-person has been strained by the potential lack of 

poll workers, polling places, and provisions necessary 

to carry out voting. If voting by mail had not been so 

successful in 2020, the in-person voting system would 

perhaps have been under an insurmountable strain. 

On the other hand, the rebound away from mail bal -

lots in 2022 may have exacerbated strains on the 

in-person voting system that had been avoided in 2020 

by reducing demand on the system. Nonetheless, as in 

2020, voters who cast their ballots in person in 2022 

ultimately reported that their experiences were very 

similar to in-person voters in the past. 

The in-person voting experience 

The SPAE asks in-person voters about problems they 

had with voter registration and voting equipment, 

how well things were run in the polling place, and the 

job performance of poll workers. As with mail vot -

ing, in-person voters reported very similar, and over -

all positive, experiences to past years. Among those 

who voted on Election Day, for instance, 98 percent 

said they had no problems with registration when they 

tried to vote, 97 percent did not encounter any prob -

lems with the voting equipment, 83 percent said the 

polling place was very well-run, and 70 percent said 

the performance of the poll workers at the polling 

place was excellent. These statistics are virtually iden -

tical to all past SPAE studies. 

In addition, 68 percent of the Election Day voters said 

that they were very confident that their ballot was 

counted as intended, with another 24 percent saying 

they were somewhat confident. The percentage of 

Election Day voters who were very confident that their 

vote was counted as intended rebounded from 2020. 

Experience voting on Election Day 

17 

How We Voted in 2022 Where people voted 

Arranging for places for people to vote in-person has 

become greater in recent years. The COVID pandemic 

in 2020 accelerated the pace of difficulties. In 2020, 

with schools closing, churches not holding services, 

rising concerns about infections in nursing homes, 

and apprehension among first responders about inter  -

acting with the public, the availability of traditional 

high-demand polling places — schools, churches, se -

nior centers, and fire stations — was in question. 

Patterns related to in-person voting locations contin -

ued from 2020 into 2022. The major long-term trend 

has been the decline in the use of schools, which con -

tinued in 2022. Still, 26 percent of Election-Day voters 

reported casting a ballot in a school, 21 percent in a 

community center, 20 percent in a church, 10 percent 

in other types of government buildings (courthouses, 

government office buildings, etc.), and 17 percent in 

all other places. None of these percentages are sta -

tistically different from 2020, although we can con -

firm that the long-term downward trend in voting in 

schools is significant. 

Early voting typically occurs in a different collection 

of buildings, because voting is stretched out over a lon -

ger period and more people typically frequent them. 

“Other government buildings,” which includes court 

houses, city halls, and election offices, has been by far 

the most common place where early in-person votes 

were cast. The decline in the use of these facilities 

continued in 2022. As with Election Day voting, the 

usage rates of building types were nonetheless very 

similar to what was observed in 2020. In 2022, 35 per -

cent of early in-person voters cast a ballot in an “other 

government building,” 21 percent in a community cen -

ter, 14 percent in a library, 11 percent in a school, 5 per -

cent in a church, and 14 percent in all other facilities. 

How confident are you that your vote in the general election was counted as you 

intended? 

> Election Day voting

How We Voted in 2022 

18 How would you describe the place where you voted? 

How would you describe the place where you voted? 

> Election Day voters
> Early voters

19 

How We Voted in 2022 Wait times to vote 

The issue of voter wait times became salient immedi -

ately after the 2012 election, when President Obama 

cited long lines in Florida during his victory speech, 

calling on Americans “to fix that.” Efforts to reduce 

wait times were successful in the following three fed -

eral elections, but reared back up in 2020. Wait times 

were much greater in 2020 than in 2016, reversing 

gains made over the preceding decade. 

Wait times in 2022 returned to the levels seen in the 

2018 midterm election, which were higher than 2014. 

Approximately how long did you have to wait in line to vote? 

> Note: Data from 2018 are from the Cooperative Election Study.
> Those waiting more than 30 minutes

The average Election Day voter waited six minutes be -

fore voting; the average early voter waited four min -

utes. (These differences were not statistically signif  -

icant.) That wait times would be much less than in 

2020 is unsurprising, because long wait times are a 

sign of congestion in polling places as the pace of ar -

rivals challenges the capacity of the system. In-person 

turnout is less in a midterm election than in a presi -

dential election, but local officials tend not to reduce 

polling place capacity—measured by the number of 

voting booths, poll books, and voting machines/scan -

ners—to the same degree as the decline in turnout. 

How We Voted in 2022 

20 There were a few pockets of long wait times, mea -

sured by the percentage of voters reporting that they 

waited more than thirty minutes to cast a ballot. (The 

thirty-minute benchmark was established in the 2014 

report of the Presidential Commission on Election 

Administration.) In 2022, two states (Florida and Ten -

nessee) and the District of Columbia saw more than 10 

percent of in-person voters waiting over thirty minutes 

to vote in person. As in most years, African Ameri -

cans were more likely to report waiting more than 30 

minutes to vote (8.2 percent) than Whites (3.4 percent). 

Percentage of in-person voters who waited longer than 30 minutes to vote 

> Note: States with fewer than 50 observations in the data set are colored grey.

21 

How We Voted in 2022 Disruptions in polling places 

The 2022 election was held in the context of height -

ened concerns over the safety and security of election 

workers and facilities. Although most of the public 

concern pertained to election officials and their of -

fices, the elections community also had concerns that 

violence, or at least disruptions, would erupt in polling 

places themselves. 

To gauge the degree to which voters encountered 

concerning behavior, the SPAE included two related 

batteries of questions for the first time in 2022. The 

first asked about disruptions observed in polling plac -

es, both on Election Day and during early voting. The 

second asked about activities outside of polling plac -

es. (A related set of questions were asked of those who 

used drop boxes. See the voting-by-mail section for a 

discussion of these items.) 

Voters who cast their votes in person, either on Elec -

tion Day or early, were asked, “When you went to vote, 

did you directly observe any of the following events 

taking place in the polling place? (Mark all that ap -

ply.)” The events mentioned were 

» People in the polling place talking loudly or acting 

in a way that disrupted the voting. 

» A voter in a dispute with an official election work -

er. 

» A voter in a dispute with another voter. 

» An individual, other than a police officer, carrying 

a gun. 

» Someone who was not an official election worker 

challenging whether someone could vote. 

» Someone taking pictures of voters or election 

workers who did not seem to be a reporter. 

» Anything else that seemed disruptive. 

Respondents were also allowed to state that they ob -

served none of these events. 

An overwhelming number of in-person voters—90 

percent of Election Day voters and 91 percent of early 

voters—reported that they observed none of these po -

tentially disruptive behaviors. The most common dis -

ruptive behaviors observed involved disputes with poll 

workers or voters, or people talking loudly. (Often, the 

loud talking was observed along with the disputes.) 

The disruptions observed in the two in-person vot -

ing modes were slightly different. Election Day vot  -

ers were much more likely to see loud talking, voters 

disputing each other, and someone (other than a po -

lice officer) carrying a gun, whereas early voters were 

much more likely to report voters in a dispute with 

poll workers, voters being challenged from voting, and 

people taking pictures of voters. 

When you went to vote, did you directly observe any of the following events taking place 

in the polling place? 

How We Voted in 2022 

22 In-person voters were also asked about what they ob -

served outside the polling place with this question: 

“When you went to vote, did you directly observe any 

of the following events taking place outside the polling 

place?” The possible responses were the following: 

» People peacefully holding signs or giving out liter -

ature in support of a candidate or ballot question. 

» Individuals or groups of people casting doubt on 

whether the election was fraudulent. 

» Individuals or groups of people seeming to chal -

lenge whether some people could enter the polling 

place to vote. 

» Individuals or groups, other than police officers, 

carrying a gun. 

» Someone taking pictures of voters or election 

workers who did not seem to be a reporter. 

When you went to vote, did you directly observe any of the following events taking place 

outside the polling place? 

» Anything else that seemed disruptive. (Please de -

scribe what you observed.) 

» I didn’t observe any of these things. 

The first response, people peacefully holding signs 

or passing out literature, should not be considered a 

disruption, although voters may find even these activi -

ties to be intimidating. Twenty-one point five percent 

of respondents reported seeing this type of activity. 

Turning our attention to the remaining activities, the 

two most common outside disruptions involved people 

protesting that the election was fraudulent and chal -

lenging whether others could vote. Less common, but 

still observed by two percent of respondents, was peo -

ple taking pictures of those coming to vote and some -

one other than a police officer carrying a gun. 

23 

How We Voted in 2022 NOT VOTING 

Sixteen percent of respondents in 2022 reported that 

they did not vote. To understand the reasons, non-vot -

ing respondents were asked “What was the main rea -

son you did not vote?” The categories these respon  -

dents were presented are the following: 

» I forgot 

» I’m not interested 

» Too busy 

» Did not like the candidates 

» I am not registered 

» I did not have the correct form of identifica -

tion 

» Out of town 

» Sick or disabled 

» Transportation 

» Bad weather 

» The line at the polls was too long 

» I was not allowed to vote at the polls, even though 

I tried 

» I requested but did not receive an absentee bal -

lot 

» I did not know where to vote 

» I did not feel that I knew enough about the choic -

es 

» I was worried about the COVID-19 virus 

» Other 

» Don’t know 

Respondents who answered “other” were invited to 

write in their reason. 

The three most common responses in 2022 were 

“didn’t know enough about choice” (12.1%), “not in -

terested” (11.7%), and “too busy” (9.8%). A sizeable 

number of respondents, 9.7 percent, chose the “other” 

response. This was truly a catch-all category, but sig -

nificant numbers of respondents who chose this cate -

gory mentioned believing the election was rigged, hav -

ing to work, and a belief that elections were one-sided 

in their state. 

It is notable that reasons for not voting due to election 

administration reasons, such as not receiving a mail 

ballot, not having an ID, not knowing where to vote, 

and long lines, were given less often in 2022 than rea -

sons associated with the respondent’s own situation, 

including being disengaged from the process or being 

sick or out of town. The excuse of not voting because 

of long lines was given less often in 2022 (2.2%) than 

in 2020 (5.0%). 

The frequencies of reasons given for not voting in 2022 

were similar to those in 2020, with a few notable ex -

ceptions. Not liking the candidates was mentioned 

much less often in 2022 (9.2%) than in 2020 (16.4%) as 

was a fear of COVID (4.1% vs. 8.6%). With these rea  -

sons being reduced in 2022, excuses related to the vot -

er’s own circumstances and disengagement from the 

process took on a more prominent role in 2022, as is 

true in most midterm elections. 

What was the main reason you did not vote? 

How We Voted in 2022 

24 CONFIDENCE IN THE ELECTION 

With all of the discord over the postelection period, 

there has been renewed attention to confidence in 

the electoral process and confidence in our democ -

racy. The SPAE asks a series of questions that takes 

a very focused approach to the issue of confidence. It 

asks whether voters were confident that their vote was 

counted as intended. In addition, it asks all respon -

dents whether they voted or not, and whether they 

were confident that votes in their city, county, and na -

tionwide were counted as intended. The general pat -

tern of responses in 2022 was similar to that of past 

years. Respondents were the most confident that their 

own vote was counted as intended, less confident that 

votes in their county were counted as intended, slight -

ly less confident about votes in the state, and the least 

confident about votes nationwide. 

How confident are you that votes [at level] were counted as intended? 

25 

How We Voted in 2022 Confidence in one’s own vote vs. the coun -

ty, state, and nation 

Beneath these general patterns are important dynam -

ics that reflect how confidence has changed over time 

and how it varies across groups. 

We start this discussion with the respondent’s own 

vote. As was true with the past several years, two-

thirds of respondents were very confident that their 

own personal votes were counted as intended in 2022. 

The results on this score have been virtually un -

changed over the past two decades. 

Although confidence in the vote count at the coun -

ty level has been lower than confidence in one’s own 

vote, the time trend also remained stable in 2022 com -

pared to past years. 

How confident are you that  your vote  in the General Election was counted as you 

intended? 

How confident are you that votes in  your city or county  were counted as intended? 

How We Voted in 2022 

26 It is in asking about confidence that votes in the state 

were counted as intended where the movement in the 

time trend becomes apparent. Confidence that votes 

were counted as intended softened in 2020 when re -

spondents were asked about their state. The percent -

age of voters who were very confident actually rose, but 

the percentage of those who were somewhat confident 

fell significantly, from 38 percent to 29 percent. In ad -

dition, the percentage of respondents who answered 

“not at all confident” doubled, rising from 5 percent 

to 10 percent. The results in 2022 were very similar to 

those in 2020, although overall confidence (very confi -

dent + somewhat confident) edged up five points. 

Respondents’ answers to the questions about con -

fidence in votes nationwide most clearly reflect the 

political polarization on the issue. In 2020, both the 

percentage of respondents saying they were very con -

fident that votes were counted as intended nationwide 

and the percentage reporting that they were not con -

fident at all rose from 2016. In 2022, the fraction of 

respondents who stated they were not at all confident 

fell back to 13 percent, in line with the results prior to 

2020. The share of respondents who were somewhat 

confident also grew by nine points. On the whole, 

then, more respondents expressed at least some de -

gree of confidence in voting nationwide in 2022 than 

in 2020, although overall confidence did not return to 

pre-2020 levels. 

How confident are you that votes in  your state  were counted as intended? 

How confident are you that votes  nationwide  were counted as voters intended? 

27 

How We Voted in 2022 Partisan polarization of confidence in 

state and nation 

Recent patterns in voter confidence, especially at the 

state and national levels, are a product of the polariza -

tion of attitudes about the electoral process along par -

tisan lines. In 2016, Democrats and Republicans gave 

similar responses to the question about nation con -

fidence. In 2020, confidence among Democrats rose 

from 69 percent to 93 percent, while the percentage of 

Republicans who were either very or somewhat confi -

dent in the nationwide vote count fell from 83 percent 

to 22 percent. Democratic confidence remained essen -

tially unchanged in 2022, whereas Republican confi -

dence jumped twenty points. 

Of particular interest here is confidence about vote 

counting in the states. It is the states, after all, that ad -

minister elections, and that therefore bear the brunt of 

controversy in close and contested elections. Dissat -

isfaction with election administration in many states, 

especially battleground states, led to intense state leg -

islative activity in 2021 and 2022. 

In 2020, we reported that the gap between Democrats 

and Republicans in state confidence grew to a 32-point 

difference, after being nearly zero in 2016. While 

large, it was much less than the 71-point partisan gap 

in national confidence. In 2022, the partisan gap in 

statewide confidence closed somewhat, to 20 points, 

which was more in line with the partisan gap follow -

ing the 2012 presidential election when Barack Obama 

defeated Mitt Romney. 

How confident are you that votes  nationwide  were counted as voters intended? (Very or 

somewhat confident) 

In reporting on the results of the 2020 SPAE, we not -

ed that in some states, the partisan gap in confidence 

about state voting was enormous, whereas in others, it 

was tiny or non-existent. The states that had the larg -

est partisan gaps shared one of two characteristics: 

they were either states where Donald Trump barely 

lost (Michigan, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Nevada, and 

Georgia), or where the state used universal vote-by-

mail (Nevada, New Jersey, Oregon, Washington, Colo -

rado, and California). 

How We Voted in 2022 

28 Difference in the percentage of Democrats 

Expressing Confidence in State-Level Voting 

Counting minus Republican Confidence, 2020 

and 2022. 

How confident are you that votes in  your state  were counted as voters intended? (Very or 

somewhat confident) 

In 2022, the Democratic-Republican gap closed in 

most states, most notably in the battleground states 

where Trump barely lost. The Democratic-Republican 

gap closed by at least twenty points in nine states— 

Nevada (22 points), Colorado (23), New Jersey (27), Illi -

nois (28), North Carolina (30), Michigan (33), Virginia 

(34), Georgia (36), and Wisconsin (41). A few of these 

states, notably Georgia, saw significant state legisla -

tive activity in 2021 that may have garnered the notice 

of skeptical Republicans. However, in most of these 

states, the only major development between 2020 and 

2022 was the passage of time and the holding of more 

elections. 

The Democratic-Republican gap did not close in all 

states, and in a few cases, grew. Among states with 

significant Republican skepticism in 2020 compared 

to Democrats, Pennsylvania, Arizona, New Mexico, 

and California saw little-to-no movement in the par -

tisan divide. In four states, Republicans became nota -

bly more skeptical in 2022: Alaska, Connecticut, Del -

aware, and Tennessee. Finally, it is worth noting that 

in Texas, where there was virtually no divide between 

the parties in state-level trust, a gap did open up in 

2022, with Democrats moving to a clearly less trustful 

position relative to Republicans. 

29 

How We Voted in 2022 INCREASING THE SECURITY OF ELECTIONS 

With the 2016 election came a heightened awareness 

of the security threats that surround elections. Prior 

to 2016, those threats had mostly been physical and 

related to protecting ballots from being stolen or tam -

pered with; concerns had also been expressed about 

the accuracy of voting equipment and the ability to 

catch efforts to compromise that equipment. These 

concerns led to a movement to require paper ballots 

and post-election audits. During the 2016 election, a 

new form of threat became salient, that of cyber-at -

tacks against election administration infrastructure. 

These concerns led to new attention to cybersecurity. 

Whether cyber or physical, security has become a more 

salient issue to the public over the past few years. To 

gauge where voters are on this issue, the SPAE added 

a battery of questions in 2022 that sought to measure 

how much voters know about the efforts officials take 

to secure the election, as well as assess which of these 

measures are the most reassuring to voters. The first 

question measured voter knowledge. All respondents 

were asked, “Which of the following actions, if any, 

are you aware of that occur to ensure elections are 

secure and free from fraud locally and in [your state] 

(Check all that apply).” The response categories were 

the following: 

» Election officials test every machine used in the 

election to ensure they are secure. 

» Non-partisan poll watchers observe the election to 

ensure it’s fair. 

» Poll watchers affiliated with the political parties 

or candidates observe the election to ensure it’s 

fair. 

» Election officials conduct audits of ballots after 

every election to confirm the results were accu -

rate. 

» Paper ballots are stored in secure facilities so there 

is always a paper trail and audits and recounts can 

be conducted. 

» Election officials work with law enforcement to 

prosecute those who commit voter fraud. 

» Impartial teams of election judges conduct signa -

ture verification on each mail-in ballot received. 

» Election officials work closely with national secu -

rity agencies, such as the Department of Home -

land Security, and the military to prevent foreign 

interference. 

» Election officials work with the [state] National 

Guard on Election Day to prevent cyber-attacks. 

» Election officials conduct “war games’’ with elec -

tion officials across the state and the National 

Guard to protect the election from cyber-attacks. 

» None of the above. 

Respondents were then asked, “Which of the following 

actions, if any, are you aware of that occur to ensure 

elections are secure and free from fraud locally and in 

[your state]? (Check all that apply).” The response cat -

egories were the same as the knowledge question. 

Responses to the knowledge question reveal that vot -

ers are not very aware of the measures election offi -

cials undertake to secure elections. One-third of re -

spondents stated that officials understood none of 

these measures. (Twenty-three percent of Democrats 

gave this response compared to 41 percent of Repub -

licans.) Only 41 percent of respondents stated they 

knew that logic and accuracy testing was conducted 

and 35 percent were aware that paper ballots were 

stored securely. 

Which of the following actions, if any, are you 

aware of that occur to ensure elections are 

secure and free from fraud locally and in [your 

state]? (check all that apply) 

Regardless of whether your state does the 

following, how would knowing that [your state] 

took the following actions impact how much 

confidence you have in the security and integrity 

of [your state]’s election system? 

How We Voted in 2022 

30 Even these percentages must be regarded skeptically. 

Like all areas of public policy, it is likely that few voters 

are highly knowledgeable about the details of election 

administration. This means that respondents may an -

swer this question based on activities that sound like 

things election officials undertake, rather than out of 

actual awareness or knowledge of these activities. 

The second question about security measures gets 

at which of these activities would be reassuring to 

the respondent. L&A testing, securing ballots, and 

post-election audits are at the top of the list when it 

comes to items that respondents said would assure 

them of the security and integrity of the election. At 

the bottom of the list is the presence of partisan poll 

watchers—nonpartisan poll watchers are much more 

highly regarded. 

Because of the partisan divide that has opened up over 

confidence in elections and the longstanding partisan 

differences over the prevalence of fraud, it is informa -

tive to understand whether there is a partisan divide 

over which activities would instill trust in the securi -

ty and integrity of elections. Overall, although there 

were some partisan differences over what increases 

respondents’ confidence, these differences were small. 

For instance, Democrats were more likely than Repub -

licans to be reassured by knowing election officials 

perform logic and accuracy testing, but the percentag -

es were high for both parties (79 percent for Democrats 

and 70 percent for Republicans) and the difference is 

just nine points. The largest partisan difference, at 

18 points, was about working with national security 

agencies to combat foreign interference in elections. 

Regardless of whether your state does the following, how would knowing that [your 

state] took the following actions impact how much confidence you have in the security and 

integrity of [your state’s] election system? 

31 

How We Voted in 2022 FRAUD 

For over a decade, the SPAE has asked respondents to 

indicate how often they believe certain fraudulent or 

illegal activities occur in their city or county. These 

activities include people voting with an absentee bal -

lot intended for another person, noncitizens voting, 

voter impersonation, people voting more than once, 

election officials fraudulently changing the reported 

vote count, and people stealing or tampering with bal -

lots that had been cast. In 2022, three new items were 

added: vote counting software manipulated in a way 

to not count ballots as intended, paying voters to cast a 

ballot for a particular candidate, voting under fraudu -

lent voter registrations, and submitting too many bal -

lots in drop boxes. 

The percentage of respondents who responded that 

these activities were very common or occurred occa -

sionally ranged between 27 percent (software manipu -

lation of the votes) to 35 percent (absentee ballot fraud), 

although the partisan divide over all these items was 

significant. The overall percentage of voters who be  -

lieved these activities occurred remained very similar 

to what we’ve seen over the past dozen years. 

Please indicate how often you think these activities occur in your county or city. (Percent 

answering ‘very common’ or ‘occasionally’) 

How We Voted in 2022 

32 Partisan patterns in beliefs about fraud 

Throughout the history of the SPAE, Republicans have 

generally been more likely than Democrats to express 

a belief in the high frequency of voter fraud. That gap 

widened dramatically in 2020 and only moderated a 

bit in 2022. The following graph shows one example 

of this, with respondents’ answer to a question about 

stealing or tampering with ballots that have been vot -

ed. In the 2016 election, the percentage of Democrats 

and Republicans saying this almost never or infre -

quently happened was only 10 percentage points apart 

— 79 percent for Democrats and 69 percent for Repub -

licans. In 2020, the gap opened to 46 points (89 per -

cent for Democrats and 43 percent for Republicans). 

In 2022, the gap fell to 34 points, as the percentage 

of Democrats saying tampering with ballots almost 

never or infrequently happened dropped to 81 percent 

while rising to 47 percent among Republicans. Thus, 

the gap narrowed compared to 2020, but it was still 

much greater than ever measured before 2020. 

Please indicate how often you think these activities occur in your county or city: 

> Note: Questions about software, vote-buying fraudlent voter registration, and ballot harvesting were first asked in 2022.

33 

How We Voted in 2022 Similar patterns were evident in each of the six fraud 

items that were on the SPAE in 2016, 2020, and 2022. 

(Four items were new to 2022.) In 2016, Republicans 

were less likely to believe that fraud was infrequent 

than Democrats for each of the items on the survey 

instrument. In 2020, the partisan divide grew tremen -

dously, with Republicans becoming much less likely to 

say that fraud was infrequent and Democrats much 

more likely to say it was infrequent. In 2022, Demo -

crats generally returned to the levels they expressed in 

2016, whereas Republicans relented only slightly—if 

at all—in viewing fraud as an infrequent occurrence. 

Therefore, the slight narrowing of the partisan gap in 

2022 was almost entirely due to Democrats becoming 

slightly more likely to say that fraud was frequent. 

Please indicate how often you think these activities occur in your county or city: People 

stealing or tampering with ballots that have been voted. 

> Last four items only asked in 2022.

Change in attitudes about frequency of fraud among partisans between 2016 and 2022 

> Those saying these frauds happen ‘almost never’ or ‘infrequently.’
> Those saying ‘almost never’ or ‘infrequently.’

How We Voted in 2022 

34 REFORM 

Finally, there is the issue of election reform. For over 

a dozen years, the SPAE has asked respondents their 

opinions about eleven reform ideas that are pursued 

from time to time by various reform groups. These re -

forms range from voting over the Internet and voting 

by mail to establishing Election Day as a holiday or 

moving it to a weekend. In 2022, two new items were 

to show photo ID to vote, allowing automatic changes 

to a voter’s registration upon moving, electing officials 

on a bipartisan basis, and making Election Day a na -

tional holiday. The least popular reforms have long 

been voting by cell phone, followed by voting on the 

Internet and then universal voting by mail. 

Among the items added in 2022, neither ranked-choice 

voting nor counting ballots by hand were supported 

by a majority of respondents. However, they each ex  -

hibited partisan support patterns, with a majority of 

Democrats favoring RCV and a smaller majority of Re -

publicans favoring counting all votes by hand. 

As in past years, opinions about most of these reforms 

were split along party lines. The only reforms without 

a partisan split were requiring electronic machines to 

have paper backups and requiring that election offi -

cials be elected on a nonpartisan basis. 

The only reform where partisan attitudes have shift -

ed notably in recent years has been universal vote-by-

mail. Prior to 2020, Democrats were more likely to 

favor the reform compared to Republicans, but nei -

ther set of partisans gave it majority approval. For 

instance, in 2016, 14 percent of Republicans and 36 

percent of Democrats responded that they favored 

universal VBM. That 22-point gap more than doubled 

in 2020, to 54 points, with 10 percent of Republicans 

favoring it compared to 64 percent of Democrats. The 

gap only slimmed somewhat in 2022, to 43 points, 

Do you support or oppose any of the following proposals for new ways of voting or con -

ducting elections? 

added, counting all ballots by hand and ranked-choice 

voting (RCV). 

Among the items that appeared in the SPAE previous -

ly, responses were similar to the past. The most pop -

ular reforms, by far, were requiring computerized vot -

ing machines to have paper backups, requiring voters 

35 

How We Voted in 2022 with 15 percent of Republicans and 58 percent of Dem -

ocrats favoring. 

Support for universal vote-by-mail is an interesting 

topic to focus on because of the role of absentee/mail 

voting in 2020. Prior to 2020, respondents in Colora -

do, Oregon, and Washington — states that have con -

ducted all vote by mail elections for several cycles — 

were much more supportive of voting by mail than in 

the rest of the nation. Although Republicans in these 

states tended to support voting by mail at much lower 

rates the Democrats, in the 2012 and 2016 elections, 

Republicans supported voting by mail in the range of 

40-to-50 percent. In 2020, however, support among 

Republicans plummeted to 15 percent in these three 

states, while it continued to grow to among Demo -

crats, rising to 90 percent support. 

At the same time, seven states adopted universal vote-

by-mail for the first time in 2020. Hawaii and Utah 

had already decided to go down this path prior to 

2020 and New Jersey ended up doing so for only 2020. 

Among these states, support for universal VBM had 

been low prior to 2020, even among Democrats. In 

2020, support shot up to 71 percent among Democrats 

and declined among Republicans. Finally, in every 

other state, support for universal VBM had been lower 

still, among both Democrats and Republicans prior to 

2020. Among Democrats in these states, support shot 

up to 61 percent in 2020 while staying flat among Re -

publicans. 

In 2022, the partisan divides that had opened up in 

2020 receded by only a small amount. Republicans in 

the legacy VBM states showed the biggest rebound 

in support, back to levels close to where they were in 

2008, when the time series began. Still, there was a 

62-point gap between the parties in these three states 

in 2022. Republican support grew a bit and Demo -

cratic support declined an even smaller amount in the 

“new” VBM states, but the gap was still at 47 points. 

Finally, in all the remaining states, Democrats retreat -

ed a small amount in support for universal VBM, but 

a majority still support it; Republican support is still 

barely in the double digits. 

Support for holding all elections by mail 

> Those supporting ‘strongly’ or ‘somewhat.’

How We Voted in 2022 

36 CONCLUSION 

The 2022 election was held just two years after one 

of the most administratively challenging elections in 

American history. The administrative landscape in 

2022 was much less fraught in 2020, as worries over 

the pandemic receded in the minds of most Ameri -

cans. Election officials and voters had adapted to new 

patterns of voting. 

The election of 2022 did not fully represent a “return 

to normal,” as it saw some new patterns that emerged 

in 2020 persist. In addition, the polarization that 

emerged over election administration during and 

in the aftermath of the 2020 election continued into 

2022, abating only somewhat once all the ballots were 

counted. Polling place violence and disruptions did 

not appear on a widespread basis, as some had feared. 

As the country prepares to vote in yet another presi -

dential election, citizen attitudes are likely to rest on 

what was observed in 2022. Partisan divisions persist 

and may harden further as the next campaign season 

comes into full swing. News that election officials 

are expressing frustration with the negative environ -

ment in which they work and quitting in large num -

bers could have significant consequences for how vot -

ers experience the 2024 election—depending on how 

expert their replacements are and whether inexperi -

enced election officials have a difficult time coping 

with the challenges that arise in administering presi -

dential elections. Voters have expressed positive feed -

back from their voting experience for over a decade (at 

least); 2022 was no different. Whether this continues 

in 2024 remains to be seen. 

37 

How We Voted in 2022 METHODOLOGICAL NOTE 

This report does not show the confidence intervals 

(“margins of error”) for the statistics reported. This 

is to increase the readability and flow of the report. 

Because of the large sample sizes used to compute 

most statistics, the margins of error are generally quite 

small, often the size of the data tokens used to display 

the statistics. This section gives the reader a guide to 

the approximate 95% confidence intervals of the sta -

tistics reported here. 

The two major determinants of confidence intervals 

are (1) the size of the (sub)sample and (2) the size of the 

estimated statistics (e.g., percentage). The sample size 

of the complete SPAE is 10,100 for each year except 

2008, when the District of Columbia was not sampled. 

In that year, the total sample size was 10,000. Some 

statistics are broken down by party. In 2022, there 

were 4,886 self-identified Democrats (47.9% of the 

sample), 3,773 Republicans (37.0%), and 1,541 either 

independents or identifiers of other parties (15.1%) in 

the sample. Some analyses in this report break down 

the sample by voting mode. In 2022, the overall sam -

ple had 3,868 respondents who reported voting on 

Election Day, 1,719 who voted in person before Elec -

tion Day, 3,080 who voted by mail, 1,502 who stated 

they did not vote, and 31 who stated they voted but did 

not remember how. 

The following table reports the confidence intervals 

of various proportions depending on the sample size 

and the estimated proportion. The sample sizes cor -

respond to the overall sample size in 2022 (10,200) and 

the various partisan and vote-mode subsamples. For 

example, if an estimate of the entire SPAE sample in -

dicates that 10 percent of respondents responded in a 

certain way, then the 95% confidence interval (or mar -

gin of error) would be + 0.59 percentage points. If the 

statistic was calculated from among Democrats alone, 

the 95% confidence interval would be + 0.84 points. 

Probability 

Basis of sam -

ple size 

Sample size  10%  25%  50%  75%  90% 

Overall  10,100  0.59  0.84  0.98  0.84  0.59 

Democrats  4,886  0.84  1.21  1.40  1.21  0.84 

Republicans  3,773  0.96  1.38  1.60  1.38  0.96 

Independents  1,541  1.50  2.16  2.50  2.16  1.50 

Election Day  3,868  0.95  1.36  1.58  1.36  0.95 

Early  1,719  1.42  2.05  2.36  2.05  1.42 

Mail  3,080  1.06  1.53  1.77  1.53  1.06 

Non-voters  1,502  1.52  2.19  2.53  2.19  1.52 

How We Voted in 2022 

38 This table shows that in most cases, the 95 percent -

age confidence intervals of the percentages reported 

in this report are between 1 and 2 percentage points. 

This report also compares differences between subsa -

mples, for instance, the percentage of Democrats who 

said they were very confident their vote was count -

ed as intended versus the percentage of Republicans. 

The 95% confidence interval of the difference of two 

proportions is calculated using the size of the two 

samples being compared and the percentage statis -

tics associated with each sample. The following table 

shows examples 95% confidence intervals for a variety 

of percentages associated with Republican and Dem -

ocratic samples. For instance, if 10 percent of Demo -

crats agreed with a particular question and 25 percent 

of Republicans agreed, the confidence interval of this 

difference (15 points) would be + 1.6 percentage points. 

To be on the conservative side, percentage differences 

in this report of less than 3 percentage points should 

not be considered a statistically significant difference. 

A second methodological issue, aside from that of 

confidence intervals, is the matter of mis-reporting 

whether someone has voted. It is well established 

in the political science literature that respondents to 

public opinion surveys often mis-report that they vot -

ed, a phenomenon explained by the term “social desir -

ability bias.” (That is, non-voters often do not want 

to admit that they did not vote.) Therefore, it is likely 

that the non-voting rate among SPAE respondents was 

much greater than the 16 percent reported. As a part 

of the SPAE project, the official state voting records 

of SPAE respondents are double-checked and a code 

is added to the dataset indicating which respondents 

were validated as having voted. As of the writing of 

this report, that validation has not been completed—it 

usually takes a year to complete this task—therefore 

the statistics concerning the experience of reported 

voters undoubtedly includes individuals who did not 

vote, but said they did. 

Republican % 

Democratic %  10%  25%  50%  75%  90% 

10%  1.3  1.6  1.8  1.6  1.3 

25%  1.5  1.8  2.0  1.8  1.5 

50%  1.7  2.0  2.1  2.0  1.7 

75%  1.5  1.8  2.0  1.8  1.5 

90%  1.3  1.6  1.8  1.6  1.3 

39 

How We Voted in 2022
