Title: Measles cases reach 36 in Oconto County, DHS says

URL Source: https://www.greenbaypressgazette.com/story/news/local/oconto-county/2025/09/12/measles-cases-hit-36-in-oconto-county/86118922007/

Published Time: 2025-09-12T21:01:46Z

Markdown Content:
Nine more people were reported to have measles this month, bringing the total number of cases to 36 in Wisconsin, data from the state Department of Health Services shows.

DHS updated its dashboard Sept. 12 with the total number of cases. All 36 residents are in Oconto County. None are vaccinated with the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine. One case was reported this week and eight cases were identified the week of Aug. 31, according to DHS.

Out of the 36 people, two have been hospitalized. No one has died from the virus.

Half of the cases involve people between 5 and 17 years old, followed by 14 people who are over 18. Four of the cases involve people under the age 4, DHS reported.

The first cases of measles were announced by state health officials in Wisconsin Aug. 2. DHS launched the dashboard at the beginning of September as the number of cases continued to rise.

In 2024, about 74% of 2-year-olds in Oconto County had received one or more doses of the MMR vaccine, according to DHS. The vaccine threshold for the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine is 95% because measles is highly contagious.

Measles was previously eradicated in 2000. Since January, cases have been detected in at least 40 states. Measles can cause complications including hearing loss, pneumonia and trouble breathing. One in 10 people have been hospitalized and three people died from the virus —two children in Texas and one adult in New Mexico.Meanwhile, a child has died from measles complications years after being infected, California health officials said on Sept. 11.

What are the symptoms of measles?
---------------------------------

Symptoms of measles appear one to two weeks after exposure to the virus. The first symptoms usually include:

*   Fever
*   Dry cough
*   Runny nose
*   Watery eyes

A couple days later, people may see small, white spots in their mouth and a rash that starts on the face and neck and moves down the rest of the body.

A person with measles can spread the virus four days before the rash appears and four days after, according to the Mayo Clinic. If you think you are infected, you should call your primary doctor or pediatrician first before going in-person to make sure protective measures are in place to limit spread.

Check your vaccination status
-----------------------------

Wisconsin residents can find their immunization records through the Wisconsin Immunization Registry at dhfswir.org. You need to name, date of birth, and Social Security or Medicaid ID number to find your records.

Those vaccinated outside of the state will need to check that state's records.

_Contact Benita Mathew at bmathew@gannett.com._
