Title: Senator Bob Corker on Middle East Policy : CSPAN : December 5, 2015 10:19am-11:18am EST : Free Borrow & Streaming : Internet Archive

URL Source: https://archive.org/details/CSPAN_20151205_151900_Senator_Bob_Corker_on_Middle_East_Policy

Markdown Content:
10:19 am

us has the responsibility to stop the suffering caused by malaria. all of us can do something to help. ladies,udying first knowing some of them very well, like my mother-in-law or lady bird johnson, we benefit our country by whatever our first erests are. >> laura bush is the second woman in history to be the wife of a president and the daughter-in-law of another. less than nine months in office, the 9/11 attacks occurred, and laura bush helped to comfort the nation while pursuing interests important to her, including literacy and women's health. this sunday night at

10:20 am

8:00 eastern on "first ladies: influence and image." examining the women who filled the role of first lady and their influence on the presidency. american history tv on c-span3. >> next, a look at u.s. policy in the middle east with bob corker of tennessee. he was part of a recent roundtable discussion that included journalists, former diplomats, and foreign-policy experts. this is an hour. let's get started. welcome, everybody. isaacson.r it is my pleasure to welcome you to the aspen institute.

10:21 am

we were discussing a period in the 1940's. a book was written: "the wise men." global counter similar to what we are facing today. the secretary of state, every evening, used to drive past the waterman park and stop by and talk to the republican chair of the senate foreign relations committee. together, when a bipartisan group of people at the senate and the truman administration working in concert, they were able to have the most creative flourish to global challenges in history. the creation of nato, the world bank, radio free europe. the bretton woods economic agreement. the marshall plan. we are facing that kind of

10:22 am

struggle today when we face terrorism, isis, a new global challenge that is pretty much as dangerous as the rise of communism in the 1940's. but we rarely have that structure of the great wise men. i'm using this as an introduction because at a time when people say, who are the wise men today, i think of senator bob corker. it is my honor to turn it over , who runs ourn program, used to be a congressman from the great state of kansas. corker foru, senator coming. you have his bio in front of you. i like to think, who would the founding fathers have in mind for someone managing and running public policy issues? i think they have a guy like you in mind.

10:23 am

businessman, not a career politician. at the same time, somebody who has come to washington and is viewed as independent, thoughtful, bipartisan. adjectives not often used to describe people in influence like you are. we are delighted to have you. sayt of all, i just want to this has been financed by the michelle smith and robert h smith foundation. i will ask the senator a question or two. i know you have to stop close to noon. we will try to get you out of here. you were in egypt and stopped in paris. you have been in 56 countries since you have been chairman? sen. corker: since i was in the senate. >> whatever it is, you are traveling a lot. i am sure your wife is thrilled

10:24 am

to see you. from your observation of the middle east, how do you judge the viability of these different state structures around the region? from libya to iraq to syria to jordan to egypt to every place else, do we have a group of countries that are capable of managing these problems, or will we be stuck in a constant state of chaos for the next couple of decades? sen. corker: great question. i want to say before answering i am always thrilled to be with people like who are here. i was a business guy before coming to the senate. what i have learned i have learned from people like you and others around the world. me --a provision for privilege for me to be with you. obviously, the state structure

10:25 am

was created years ago. we built with a balance of power in disarray in the middle east. right now in the middle east, in egypt, you have a country with 90 million people, 2.5 million new people born into the country each year. 700,000 new jobs created each year to take care of the young people coming in. 24,000 classrooms this very second that they do not have. thathave a medical system is very decrepit. and they have issues, obviously, of economic growth. tourism is obviously way down because of what just happened and also inliner terms of terrorism in the desert and western portions of the country near libya.

10:26 am

at the tough issues that president obama has to deal with as president and you look at a guy like sisi in egypt. the issues you are dealing with are unbelievably difficult. have moved through a three-step process now, but where this takes them, who knows? you look at libya, which is not really a country at present, you is not iraq, where abadi doing the things we thought you would do. syria is obviously not really a country. i think the answer to your question is that we need strong state structures for governance to occur. otherwise, you end up with a up beinghat end breeding grounds for the kinds of things that he saw take place in paris.

10:27 am

we have not had the leadership, the support, to make that happen. so making sure over the long haul that we do the things necessary to ensure that these structures can function is obviously in our interests. >> to talk about leadership and will. characterize american leadership and will as it relates to syria, isis, iraq? not even talking about the iranian nuclear issue. the secretary of defense talked about sending some variation of ground support into the region. how do you feel about that? sen. corker: same question i was asked last week in paris. i think we have to make a decision. the president has to make an executive decision, especially as it relates to syria.

10:28 am

but over time, libya will be the same type of place. is it his decision we are going hisefeat isis, or is it decision to continue on with a strategy that has been more about containment? i know we have people running for president making all kinds of comments on a daily basis, as you would expect. we have people making all kinds of prognostications about numbers of troops. but i think the first decision that has to be made by the thatdent is give me a plan will allow us to actually defeat hat. and let me vet t any of us throwing out bits and pieces that are not coherent does not take us there. when i met with the equivalent of the national security advisor in paris who was coming with hollande to meet the president,

10:29 am

that was a moment in time when i said, because of what has occurred, which is devastating, this is your time to press our president into a place to be part of a coalition that really wants to defeat isis, not just contain them. i think that is what they did when they came here. there week was made up of a meeting with putin, cameron, obama, and it is a week that bore fruit. cameron is moving ahead in the u.k., germany is moving ahead. hopefully the president will make a decision to lead an effort to not just contain that defeat. -- but defeat. >> just to follow-up up on the question of bipartisanship, this

10:30 am

is not an unimportant struggle. you talk terrorism, potential nuclear threats, everything else. the president tries to figure out what he thinks we ought to do. do you senator corker: first of all, there is a very strong bipartisan sense on the foreign relations committee. it really does exist. it is real. i are in constant contact. our chiefs of staff are very close. there is a constant back-and-forth. that is real. the house is functioning somewhat that way.

10:31 am

i think eliot engel and the chairman do well together. as it relates to the administration, you know, i have worked much more closely with realize. people i will say, since we have the momentum around the iran nuclear we passed thate piece of legislation out of there has not been a lot of give-and-take. i don't know whether it is just that time in the administration. it is an interesting thing. you have talked about things like the kinds of things you laid out, which are creating institutions. for those kinds of things to happen, i think you do have to

10:32 am

and congress involved y through.l the wa when it comes to laying out policy in what you will do in ukraine, i think the administration really resorts back, and you can understand this, the article to mentality that, look, we are the commander in chief. had pushing, which we have plenty of, bipartisan pushing, i particularly not well received there is really a sort of wish back -- pushe back that takes place. back in may 2013, before assad side, a veryhe red robust piece of legislation. was felt that

10:33 am

when there is a bipartisan push to actually, in some ways, give the administration some cover, one support from the senate particular issues, i do not think that is particularly well received. on other kinds of things, we work very closely with them. again, you referred to institutions being created. i think it is different with the administration who is trying to develop a policy. at the end of the day, let's be honest. i think the president would say this. these are not issues they really want to pursue in the first place. you kind of wake up, you are the president of the united states, you have these problems to deal with. they are not the kind of problems you want to deal with as president. you want to be as at the robust level of what you are doing --

10:34 am

it is not a criticism, it is an observation. i think the president of iran stated clearly that these tires of issues are things he certainly wanted to end. i think what we found, unfortunately -- i was telling them when i was coming in, i have been to 66 countries, guess, but it seems like i go to the same ones over and over again. we are not adding to the list. we continue to go back to the middle east nonstop. i think that when the president came in, he expected, at some point, that we will be able to check the box. i think what we found is the middle east, because of your first question, is not a place where you can just check the box, and leave at some point. >> i just have one final question before we get to you

10:35 am

all, and a few to put your cards up, if you want to ask a question. you mentioned the iranian nuclear agreement. what is your committee proposing in terms of oversight for that agreement? how effective do you think you can be in monitoring what is ?oing on senator corker: very. something going out that will lay out the schedule of oversight taking place. the first date, operational date, from the administration is december 17. briefing, a have a classified briefing, on what actually happened -- most people say the possible military dimension, i say the previous military dimensions.

10:36 am

we watched what happened in north korea where agreements were reached, but not followed up on, so therefore, let's face it, north korea is a nuclear country today, really, for all .ractical purposes there was not a follower. one of the most important aspects of the iran nuclear review act was not just understanding the deal, but the follow-up that takes place, and the things that the administration -- after this administration, it will go on for a long time. what congress is role is in overseeing that, to ensure that this is not one of those things , forget about, and move on. the next thing, you wake up, and you are in a very different place. >> you talked about the president asserting his article to authority. it is interesting, the founding

10:37 am

fathers decided that article one was not the executive branch. corker: but, it is bipartisan. if you are someone who supported sureeal, you want to make that everyone is paying attention and it is successful. support the deal, you have the same motivation. this is now what has been agreed period at least for this of time, during this presidency, this is the deal that will continue. i think all of us, at the end of the day, our general concern is ensuring the iran does not get a nuclear weapon. if this is one of those deals where people on both sides of the aisle want to do a diligent job to make sure that does not happen. >> steve, ambassador, then we will go down the list.

10:38 am

try to keep your questions as short as possible. introduce yourself as well. >> i am a palestinian journalist. i ask you about the palestinian israeli issue. a few weeks back, the president the cleared the death of the peace process, at least while he is in process. do you, in your capacity, and your committee, that has a good deal of influence, see any movement or possible movement or initiative that you may possibly goingo get this process again? thank you. inator corker: being honest, see zero momentum around that issue right now. kerry, tot secretary his credit, while we may disagree on certain policy issues, to his credit, he has

10:39 am

been like an energizer bunny, trying to take on difficult issues. i'm sure he is disappointed that does not look like the fact that that is unlikely outcome. on one of my trips, i snuck into north totraveled from south -- from south to north, then back north. of, you name kinds what you want, coming through the tunnels. i do understand the importance. withe always spent time the palestinian prime minister's. i felt momentum- i'm going togo, say, three years ago. it felt like rings were coming together. the security situation was

10:40 am

changing. economic growth was taking place. this last trip, which was in march -- i think that is right -- i feel zero momentum around the issue at present. >> thank you so much for being here. the question i want to ask you is about the strategic mindset of people in the committee. when i think that to the cold war, and look at the debates that happened in that time, the liberals wanted to intervene, here, there, you had people with strategic mindsets that competed . behind that was the stark reality of how everything could end. today, that power that the united states has so easily isisked, and you can call

10:41 am

a strategic threat on par with anything else, i get the sense that what people bring to the think decisions does not through the cost of benefit approach. when richard lugar was in your position, i remember him asking etraeus once. he said i cannot wait in because my world is just afghanistan, someone else has to do it. i thought it was a very important exchange that we do not reflect back on. i wonder how you think about this. is there a strategic frame that we are all missing that your committee members have? i think it is a great question, a great point. think, with all the multiple

10:42 am

issues being done with, not one insurmountable issue, they are you arelex, i think right. that strategic focus was not trying to get out any blame that this.ist relative to i think, when you have this , where it is the cold war, and everybody understands, i think it is so much easier to develop a strategic framework. i do think, in fairness to the administration -- i hate to keep being so fair and this meeting. [laughter] senator corker: i think part of the resistance from the joint chiefs has been exactly what you said. willis like the media

10:43 am

so much on publications. people get so focused on that yes, period of time, and things get hijacked. i am certain of this, based on conversations i have had, there is resistance by the military complex because of these competing resource issues, and not wanting to get to sectucked when you really think about it, i don't know how you want to grade these. each person would grade them differently. when you think about what is happening in the south china sea , which is of concern. when you think of what russia is doing in ukraine -- i had a great meeting recently with our nato head. what he shared with me as exactly what you just said.

10:44 am

he said, the problem is, russia rug.oking at the whole what we do is look at one piece of the rouug, relative to what they are doing. they are not looking at it that way. they are looking at it very much like you just laid out. then you add to that the issue of isis. you have what is happening in syria, specifically. you look at iran. the huge amount of energy it took to negotiate that deal. by the way, when other things were very problematic. i think what you have just said is true, and it makes it difficult to strategically lay things out. think that you

10:45 am

accompany that with the , who i really i don't want to be overstated by the media in saying this, i just think they looking so forward to january 20, to be away from the military excursions, and those sorts of things. the notion of developing some sort of strategic vision, if you will, with congress is not something they even want to engage in. i think they want to move away from being an office, and have as little engagement as possible, which is understandable, but it does not breed laying out a vision for

10:46 am

the next decade. let's face it. at the end of the day, while you had some wiseman -- malta would call them -- working towards that end when others were typeng with cold war things, you had administration that was laying out a vision towards that end, and working interactively with congress. that certainly is not taking place today. >> center, if i may say a word. i grew up working for ted kennedy. the senate is really fortunate to have you. you have done a terrific job. upator corker: i get choked walking by his desk. >> i just spent five and a half months in the middle east, doing anti-isis work. i have been looking at the

10:47 am

so-called coalition, the coalition of arab states, the coalition that kerry has touted. yet, when you start scraping away the surface, the germans have kicked in, but nato allies reluctant.or i'm curious, other than the fact that at the beginning they had a couple of jet planes flying overhead, but as soon as the pilot was murdered, they disappeared. we cannot really take on ice is without an effective coalition that is not a crusader coalition. i'm wondering, how do we get the arab states, in your mind, to fess up to what is necessary here? i thinkcorker:

10:48 am

everything you just said is true . we have a coalition of 65-66 , most of which are not doing anything. i do think that is changing a little bit. i see that especially some of our closest friends, parliament and others are moving in a direction to be more involved. i think that a part of this is look, i kind of hate to say this again, it is getting trite, but i really think what happened in august 2013 changed everything for us, i'm sorry, in the middle crossed thessad redline line. we did not take action. raised a lot of

10:49 am

questions in our milk eastern partners' minds -- middle .astern partners' minds when you meet with them obviously, when they meet with the white house, they say something different, i'm not in those meetings -- but, there is a commitment that they are concerned about. let's face it. from our standpoint back to them, i think this has kind of been the way it has been. there is a lot of talk that takes place. we will be back in the region on this very topic in the next several weeks. munich, weth them in have all kinds of bilateral meetings there. see them here. there is a lot of talk, but until we get a real commitment, you are right. we will create another

10:50 am

dynamic of the crusaders, if you will, on the ground in syria. again, from the administration's perspective, and as you stated it, it is a worthy concern. > almost verbatim, u.s. to my question -- you asked my question. [laughter] being done to encourage other arab countries to do something about this. i think it is pointless for the west to do it by themselves. a couple of observations, and maybe a question. senator corker: this is what of the wiseman. i will let him -- had just gotten elected, and we had the pleasure of meeting each other when i was deputy secretary. , and i learned

10:51 am

from hard experience in iraq at the u.n., it is hard to do some of these things if you do not the securitys in council. some people may think i am being silly about this. basically, if you don't have consensus, it means the great are divided. if the great powers are divided, the others will pursue their own inclinations, rather than a global consensus. that brings us to what the getting on theus same page as the russians. i would say the chinese will come along with whatever the russians agree to. that comes to another negotiation going on. and is the one about syria the negotiation for a cease-fire , and some kind of political transition. i don't i read that --

10:52 am

have inside information, but the way i read it is the russians are implicitly saying, if you could find some way to work with elements of this regime, then, maybe, we could join with you in fighting isis. at the moment, i think they want us to drop our insistence on driving assad out of power, and would prefer to see us negotiate some kind of transition. have you been following those talks? i'm sure iker: talked to secretary kerry last week about this very topic. i would never share way he said to me and a private conversation, but yes, following it there closely. falling get today, the president it today, theg

10:53 am

a press conference. at the end of the day, everybody theerstands be our -- nation, anyway, is open to dealing with the regime. we understand what we don't want to happen is what happened in iraq. what has happened in libya -- we make sure there is a country that that be our dealing .ith -- are dealing with the question is how do you get to the regime without a solid. i do not think we are ever going to -- i do not think i ran ever gets to the place, they are not part of the national security want to bed i do not pejorative, but they are not that relative to this. russia is.

10:54 am

i have a sense that we may still get there. i do. the russian ambassador was in my office recently for a couple of hours one evening. enoughthink there is overlap. let's face it. that's what we do constantly, trying to find the overlap. >> [indiscernible] i have been to russia, not recently, for obvious reasons. anyway, i kind of think there is a good chance we will get to the right place. >> thank you. fred, who is obviously a syria expert as well, among other things. >> supposed the president does come to the conclusion that to

10:55 am

defeat isis, at least in syria, it is going to require a professional, capable ground the air complement campaign. suppose he does decide to go for the coalition that mark and others are talking about, and price ofart of the coalition building, the united states will have to have some skin in the game on the ground, perhaps beyond 50 special operators. how do you think that kind of proposition will be received in what with the and president have to do to ensure a good reception in the committee? corker: i will go back to elements of all the questions, but steve's in

10:56 am

particular. you have all been there, when you walk out of the senate chamber, that is the question that -- what about ground troops , how many, what about special ops? me that the ultimate important issue is let's lay out the context, where we are going. don't call me about 10,000 troops or 15,000 troops. ,et's have a meeting like this and you guys layout where it is we are going. veracity, done with feroc i think there would be a good reception. i personally believe that the administration is acting within their legal authority right now, dealing with isis.

10:57 am

i do. i believe they are acting within the aumf's. people have talked about as crafting and aumf. here is the dynamic that exist right now. republicans who don't believe there is such a i should a strategy -- not even say republicans. i think republicans and democrats alike believe there is no strategy. there may be one or two that i might find who could do find the lack of strategy, but i think people do not understand. republicans are concerned about getting behind and aumf when they do not see a strategy. in other words, how are we going to win this, what are the elements of this? democrats, a big push on their site is we are not really

10:58 am

ynterested in and aumf, we ma act like it, but we know this president will not likely do something in a massive, ground troop way. we want to make sure the next president does. if you look at those dynamics, they have nothing to do with solving the problem. i think respective folks, both from the stateside of things, , andlso the pentagon side with real leadership, laying out what we are going to do, and how we are going to defeat, and the nine lives of activity, which they have mapped well -- there are so many elements that go with this, as you know, i think it would be received well. it has to be full. it cannot be, hey, by the way, 50 specialing in

10:59 am

ops. by the way, who will be participating, and how? >> thank you. senator, you mentioned some countries in the region where the situation is really chaotic. in the same region, you can find other countries which are doing well, despite the tremendous challenges they are facing and the instability in the neighborhood. countries like my country, emerging democracy deserves torages -- be encouraged. my question is do you think the usa is doing enough to help

11:00 am

consolidate its democratic process? thank you. great question. i was into these are earlier this year on my second or third trip there. it is an amazing thing to see what has happened there, in spite of what is happening around the borders. tois an amazing testament personal leadership within the country. people of different factions putting the country first. ofy still have huge numbers foreign fighters that will be coming back. german is challenges internally. -- tremendous challenges internally. we have to had a discussion about tunisia before we came here. i know there has been some discrepancy of resource allocation between the house and senate. this may be what you are referring to. the commitment level has been

11:01 am

$134 million, which, by the way, is ramped up. i know does not celica huge amount of money. i think, when you see this omnibus come out, you will see all of that fixed. that is not my committee, it is an appropriations committee. they wanted to use unspent sums to fill the void. i think you will see in the next 10 days happiness, as it relates .o tunisia i think that is, yes, a real commitment to do everything we tunisia help their leadership, which has done an outstanding job. great headline a now. [laughter] corker: i hope that ends up being truthful. that is what appears will

11:02 am

happen. >> thank you, senator. andg back to the metaphor, -- sorry, i am from the israel american council. the notion that we are dealing with a multi-actor world, and the notion that they want to invest in the asia-pacific. i'm interested to hear what have been some of the discussions in the committee, dealing with the middle east issue. i will berker: honest, not much. china, relative to the middle east issue. of course, i know they just firstced building their naval base. , if you will, in the region. not much. i think most of us look at china that is 99.9% self

11:03 am

interested. the use their role today in the world very differently than what has been the role of the united last 60-70 years. it is a very different role. them asy have not seen a major contributor, if you will, to solving the problems. there has been almost no discussion. i hope it changes. certainly, well, i hope it changes. >> be careful what you wish for. thank you for your time. you mentioned you were in egypt, and mentioned the challenges.

11:04 am

whether you have any conclusions about how it might involve or adopt. i was not happy with us conjuring our relationship with egypt for a while. oup, was it not? i spent a lot of time on the phone with secretary hagel, who i think, by the way, did not want to alter our relationship the way we did. i feel like at that moment in time, it was not the right thing to do. i think we look at the security country,inside of the

11:05 am

and all the issues are very difficult to deal with. in egypt, i've met with, as we always do, and typically we do it first, other than sometimes meeting with folks at our embassy that have the ability to let us know what is truly happening in the region, but after that, we typically meet activists inghts countries like this, and people are concerned about religious persecution, and those kinds of things. what is happening with detainees , disappearances, and the treatment of people who have altering views. i think that with the country with the issues that they have, our policy should be

11:06 am

that we are going to continue to work very closely with you. over time, we want these human rights issues dealt with in the appropriate way. we understand you are stepping , notgh these very slowly at the pace that many would like. at the same time, i'm sorry, i of some of the major challenges they are dealing with inside the country and have a degree of understanding as to why they would put security and economic .ssues at the top that does not mean they are not important, they are very important. at some point in time, there will be a pressure within the country that will create significant problems. they have to be dealt with. i think our policy should be to

11:07 am

do everything we can with this 90,000,000-100,000,000 person country that has significant issues, for us to do everything we can to support a state that at least is operating, and make it as successful as we can. >> i want to close with walter. we will do one more now so we get the senator back in time to vote, and do other things. is this john? >> first of all, thank you for what you do. i'm concerned about the vulnerability and challenges to three of our closest friends -- jordan, lebanon, tunisia. obviously, jordan and lebanon, like turkey, face pressure from

quote

11:08 am

refugee populations. what is your sense of the survivability and our security relationships in particular with jordan, lebanon, and support for morocco and tunisia. senator corker: what  do you mean about that? >> the fact that they have tremendous challenges, and now external challenges from the refugees. besides providing funding, how are we ensuring that jordan and lebanon will make a difference? we are summoning to resume to be next president of lebanon. look, i think: there is significant to huge concerns about jordan. slow to movebeen through some of the reforms that need to take place.

11:09 am

he is a great, great friend of ours, israel, the region. he spends a lot of time on external issues, but has tremendous internal issues that still have to be resolved. us ink probably

 most of the room have visited the turkey, jordan, and other places. turkey, inomenal -- particular, they are hosting people in their homes. .t is an incredible thing they have a lack of water resources they are being bought up by huge amounts of people that are in their country. almost in every conversation we have, relative to the region, jordan, more so than lebanon -- i'm sorry, but we have the same concerns about lebanon, but jordan in particular is focused on, as a country, that could go 

11:10 am

the wrong way. we do support them more than i think people think, relative to internal security issues, and those kinds of things. jordan in particular is a country that wants to play a highly constructive role in the region, and yet, has tremendous destabilizing forces that are taking place. it is a place that we have to pay a lot of attention to. i could say less about morocco. we understand concerns, by think ier concerns,t it would be jordan, lebanon, morocco, and irony spoke to tunisia -- i already spoke to tunisia. aboveould put tunisia morocco. [laughter] >> let me end with a question

11:11 am

.hat is a little bit tangential it involves the intelligence isis. to defeat there has been a debate over the collection of data, bulk collection. the nsa quit doing that. everybody from the admiral, director has said this is causing us to go blind to lose track of terrorists. how much should we worry about that and recalibrate on that? sorry, iorker: i'm have not been around that long in the senate. i'm 63 years old. i guess some would consider me a teenager in the senate. there is no doubt that it was a generational thing. those not clearly along lines, but emanated from a

11:12 am

generational thing relative to the millennial thinking and libertarian thinking about civil liberties, and what the nsa was doing relative to bulk collection. i thought it was, i'm sorry, absurd that we did away with bulk collection. absurd. absurd, absurd, just the most ridiculous. >> how do you really feel about it? [laughter] get reallyker: i angry to think that this person, who betrayed our nation, helped create this atmosphere of us not protecting our own citizens. after that event, i went and spent four hours at the nsa, and walked through the book collection ofbulk ram. are you kidding me? total who could

11:13 am

access materials, and they had to go through all kinds of levels to ever access -- by the 1-3 hops out, now the data , and how many thousands of people will have it will not work in the way it should. i'm just so upset that our inion follow this momentum the wrong place and wrong direction. it has hurt our security. i can't believe it has happened, but it did. other piece that is even more of a concern to me is i moved into the new age. i have an iphone. i had dinner with tim cook, and

11:14 am

obviously, his goal, as a businessman, is make sure that this piece of equipment -- there is no way for you to ever gain access to this. everything that comes in and out of this is encrypted so you can store your health records, and everything else on it. i understand it. of course. there is a little bit of a debate -- we had a discussion, people are talking about having a key so that people can access the bad guy. his point would be that if the bad guy -- i mean, if the good guys can access it, then the bad guys can. . legitimate point then you go to paris, and meet with folks who know things about this, and you realize that now, regardless of what they may do, there are all these apps now where all of your messaging is encrypted.

11:15 am

as upset as i was about the , iue of bulk collection cannot believe we went down the path we went down. i cannot believe the administration would let us go down that path. to let the fever of the time to take us to that place is disappointing, but what is happening now in our society is most communications, most isis folks over time will have the ability -- i'm not blaming this on apple, by the way because there are already apps that exist where you can communicate on a totally encrypted network that somebody will create. that is what happens in this world of innovation, someone will create even more of. how, then, are we going to be able to keep things from happening here in our own

11:16 am

country? i do not know how we solve that problem. i do not know if our guys at nsa will have the ability, no matter what is developed over time to what isnd understand happening. at this moment in time, my sense is that is where a gap exists that is problematic. you for allowing me to be here. [applause] add, a big thanks to dan. for 30 years or so, the aspen institute has had a program. you are a great part of this tradition and thank you for bringing senator corker here today. >> we will hear more about foreign policy and national security monday from house homeland security chair michael

11:17 am

mccaul. he will be speaking at the national defense university about the rise of radicalism and the u.s. response to isis and other terror threats. that is live on monday on c-span 2. this weekend, 10 democratic senators are in paris for the u.n. climate change conference. this pictureeted of himself with his colleagues. the conference began last week with more than 50 heads of state attending, including president obama. the goal is to produce an international agreement for reducing carbon emissions by the year 2020. the conference officially comes to a close next friday. earlier this week, we saw another group of senators get together to endorse hillary clinton for president. expressedenators

120 Views

info Stream Only

Uploaded by TV Archive on December 5, 2015
