Title: U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress

URL Source: https://www.congress.gov/crs_external_products/R/PDF/R44891/R44891.47.pdf

Published Time: Sat, 21 Jun 2025 02:42:25 GMT

Markdown Content:
U.S. Ro le in the World: 

# Background  and  Issues for Congress 

# Updated April 6, 2020 

Congressional Research Service 

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

R44891 U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress 

> Congressional Research Service

# Summary 

The U.S. role in the world refers to the overall character, purpose, or direction of U.S. 

participation in international affairs and the country ’s overall relationship to the rest of the world. 

The U.S. role in the world can be viewed as establi shing the overall context or framework for 

U.S. policymakers for developing, implementing, and measuring the success of U.S. policies and 

actions on specific international issues, and for foreign countries or other observers for 

interpreting and understand ing U.S. actions on the world stage. 

While descriptions of the U.S. role in the world since the end of World War II vary in their 

specifics, it can be described in general terms as consisting of four key elements: global 

leadership; defense and promotion o f the liberal international order; defense and promotion of 

freedom, democracy, and human rights; and prevention of the emergence of regional hegemons in 

Eurasia. 

The issue for Congress is whether the U.S. role in the world is changing, and if so, what 

imp lications this might have for the United States and the world. A change in the U.S. role could 

have significant and even profound effects on U.S. security, freedom, and prosperity. It could 

significantly affect U.S. policy in areas such as relations with a llies and other countries, defense 

plans and programs, trade and international finance, foreign assistance, and human rights. 

Some observers, particularly critics of the Trump Administration, argue that under the Trump 

Administration, the United States is substantially changing the U.S. role in the world . Other 

observers, particularly supporters of the Trump Administration, while acknowledging that the 

Trump Administration has changed U.S. foreign policy in a number of areas compared to policies 

pursued by the Obama Administration, argue that under the Trump Administration, there has been 

less change and more continuity regarding the U.S. role in the world .

Some observers who assess that the United States under the Trump Administration is substantially 

chang ing the U.S. role in the world —particularly critics of the Trump Administration, and also 

some who were critical of the Obama Administration —view the implications of that change as 

undesirable. They view the change as an unnecessary retreat from U.S. globa l leadership and a 

gratuitous discarding of long -held U.S. values, and judge it to be an unforced error of immense 

proportions —a needless and self -defeating squandering of something of great value to the United 

States that the United States had worked to b uild and maintain for 70 years. 

Other observers who assess that there has been a change in the U.S. role in the world in recent 

years —particularly supporters of the Trump Administration, but also some observers who were 

arguing even prior to the Trump Ad mi nistration in favor of a more restrained U.S. role in the 

world —view the change in the U.S. role, or at least certain aspects of it, as helpful for responding 

to changed U.S. and global circumstances and for defending U.S. values and interests, 

particularl y in terms of adjusting the U.S. role to one that is more realistic regarding what the 

United States can accomplish , enhancing deterrence of potential regional aggression by making 

potential U.S. actions less predictable to potential adversaries , reestabli shing respect for national 

sovereignty as a guidepost for U.S. foreign policy and for organizing international affairs , and 

encouraging U.S. allies and security partners in Eurasia to do more to defend themselves. 

Congress ’s decisions regarding the U.S . ro le in the world could have significant implications for 

numerous policies, plans, programs, and budgets, and for the role of Congress relative to that of 

the executive branch in U.S. foreign policymaking. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress 

> Congressional Research Service

# Contents 

Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .....  1

Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .....  1

Overview of U.S. Role: Four Key Elements  ................................ ................................ .............  1

Global Leadership  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  1

Defense and Promotion of Liberal International Order  ................................ ......................  2

Defense and Promotion of Freedom, Democracy, and Human Rights  ...............................  3

Prevention of Emergence of Regional Hegemons in Eurasia  ................................ .............  4

Changes over Time  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  5

Long -Standing Debate over Its Merits  ................................ ................................ ......................  5

Issues for Congress  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  5

Is the United States Changing Its Role ? ................................ ................................ ....................  6

Some Observers Believe the United States Is Changing Its Role  ................................ .......  6

Other Observers Disagree  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...  7

Still Other Observers See a Mixed or Confusing Situation  ................................ ................  7

Some Observers Argue That Change Began Earlier  ................................ ...........................  8

Potential Combined Perspectives  ................................ ................................ ........................  8

Im plications of a Changed U.S. Role  ................................ ................................ ........................  8

Some Observers View Implications as Undesirable  ................................ ...........................  8

Other Observers View Implications as Helpful  ................................ ................................ ..  9

Some Related or Additional Issues ................................ ................................ ..........................  10 

Potential Impact of COVID -19 (Coronavirus) Situation  ................................ ..................  10 

Costs and Benefits of Allies  ................................ ................................ ..............................  10 

U.S. Public Opinion  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  11 

Operation of U.S. Democracy  ................................ ................................ ............................  11 

Potential Implications for Congress as an Institution  ................................ .......................  12 

Reversibility of a Change in U.S. Role  ................................ ................................ .............  12 

Additional Writing s ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  13 

# Appendixes 

Appendix A. Glossary of Selected Terms  ................................ ................................ ......................  14 

Appendix B. Past U.S. Role vs. More Restrained  Role ................................ ................................ . 17 

Appendix C. Additional Writings  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..  21 

# Contacts 

Author Information ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  59 U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 1

# Introduction 

This report provides background information and issues for Congress regarding the U.S. role in 

the world, meaning the overall character, purpose, or direction of U.S. p articipation in 

international affairs and the country ’s overall relationship to the rest of the world . The U.S. role in 

the world can be viewed as establishing the overall context or framework for U.S. policymakers 

for developing, implementing, and measuring the success of U.S. policies and actions on specific 

international issues , and for foreign countries or other observers for interpreting and 

understand ing U.S. actions on the wo rld stage. 

So me observers perceive that after remaining generally stable for a period of more than 70 years 

(i.e., since the end of World War II in 1945 ), the U.S. role in the world under the Trump 

Administration is undergoing a potentially historic change . A change in the U.S. role in the world 

could have significant and even profound effects on U.S. security , freedom, and prosperity. It 

could significantly affect U.S. policy in areas such as relations with allies and other countries, 

defense plans and pro grams, trade and international finance, foreign assistance, and human rights. 

The issue for Congress is whether the U.S. role in the world is changing, and if so, what 

implications this m ight have for the United States and the world . Congress ’s decisions regarding 

the U.S . role in the world could have significant implica tions for numerous policies, plans, 

programs , and budgets, and for the role of Congress relative to that of the executive branch in 

U.S. foreign policy making .

A variety of other CRS reports address in greater depth specific international issues mentioned in 

this report.  Appendix A  provides a glossary of some key terms used in this report , such as 

international order or regional hegemon . For convenience, this report uses the term U.S. role as a 

shorthand for referring to the U.S . role in the world. 

# Background 

# Overview of U.S. Role : Four Key Elements 

While descriptions of t he U.S. role in the world since the end of World War II vary in their 

specifics , it can be described in general terms as consisting of four key elements: 

 global leadership; 

 defense and promotion of the liberal international order; 

 defense and promotion of freedom, democracy, and human rights ; and 

 prevention of the emergence of regional hegemons in Eurasia .

The following sections provide brief discussions of the se four key elements. 

Global Leadership 

The U.S. role in the world since the end of World War II is generally described , first and 

foremost, as one of global leadership , meaning that the United States tends to be the first or most 

important country for identifying or framing international issues, taking actions to address those 

issues, setting an exam ple for other countries to follow, organizing and implementing multilateral 

efforts to address international issues , and enforcing international rules and norms. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 2

Observers over the years have referred to U.S. global leadership using various terms, some of 

which r eflect varying degrees of approval or disapproval of this aspect of the U.S. role . Examples 

of such terms (other than global leader itself) include leader of the free world, superpower, 

indispensable power, system administrator, hyperpower, world po liceman, or worl d hegemon. 

The U .S. role of global leadership has resulted in extensive U.S. involvement in international 

affairs, and this, too, has been described with various phrases. T he United States has been 

described as purs uing an internationalist foreign policy; a foreign policy of globa l engagement or 

deep engagement; a foreign policy th at provides global public goods; a foreign policy of liberal 

order building, liberal internationalism, or liberal hegemony; an interventionist foreign policy; or 

a foreign policy of seeking primacy or world hegemony. 

Defense and Promotion of Liberal International Order 

A second key element of the U.S. role in the world since W orld War II —one that can be viewed 

as inherently related to the first key element above —has been to defend and promote the liberal 

international order 1 that the United States, with the support of its allies, created in the years after 

World War II. Although definitions of the liberal international order vary, key elements of it are 

generally said to include the following :

 respect for the territorial integrity of countries, and the unacceptability of 

changing international borders by force or coercion; 

 a preference for resolving disputes between countries peacefully, without the use 

or thr eat o f use of force or coercion, and in a manner consistent with international 

law; 

 respect for international law, global rules and norms, and universal values, 

including human rights; 

 strong international institutions for supporting and implementing internatio nal 

law, global rules and norms, and universal values; 

 the use of liberal (i.e., rules -based) international trading and investment systems 

to advance open, rules -based economic engagement, development, growth, and 

prosperity ; and 

 the treatment of internati onal waters, international air space, outer s pace, and 

(more recently) cyber space as international commons rather than domains subject 

to national sovereignty. 

Most of the key elements above (arguably, all but the final one) can be viewed collectively as 

forming what is commonly referred to as a rules -based international order. A traditional antithesis 

of a rules -based order is a might -makes -right order (sometimes colloquially referred to as the law 

of the jungle), which is an international order (or a situ ation lacking in order) in which more 

powerful countries routinely impose their will arbitrarily on less -powerful countries, 

organizations, and individuals , with little or no regard to rules.                        

> 1Other terms used to refer to the liberal international order include U. S. -led international order ,postwar international
> order ,rules -based international order , and open international order .Observers sometimes substitute world for
> international , or omit international or world and refer simply to the liberal order, the U.S. -led order, and so on. In the
> terms liberal international order and liberal order , the word liberal does not refer to the conservative -liberal construct
> often used in discussing contemporary politics in the Un ited States or other countries. It is, instead, an older use of the
> term that refers to an order based on the rule of law, as opposed to an order based on the arbitrary powers of hereditary
> monarchs. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress
> Congressional Research Service 3

Though often referred to as if it is a fully developed or univer sally established situation, the 

liberal international order, like other international orders that preceded it, is 

 incomplete in geographic reach and in other ways; 

 partly aspirational ;

 not fixed in stone, but rather subject to evolution over time; 

 sometim es violated by its supporters; 

 not entirely free of m ight -makes -right behavior; 

 resisted or rej ected by certain states and non state actors ; and 

 subject to various stresses and challenges. 

Some observers, emphasizing points like those above, argue that the liberal international order is 

more of a myth than a reality. Other observers, particularly supporters of the order, while 

acknowledging the limitations of the order, reject characterizations of it as a myth and emphasize 

its differences from international orders that preceded it. 

As mentioned above, t he liberal international order was created by the United States with the 

support of its allies in the years immediately after World War II. At that time, the United States 

was the only country with both the capacity and willingness to establish a new international order. 

U.S. willingness to establish and play a leading role in maintaining the liberal i nternational order 

is generally viewed as reflecting a desire by U.S. policymakers to avoid repeating the dea dly 

major wars and widespread economic disruption and deprivation of the first half of the 20 th 

centu ry —a period that included World War I, the Great Depression, the rise of communism and 

fascism, the Ukrainian famine, the Holocaust, and World War II .

U.S. willingness to establish and play a leading role in maintaining the liberal international order 

is also generally viewed as an act of national self -interest , reflecting a belief among U.S. 

policymakers that it would strongly serve U.S. security, polit ical , and economic objectives .

Supporters of the liberal international order generally argue that i n return for bearing the costs of 

cre ating and sustaining the liberal international order, the United States receive s significant 

security, political, and ec onomic benefits, including the maintenance of a favorable balance of 

power on both a global and regional level, and a leading or dominant role in establishing and 

operating global institutions and rules for international finance and trade . Indeed, s ome critics of 

the liberal international order argue that it is primarily a construct for serving U.S. interests and 

promoting U.S. world primacy or hegemony . The costs and benefits for the United States of 

defending and promoting the liberal international order , however, are a matter of debate. 

Defense and Promotion of Freedom, Democracy, and Human Rights 

A third key element of the U.S. role in the wor ld since World War II has been to defend and 

promot e freedom, democracy, and human rights as universal val ues, while criticizing and 

resisting authoritarian and illiberal forms of government where possible . This element of the U.S. 

role is viewed as consistent not only with core U.S. political values but also with a theory 

advanced by some observers (sometimes called the democratic peace theory) that democratic 

countries are more responsive to the desires of their populations and consequently are less likely 

to wage wars of aggression or go to war with one another. 

Defending and promoting freedom, democracy, an d human rights is additionally viewed as a key 

component of U.S. soft power , because it can en courage like -minded governments, as well as 

organizations and individuals in other countries , to work with the United States , and because it 

has the potential to shape the behavior of authoritarian and illiberal governments that are acting U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 4

against U.S. interests by shaming those governments and inspiring pro democracy organizations 

and individuals within those countries. 

Prevention of Emergence of Regional Hegemons in Eurasia 

A fourth element of the U.S. role in the world since World War II —one that U.S. policymakers do 

not often state explicitly in public —has been to o ppos e the emergence of regional hegemons in 

Eurasia. This objective reflects a U.S. perspective on geopolitics and grand strategy developed by 

U.S. strategists and policymakers during and in the years immediately after World War II that 

incorporates two key judgments: 

 that given the amount of people, resources, and economic activity in Eurasia , a 

region al hegemon in Eurasia would represent a concentration of power large 

enough to be able to threaten vital U.S. interests ; and 

 that Eurasia is not dependably self -regulating in terms of preventing the 

emergence of regional hegemons , meaning that the countri es of Eurasia cannot 

be counted on to be able to prevent, though their own actions, the emergence of 

regional hegemons, and may need assistance from one or more countries outside 

Eurasia to be able to do this dependably .2

Preventing the emergence of region al hegemons in Eurasia is sometimes also referred to as 

preserving a division of power in Eurasia, or as preventing key regions in Eurasia from coming 

under the domination of a single power, or as preventing the emergence of a spheres -of -influence 

world , w hich could be a consequence of the emergence of one or more regional hegemons in 

Eurasia .

U.S. actions that can be viewed as expressions of the U.S. goal of preventing the emergence of 

regio nal hegemons in Eurasia include but are not necessarily limited to the following: 

 U.S. participation in World War I ,3 World War II, the Korean War, and the 

Vietnam War ;4

 U.S. a lliance s and security partnership s, including 

 the NATO alliance, which was established in large part to deter and counter 

attempts by the Soviet Union (now Russia) to become a regional hegemon in 

Europe;           

> 2For additional discussion, see CRS In Focus IF10485, Defense Primer: Geography, Strategy, and U.S. Force Design ,
> by Ronald O'Rourke .
> 3Although the goal of preventing the emergence of regional hegemons was not articulated in explicit terms (at least not
> wid ely) by U.S. strategists until World War II and the years immediately thereafter, U.S. participation in World War I
> against Germany can in retrospect be viewed as an earlier U.S. action reflecting this goal.
> 4U.S. participation in the Vietnam War was just ified in part by the so -called domino theory, which argued that a
> victory by communist -ruled North Vietnam over South Vietnam could be followed by other countries in the region
> falling, like dominos in a row, under communist control. Opponents of the domin o theory challenged its validity and
> argue that it was disproven when North Vietnam’s defeat of South Vietnam was not followed by other countries in the
> region falling under communist control. The theory’s supporters argue that the theory was not disproven , because the
> years -long U.S. effort to defend South Vietnam, though ultimately unsuccessful in preventing victory by North
> Vietnam, gave other countries in the region time and space to develop their political institutions and economies enough
> to deter or resist communist movements in their own countries. Valid or not, the domino theory’s use as a justification
> links U.S. participation in the war to the goal of preventing the emergence of a regional hegemon (in this case, a
> communist hegemon of China and/or the Soviet Union). U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress
> Congressional Research Service 5

 U.S. alliance s with countries in East Asia and the Pacific , which were 

established in larg e part to deter and counter attempts by the Soviet Union or 

China to become a regional hegemon in East Asia ; and 

 U.S. security partnerships with countries in the Persian Gulf region , which 

were established in large part to deter or counter attempts by Iran or the 

Soviet Union (now Russia) to become a re gional hegemon in that region; and 

 additional U.S. politica l, diplomatic, and economic actions to contain and oppose 

the Soviet Union during the Cold War , including the Marshall Plan and 

subsequent U.S. foreign assistance programs. 

In pursuing the goal of prevent ing the emergence of regional hegemons in Eurasia , U.S. 

policymakers have sometimes decide d to work with or support non democratic regimes that for 

their own reasons view Russia, China, or Iran as competitors or adversaries. As a consequence, 

the goal of preventing the emergence of regional hegemons in Asia has sometimes be en in tension 

with defending and promoting f reedom, democracy, and human rights .

# Changes o ver Time 

Although the U.S. role in the world was generally stable over the p ast 70 years, the specifics of 

U.S. foreign policy for implementing that role have changed frequently for various reasons, 

including changes in administrations and changes in the international security environment. 

Definition s of the U.S. role ha ve room wi thin them to accommodate some variation in the 

specifics of U.S. foreign policy. 

# Long -Standing Debate over Its Merits 

The fact that the U.S. role in the world has been generally stable over the p ast 70 years does not 

necessarily mean that this role was the right one for the United States , or that it would be the right 

one in the future. Although the role the United States has played in the world since the end of 

World War II has many defenders, it also has critics, and the merits of that role have been a ma tter 

of long -standing debate among for eign policy specialists, strategists, policymakers , and the 

public, with critics o ffering potential alternative concepts for the U.S. role in the world. 

The most prominent dimension of the debate is whether the United States should attempt to 

continue playing the active internationalist r ole that it has played for the p ast 70 years, or instead 

adopt a more restrained role that reduces U. S. involvement in world affairs . A nu mber of critics of 

the U .S. role in the world over the p ast 70 years have offered multiple variations on the idea of a 

more restrained U.S. role . (For additional discussion, see  Appendix B .)

A second major dimension within the debate over the future U.S. role concerns how to balance or 

combine the pursuit of narrowly defined material U.S. interests with the goal of defending and 

promoting U.S. or universal values such as democracy, freedom, and human rights. A third major 

dimension concerns the balance in U.S. foreign policy between the use of hard power and soft 

power . Observers debating these two dimensions of the future U.S. role in the world stake out 

varying positions on these questions. 

# Issues for Congress 

The issue for Congress is whether the U.S. role in the world is changing, and if so, what 

implications this might have for the United States and the world. The sections below provide 

some discussion of this issue. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 6

# Is the United States Changing Its Role? 

There currently are multiple views on the question of whether the United States under the Trump 

Administration is changing the U.S. role in the world , some of which are outlined briefly bel ow. 

Some Observers Believe the United States Is Changing Its Role 

Some observers, particularly critics of the Trump Administration, argue that under the Trump 

Administration , the United States is substantially changing the U.S. role in the world by alterin g

some or all of the four key elements of the U.S. role described earlier. Although views among 

these observers vary in their specifics, a number of these observers argue that the 

Administration ’s America First construct , its emphasis on national sovereignty as a primary 

guidepost for U.S. foreign policy , and other Administration actions and statements form a new 

U.S. role characterized by 

 a voluntary retreat from or abdicat ion of global leadership ,

 a greater reliance on unilateralism ,

 a reduced wi llingness to work through international or multilateral institutions 

and agreements ,

 an acceptance of U.S. isolation or near -isolation on certain international issues ,

 a more skeptical view of the value of alliances to the Un ited States, 

 a less -critical vi ew of certain authoritarian or illiberal governments, 

 a reduced or more selective approach to p romot ing and defe nd ing certain 

universal values, 

 the elevation of bilateral trade balances , commercial considerations, monetary 

transactions, and ownership of assets such as oil above other foreign policy 

considerations , and 

 an implicit tolerance of the re emergence of aspects of a might -makes -right 

international order. 

In support of this view, the se observers cite various Administration actions and sta tements ,

including , among other things 

 the Administration ’s decision s to withdraw from the Trans -Pacific Partnership 

(TPP) regional trade agreement, the multilateral Paris climate agreement , and the 

Iran nuclear agreement ;

 its earlier proposals for reducing State Department funding and foreign assistance 

funding , and delays in filling senior State Department positi ons; 

 the P resident ’s skeptical statements regarding the value to the United States of 

certain U.S. alliances (particularly with European countries and S outh Korea ) and 

more generally his apparent transactional and monetary -focused approach to 

understanding and managing alliance relationships ;

 what these observers view as the President ’s affinity for certain authoritarian or 

illiberal leaders , as well as h is apparent reluctance to criticize Russia an d his 

apparent continued desire to seek improved relations with Russia, despite 

Russian actions judged by U.S. intelligence agencies and other observers to have 

been directed against the United States and overseas U.S. interests ;U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 7

 the President ’s decision, announced by the Administration on October 6, 2019, to 

withdraw U.S. troops from northern Syria; 

 the Administration ’s focus on pursuing bilateral trade negotiations with various 

countries; and 

 the A dminist ration ’s infrequent or inconsistent statements in support of 

democracy and human rights, including the Admini st ration ’s reaction to the 

killing of journalist Jamal Khashoggi and the President ’s statements regarding 

the prod emocracy protests in Hong Kong. 

Other Observers Disagree 

Other observers, particularly supporters of the Trump Administration, disagree with some or all of 

the perspective above. While acknowledging that the Trump Administration has changed U.S. 

foreign policy in a number of areas compar ed to policies pursued by the Obama Admini stration, 

these o bservers argue that under the Trump Administration, there has been less change and more 

continuity regarding the U.S. role in the world. In support of this view, the se observers cite, 

among other t hings 

 the Administration ’s December 2017 national security strategy (NSS) document 

and its January 2018 unclassified summary of its supporting national d efense 

strategy (NDS) document —large portions of which refer to U.S. leadership, a 

general emphasis on great power competition with China and Russia, and strong 

support for U.S. alliances ;

 Administration statements reaffirming U.S. support for NATO , as well as 

Administration actions to improve U.S. military capabilities in Europe for 

deterring potential Ru ssian aggression in Europe; 

 the Administration ’s willingness to impose and maintain a v ariety of sanctions on 

Russia; 

 the Administration ’s Free and Open Indo -Pacific (FOIP) construct for guiding 

U.S. policy toward the Indo -Pacific region; 

 the Administratio n’s more confrontational policy toward China, including its plan 

to increase funding for U.S. foreign assistance programs to compete against 

China for influence in Africa, Asia, and the Americas; 

 U.S. trade actions that, in the view of these observers, are intended to make free 

trade more sustainable over the long run by ensuring that it is fair to all parties, 

including the United States ; and 

 the Administration ’s (admittedly belated) support of Hong Kong ’s pro democracy 

protestors, its criticism of China ’s human rights practices toward its Muslim 

Uyghur population, and its emphasis on r eligious freedom as a component of 

human rights. 

Still Other Observers See a Mixed or Confusing Situation 

Still other observers, viewing points made by both of the above sets of observers, see a mixed or 

confusing situation regarding whether the United States under the Trump Adminis tration is 

changing the U.S. role in the world. For these observers, whether the U.S. role is changing is 

difficult to discern, in part because what they view as incoherence or contradictions in the 

Administration ’s foreign policies and in part because the President ’s apparent views on certain 

issues —such as the value of U.S. alliances, the acceptability of certain actions by Russia or North U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 8

Korea , and the importance of democracy and human r ig hts as universal value s—have frequently 

been in tension with or contradicted by statements and actions of senior Administration officials 

(particularly those who served during the first two years or so of the Administration) , with the 

President ’s views being more consistent with the change in the U.S. role outlined by the first set 

of observers above, and statements and actions of senior Administration officials frequently being 

more consistent with a continuat ion of the U.S. role of the past 70 years outlined by the second 

set of observers above. 

Some Observer s Argue That Change Began Earlier 

Some observers argue that if the U.S. role is changing , that change started not under the Trump 

Administration, but unde r the Obama Administration, particularly regardin g the question of 

whether the United States has reduced or withdrawn from global leadership. In support of this 

view, these observers cite what they views as the Obama Administration ’s

 focus on reducing the U.S. military presence and ending U.S. combat operations 

in Iraq and Afghanistan in favor of focusing more on domestic U.S. rebuilding 

initiatives ,

 decision to announce but not enforce a “red line ” regarding the behavior of the 

Syrian government , and 

 restr ained response to Russian actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine , and more 

generally, its relucta nce, for a time at least, to fully ackn owledge and adapt to 

less cooperative and more confrontation al relationships with Russia and China. 

Still others view the start of a change in the U.S. role as occurring even sooner, under the George 

W. Bush Administration —when that Administration did not respond more strongly to Russia ’s

2008 invasion and occupation of part of Georgia —or un der the Clinton Administration. 

For these observers, a change in the U.S. role in the world under the Trump Administration may 

represent not so much a shift in the U.S. role as a continuation or deepening of a change that 

began in a prior U.S. Administration. 

Potential Combined Perspecti ves 

The perspectives outlined in the preceding sections are not necessarily mutually exclusive —

assessments combining aspects of more than one of these perspectives are possible. 

# Implications of a Changed U.S. Role 

Among observers who assess that there has been a change in the U.S. role in the world in recent 

years, there are multiple views regarding the potential implications of that change. 

Some Observers View Implications as Undesirable 

Some observers who assess that the United States under the Trump Admi nistration is substantially 

changing the U.S. role in the world —particularly critics of the Trump Administration, and also 

some who were critical of the Obama Administration —view the implications of that change as 

undesirable . The y view the change as an un necessary retreat from U.S. global leadership and a 

gratuitous discarding of long -held U.S. values , and judge it to be an unforc ed error of immense 

proportions —a needless and self -defeating squandering of something of great value to the United 

States that the United States had worked to build and maintain for 70 years. More specifically, U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 9

they argue that the change in the U.S. role i n recent years that they see is doing some or all of the 

following: 

 reducing U.S. power and foreign -policy capacity , particularly by weakening or 

hollowing out the State Department and reducing or devaluing elements of U.S. 

soft power; 

 weakening the U.S. ability to leverage its power and foreign -policy capacity in 

international affairs —and isolating the United States o n certain international 

issues, effectively turning the concept of America First into “America Alone ”—

by

 damaging long -standing and valua ble U.S. alliance relationships ,

 reducing U.S. participation in multilateral political and trade negotiations and 

agre ements, and 

 making the United States look more erratic and impulsive as an international 

actor, and less reliable as a n ally and negotiating partner; 

 weakening the U.S. -led international order and encouraging a re emergence of 

aspects of a might -makes -right international order; 

 slowing the spread of democracy and human rights, encouraging a moral 

equivalency between the United States and authoritarian and illiberal countries, 

and tacitly facilitating a re emergence of authoritarian an d illiberal forms of 

gover nment ;

 disregarding the costly lessons of the first half of the 20 th centur y, and how the 

U.S. role in the world of the last 70 years has been motivated at bottom by a 

desire to prevent a repetition of the horrific events of that period; and 

 creating vacu ums in global leadership in establishing and maintaining g lobal 

rules and norms, on the disposition of specific disputes and other issues , and in 

regional powe r balances that China and Russia as well as France, Turkey , Syria, 

Iran, and other countries are moving to fill, often at the expense of U.S. i nterests 

and values. 

Other Observers View Implications as Helpful 

Other observers who assess that there has been a change in the U.S. role in the world in recent 

years —particularly supporters of the Trump Admin istration, but also some observers who were 

arguing even prior to the Trump Ad ministration in favor of a more restrained U.S. role in the 

world —view the change in the U.S. role, or at least certain aspects of it, as helpful for responding 

to changed U.S. a nd global circumstances an d for defending U.S. values and interests. More 

specifically, they argue that the change in the U.S. role in recent years that they see is doing some 

or all of the following :

 adjusting the U.S. role to one that is more realistic r egarding what the United 

State s can accomplish in the world today and in the future , particularly given 

limits on U.S. resources and the reduction in U.S. economic and military 

preponderance in recent decades as other countries have grown economically and 

developed their militaries; 

 enhancing deterrence of potential regional aggression by making potential U.S. 

actions less predictable to potential adversaries; U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 10

 reestablishing respect for national sovereignty as a guidepost for U.S. for eign 

policy and for organ izing international affairs; 

 encouraging U.S. allies and security partners in Eurasia to do more to defen d

themselves, thereby reducing U.S. costs and developing Eurasia ’s potential to 

become more self -regulating in terms of preven ting the emergence of regional 

hegemons; 

 placing an emphasis on countering and competing with China, which poses a 

uniquely strong and multidimensional challenge to U.S. security and prosperi ty; 

 working to strengthen the security architecture of the Indo -Pacific region under 

the FOIP construct ;

 exploring possibilities for improving relations where possible with countries such 

as Russia and North Korea; and 

 making trade agreements more fair to the United States. 

# Some Related or Additional Issues 

The followin g sections provide brief discussion s of some related or additional issues for Congress 

regarding the U.S. role in the world. 

Potential Impact of COVID -19 (Coronavirus) Situation 

A rapidly emerging but potentially very significant issue is the question of whether and how the 

COVID -19 situation in the United States and around the world m ight lead to profound ly 

transformative and long -lasting changes in both the structure of international politics and the U.S. 

role in the world in areas such as U.S. global le adership , U.S. strategic competition with China, 

U.S. relations with allies, and U.S. definitions of U.S. national security . For some examples of 

writings addressing this emerging issue, see some of the more recent writings cited in  Appendix 

C.5

Costs and Benefits of Allies 

Within the overall debate over the U.S. role in the world , one specific question relates to the costs 

and ben efits of allies. As noted earlier, some observers believe that under the Trump 

Administration, the United States is b ecoming more skeptical of the value of allies, particularly 

those in Europe, and more transactional in managing U.S. alliance re lationships .

Skeptics of allies and alliances generally argue that the ir value to the United States is overrated ;

that allies are capable of defendin g themselves without U.S. help; that U.S. allies frequently act as 

free riders in their alliance relationships with th e United States by shift ing security costs to the 

United States; that in the absence of U.S. help, these allies would do more on their own to balance 

against potential regional hegemons; and that alliances create a risk of drawing the United States 

into co nflicts involving allies over issues that are not vital to the United States. 

Supporters of the U.S. approach to allies and alliances of the past 70 years , while acknowledging 

the free -rider issue as something that needs to be managed , generally argue that alliances are 

needed and valuable for preventing the emergence of regional hegemons in Eurasia and for           

> 5For other CRS reports that discuss aspects of this issue, see, for example, CRS In Focus IF11421, COVID -19: Global
> Implications and Responses , by Sara M. Tharakan et al. ;CRS In Foc us IF11434, COVID -19: U.S. -China Economic
> Considerations , by Karen M. Sutter and Michael D. Sutherland ; and CRS Report R46270, Global Economic Effects of
> COVID -19 , coordinated by James K. Jackson .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress
> Congressional Research Service 11

otherwise deterring potential regional aggression ; that alliances form a significant advantage for 

the United States in its dealings with other major po wers, such as Russia and China (both of 

which largely lack similar alliance networks); that although allies might be capable of defending 

themselves without U.S. help, they might also choose, in the absence of U.S. help, to bandwagon 

with would -be regional hegemons (rather than contribute to efforts to balance against them); that 

in addition to mutual defense benefit s, alliances offer other benefits, particularly in peacetime, 

including sharing of intelligence, information, and technology and the cultivatio n of soft -power 

forms of cooperation; and that a transactional approach to alliances, which encourages the merits 

of each bilateral alliance relationship to be measured in isolation, overlooks the collective benefits 

of maintaining alliances with multiple countries in a region. 

U.S. Public Opinion 

U.S. public opinion can be an important factor in debates over the future U.S. role in the world. 

Among o ther things, public opinion can 

 shape the political context (and provide the impulse) for negotiating the terms of, 

and for considering whether to become party to, international agreements; 

 influence debates on whether and how to employ U.S. military force; and 

 influence policymaker decisions on funding levels for defense , international 

affairs activities , and foreign assistance .

Foreign policy specialists, strategists, and policymakers sometimes invoke U.S. public opinion 

poll results in debates on the U.S. role in the world. One issue relating to U.S. public opinion that 

observers are discussing is the extent to which the U.S. public may now believe that U.S. leaders 

have broken a tacit social contract under which the U.S. public has supported the costs of U.S. 

global leadership in return for the promise of receiving certain benefits, particularly steady 

incre ases in real incomes and the standard of living. 

Operation of U.S. Democracy 

Another potential issue for Congress is how the operation of democracy in the United States 

might affect the U.S. role in the world, particularly in terms of defending and promoti ng 

democracy and criticizing and resisting authoritarian an d illiberal forms of government. 

During the Cold War , the effective operation of U.S. democracy at the federal level and lower 

levels was viewed as helpful for arguing on the world stage that Weste rn -style democracy was 

superior, for encouraging other countries to adopt that model, and for inspiring people in the 

Soviet Union and other authoritarian countries to resist authoritarianism and seek change in the 

direction of more democratic forms of gov ernment. The ability of the United State to demonstrate 

the effectiveness of democracy as a form of government was something that in today ’s parlance 

would be termed an element of U.S. soft power. 

The end of the Cold War led to a diminution in the ideologi cal debate about the relative merits of 

democracy versus authoritarianism as form s of government. As a possible consequence, there 

may have been less of a perceived need during this period for focusing on the question of whether 

the operation of U.S. democracy was being viewed positively or otherwise by observers in other 

countries. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 12

The shift in the inte rnational environment over the p ast few years from the post -Cold War era to a 

new situation featuring renewed great power competi tion 6 has led to a renewed ideological debate 

about the relative merits of Western -style democracy versus 21 st -century forms of authoritarian 

and illiberal government. Articles in China ’s state -controlled media, for example, sometimes 

criticize the operati on of U.S. democracy and argue that China ’s form of govern ance is more 

advantageous . The potential issue for Congress is whether, in a period of renewed ideological 

competition , there is now once again a need for focusing more on the question of whether th e

operation of U.S. democracy is being viewed positively or otherwise by observers in other 

countries. 

Potential Implications for Congress as an Institution 

Another issue for Congress is what implications a changed U.S. role in the world might have for 

Con gress as an institution, particularly regarding the preservation and use of congressional 

powers and prerogatives relating to foreign policy, national security, and international economic 

policy, and more generally the role of Congress relative to that of the executive branch in U.S. 

foreign policymaking. Specific matters here include, among other things, the question of war 

powers, the delegation of authority for imposing tariffs, and whether a change in the U.S. role 

would have any implications for congre ssional organization, capacity, and operations .

Reversibility of a Change in U.S. Rol e

Another potential issue for Congress is whether a change in the U.S. role in the world would at 

some point in the future be reversible , s hould U.S. policymakers in the f uture desire to return to a 

U.S. role in the world more like that of the p ast 70 years. Potential questions for Congress include 

the following: 

 What elements of change in the U.S. role might be more reversible, less 

reversible, or irreversible? What elements might be less reversible due to 

technological developments, changes in international power dynamics , or 

changes in U.S. public opinion? 

 How much time and effort would be required to implement a return to a U.S. role 

like that of the past 70 years? 

 How might the issue of reversibility be affected by the amount of time that a 

change in the U.S. role remains in place before an attempt might be made to 

reverse it? 

 How might decisions that Congress and the executive branch make in the near 

term affect the question of potential downstream reversibility? What actions , if 

any, should be taken now with an eye toward preserving an option for reversing 

nearer -term change s in the U.S. role? 

 What are the views of other countries regarding the potential r eversibility of a 

change in the U.S. role, and how might those views affect the foreign policies of 

those countries?       

> 6For more on this shift, see CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense —
> Issues for Congress , by Ronald O'Rourke .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress
> Congressional Research Service 13

# Additional Writings 

As potential sources of additional reading,  Appendix C  presents a list of recent writings on 

whether the United States under the Trump Administration is changing the U.S. role in the world 

and what the implications of such a change might be .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 14

# Appendix A. Glossary of Selected Terms 

Some key terms used in this report include the following: 

# Role in the world 

The term role in the world generally refers in foreign policy discussions to the overall character, 

purpose, or direction of a country ’s participation in international affairs or the country ’s overall 

relationship to the rest of the world. A country ’s role in the world can be taken as a visible 

expression of its grand strategy (see next item). In this report, the term U.S. role in the world is 

often shortened for convenience to U.S. role .

# Grand strategy 

The term grand strategy generally refers in foreign policy discussions to a country ’s overall 

approach for securing its interests and making its way in the world, using all the national 

instr ument s at its disposal, including diplomatic, information al , military, and economi c tools 

(sometimes abbreviated i n U.S. government parlance as DIME). A country ’s leaders might deem 

elements of a country ’s grand strategy to be secret, so that assessments, assumptions, or risks 

included in the strategy are not revealed to potential adversaries. Consequently, a country ’s

leaders might say relatively little in public about the country ’s grand strategy. As mentioned 

above, however, a country ’s role in the world can be taken as a visible expression of its grand 

strategy. For the United States, grand strategy can be viewed as strategy at a global or 

interregional level, as opposed to U.S. strategies for individual regions, countries, or issues. 

# International order /world order 

The term international order or world order generally refers in foreign policy discussions to the 

collection of organizations, institutions, treaties, rules, norms , and practices that are intended to 

organize, structure, and regulate internati onal relations during a given historical period. 

International orders tend to be established by major world powers, particularly in the years 

following wars between major powers, though they can also emerge at other times. Though often 

referred to as if th ey are fully developed or firmly established situations, international orders are 

usually incomplete, partly aspirational, sometimes violated by their supporters, rejected (or at 

least not suppo rted) by certain states and non state actors, and subject to va rious stresses and 

challenges. 

# Unipolar /bipolar /tripolar /multipolar 

In foreign policy discussions, terms like unipolar , bipolar , tripolar , and multipolar are sometimes 

used to refer to the number of top -tier world powers whose actions tend to characterize or give 

structure to a given historical period ’s international security situation. The Col d War that lasted 

from the late 1940s to the late 1980s or earl y 1990s is usually described as a bipolar situation 

featuring a competition between two superpowers (the United States and the Soviet Union) and 

their allies. The post -Cold War era, which followed the Cold War, is sometimes described as the 

unipolar moment , with the United States being the unipolar power, meani ng the world ’s sole 

superpower. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 15

As discussed in another CRS report, 7 observers have concluded that in recent years, there has 

been a shift from the post -Cold War era to a new international security si tuation characterized by 

renewed great power competition between the United States, China, and Russia, leading 

observers to refer to the new situation as a tripolar or multipolar world. Observers who might list 

additional cou ntries (or groups of countries, such as the European Union) as additional top -tier 

world powers, along with the United States, China, and Russia, might also use the term 

multipolar. 

# Eurasia 

The term Eurasia is used in this report to refer to the entire land mass that encompasses both 

Eu rope and Asia, including its fringing islands, extending from Portugal on its western end to 

Japan on its eastern end, and from Russia ’s Arctic coast on its northern edge to India on its 

southern edge, and encompassing all the lands and countries in betwee n, including those of 

Central Asia, Southwest Asia, South Asia, and Southeast Asia. Eurasia ’s fringing islands include, 

among others, the United Kingdom and Ireland in Europe, Sri Lanka in the Indian Ocean, the 

archipelagic countries of Southeast Asia , and Japan . There are also other definitions of Eurasia, 

some of which are more specialized and refer to subsets of the broad area described above. 

# Regional hegemon 

The term regional hegemon generally refers to a country so powerful relative to the other 

count ries in its region that it can dominate the affairs of that region and compel other countries in 

th at region to support (or at least not oppose) the hegemon ’s key policy goals. The United States 

is generally considered to have established itself in the 19 th century as the heg emon of the 

Western Hemisphere. 

# Spheres -of -influence world 

The term spheres -of -influence world generally refers to a world that, in terms of its structure of 

international relations, is divided into multiple regions (i.e., spheres), eac h with its own hegemon. 

A spheres -of -influence world, like a multipolar world, is characterized by having multiple top -tier 

powers. In a spheres -of -influence world, however, at least some of those top -tier powers have 

achieved a status of regional hegemon, while in a multipolar world, few or none of those major 

world powers (other than the United States, the regional hegemon of the Western Hemisphere) 

have achieved a status of regional hegemon. As a result, in a spheres -of -influence world, 

international rel ations are more highly segmented on a regional basis than they are in a multipolar 

world. 

# Geopolitics 

The term geopolitics is often used as a synonym for international politics or for strategy relating 

to international politics. More specifically, it refers to the influence of basic geographic features 

on international relations, and to the analysis of international relations from a perspective that 

places a strong emphasis on the influ ence of such geographic features. Basic geographic features 

involved in geopolitical analysis include things such as the relative sizes and locations of 

countries or land masses; the locations of key resources such as oil or water; geographic barriers      

> 7CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense —Issues for Congress , by Ronald
> O'Rourke .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress
> Congressional Research Service 16

such as oceans, deserts, and mountain ranges; and key transportation links such as roads, 

railways, and waterways. 

# Hard power and soft power 

In foreign policy discussions, the term hard power generally refers to coercive power, particularly 

military and economic power , while the term soft power generally refers to the ability to persuade 

or attract support, particularly through diplomacy, development assistance, support for 

international organizations, education and cultural exchanges, and the international popularity of 

cultural elements such as music, movies, television shows, and literature .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 17

# Appendix B. Past U.S. Role vs. More 

# Restrained  Role 

This appendix provides additional discussion on the debate over whether the Unite d States should 

attempt to continue playing the active internationalist r ole that it has played for the p ast 70 years, 

or instead adopt a more restrained role that reduces U. S. involvement in world affairs .

Among U.S. strategists and foreign policy special ists, advocat es of a more restrained U.S. role 

include (to cite a few examples) Andrew Bacevich, Doug Bandow, Ted Galen Carpenter, John 

Mearsheimer, Barry Posen, Christopher Preble, William Ruger, and Stephen Walt. The se and 

other authors have offered mult iple v ariations on the idea of a more restrained U.S. role . Terms 

such as offshore balancing , offshore control , realism , strategy of restraint , or retrenchment have 

been used to describe some of these variations. 8 These v ariations on the idea of a more res trained 

U.S. role would not necessarily match in their details a change d U.S. role that might be pursued 

by the Trump Administration .9

# Arguments in Favor of a More Restrained U.S. Role 

Observers advocating a more restrained U.S. role in the world make various arguments regarding 

the United States and other countries. Arguments that they make relating to the United States 

include the following: 

 Costs and benefits. In terms of human casualties, financial and economic 

impacts, diplomatic impacts, and impac ts on domestic U.S. values, politics, and 

society, the costs to the United States of defending and promoting the liberal 

international order have been underestimated and the benefits have been 

overestimated. U.S. interventions in the security affairs of Eu rasia have 

frequently been more costly and/or less successful than anticipated, making a 

strategy of intervening less cost -effective in practice than in theory. U.S. 

interventions can also draw the United States into conflicts involving other 

countries ove r issues that are not vital or important U.S. interests. 

 Capacity. Given projections regarding future U.S. budget deficits and debt, the 

United States in coming years will no longer be able to afford to play as 

expansive a role in the world as it has playe d for the past 70 years. 

Overextending U.S. participation in international affairs could lead to excessive  

> 8

The terms offshore balancing and offshore control refer in general to a policy in wh ich the United States, in effect, 

stands off the shore of Eurasia and engages in the security affairs of Eurasia less frequently, less directly, or less 

expansively. The term retrenchment is more often used by critic s of these proposed approaches.  

> 9

Debate about this dimension of the U.S. role in the world is not limited to one between those who favor continued 

extensive engagement along the lines of the past 70 years and those who prefer some form of a more restrained role —

other options are also being prom oted. For example, one analyst and former White House aide advocates an approach 

that differ s from both retrenchment and re assertion, an approach he labels “re -calibration” to the “geopolitical, 

economic, technological and other dynamics driving th e 21 st -century world.” Such an approach, he argues, would entail 

a reappraisal of U.S. interests, a reassessment of U.S. power, and a repositioning of U.S. leadership. (See Bruce 

Jentleson, “Apart, Atop, Amidst: America in the World,” War on the Rocks, January 201 7.) 

As another example, a different analyst argues in favor of a U.S. role based on “a better nationalism” —what he 

describes as a more benign and constructive form that “would not dismantle the post -war order and America’s post war 

project, but would take a harder -edged and more disciplined approach to asserting U.S. interests.” (Hal Brands, “U.S. 

Grand Strategy in an Age of Nationalism: Fortress American and it Alternatives,” Washington Quarterly , Spring 2017 :

73 -93. )U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 18

amounts of federal debt and inadequately addressed domestic problems, leaving 

the United States poorly positioned for sustaining any future desired l evel of 

international engagement. 

 Past 70 years as a historical aberration. The U.S. role of the past 70 years is an 

aberration when viewed against the U.S. historical record dating back to 1776, 

which is a history characterized more by periods of restrain t than by periods of 

high levels of international engagement. Returning to a more restrained U.S. role 

would thus return U.S. policy to what is, historically, a more traditional policy for 

the United States. 

 Moral standing. The United States has not always lived up to its own ideals, and 

consequently lacks sufficient moral standing to pursue a role that involves 

imposing its values and will on other countries. Attempting to do that through an 

interventionist policy can also lead to an erosion of those value s at home. 

 Public opinion. It is not clear that U.S. public opinion supports the idea of 

attempting to maintain a U.S. role in the world as expansive as that of the past 70 

years, particularly if it means making trade -offs against devoting resources to 

dom estic U.S. priorities. In public opinion polls, Americans o ften express support 

for a more restrained U.S. role, particularly on issues such as whether the United 

States should act as the world ’s police force, funding levels for U.S. foreign 

assistance pro grams, U.S. participation in (and financial support for) international 

organizations, and U.S. defense expenditures for defending allies. 

Arguments that these observers make relating to other countries include the following: 

 Growing wealth and power . Given the rapid growth in wealth and power in 

recent years of China and other countries, the United States is no longer as 

dominant globally as it once was, and is becoming less dominant over time, 

which will make it increasingly difficult or expensive and/or l ess appropriate for 

the United States to attempt to continue playing a role of global leadership. 

 Ideas about international order. Other world powers, such as China, have their 

own ideas about international order, and these ideas do not match all aspects o f

the current liberal international order. The United States should acknowledge the 

changing global distribution of power and work with China and other countries to 

define a new international order that incorporates ideas from these other 

countries. 

 Eurasi a as self -regulating. Given the growth in the economies of U.S. allies and 

partners in Europe and Asia since World War II, these allies and partners are now 

more capable of looking after their own security needs, and Eurasia can now be 

more self -regulating in terms of preventing the emergence of regional hegemons 

in Eurasia. Consequently, the level of U.S. intervention in the affairs of Eurasia 

can be reduced without incurring undue risk that regional hegemons will emerge 

there. The current substantial leve l of U.S. intervention in the affairs of Eurasia 

discourage s countries in Eurasia from acting more fully on their own to prevent 

the emergence of regional hegemons. 

 Hegemons and spheres of influence . Even if one or more regional hegemons 

were to emerge in Eurasia, this would not pose an unacceptable situation for the 

United States —vital U.S. interests could still be defended. Similarly, the 

emergence of a spheres -of -influence world need not be unacceptable for the U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 19

United States, because such a world would a gain not necessarily be incompatible 

with vital U.S. interests. 

# Arguments in Favor of Continuing U.S. Role of the Past 70 Years 

Observers who support a continuation of the U.S. role in the world of the past 70 years generally 

reject the above arguments and argue the opposite. Arguments that these observers make relating 

to the United States include the following: 

 Costs and benefits. Although the costs to the United States of its role in the 

world over the p ast 70 years have been substantial, the benefits have been 

greater . The benefits are so long -standing that they can easily be taken for 

granted or underestimated. U.S. interventions in the security affairs of Eurasia, 

though not without significant costs a nd errors, ha ve been successful in 

preventing wars between major powers and defending and promoting vital U.S. 

interests and values. A more restrained U.S. role in the world might be less 

expensive for the United States in the short run, but would create a risk of 

damaging U.S. security, liberty, and prosperity over the longer run by risking the 

emergence of regional hegemons or a spheres -of -influence world. 

 Capacity. Projections regarding future U.S. budget deficits and debt need to be 

taken into account, but even in a context of limits on U.S. resources, the United 

States is a wealthy country that can choose to play an expansive role in 

international affairs, and the costs to the United States of playing a more 

restrained role in world affairs may in the l ong run be much greater than the costs 

of playing a more expansive role. Projections regarding future U.S. budget 

deficits and debt are driven primarily by decisions on revenues and domestic 

mandatory expenditures rather than by decisions on defense and fo reign -policy -

related expenditures. Consequently, these projections are an argument for getting 

the country ’s fiscal house in order primarily in terms of revenues and domestic 

mandatory expenditures, rat her than an argument for a more restrained U.S. role 

in the world. 

 Past 70 years as a historical aberration. Although a restrained U.S. foreign 

policy may have been appropriate for the United States in the 18 th and 19 th 

centuries, the world of the 18 th and 19 th centuries was quite different. For 

example, give n changes in communication, transportation, and military 

technologies since the 18 th and 19 th centuries, the Atlantic and Pacific oceans are 

much less effective as geographic buffers between the United States and Eurasia 

today than they were in the 18 th an d 19 th centuries. E xperiences in more recent 

decades (including World Wars I and II and the Cold War) show that a more 

restrained U.S. foreign policy would now be riskier or more costly over the long 

run than an engaged U.S. foreign policy. 

 Moral standing. The United States, though not perfect, retains ample moral 

authority —and responsi bility —to act as a world leader, particularly in 

comparison to authoritarian countries such as China or Russia. 

 Public opinion. Other public opinion poll results show that Americans support a 

U.S. global leadership role. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 20

Arguments that these observers make relating to other countries include the following: 

 Growing wealth and power . Although the wealth and power of countries such 

as China have grown considerably in recent years, future rates of growth for 

those countries are open to question. China faces the prospect of declining rates 

of economic growth and the aging and eventual sh rinkage of its population, while 

Russia has a relatively small economy and is experiencing demographic decline. 

The United States has one of the most favorable demographic situations of any 

major power, and retains numerous advantages in terms of economic and 

financial strength, military power, technology, and capacity for innovation. 

Although the United States is no longer as dominant globally as it once was, it 

remains the world ’s most powerful country, particularly when all dimensions of 

power are taken into consideration. 

 Ideas about international order. The liberal international order reflects U.S. 

interests and values; a renegotiated international order incorporating ideas from 

authoritarian countries such as China would produce a world less conducive to 

defending and promoting U.S. interests and values. Americans have long lived in 

a world reflecting U.S. interests and values and would not welcome a world 

incorporating Chinese values on issues such as the rule of law; the scope of civil 

society; politi cal and human rights; freedom of speech, the press, and 

information; and privacy and surveillance. 

 Eurasia as self -regulating. Eurasia historically has not been self -regulating in 

terms of preventing the emergence of regional hegemons, and the idea that it will 

become self -regulating in the future is a risky and untested proposition. 

 Hegemons and spheres of influence . A regional hegemon in Eurasia would have 

enough economic and other power to be able to threaten vital U.S. interests. In 

addition to threaten ing U.S. access to the economies of Eurasia, a spheres -of -

influence world would be prone to war because regional hegemons historically 

are never satisfied with the extent of their hegemonic domains and eventually 

seek to expand them, coming into conflict w ith other hegemons. Leaders of 

regional hegemons are also prone to misjudgment and miscalculation regarding 

where their spheres collide. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 21

# Appendix C. Additional Writings 

As potential sources of additional reading, this appendix presents a list of writings over the p ast 

year or so on whether the United States under the Trump Administration is changing the U.S. role 

in the world and what the implica tions of such a change might be, listed in chronological order, 

with the most recent on top. Writing s from more than a year a go can be found in earlier versions 

of this report. 

Ted Anthony, “After Virus, How Will Americans ’ View of the World Change? ” Washington Post ,

April 6, 2020. 

Zachery Tyson Brown, “America ’s National Security Software Needs an Upgrade, The Outdated 

U.S. Security Apparatus Was Completely Unprepared for the Coronavirus Pandemic. ” Foreign 

Policy , April 6, 2020. 

Kyle Harper, “The Coronavirus Is Accelerating History Past the Breaking Point, Every Era Gets 

the Infectious Diseases —and the Resulting Political Upheaval —It Has Coming. ” Foreign Policy ,

April 6, 2020. 

James Lamond , “ Authoritarian Regimes Seek To Take Advantage of the Coronavirus Pandemic ,” 

Center for America n Progress, April 6, 2020. 

Victor Davis Hanson , “ Don ’t Be Fooled: Trump Is Leading the World Against Coronavirus ,” 

National Interest , April 5, 2020. 

Nadia Schadlow, “Consider the Possibility That Trump Is Right About China, Critics Are Letting 

Their Disdai n for the President Blind Them to Geopolitical Realities. ” Atlantic , April 5, 2020 .

Stratfor Worldview , “ Will the Coronavirus Ruin Countries ’ Ability to Wage War? ” National 

Interest , April 5, 2020. 

Anthony Vinci and Nadia Schadlow, “Time for the US to decl are independence from China ,” 

Washington Examiner , April 5, 2020. 

Andy Blatchford, “Trump's Moves to Hold Medical Supplies Tip Trudeau to China ,” Politico ,

April 4 (updated April 5), 2020. 

Anthony Faiola , Lindzi Wessel , and Shibani Mahtani , “ Coronavirus Chills Protests from Chile to 

Hong Kong to Iraq, Forcing Activists to Innovate ,” Washington Post , April 4, 2020 .

Seth J. Frantzman , “ Coronavirus Is Empowering Dictators And Changing The World Order ,”

National Interest , April 4, 2020. 

Lara Jakes, “When the F ace of America Falls Ill: A Virus ’s Toll on Diplomats ,” New York Times ,

April 4, 2020. 

Matthew Lee and Edith M. Lederer , “ Global Diplomacy Under the Gun in The Time of 

Ccoronavirus, ” Associated Press , April 4, 2020 .

Stratfor Worldview, “How the Coronavirus Pandemic Is Changing the World —and the Future ,”

National Interest , April 4, 2020. 

Bradley A. Thayer and Lianchao Han , “ The Consequences of the Pandemic for China and the 

World ,” National Interest , April 4, 2020 .

Thomas Wright, “Stretching the Internationa l Order to Its Breaking Point, The Greatest Error 

That Geopolitical Analysts Can Make May Be Believing That the Crisis Will Be Over in Three to 

Four Months. ” Atlantic , April 4, 2020 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 22

Emma Ashfo rd and Matthew Kroenig, ” Will Trump ’s Pandemic Response Help or Harm U.S. 

Power? Russia and China Are Stepping in While the United States and Europe Fumble. ” Foreign 

Policy , April 3, 2020. 

Vanda Felbab -Brown , “ What Coronavirus Means for Online Fraud, Forced Sex, Drug Smuggling 

and Wildlife Trafficking ,” Lawfare , April 3, 2020 .

James Jay Carafano , “ America's Post -Coronavirus China Syndrome ,” Heritage Foundation, April 

3, 2020. 

Henry A. Kissinger, “The Coronavirus Pandemic Will Forever Alter the World Order ,” Wall Street 

Journal , Apr il 3, 2020. 

Gregory D. Koblentz and Michael Hunzeker, “National Security in the Age of Pandemics ,” 

Defense One , April 3, 2020. 

Matthew Kroenig, “Why the U.S. Will Outcompete China, The Faith in Autocratic Ascendance 

and Democratic Decline Is Contrary to Hi storical Fact. ” Atlantic , April 3, 2020 .

Joshua Kurlantzick, “Dictators Are Using the Coronavirus to Strengthen Their Grip on Power ,” 

Washington Post , April 3, 2020. 

Edward Lucas, “China Was Once the Cradle of the Coronavirus Pandemic But It Has Bounced 

Back with Astonishing Speed, Writes E dward Lucas A s He Reveals the Country May Have Won 

the War for Global Supremacy As Well ,” Daily Mail (UK) , April 3, 2020 .

Bruno Maçães , “ China Wants to Use the Coronavirus to Take Over the World ,” National Review ,

April 3, 2020. 

Minxin Pei , “ China ’s Coming Upheaval, Competition, the Coronavirus, and the Weakness of Xi 

Jinping, ” Foreign Affairs , April 3, 2020 .

Stephen M. Walt, “The United States Can Still Win the Coronavirus Pandemic ,” Foreign Policy ,

April 3, 2020. 

Riley Walters, “Decreasing U.S. -China Trade Is Worrisome ,” Heritage Foundation , April 3, 2020 .

Cara Anna, “Extremists See Global Chaos from Virus As An Opportunity, ” Associated Press ,

April 2, 2020. 

Ryan Broderick, “After The Coronavirus Passes, Your World Will Not Go Back To Normal, 

Before the Pandemic Began, the Systems That Govern O ur World Were Brittle. Today, Th ey Are 

Broken. When We Emerge, the World Will Be Different, and So Will We. ” Buzzfeed News , April 

2, 2020. 

Rick Gladstone, “U.N. Security Council ‘Mi ssing In Action ’ in Coronavirus Fight ,” New York 

Times , April 2, 2020. 

Susan B. Glasser, “The Coronavirus Is the World ’s Only Superpower, Trump ’s America? Not so 

Much. ” New Yorker , April 2, 2020 .

Robbie Gramer and C olum Lynch , “ In Global Leadership Void on Pandemic, Critics Ask: 

Where ’s Pompeo? ” Foreign Policy , April 2, 2020 .

Ash Jain, “Trump Just Missed a Perfect Opportunity to Reassert American Leadership, The G -20 

helped beat Ebola. Why can ’t it do the same for the coronavirus? ” Foreign Policy , April 2, 2020 .

James Jay Carafano , “ Coronavirus and Regime Change —Will This Plague Topple Nations Great 

and Small? ” Heritage Foundation , April 1, 2020 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 23

Joh n Haltiwanger, “The Coronavirus Just Created a New Dictator in Europe and Has Emboldened 

the Toxic Behavior of Authoritarians Worldwide ,” Business Insid er, April 1, 2020 .

Walter Russell Mead, “The Trump -Russia Showdown Over Oil ,” Wall Street Journal , April 1, 

2020. 

Luke McGee, “Power -Hungry Leaders Are Itching to Exploit the Coronavirus Crisis ,” CNN ,

Apr il 1, 2020. 

Jacob Mchangama and S arah McLaughlin , “Coronavirus Has Started a Censorship Pandemic ,” 

Foreign Policy , April 1, 2020. 

Tom O’Connor and Naveed Jamali , “ As U.S. S truggles to Fight Coronavirus, China, Russia See 

Opportunity to Gain Global Power ,” Newsweek , April 1, 2020 .

Matthew Petti, “Pompeo: China Will Be ‘True Strategic Competitor ’ After Coronavirus ,”

National Interest , April 1, 2020. 

Jeff M. Smith , “ How America Is Leading the "Quad Plus" Group of 7 Countries in Fighting the 

Coronavirus ,” Herit age Foundation, April 1, 2020 .

Adam Tooze, “America Is Ailing —and Leading the World, The Coronavirus Pandemic Has Been 

a Humiliation for the United States —and Confirmation of Its Unmatched International Power. ”

Foreign Policy , April 1, 2020. 

Philip Wen and Drew Hinshaw , “ China Asserts Claim to Global Leadership, Mask by Mask ,” 

Wall Street Journal , April 1, 2020. 

George Packer, “The President Is Winning His War on American Institutions, ” Atlantic , April 

2020. 

David Barno and Nora Bensahel, “After the Pandemic: America and National Security in a 

Changed World ,” War on the Rocks , March 31 , 2020 .

Max Boot, “Covid -19 is Killing Off Our Traditional Notions of National Defense ,” Washington 

Post , March 31, 2020. 

Nic Cheeseman , “ The Coronavirus Could Topple Gov ernments Around the World ,” Foreign 

Policy , March 31, 2020. 

Ian Goldin and Robert Muggah , “ End of International Cooperation? How Coronavirus Has 

Changed the World Permanently ,” National Interest , March 31 , 2020 .

Ruchir Sharma , “ The Comeback Nation, U.S. Ec onomic Supremacy Has Repeatedly Proved 

Declinists Wrong, ” Foreign Affairs , March 31 , 2020 .

Carolyn Whitzman , “ Could Coronavirus Lead To a Fairer World? ” National Interest , March 31, 

2020. 

Doug Bando w, “Donald Trump Needs to Focus on Coronavirus (Not Fighting with China and the 

EU) ,” National Interest , March 30 , 2020 .

Florian Bieber, “Authoritarianism in the Time of the Coronavirus, The Pandemic Offers 

Dictators —and Democracies Alike —an Opportunity for Abuse. ” Foreign Policy , March 30, 

2020. 

Daniel W. Drezner, “The Most Counterintuitive Prediction about World Politics and the 

Coronavirus, What If Nothing Changes? ” Washington Post , March 30 , 2020 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 24

Selam Gebrekidan, “For Autocrats, and Others, Coronavirus Is a Chance to Grab Even More 

Power ,” New York Tim es , March 30 , 2020 .

Daniel J. Ikenson , “ The Coronavirus Crisis Is the Worst Time For Trump To Put Up Trade 

Barriers ,” National Interest , March 30 , 2020 .

Elizabeth Kolbert , “ Pandemics and the Shape of Human History, Outbreaks Have Sparked Riots 

and Propelle d Public -Health Innovations, Prefigured Revolutions and Redrawn Maps. ” New 

Yorker , March 20, 2020. 

Simon Lester, “The Coronavirus Crisis Is the Right Time For Free Trade ,” National Interest ,

March 30, 2020. 

Simon Mair, “Why Coronavirus May Change the World (For Better or Worse) ,” National Interest ,

March 30, 2020. 

Walter Russell Mead, “U.S. Leadership Will Survive Coronavirus ,” Wall Street Journal , March 

30, 2020. 

Chris Murphy, “The U.S. Government Must Prepare Now for the Next Pandemic ,” Foreign 

Policy , March 30, 2020. 

Matthew Petti , “ Lincoln Chafee: Stop Endless Wars To Deal With Coronavirus Pandemic ,” 

National Interest , March 30, 2020. 

Josh Rogin, “The National Security Council Sounded Early Alarms about the Coronavirus ,” 

Washington Post , March 30, 2020 .

Michael Rubin, “Washington Post ’s Broadside against Mike Pompeo Is Wi ldly Unfair ,” 

Washington Examiner , March 30, 2020. (Responds to the March 29, 2020, writing below by 

Jackson Diehl.) 

Jeff M. Smith, “How America Is Leading the ‘Quad Plus ’ Group of Seven Countries in Fighting 

the Coronavirus ,” National Interest , March 30 , 2020 .

Wang Wen , “ COVID -19 Blunders Signal End of ‘American Century ,’” Global Times (China) ,

March 30, 2020. 

Jackson Diehl, “Pompeo ’s Pandemic Performance Ensures His Place Among the Worst 

Secretaries of State Ever ,” Washington Post , March 29, 2020. (For a response, see the March 30, 

2020, writing above by Michael Rubin.) 

Brett McGurk, “America Should Build an International Coalition Now; The United States Has an 

Urgent Interest in Filling the Global Leadership Void During This Stateless Scourge. ” Atlantic ,

March 29, 2020. 

Nahal Toosi, “Coronavirus Rattles America ’s National Security Priesthood ,” Politico Pro , March 

29, 2020. 

Ted Galen Carpenter, “Donald Trump Offered to Help North Korea on Coronavirus. Why Not 

Iran? ” National Interest , March 27 , 2020 .

David Frum, “The Coronavirus Is Demonstrating the Value of Globalization ,” Atlantic , March 27, 

2020. 

Doug Bandow, “Now ’s The Time To Become A Truly ‘America First ’ Military, With Coronavirus 

Killing the Economy, We Can No Longer Afford to Project Power Everywhere. ” American 

Conservative , March 26, 2020. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 25

Zack Beauchamp , “ The Myth of Authoritarian Coronavirus Supremacy ,” Vox , March 26 , 2020 .

Fred Kaplan, “The Coronavirus Hasn ’t Stopped Trump From Undermining Our National 

Security ,” Slat e, March 26 , 2020 .

Nicholas Mulder, “The Coronavirus War Economy Will Change the World ,” Foreign Policy ,

March 26, 2020. 

Joseph S. Nye, Jr., “COVID -19 ’s Painful Lesson about Strategy and Power ,” War on the Rocks ,

March 26, 2020. 

Paul R. Pillar, “Donald Trump's Nationalist Response to the Coronavirus ,” National Interest ,

March 26, 2020. 

Josh Rogin, “America ’s $2 Trillion Coronavirus Stimulus Package Ignores the Rest of the 

World ,” Washington Post , M arch 26 , 2020 .

Ali Wyne, “Why China and the U.S. Can ’t Cooperate to Fight Coronavirus ,” Washington Post ,

March 26, 2020. 

Doug Bandow, “How the Coronavirus Shows North Korea Doesn ’t Matter That Much to 

America ,” National Interest , March 25 , 2020 .

Noah Barkin, “Germany ’s Strategic Gray Zone With China ,” Carnegie Endowment for 

International Peace , March 25, 2020. 

Kevin Baron, “Trump Could Have Led the World Against the Coronavirus ,” Defense One , March 

25, 2020. 

Pete McKenzie, “America ’s Allies Are Becomin g a Nuclear -Proliferation Threat ,” Defense One ,

March 25, 2020. 

Peter Rough, “How China is Exploiting the Coronavirus to Weaken Democracies ,” Foreign 

Policy , March 25, 2020. 

Micah Zenko, “The Coronavirus Is the Worst Intelligence Failure in U.S. History ,” Foreign 

Policy , March 25, 2020. 

James Jay Carafano, “Great Power Competition After the Coronavirus Crisis: What Should 

America Do? ” National Interest , March 24 , 2020 .

Paul Haenle and L ucas Tcheyan , “ U.S. -China Cooperation on Coronavirus Hampered by 

Propaga nda War ,” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, March 24, 2020. 

Mark Hannah, “Will America ’s Coronavirus Response Inspire Countries to Follow China ’s

Model? ” National Interest , March 24 , 2020 .

Jonathan Marcus, “Coronavirus: US -China Battle Behind the Scenes ,” BBC News , March 24, 

2020. 

Mira Rapp -Hooper, “China, America, and the International Order After the Pandemic ,” War on 

the Rocks , March 24, 2020. 

Brett Schaefer and Charles Stimson , “ How the U.S. Should Respond to the ICC ’s Decision to 

Investigate Americans ,” Heritage Foundation, March 24, 2020. 

Anne Applebaum , “ The People in Charge See an Opportunity, Around the World, Rulers Are 

Using the Pandemic As An Excuse to Grab More Power. And the Public Is Going Along with It. ”

Atlanti c, March 23, 2020. 

Do ug Bandow, “A War of Words With China Helps Nobody ,” Foreign Policy , March 23 , 2020 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 26

Dan Blumenthal , “ Donald Trump ’s China Problem Has Arrived ,” National Interest , March 23, 

2020. 

Elisabeth Braw, “As the West Panics, Putin Is Watching ,” Foreign Policy , Mar ch 23 , 2020 .

Emily de La Bruyere and Nathan Picarsic , “ Competition Meets Crisis: China ’s Perverse 

Opportunity and a Strategic Response ,” National Interest , March 23 , 2020 .

Editorial Board, “The Coronavirus Pandemic May Mark a Decline in U.S. Leadership ,” 

Washington Post , March 23, 2020. 

Olivia Enos, “The U.S. Should Do More to Tackle Forced Labor in Xinjiang ,” Heritage 

Foundation, March 23, 2020. 

Azeem Ibrahim , “ China ’s Debt Diplomacy Will Get a Coronavirus Boost ,” Foreign Policy ,

March 23, 2020. 

Matthew K roenig , “ Pandemics Can Fast Forward the Rise and Fall of Great Powers ,” National 

Interest , March 23, 2020. 

Stephen S. Roach and Daniel J. Arbess , “ US Lives and Economic Stability Are Threatened by 

Coronavirus Conflict with China ,” The Hill , March 23 , 2020 .

Stephen M. Walt, “The Death of American Competence, Washington ’s Reputation for Expertise 

Has Been One of the Greatest Sources of Its Power. The Coronavirus Pandemic May End It for 

Good. ” Foreign Policy , March 23 , 2020 .

Doug Bandow, “Coronavirus Means Ame rica Is Really Broke. Trump Should Get the Hell Out of 

Syria. ” National Interest , March 22 , 2020 .

Gordon G. Chang, “Donald Trump Can't Cooperate with China on Coronavirus ,” National 

Interest , March 22, 2020. 

Michael Crowley, Edward Wong and Lara Jakes , “ Coronavirus Drives the U.S. and China Deeper 

Into Global Power Struggle ,” New York Times , March 22 , 2020 .

Melinda Haring and Doug Klain , “ Why Autocrats Love Coronavirus ,” National Interest , March 

22, 2020. 

Ronald E. Neumann and Marc Grossma n, “More US Dipl omats Need to Be Overseas to Best 

Serve America ,” The Hill , March 22 , 2020 .

Stratfor Worldv iew, “Coronavirus Could Lead To Lots of This in the Near Future ,” National 

Interest, March 22, 2020. (The article discusses potential actions by non -state actors.) 

John Allen et al. , “ How the World Will Look a fter the Coronavirus Pandemic ,” Foreign Policy ,

March 20, 2020. 

James Jay Carafano, “Saving the World ’s International Organizations ,” Heritage Foundation ,

March 20, 2020. 

Ari Cicurel, “'Endless Wars ’ and Political Warfare ,” The Hill , March 20 , 2020 .

Steven Erlanger, “Another Virus Victim: The U.S. as a Global Leader in a Time of Crisis ,” New 

York Times , March 20 (updated March 22), 2020. 

Richard Fontaine, “Virus Competition Is Wrecking China -U.S. Cooperatio n Hopes, Coronavirus 

Efforts Are A New Battlefront —and Beijing Is the Only One in the Game. ” Foreign Policy ,

March 20, 2020. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 27

James Holmes, “Beware of Pandemic America, Note to China and Russia: Despite Appearances, 

the Time of Coronavirus May Not Be an Opp ortune Time for You to Chisel Away at America ’s

Global Standing. ” National Interest , March 20 , 2020 .

Yang Jiang, “China ’s Moment of Vindication ,” Danish Institute for International Studies, March 

20, 2020. 

Suzanne Nossel, “China Is Fighting the Coronavirus Propaganda War to Win ,” Foreign Polic y, 

March 20, 2020. 

Kori Schake, “The Damage That ‘America First ’ Has Done ,” Atlantic , March 20 , 2020 .

Gary J. Schmitt, “National Security and the Pandemic of 2020 ,” American Interest , March 20, 

2020. 

Katie Bo Williams, “US -China Tensions Heat Up As Beijing Seeks Leadership Role, ” Defense 

One , March 20, 2020. 

Doug Bandow, “On Iraq, Is Donald J. Trump Morphing Into George W. Bush? ” American 

Conservative , March19, 2020. 

David Ignatius, “The Coronavirus Is A Test of Our National Character ,” Washington Post , March 

19, 2020. 

David E. Sanger, David D. Kirkpatrick, Sui -Lee Wee , and Katrin Bennhold , “ Search for 

Coronavirus Vaccine Becomes a Global Competition, The United States, China and Europe are 

battling to be the first to find a cure, bringing a nationalist element to a worldwide crisis. ” New 

York Times , March 19, 2020. 

Morten Soendergaard Larsen and R obbie Gramer , “ China Casts Itself as Global Savior While 

U.S. and EU Focus on Virus at Home ,” Foreign Policy , March 19 , 2020 .

Bradley A. Thayer and Lianchao Han , “ China ’s Coronavirus Plan: Create a ‘Silk Road ’ of Health 

Care Leading Towards World Dominance ,” National Interest , March 19 , 2020 .

Alan Crawford and Peter Martin , “ China Showers Europe With Virus Aid W hile Sparring With 

Trump ,” Bloomberg , March 19 , 2020 .

Daniel B. Baer, “The Virus Has Exposed the Recklessness of Trump ’s ‘America First, ’” Foreign 

Policy , March 18, 2020. 

Dan Blumenthal, “Coronavirus and the Future of US -China Geopolitical Competition: Wha t We

Know So Far ,” Center for Strategic and International Studies , March 18 , 2020 .

Kurt M. Campbell and Rush Doshi , “ The Coronavirus Could Reshape Global Order, China Is 

Maneuvering for International Leadership as the United States Falters, ” Foreign Affair s, March 

18, 2020. 

Joseph Haboush , “ The US Must Remain Engaged in Lebanon or Risk Russian and Chinese 

Gains ,” Middle East Institute, March 18, 2020. 

Walter Russell Mead , “ Beijing Escalates the New Cold War ,” Wall Street Journal , March 18, 

2020. 

Mie Oba, “Coronavirus and the Future of Globalization ,” Diplomat , March 18 , 2020 .

Wilson VornDick, “America Must Have a Grander Strategy for China, ” National Interest , March 

16, 2020. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 28

Eva Siewert, “How China Is Expanding Beyond Western Institutions ,” Diplomat , March 16, 

2020. 

Dov S. Zakheim, “NATO ’s Budget Virus: How the Pandemic Could Slash Military Spending ,” 

The Hill , March 16, 2020. 

Joshua Meservey and Alexander St. Leger, “America ’s Opportunity to Quell Russian Meddling in 

Libya ,” Heritage Foundation, March 13, 2020 .

Doug Bandow, “Not Even South Korea Deserves Unlimited Defense From America ,” American 

Conservative , March 12, 2020. 

Ted Galen Carpenter, “Bernie Sanders Is a Foreign Policy Disappointment; A Sanders Presidency 

Would Likely Have Been a Major Disappoin tment to Americans Who Want a More Restrained 

and Sensible Foreign Policy. ” National Interest , March 12 , 2020 .

Philippe Legrain Marc, “The Coronavirus Is Killing Globalization as We Know It ,” Foreign 

Policy , March 12, 2020. 

James Jay Carafano , “ Syria Is the War Nobody Wins, Except Maybe Trump ,” Heritage 

Foundation, March 11, 2020. 

James Andrew Lewis, “Strategy After Deterrence, ” Center for Strategic and International Studies, 

March 11, 2020. 

Doug Bandow, “Trump Administration Policy Inadvertently Aids the Xi Government ,” Cato 

Institute , March 10, 2020. 

David Ignatius, “Trump ’s Pushback Against China Pays Off with An Important Win, ” Washington 

Post , March 10, 2020. 

Daniel Kochis , “ Recent EU Strategic Autonomy Advances Threaten the Transatlantic Link ,” 

Heritage Foundation, March 9, 2020. 

Patrick Tyrrell and Anthony B. Kim , “ Foreign Aid Should Go to Those in Need, Not Ruling 

Elites ,” Heritage Foundation, March 9, 2020. 

Doug Bandow, “The Brutal Tragedy of Idlib: Why the U.S. Should Stay out of Syria and Du mp 

NATO ,” National Interest , March 7, 2020 .

Doug Bandow, “Trump ’s Policy Inadvertently Aids the Xi Government ,” China -US Focus ,

March 6, 2020. 

James Jay Carafano and Daniel Kochis, “The Quiet Success of Trump ’s Politically Appointed 

Ambassadors in Europe ,” Heritage Foundation, March 5, 2020 .

Michael Rubin, “Pompeo ’s State Department Keeps Supporting Islamic Extremists, ” National 

Interest , March 3, 2020. 

Clark Packard, Scott Lincicome, Kimberly Clausing, and Mary Lovely , “ How to Make America ’s

Next Trade Pol icy ,” Bulwark , March 2, 2020 .

Stephen M. Walt, “Grow Up About Dictators, America! ” Foreign Policy , March 2, 2020 .

Peter Harris, “America Alone: Why the Trump Administration Will Pay for Alienating Its 

Strategic Partners, ” National Interest , February 28 , 2020 .

James Jay Carafano , “ 3 Big Takeaways From Trump ’s Successful Trip to India ,” Heritage 

Foundation , February 27, 2020. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 29

Svante E. Cornell and Brenda Shaffer, “The United States Needs to Declare War on Proxies, ”

Foreign Policy , February 27, 2020. 

Scott L incicome , “ Who Are the Real Trade ‘Fundamentalists ’?” Dispatch , February 27 , 2020 .

Philip Stephens, “Donald Trump ’s America Is Threatening the Nuclear Peace, ” Financial Times ,

February 27, 2020. 

Peter Rough, “Europe Is Thinking Harder About Divorcing Ameri ca, ” Foreign Policy , February 

26, 2020. 

Quinta Jurecic and Benjamin Wittes, “Trump ’s Most Dangerous Destruction, ” Atlantic , February 

25, 2020. 

Charles Kenny, “The Case for Closing the Pentagon, ” Politico , February 25 , 2020 .

Keith Johnson, “What Trump Reall y Doesn ’t Get About Trade, ” Foreign Policy , February 24, 

2020. 

Walter Russell Mead, “Does the Arc of History Bend Toward Idlib? ” Wall Street Journal ,

February 24, 2020. 

James Jay Carafano, “Donald Trump: A Great Decision Maker? ” National Interest , February 23, 

2020. 

Ted Galen Carpenter, “How Barack Obama's Good ‘Intentions ’ Destroyed Libya ,” National 

Interest , February 23, 2020. 

Uri Friedman, “What Democrats Aren ’t Admitting About Trump ’s Record, ” Atlantic , February 

22, 2020. 

Kevin Baron, “The West Can ’t Even Agree on Itself, Much Less China, ” Defense One , February 

21, 2020. 

Elisabeth Braw, “Will American Firms Put America First? ” Foreign Policy , February 21 , 2020 .

Doug Bandow, “Will the 2020 Candidates End Our Pointless Wars? ” American Conservative ,

February 20, 2020. 

Theodore Bromund , “ The United States Should Withdraw from the U.N. ’s Programme of Action 

on Small Arms ,” Heritage Foundation, February 20, 2020. 

Agence France -Presse, “Despite Trade Wars, Trump Says US ‘Open for B usiness, ’” Agence 

France -Presse , February 19, 2020. 

Hal Brands, “From Japan to Britain, the World Loves Hosting U.S. Troops, ” Bloomberg ,

February 19, 2020. 

Jeff M. Smith, “Rising Above the Fray: The Trump -Modi Chapter in India -U.S. Relations ,” 

Heritage Foundation, February 19, 2020. 

Olivia Enos, “Why the U.S. Government Should Prioritize the Release of Christian Pastor Wang 

Yi ,” Heritage Foundation, February 18, 2020. 

Nile Gardiner , “ Setting the Record Straight on American Leadership of the West ,” Herita ge 

Foundation, February 18, 2020. 

David J. Lynch, “Trump ’s Recent Trade Moves Show Adversarial Approach Has Only Ju st

Begun, ” Washington Post , February 18 , 2020 .

Uri Friedman, “American Is Alone in Its Cold War With China, ” Atlantic , February 17 , 2020 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 30

Joe l Gehrke, “‘ It Is Dangerous ’: France ’s Macron Startles Allies and Angers US Officials with 

Defen se Proposals, ” Washington Examiner , February 17 , 2020 .

Walter Russell Mead, “Europeans Try to Have It Both Ways, ” Wall Street Journal , February 17, 

2020. 

Gideon Rachman, “Donald Trump ’s Erratic Style of Diplomacy Has a Price, ” Financial Times ,

February 17, 2020. 

Doug Bandow, “Time to Drop Defense Guarantees to the Philippines ,” American Spectator ,

February 16, 2020. 

Michael Birnbaum, Loveday Morris, and John Hudson, “Europe Is Watching the U.S. Presidential 

Campaign —and Holding Its Breath About Trump and Sanders, ” Washington Post , February 16, 

2020. 

Yasmeen Abutaleb and Josh Dawsey, “Trump ’s Soft Touch with China ’s Xi Worries Advisers 

Who Say More Is Needed to Combat Coronavirus Outbreak, ” Washington Post , February 16, 

2020. 

Noah Barkin, “The U.S. and Europe Are Speaking a Different Language on China, ” Foreign 

Policy , February 16, 2020. 

Michael Birnbaum, John Hudson, a nd Loveday Morris, “At Munich Security Conference, an 

Atlantic Divide: U.S. Boasting and European Unease, ” Washington Post , February 15 , 2020 .

Robin Emmott and John Irish, “‘ The West Is Winning, ’ U.S. Tells China; France Wary, ” Reuters ,

February 15, 2020. 

Michelle Fitzpatrick, “US, Europe Clash o ver Washington ’s Global Retreat, ” Agence France -

Presse , February 15, 2020. 

David E. Sanger and Steven Erlanger, “‘ The West Is Winning, ’ Pompeo Said. The West Wasn ’t

Buying It. ” New York Times , February 15 , 2020 .

Nan cy A Youssef, James Marson, and Laurence Norman, “U.S. -Europe Divide Gets Spotlight at 

Security Conference, ” Wall Street Journal , February 14 , 2020 .

Robert Burns, “While US Worries About China, Europe Stays Focused on Russia, ” Associated 

Press , February 13 , 2020. 

Tarun Chhabra, Scott Moore, and D ominic Tierney, “The Left Should Play the China Card; 

Foreign Policy Rivalry Inspires Progress at Home, ” Foreign Affairs , February 13 , 2020 .

Walter Lohman, “Let ’s Keep Our Nerve on U.S. -Philippines Relations ,” Herit age Foundation, 

February 13, 2020. 

Josh Rogin, “The U.S. and Europe Are Headed for A Showdown on China in Munich, ”

Washington Post , February 13, 2020. 

Edward Wong, “US. Faces Tough ‘Great Game ’ Against China in Central Asia and Beyond, ” New 

York Times , Feb ruary 13, 2020. 

Noah Bierman and staff writer, “White House Quietly Trims Dozens of National Security 

Experts, ” Los Angeles Times , February 12 , 2020 .

Hal Brands, “Yes, Ukraine Matters to the U.S., ” Bloomberg , February 12 , 2020 .

Michael Brenes and Michael F ranczak, “2 East Ways to Shrink America ’s Overseas Footprint, ”

Foreign Policy , February 11, 2020. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 31

Michael Fullilove, “How I Lost My Faith in America, The World Still Wants to Believe in the 

U.S. But It Needs Some Help. ” Atlantic , February 11 , 2020 .

Josh Rogin, “State Department Excludes Taiwan from Religious Freedom Alliance ,” Washington 

Post , February 11, 2020. 

Brett D. Schaefer and James Jay Carafano, “U.S. Shouldn ’t Rejoin U.N. ‘Tourism ’ Agency, 

Despite Trump ’s Budget Request ,” Heritage Foundation, Feb ruary 11 , 2020 .

Chris Walsh, “Why US Democracy Support Matters, ” The Hill , February 11 , 2020 .

Graham Allison, “The New Spheres of Influence, Sharing the Globe with Other Great Powers, ”

Foreign Affairs , February 10, 2020. 

Kathleen Hicks, “Getting to Less, The Truth About Defense Spending, ” Foreign Affairs , February 

10, 2020. 

Stephen D. Krasner, “Learning to Live With D espots, The Limits of Democracy Protection, ”

Foreign Affairs , February 10, 2020. 

Bonnie Kristian, “Donald T rump ’s Erratic Foreign Policy Is a Failure, ” National Interest ,

February 10, 2020. 

Stephen Wertheim, “The Price of Primacy, Why America Shouldn ’t Dominate the World, ”

Foreign Affairs , February 10, 2020. 

Thomas Wright, “The Folly of Retrenchment, Why Americ a Can ’t Withdraw From the World, ”

Foreign Affairs , February 10, 2020. 

Hal Brands, “John Quincy Adams Isn ’t Who You Think He Is, The Sixth President Has Become 

an Icon for Those Wanting to Shrink America ’s Global Role, But He Was Actually A Die -Hard 

Expansi onist, ” Bloomberg , February 8, 2020 .

William J. Burns, “Impunity Is Triumphing Over Integrity, Trump ’s Attacks on Public Servants 

Will Do Lasting Damage to American Diplomacy, ” Atlantic , February 8, 2020 .

Adaobi Tricia Nwaubani, “Tough Talk, Candor and Res ilience Are Admired in My Country. The 

President Is Perceived to Have These Traits, ” Washington Post , February 7, 2020 .

Joel Simon, “How Trump Has Reversed Decades of American Hostage Policy, ” New Yorker ,

February 7, 2020. 

Doug Bandow, “Our Military Is Cla shing with Russians While Defending Syrian Oil. Why? ”

American Conservative , February 6, 2020. 

Josh Rogin, “Trump ’s Foreign Policy Is All Politics, No Policy, ” Washington Post , February 6, 

2020. 

Ruby Mellen and Siobhán O'Grady, “How Trump ’s State of the Union Addressed Foreign 

Policy, ” Washington Post , February 6 (posted online February 5), 2019 .

Ted Galen Carpenter , “ Trump ’s Brass Knuckles Tactics Toward the European Allies ,” Cato 

Institute, Febr uary 5, 2020. 

Daniel W. Drezner , “ Donald Trump ’s Potemkin Fo reign Policy ,” Washington Post , February 5, 

2020. 

Robbie Gramer, “At Embassies Abroad, Trump Envoys Are Quietly Pushing Out Career 

Diplomats, ” Foreign Policy , February 5, 2020 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 32

Mollie Hemingway , “ 13 Key Takeaways From President Trump ’s Epic State Of The Union 

Address ,” Federalist , February 5, 2020 .

Michael Hirsh, Amy Mackinnon, and Robbie Gramer, “5 Foreign -Policy Takeaways from 

Trump ’s State of the Union, ” Foreign Policy , February 5, 2020 .

Daniel R. DePetris, “Impeachment Is Damaging America In One Nearly Forgotten Way, Two 

Words: Foreign Policy ,” National Interest , February 4, 2020 .

John Gans, “Trump Finally Has the Dangerous Foreign -Policy Process He Always Wanted, ”

Foreign Policy , February 4, 20 20. 

Alex Hobson, “An Eye for an Eye Doesn ’t Make Americans Safer, ” Foreign Policy , February 4, 

2020. 

Adam Taylor , “ What Trump Said About Foreign Policy in Last Year ’s State of the Union (and 

What Actually Happened) ,” Washington Post , February 4, 2020 .

Kathy Gilsinan, “Iraq Is the One War Zone Trump Doesn ’t Want to Leave ,” Atlantic , February 3, 

2020. 

Michael Hirsh, “Berned Beyond Recognition: How Sander ’s Rise Changes U.S. Foreign Policy, ”

Foreign Policy , February 3, 2020. 

Casey Michel, “How the US Becam e the Center of Global Kleptocracy, ” Vox , February 3, 2020 .

Caleb Slayton, “Africa: The First U.S. Casualty of the New Information Warfare Against China, ”

War on the Rocks , February 3, 2020. 

Alex War d, “ Why Trump ’s Acquittal Will Damage US Foreign Policy, ” Vox , February 3, 2020 .

Stefano Gennarini and Grace Melton , “ Promises Kept: The Trump Administration Has Paved the 

Way for Promoting the Culture of Life ,” National Interest , February 2, 2020 .

A. Trevor Thrall and Jordan Cohen , “ Trump Extends Travel Ban to 6 Countries — but Is OK with 

Selling Arms to Those Same Places ,” Cato Institute , January 31 , 2020 .

Doug Bandow, “Trump Ignores the Saudis ’ Awful Record on Religious Freedom ,” Cato Institute ,

January 30, 2020. 

Tom Rogan, “Why China Is a Bigger Threat Than the Soviet Union, ” Washington Examiner ,

January 30, 2020. 

Michael Krepon, “The Long -Term Costs of NATO Expansion, ” National Interest , January 29, 

2020. 

Ali Wyne and Michael J. Mazarr, “The Real US -China Competi tion: Competing Theories of 

Influence, ” Interpreter , January 29 , 2020 .

Robert Malley and Aaron David Miller, “The Real Goal of Trump ’s Middle East Plan, ” Politico ,

January 28, 2020. 

Doug Bandow, “Stop Treating U.S. Military as Mercenary Force Hired Out to Protect Saudi 

Royals ,” American Spectator , January 24 , 2020 .

Doug Bandow, “Trump is Rig ht: Afghanistan is a ‘Loser War ,’” American Conservative , January 

23, 2020. 

Ted Galen Carpenter , “ Trump ’s Critics Show Their Own Sterile Thinking about Foreign Policy ,”

National Interest , January 23, 2020. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 33

James Phillips , “ The Suleimani Strike: The Right Call to Make ,” Heritage Foundation, January 

23, 2020. 

Jeff M. Smith, “Is America On the Decline And Ceding Its Position to China in Asia? ” National 

Interest , January 21, 2020. 

Doug Bandow, “Donald Trump's Iran Ob session Comes Down to 2 Words: Barack Obama ,” 

National Interest , January 20, 2020. 

Steven A. Cook, “Outrage Culture Is Ruining Foreign Policy, ” Foreign Policy , January 20 , 2020 .

Niall Ferguson, “Cold War II Has Ame rica at a Disadvantage as China Courts Russia, ” Boston 

Globe , January 20, 2020. 

Anatol Klass, “Did the United States Just Bless Chinese Authoritarianism? ” Washington Post ,

January 20, 2020. 

Dimitri Simes, “The Rift Between Turkey and America Has Paved the Way for Russia ’s

Rebound ,” National Interest , January 20 , 2020 .

Anne Gearan and John Hudson, “Trump ’s Strong -Arm Foreign Policy Tactics Create Te nsions 

with U.S. Friends and Fo es, ” Washington Post , January 19 , 2020 .

Robert D. Kaplan, “Why the U.S. -China Co ld War Will Be Different, ” National Interest , January 

19, 2020. 

William Saletan, “Trump Is a Remorseless Advocate of Crimes Against Humanity, ” Slate ,

January 18, 2020. 

Ted Galen Carpenter, “In Bullying Iraq, America is Starting to Look Like the New Evil Em pire ,” 

American Conser vative, January 17, 2020. 

Tom McTague, “Donald Trump Stumbles Into a Foreign -Policy Triumph, ” Atlantic , January 17, 

2019. 

David Von Drehle, “Tru mp’s Mercenary Foreign Policy Confirms What Our Worst Critics Say of 

Us, ” Washington Post , January 17 , 2020 .

Doug Bandow, “Note to Trump: Iraq is Not a U.S. Colony ,” American Conservative , January 16, 

2020. 

Hal Brands, “Does U.S. Credibility Matter? Trump Is Putting It to the Test, ” Bloomberg , January 

16, 2020. 

Robbie Gramer, “Pompeo ’s Silence Creates a ‘Crisis of Morale ’ at State Department, ” Foreign 

Policy , January 16, 2020. 

Claes G. Ryn, “Donald J. Trump and the ‘America First ’ Fairy Tale, ” National Interest , January 

16, 2020. 

Bob Davis, “U.S. -China Deal Could Upend the Way Nations Settle Dis putes, ” Wall Street 

Journal , January 16, 2020. 

Jonathan Stearns, “Europe Threatens Legal Challenge to U.S. -China Trade Pact at WTO, ”

Bloomberg , January 16, 2020. 

Bruce Stokes, “Trump ’s Growing European Base, ” Foreign Policy , January 16 , 2020 .

Matthew Bodner, “What Was Russia ’s Putin Up To After the Death of Iran ’s Soleimani? ” Defense 

News , January 15, 2020. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 34

Max Boot, “These 7 Impulses Explain Trump ’s Inexplicable Foreign Policy, ” Washington Post ,

January 15, 2020. 

Douglas London, “The President, His Relationship with Intelligence, and the Soleimani Strike, ”

Just Security , January 15, 2020. 

Ashley Parker, “New Book Portrays Trump as Erratic, ‘At Times Dangerously Uninformed, ’” 

Washington Post , January 15, 2020. 

Asli Aydintasbas, “This Is Putin ’s World Now, ” Washington Post , January 14 , 2020 .

Ted Galen Carpenter, “Putin ’s Russia Is Not the Soviet Union Reborn ,” National Interest , January 

14, 2020. 

Thomas L. Friedman, “Trump ’s Code of Dishonor, ” New York Times , January 14 , 2020 .

Paul McCleary, “China, Russia Press For Mideast Gains While US Talks Of Withdrawal, ”

Breaking Defense , January 14, 2020. 

Elizabeth Rosenberg and Neil Bhatiya, “Trump Has Made Sanctions a Path to Strikes, ” Foreign 

Policy , January 14, 2020. 

Doug Ba ndow, “Why NATO to the Middle East Is A Really Bad Idea ,” The Hill , January 13, 

2020. 

Isaac Chatiner, “Andrew Bacevich on U.S. Foreign Policy Mistakes, ” New Yorker , January 13, 

2020. 

Alan W. Dowd, “NATO And America ’s Alliances Are A Good Deal For The Ameri can People, ”

National Interest , January 13, 2020. 

Peter Harris, “Trump ’s War of Choice with Iran, ” National Interest , January 13 , 2020 .

Ron Huisken, “US -China Rivalry and the Future of Interdependence, ” Strategist , January 13, 

2020. 

Kay C. James , “Congress ’ Personal Disdain for Trump Impedes National Security ,” Washington 

Times , January 13, 2020. 

Walter Russell Mead, “Freedom Stages a Comeback, Even When Officials Push Realpolitik, the 

U.S. Remains a Beacon of Liberty to the World, ” Wall Street Jou rnal , January 13 , 2020 .

David Nakamura, “Muted on Hong Kong Demonstrations, Trump Showers Support on Iranian 

Protestors and Seeks to Score Points on Democrats, ” Washington Post , January 13 , 2020 .

Stuart Schrader, “The Global Policeman Will Always Shoot Peo ple, ” Foreign Policy , January 13, 

2020. 

Stephen N. Walt, “Why Is the United States So Bad at Foreign Policy? ” Foreign Policy , January 

13, 2020. 

Amy Zegart, “The Race for Big Ideas Is On, The United States Faces Genuinely New Global 

Challenges —But Tries to Understand Them Using Outmoded Theories from a Bygone Era, ”

Atlantic , January 13, 2020. 

Paul Sonne, Greg Jaffe, and Josh Dawsey, “Killing Soleimani Reflects an Aggressive National 

Security Team Not Inclined to Curb Trump, ” Washington Post , January 12 , 2020 .

Hans A. von Spakovsky , “ Hans von Spakovsky: Trump killing of Soleimani and Action Against 

Iran L egal —Despite Democratic Complaints ” Fox News , January 11 , 2020 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 35

Nikolas K. Gvosdev , “ The Carter Doctrine Conundrum: Has Trump Repudiated a Foundational 

Elemen t of U.S. National Security Strategy? ” National Interest , January 10 , 2020 .

Andrew Sullivan, “Donald Trump Is the War Crimes President, ” New York , January 10 , 2019 .

Benjamin Denison , “ Regime change rarely succeeds. When will the U.S. learn? ” Washington 

Post , January 9, 2020. 

Marc Fisher, “For Trump, Foreign Relationships Aren ’t About Strategy. They ’re About Cash. ”

Washington Post , January 9, 2020. 

David Mednicoff, “The US -Iran Conflict and the Consequences of International Law -Breaking, ”

The Conversation , January 9, 2020. 

Clark Packard, “Trump ’s Real Trade War Is Being Waged on the WTO, ” Foreign Policy , January 

9, 202. 

Jim Webb, “When Did It Become Acceptable to Kill a Top Leader of a Country We Aren ’t Even 

at War With? ” Washington Post , January 9, 2020 .

Edward Wong, “Trump Administration ’s Actions in Middle East Complicate Its Criticisms of 

China, ” New York Times , January 9, 2020 .

James Freeman, “A Reagan Revival in Trump ’s Foreign Policy? ” Wall Street Journal , January 8, 

2020. 

Harold Hongju Koh, “Is Pree mptive Assassination the New Trump Doctrine? ” Foreign Policy ,

January 8, 2020. 

Klaus W. Larres, “Trump Asks NATO Allies for Help with Iran after years of Bashing the 

Alliance, ” The Conversation , January 8, 2020 .

Paul R. Pillar, “Making America Rogue Again, ” National Interest , January 8, 2020 .

Andrew Prokop, “Dominance and Reputation: How Trump Thinks About Iran, ” Vox , January 8, 

2020. 

David Sacks, “Suleimani ’s Assassination Marks the Death of the Trump Administration ’s

Realism ,” National Interest , January 8, 2020 .

Elizabeth Cobbs and Kimberly C. Field, “Why Did the U.S. Kill Suleimani? The Attack 

Illustrates America ’s Lack of a Clear Grand Strategy —and Why We Need One Immediately, ”

New York Times , January 7, 2020. 

David A. Graham, “The Iranian Humiliation Trump Is Trying to Avenge, ” Atlantic , January 7, 

2020. 

Tiana Lowe, “Trump ’s Strike on Qassem Soleimani Did Put ‘America First, ’” Washington 

Examiner , January 7, 2020. 

Jack Shafer, “Trump ’s Maybe War with Iran, Face d with a Foreign Crisis, the President Wants 

Everyone to Know He Might Do Something. But Also That He Might Not. ” Politico , January 7, 

2020. 

Tyler Cowen, “War Crimes? That ’s Not How to Deter Iran, Even Assassinating Military Leaders 

Is Bad for America ’s Lo ng -Term Interests, ” Bloomberg , January 6, 2020 .

Charlie Dunlap, “Would Attacking Sites ‘Important ’ to ‘Iranian Culture ’ Be a ‘War Crime ’? (Not 

Always), ” Lawfire , January 6, 2020 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 36

Milton Ezrati, “America Should Not Psych Itself Out Over China ’s Rise, ” Natio nal Interest ,

January 6, 2020. 

Max Fisher, “What Is T rump ’s Iran Strategy? Few Seem to Know, ” New York Times , January 6, 

2020. 

Farah N. Jan and Justin Melnick, “China ’s Challenge to America ’s Political and Economic 

Liberal Order, ” National Interest , Januar y 6, 2020 .

Paul Krugman, “Trump the Intimidator Fails Again, ” New York Times , January 6, 2020 .

Walter Russell Mead, “Pompeo Explains the Iran Policy, ” Wall Street Journal , January 6, 2020 .

Evan Osnos, “The Future of America ’s Contest with China, ” New Yorke r, January 6, 2020 .

Thomas Spoehr , “ Reputations and Respect Are Earned by Action, Not Talk ,” Daily Signal ,

January 6, 2020. 

Thomas Spoehr , “ War with Iran? Some People Think We’re Already in One. They ’re Wrong ,” 

Washington Examiner , January 6, 2020. 

Lara J akes, “Defenders of History Take Aim at Trump ’s Threat to Strike Iran ’s Cultural Sites, ”

New York Times , January 5 (updated January 6), 2020. 

Greg Miller, “Trump Faces Iran Crisis with Fewer Experienced Advisors and Strained Relations 

with Traditional Alli es, ” Washington Post , January 5, 2020 .

Doug Bandow, “Donald Trump ’s Iran Policy Comes Down to One Word: Chaos, ” National 

Interest , January 4, 2020. 

Christopher Bedford , “ Killing Soleimani Was The Right Move, And Shows Precisely Why It ’s

Time To Leave Iraq ,” Federalist , January 4, 2020 .

Eliot A. Cohen, “Trump Is Playing Chess One Turn at a Time, An Impulsive President Tries to 

Look Tough without Being Prepared to Follow Through, ” Atlantic , January 4, 2020 .

James Phillips, “How US Strike Against Iranian Gene ral Changes Rules of Game in Iraq, 

Region ,” Daily Signal , January 4, 2020 .

Stephen M. Walt, “Trump ’s Iran Policy Is Brain -Dead, ” Foreign Policy , January 3, 2020 .

Chris [Christopher] Preble and John Glaser , “ Trump Stokes Endless War: His Attack on an 

Irania n Military Leader Will Come Back to Haunt Him and Us ,” New York Daily News , January 

3, 2020. 

Jennifer Rubin, “Trump Has R aised Strategic Incoherence to N ew Levels with Soleimani ’s

Killing, ” Washington Post , January 3, 2020 .

Ben Westcott, “There ’s Talk of a New Cold War. But China Is Not the Soviet Union, ” CNN ,

January 3, 2020. 

Fred Kaplan, “Trump Is Clueless on Iran and North Korea, ” Slate , January 2, 2020 .

Jeff Stein, “How Russia Saw Trump: ‘A Potential Asset and an Exploita ble Victim, ’” Washington 

Post , January 2, 2019. (Book review of Malcolm Nance, The Plot to Betray America , Hac hette, 

2019, 358 pp.) 

Elbridge A. Colby and A. Wess Mitchell, “The Ag e of Great -Power Competition, ” Foreign 

Affairs , January/February 2020. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 37

Kathle en H. Hicks and Joseph P. Federici, Getting to Less? Exploring the Press for Less in 

America ’s Defense Commitments , Center for Strategic and International Studies, January 2020, 9 

pp. 

Doug Bandow, “America ’s Lawmakers Keep Writing Blank Checks for Foreign Wars, ” National 

Interest , December 30, 2019. 

Doug Bandow, “Does Congress Hate America? ” National Interest , December 30 , 2019 .

James Jay Carafano, “James Carafano: US airstrikes in Mideast —Sending T his Clear Message to 

Friends and Foes Alike ,” Fox News , December 30 , 2019 .

Derek Leebaert, “Postwar Delusions: Why America Keeps Making Mistakes Abroad, ” National 

Interest , December 25, 2019. 

Brahma Chellaney, “Laboring Under the Illusion of a Rules -Based Global Order, ” Japan Times ,

December 23, 2019. 

Keith Joh nson, “Trump Turns Global Trade Upside Down, ” Foreign Policy , December 23 , 2019 .

Walter Russell Mead, “Pompeo Champions the Faithful, ” Wall Street Journal , December 23, 

2019. 

Park Chan -kyong , “ As Seoul L oses Faith in Trump ’s Approach on North Korea, China Is Poised 

to Step In,” South China Morning Post , December 22 , 2019 .

George Beebe, “Groupthink Resurgent, ” National Interest , December 22 , 2019 .

Jamey Keaten and Matthew Lee, “As Trump Shuns US Multilateralism, China Ups Diplomatic 

Ante, ” Associated Press , December 20 , 2019 .

Shane Harris, Josh Dawsey, and Carol D. Leonnig, “Former White House Officials Say They 

Feared Putin Influenced the President ’s Views on Ukraine and 2016 Campaign, ” Washington 

Post , December 19, 2019. 

Mary Jo Murphy, “Trump Countries, ” Washington Post , December 19 , 2019 .

Doug Bandow, “The Tragedy of Donald Trump: His Presidency Is Marred with Failure ,” National 

Interest , December 18, 2019. 

Paul R. Pillar, “Misguided Wars: Lying Isn ’t the Main Problem, ” National Interest , December 18, 

2019 .

Seth Cropsey and Gary Roughead, “A U.S. Withdrawal Will Cause a Power Struggle in the 

Middle East, ” Foreign Policy , December 17 , 2019 .

Lara Jakes, “Why the State Dept. Has Largely Been Muted on India ’s Moves Against Muslims, ”

New York Times , December 17, 2019. 

Steven Keil, “Trans -Atlantic Relations a la Macron Could Make NATO ’s Brain Death a Self -

fulfilling Prophecy, ” Defense News , December 17 , 2019 .

Ali Demirdas, “Does Russia Have Red Lines in Syria? And Will Donald Trump ’s Decision to 

Withdraw American Troops Going to [sic] Usher in An Era of Endless Russian Wars? ” National 

Interest , December 16 , 2019. 

Uri Friedman, “Under Trump, the U.S. Has Become a Leading Source of Global Instability, ”

Atlantic , December 16, 2019. 

Fred Kaplan, “The Decade Big Power Politics Returned, ” Slate , December 16 , 2019 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 38

Bruce Klingner, Jung Pak, and Sue Mi Terry, “Opinion: Trump Shakedowns Are Threatening Two 

Key U.S. Allia nces in Asia, ” Los Angeles Times , December 16 , 2019 .

Robert B. Zoellick , “ Impeachable or Not, Trump ’s Foreign Policy Is Reckless ,” Wall Street 

Journal , December 16, 2019. 

Matthew Continetti , “ Present at the Demolition , The Post -WWII Order Is Ending —and Not hing 

Has Replaced It,” National Review , December 14 , 2019 .

Hal Brands, Steven A. Cook, and Kenneth M. Pollack, “RIP the Carter Doctrine, 1 980 -2019 ,

Donald Trump Has Torn Up a Foundation of U.S. Foreign Policy and Is Causing Irreparable 

Damage to the Middle East —and World Order —in the Process ,” Foreign Policy , December 13, 

2019. 

Derek Chollet, “An Inside Look at Trump ’s Foreign Policy: ‘This Is Literall y Insane, ’” 

Washington Post , December 13, 2019. (Book review of Peter Bergen, Trump and His Generals, 

The Cost of Chaos , Penguin Press, 2019, 386 pp.) 

Olivia Enos, “Codifying Religious Freedom as a U.S. Foreign Policy Priority ,” Heritage 

Foundation, December 13, 2019. 

Samuel Moyn and Stephen Wertheim, “The Infinity War, We Say We ’re a Peacefu l Nation. Why 

Do Our Leaders Always Keep Us at War? ” Washington Post , December 13 , 2019 .

Anne Applebaum, “The False Romance of Russia, ” Atlantic , December 12 , 2019 .

Eli Ratner, Elizabeth Rosenberg, and Paul Scharre, “Beyond the Trade War, A Competitive 

App roach to Countering China, ” Foreign Affairs , December 12 , 2019 .

James Jay Carafano, “NATO After London: How Germany and the United States Can Lead the 

Alliance ,” Heritage Foundation, December 11, 2019. 

Luke Coffey, “NATO Still Plays an Important Russian Re sistance Role ,” Heritage Foundation, 

December 11, 2019. 

Hal Brands, “U.S. Bets Old Ideas in a New Package Can Deter China, ” Bloomberg , December 11, 

2019. 

Kevin Baron, “‘ Are You in This? ’ If So Many Americans Believe Russia Is an Ally, China Is a 

Good Business Partner, and Terrorism Isn ’t Worth Fighting Anymore, How Can the United States 

Be Counted on for Global Security? ” Defense One , December 10 , 2019 .

Ali Demirdas, “Is France Making a Power Play By Questioning the Value of NATO? ” National 

Interest , De cember 10, 2019. 

John Glaser and Christopher A. Preble , “ High Anxiety: How Washington ’s Exaggerated Sense of 

Danger Harms Us All ,” Cato Institute, December 10, 2019. 

Michael Hirsh, “Why Putin Is Smiling, ” Foreign Policy , December 10 , 2019 .

Keith Johnson, “How Trump May Finally Kill the WTO, ” Foreign Policy , December 9, 2019 .

Colum Lynch and Robbie Gramer, “Desperate to Save Diplomacy, White House Blocks U.N. 

Meeting on North Korean Atrocities, ” Foreign Policy , December 9, 2019 .

Sumantra Maitra , “ NATO ’s Trou bles Are Not Going Away After Trump ,” Federalist , December 

9, 2019. 

William J. Burns, “An End to Magical Thinking in the Middle East, ” Atlantic , December 8, 2019 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 39

Christopher A. Preble , “ A Useful Corrective to China Fearmongering ,” Cato Institute, December 

6, 2019. 

Doug Bandow, “NATO No Longer Serves American Interests, ” National Interest , December 5, 

2019. 

Peter Bergen, “The Generals Tried to Keep Trump in Check. What Happens to Foreign Policy 

Now That They ’ve Left? ” Time , December 5, 2019 .

James Jay Caraf ano , “ Trump at NATO Summit —There Is Nothing New About Elitists Trashing 

Presidents ,” Heritage Foundation, December 5, 2019. 

Ryan Heath, “Breaking Down Trump ’s Post -NATO Hot Spots, ” Politico , December 5, 2019 .

Michael Moran, “What Trump Gets Right About Alliances, ” Foreign Policy , December 5, 2019 .

Jim Townsend and Andrea Kendall -Taylor, “NATO Is Struggling Under Trans -Atlantic Tensions, ”

Foreign Policy , December 5, 2019. 

Nicholas Burns, “Trump Violates Diplomac y’s Golden Rule, At the NATO Summit, the President 

Publicly Heaped Abuse on America ’s Closest Friends, ” Atlantic , December 4, 2019 .

James Jay Carafano, “NATO, Macron, and Trump —Why This Meeting Is Already Different ,”

Heritage Foundation, December 4, 2019. 

Ted Galen Carpenter , “ NATO ’s Dirty Little Secret Is Out ,” National Interest , December 4, 2019 .

Steven A. Cook, “Pompeo ’s Departure Is Restoring the State Department ’s Swagger, ” Foreign 

Policy , December 4, 2019. 

The Editors, “NATO Is Still Essential ,” Natio nal Review , December 4, 2019 .

Jim Geraghty , “ There ’s No Excuse for NATO Allies Not Meeting That 2 Percent Threshold ,”

National Review , December 4, 2019. 

Aamer Madhani (Associated Press), “Trump Aims for Role of NATO Statesman But Mars Unity 

Message, ” Military Times , December 4, 2019 .

Tom McTague, “The Spiritual Disunity of the West, ” Atlantic , December 4, 2019 .

Philip Stephens, “Crisis, What Crisis? The US Needs NATO As Much As Ever, ” Financial Times ,

December 4, 2019. 

Conrad Black, “Trump ’s NATO Succe sses ,” National Review , December 3, 2019 .

Hal Brands, “Macron Wants to Lead Europe. Why Would Europe Want That? ” Bloomberg ,

December 3, 2019. 

Kevin Baron, “NATO ’s Newest Threat Is Coming From Inside the House ,” Defense One, 

December 3, 2019. 

Samuel Brannon , “ Bad Idea: China -Driven U.S. Strategy, ” Center for Strategic and International 

Studies, December 3, 2019. 

James Jay Carafano, “Be Th ankful America Is Not Fighting ‘Endless Wars ,’” Heritage 

Foundation, December 3, 2019. 

Ted Galen Carpenter , “ NATO Summit 2 019: The Remnants of a ‘Zombie Alliance ,’” Cato 

Institute, December 3, 2019. 

Stephen Collinson and Caitlin Hu, “The Most Powerful Destabilizing Force Facing NATO 

Today, ” CNN , December 3, 2019 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 40

Nancy Cook, “Disruptor in c hief Trump bulldozes into NATO g athe ring, ” Politico , December 3, 

2019. 

Daniel L. Davis, “Rus sia Is Not The Soviet Union. So Why Can ’t Europe Help Pay More for 

NATO? ” National Interest , December 3, 2019 .

Victor Davis Hanson , “ Trump ’s Foreign Policy: The Popping Point of Maximum Pressure ,”

National Review , December 3, 2019. 

David M. Herszenhorn Nancy Cook, and Rym Momtaz, “Now Playing in London: The Donald 

[Trump] and Emmanuel [Macron] Show, ” Politico , December 3, 2019 .

Mark Hannah, “It ’s Not Just Trump. The American People Are Skeptical of NATO, Too. ”

Politico , December 3, 2019. 

David M. Herszenhorn and Rym Momtaz, “Allies Unite to Defend NATO —Against Macron, ”

Politico , December 3, 2019. 

Julia Ioffe, “Trump Is Waging War on America ’s Diplomats, ” GQ , December 3, 2019 .

Simo ne McCarthy, “China and Russia forge deeper ties thanks to their common e nemy: the 

United States, ” South China Morning Post , December 3, 2019 .

Toluse Olorunnipa, “‘ Everybody Wants to Make a Deal ’: Struggling to Negotiate, Trump Often 

Claims Countries Are Eager to Talk, ” Washi ngton Post , December 3, 2019 .

Katie Rogers and Annie Karni, “In Tense Exchange, Trump and Macron Put Forth Dueling 

Visions for NATO, ” New York Times , December 3, 2019 .

Julianne Smith and Garima Mohan, “The Trump Administration ’s Indo -Pacific Strategy Needs 

Proof of Life, ” National Interest , December 3, 2019 .

Alex Ward, “Trump Thinks NATO Is Good Now —After Macron Criticized It, ” Vox , December 3, 

2019. 

Robin Emmott, Steve Holland, “Trump Lashes Out at European Allies Ahead of NATO 

Anniversary Summit, ” Reuters , December 2, 2019 .

Frida Ghitis, “NATO Is Agreeing Not to Agree in the Age of Trump, ” Politico , December 2, 

2019. 

Melvyn P. Leffler, “China Isn ’t the Soviet Union. Con fusing the Two Is Dangerous, ” Atlantic ,

December 2, 2019. 

James Marson, “NATO Meeting Overshadowed by France ’s Macron, ” Wall Street Journal ,

December 2, 2019. 

Tom Rogan, “Sensing NATO Discord, Putin Plays Macron Off Trump, ” Washington Examiner ,

December 2, 2019. 

Robin Wright, “Trump Is Running Out of Time for a Meaningful Diplomatic Deal —Anywhere, ”

New Yorker , December 2, 2019. 

Hilde Eliassen Restad, “Whither the ‘City Upon a Hill ’? Donald Trump, America First, and 

American Exceptionalism, ” Texas National S ecurity Review , December 2019 .

Michael Brendan Dougherty, “We Aid the Growth of Chinese Tyranny to Our Eternal Shame, ”

National Review , November 29, 2019. 

Peter Harris, “Why Trump ’s Drone War Shows He Wants American Global Supremacy, ” National 

Interest , No vember 28, 2019. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 41

“It ’s the End of the World Trade Organisation As We Know It, And America Feels Fine, ”

Economist , November 28, 2019. 

Ted Galen Carpenter , “ The Rationale and Contours of an Amicable Transatlantic Security 

Divorce ,” Cato Institute, November 2 7, 2019 .

Adam Serwer, “The War -Crimes President, ” Atlantic , November 27 , 2019 .

Rebeccah Heinrichs, “Mike Pompeo Is ‘Keenly Aware ’ of the Threats Posed by China, ” National 

Review , November 26, 2019. 

Bruce Klingner , “ Don ’t Break Alliances Over Money ,” Herita ge Foundation, November 26 , 2019 .

David Marcus , “ Why Trump Marks The End Of The Post -Cold -War Period ,” Federalist ,

November 25, 2019. 

Kristin Tate, “Negative American Trends Open Door to Chinese World Influence, ” The Hill ,

November 24, 2019. 

Deborah Pearls tein, “Foreign Policy Isn ’t Just Up To Trump, ” Atlantic , November 23 , 2019 .

Daniel Sneider, “Ripple Effects of US Retreat in NE Asia, ” Asia Times , November 23 , 2019 .

Tim Roemer, “The U.S. Trade War Has Caught Beijing ’s Attention. Now Washington Needs a 

Lon ger -Term Plan. ” Foreign Policy , November 22 , 2019 .

Michael Moran, “Recognizing Israeli Settlements Marks the Final Collapse of Pax Americana, ”

Foreign Policy , November 22, 2019. 

Jay Nordlinger , “ Moral Equivalence, Etc. ,” National Review , November 22 , 2019 .

James Palmer, “Donald Trump ’s America Can ’t Fight X i Jinping ’s China, ” Foreign Policy ,

November 22, 2019. 

Ted Galen Carpenter, “Trump ’s Bold East Asia Defense Financial Burden -Sharing Campaign, ”

National Interest , November 21, 2019. 

Uri Friedman, “America Hasn ’t Always Supported Ukraine Like This, ” Atlantic , November 21, 

2019. 

Nancy A. Youssef and Andrew Jeong, “The U.S. ’s Quest for Military Unity on China Comes Up 

Short in Asia, ” Wall Street Journal , November 21 , 2019 .

James Jay Carafano and Riley Walters, “The Difference Between National Security and Foreign 

Competition ,” Heritage Foundation, November 20, 2019. 

Carol Morello, “Skepticism Runs Deep at NATO as Pompeo Meets with Allies, ” Washington 

Post , November 20, 2019. 

Hal Brands, “Europe and Amer ica Are Refighting the Cold War, and Both Can Win, ” Bloomberg ,

November 19, 2019. 

Brett D. Schaefer , “ Putting the U.S. Role in the U.N. Funding Crunch Into Context ,” Heritage 

Foundation, November 19, 2019. 

Joel Gehrke , “ ‘Our Worst Nightmare: ’ Lithuanian Officials Alarmed That Trump May Party with 

Putin ,” Washington Examiner , November 18 , 2019 .

Yomiuri Shimbun , “ Political Scientist Ian Bremmer: American -led Order Is Over ,” Japan News ,

November 18, 2019. 

William J. Burns, “Trump ’s Bureaucratic Arson, ” Atlantic , November 17 , 2019 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 42

Fr ed Hiatt, “While Trump Stands By , the World ’s Tyrants Are Trying to Make the World Safe for 

Dictatorship, ” Washington Post , November 17 , 2019 .

Abraham Newm an and Daniel Nexon , “ If the United States Doesn ’t Make The Rules, Chi na 

Will ,” Foreign Policy , November 17 , 2019 .

Reza Hasmath and Jennifer Y.J. Hsu, “How Chinese Norms Are Going Global, ” Diplomat ,

November 16, 2019. 

Daniel F. Runde, “Countering Malign Kremlin Influence Will Be with Us for Decades, ” The Hill ,

November 15, 2 019. 

Luke Baker, “On Russia and EU Enlargement, Macron Pushes a Radical Agenda, ” Reuters ,

November 14, 2019. 

Uri Friedman, “What America ’s Allies Really Think About Trump ’s Syria Decision, ” Atlantic ,

November 14, 2019. 

Daniel Kochis , “ The Future of the Tra nsatlantic Partnership in an Era of Great Power 

Competition ,” Heritage Foundation, November 14, 2019. 

Conrad Black, “A Post -Post -Cold -War NATO ,” National Review , November 13 , 2019 .

Daniel DePetris , “ 3 Major Reforms NATO Needs To Keep From Collapsing ,” Fede ralist ,

November 13, 2019. 

Sumantra Maitra , “ French President Emmanuel Macron Gets Trumpian On NATO ,” Federalist ,

November 13, 2019. 

Nick Danforth and Daphne McCurdy, “The United States Can ’t Have It All, ” Foreign Policy ,

November 12, 2019. 

David Ignatius, “People Died While Trump Played Games with Ukraine ’s Military Ai d,” 

Washington Post , November 12, 2019. 

Stephanie Ruhle and Carol E. Lee, “In Private Speech, Bolton Suggests Some of Trump ’s Foreign 

Policy Decisions Are Guided by Personal Interest, ” NBC Ne ws , November 12 , 2019 .

Walter Russell Mead, “NATO Isn ’t Dead, but It ’s Ailing, ” Wall Street Journal , November 11, 

2019. 

Nahal Toosi, “Trump ’s Plan to Shrink NSC Staff Draws Fire, ” Politico , November 11 , 2019 .

Nahal Toosi and Gabby Orr, “Trump Weighs Condit ioning Foreign Aid on Religious Freedom, ”

Politico , November 11, 2019. 

Nikolas K. Gvosdev, “Can a ‘Trumpian ’ Foreign Policy Stick? ” National Interest , November 9, 

2019. 

Ariel Cohen, “America ’s Great -Power Problems Will Come Back to Haunt It in the Middle E ast, ”

National Interest , November 8, 2019. 

Jacob Heilbrunn, “Emmanuel Macron Is Right: NATO Is Over, ” Washington Post , November 8, 

2019. 

Mairead McArdle , “ Pompeo: NATO Must Change or Risk Becoming ‘Ineffective or Obsolete ,’”

National Review , November 8, 20 19. 

“Pompeo Attacks Russia and China in Berlin Speech ,” BBC News , November 8, 2019 .

Kori Schake, “Why the U.S. Outplays France, ” Atlantic , November 8, 2019 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 43

Kevin Baron, “Do Americans Still Want The US to Be the World ’s Security Leader? ” Defense 

One , November 7, 2019. 

James Carafano et al ., “ How and Why American Conservatives Must Fight for the Future of the 

Transatlantic Community ,” Heritage Foundation, November 7, 2019. 

Gordon Chang, “The Great Confrontation With China, ” Wall Street Journal , November 7, 2019 .

Daniel R. DePetris, “Trillion -Dollar Question: Will Donald Trump Really End the ‘Endless 

Wars ’?” National Interest , November 7, 2019 .

Robin Emmott, “NATO Experiencing ‘Brain Death ’, France ’s Macron Says, ” Reuters , November 

7, 2019. 

Michel Rose, “France ’s Macron Says NATO Suffering ‘Brain Death ’, Questions U.S. 

Commitment, ” Reuters , November 7, 2019 .

Adam Taylor, “Macron Says NATO Has Suffered ‘Brain Death, ’ Merkel Rejects That Assessment 

as ‘Drastic, ’” Washington Post , November 7, 2019 .

Ben Weinga rten, “Pompeo: United States Fostered China ’s Rise “At The Expense Of American 

Value, ’” Federalist , November 7, 2019 .

Sylvie Corbet, “Europeans Look to China as Global Partner, Shun Trump ’s US ,” Associated 

Press , November 6, 2019. 

Michael Singh, “Why the Talk of ‘Endless Wars ’ Misses the Mark, ” Washington Post , November 

6, 2019. 

Colum Lynch, “Trump Turns U.S. Visas, Travel Restrictions Into Foreign -Policy Cudgel, ”

Foreign Policy , November 6, 2019. 

Yeganeh Torbati, “How Mike Pence ’s Office Meddled in Foreign Aid to Reroute Money to 

Favored Christian Groups, ” ProPublica , November 6, 2019 .

Simon Denyer and Min Joo Kim, “In South Korea, Military Cost Dispute and Trump ’s Moves in 

Syria Fuel Doubts over U.S. Commitment, ” Washington Post , N ovember 4, 2019 .

Lara Seligman, “‘ Allies and Partners Will Think Twice Before Taking America at Its Words, ’” 

Foreign Policy , November 4, 2019. 

Thomas Wright, “The Yes -Men Have Taken Over the Trump Administration; As the President 

Has Freed Himself from the ‘Adults, ’ He Has Also Weaponized American Foreign Policy for His 

Personal Advantage, ” Atlantic , November 4, 2019 .

A. Trevor Thrall and John Glaser , “ Will Trump End the Endless Wars? ” Cato Institute, November 

2, 2019. 

Mark Bowden, “Top Military Officers Un load on Trump, ” Atlantic , November 2019 .

Abe Greenwald, “The Failure at the End of History ,” Commentary , November 2019 .

Department of State , “The China Challenge, Speech, Michael R. Pompeo, Secretary of State, 

New York City, New York, Hudson Institute ’s He rman Kahn Award Gala, ” October 30, 2019. 

Max Boot, “In Syria and Elsewhere, Trump is Making Russia Great Again, ” Washington Post ,

October 30, 2019. 

John Hannah, “U.S. Deterrence in the Middle East Is Collapsing, ” Foreign Policy , October 30, 

2019. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 44

Joseph Bo sco, “Trump ’s Demand for Reciprocity with China Can Win ‘Cold War II, ’” The Hill ,

October 28, 2019. 

James Jay Carafano, “James Carafano: Al -Baghdadi Is dead —Trump W as Proven Right on This 

One. So Now What? ” Fox News, October 28, 2019. 

Stephen N. Walt, “How to Tell if You ’re in a Good Alliance, ” Foreign Policy , October 28 , 2019 .

Uri Friedman, “Trump ’s Defiant Message to Washington: My Approach to Alliances Just 

Worked, ” Atlantic , October 27 , 2019 .

Brett McGurk, “Baghdadi ’s Death Undersco res What We ’ve Lost by Abandoning Syria ’s Kurds, ”

Washington Post , October 27, 2019. 

Jennifer Rubin, “Three Ways the Baghdadi Raid Undermines Trump ’s Chaotic Policy, ”

Washington Post , October 27, 2019. 

David E. Sanger, “Al -Baghdadi Raid Was a Victory Built on Factors Trump Derides, ” New York 

Times , October 27, 2019, updated October 28, 2019. 

Salvatore Babones, “The United States Has Supplicants, Not Allies, ” National Interest , October 

26, 2019. 

Kathy Gil sinan, “What Was the Point of the Syria ‘Withdrawal ’?” Atlantic, October 25, 2019. 

David J. Kramer and Richard Kauzlarich, “Why Mike Pompeo Must Go, ” Washington Post ,

October 25, 2019. 

William Saletan, “Death Is Good; Trump ’s Sadistic Argument for Betrayin g the Kurds, ” Slate ,

October 25, 2019. 

Gred Sargent, “As Trump Pulls Out of Syria, His Voters Are Following Along. That ’s Ominous. ”

Washington Post , October 25, 2019. 

Editorial Board, “Donald Trump ’s ‘Very Special ’ Victory in Syria, ” New York Times , Octobe r 24, 

2019. 

James Jay Carafano, “Trump Prepares America for a Great Power Competition, ” National 

Interest , October 24, 2019. 

Eliot A. Cohen, “Trump ’s Character Betrays Him; In Foreign Policy, Reputation Means 

Everything, ” Atlantic , October 24 , 2019 .

David Ignatius, “Russia Has Earned Its Success in the Middle East —Partly Thanks to Trump, ”

Washington Post , October 24, 2019. 

Jon Lerner, “What Is an ‘Endless War ’?” National Review , October 24 , 2019 .

Aamer Madhani and Robert Burns, “Analysis: Declaring Victory, Trump Strengthens Russia ’s

Hand, ” Associated Press , October 24 , 2019 .

Edward Wong, “Pence Says U.S. Companies Leave ‘Conscience at the Door ’ Over China, ” New 

York Times , October 24, 2019. 

White House, “Remarks by Vice President Pence at the Frederic V. Malek Memorial Lecture ,

Conrad Hotel, Washington, D.C., ” October 24 , 2019 .

Kevin Baron, “Trump Declares Victory in Syria, Claims Credit for It All, ” Defense One , October 

23, 2019. 

The Editors, “An Ignominious Retreat in Syria ,” National Review , October 23 , 2019 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 45

Uri Friedman, “The Consequences of Donald Trump Washing His Hands of the Middle East, ”

Atlantic , October 23, 2019. 

Lawrence J. Korb, “Trump ’s Ukraine troubles Overshadow His Foreign Policy Successes, ”

National Interest , October 23, 2019. 

Colum Lynch and Robbie Gramer, “Outfoxed and Outgunned: How China Routed the U.S. in a 

U.N. Agency, ” Foreign Policy , October 23 , 2019 .

Aamer Madhani and Deb Riechmann, “Trump Finds No Simple Fix in Syria, Other World 

Hotspots, ” Associated Press , October 23 , 2019 .

Chr istopher A. Preble and Doug Bandow , “ Regarding the Tragedy in Northern Syria and the 

Need to Revisit U.S. Security Commitments ,” Cato Institute, October 23, 2019. 

Alex Ward, “Trump ’s Latest Syria Announcement Is the Clearest Articulation of His Foreign 

Pol icy Doctrine, ” Vox , October 23 , 2019 .

Hal Brands, “Putin Conquered the Middle East. The U.S. Can Get It Back. ” Bloomberg , October 

22, 2019. 

Anne Gearan and David J. Lynch, “Trump Says He ’s the Dealmaker In Chief, But His Record 

Lists Mostly Incompletes, ” Washington Post , October 22 , 2019 .

Justin Logan and A. Trevor Thrall, “Make America Safe Again; The American Public Would 

Prefer a More Restrained Foreign Policy Than Elites Have Delivered in Past Decades, ” National 

Interest , October 22, 2019. 

Jay Nordlinge r, “Trump, Putin, Erdogan, Orbán ,” National Review , October 22 , 2019 .

Josh Rogin, “Trump Is Following the Mob, Not the Blob, on Foreign Policy, ” Washington Post ,

October 22, 2019. 

Peter Baker, “For Trum p the Dealmaker, Troop Pullouts Without Much in Return, ” New York 

Times , October 21, 2019 (updated October 22, 2019). 

Stephen Blank, “The Russo -Chinese Alliance Emerges, ” The Hill , October 21 , 2019 .

James Jay Carafano, “Syria Cease -Fire Follows Completely Appropriate Actions by Trump —

Avoids Needless Bloodshed ,” Heritage Foundation, October 21, 2019. 

Edward Lucas, “Moscow Advances as America Retreats, ” Center for European Policy Analysis 

(CEPA) , October 21, 2019. 

Kate O ’Keeffe, “Lagarde Says U.S. Is at Risk of Losing Global Leade r Role, ” Wall Street 

Journal , October 21, 2019. 

Robin Wright, “Turkey, Syria, the Kurds, and Trump ’s Abandonment of Foreign Policy, ” New 

Yorker , October 20, 2019. 

David M. Crane, “Russia ’s Snub of Geneva Convention Protocol Sets Dangerous Precedent, ” The 

Hill , October 20, 2019. 

Conrad Black, “In Syria, Trump Makes the Best of the Situation ,” National Review , October 18, 

2019. 

Matthew Continetti, “Syria: Endgame, Column: Americans Are Getting the Retreat They Voted 

For, ” Washington Free Beacon , October 18 , 2019 .

James Jay Carafano, “On Syria and Grave Matters We Need a Serious President to Speak —Not a 

Showman to Tweet ,” Heritage Foundation , October 18 , 2019 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 46

Jonah Goldberg , “ To Trump, Alliances Are Strictly Business ,” National Review , October 18, 

2019. 

Trita Parsi and Stephen Wertheim, “America ’s Syria Debacle Is Not Trump ’s Alone, ” Foreign 

Policy , October 18, 2019. 

John Pomfret, “Trump Abandoned the Kurds in Syria. Could Taiwan Be Next? ” Washington Post ,

October 18, 2019. 

Alex Ward, “Trump Loves Dictators. Erdogan Is the Latest to Take Advantage of That. ” Vox ,

October 18, 2019. 

Joseph Bosco, “After Syria Debacle, US Need to Recommit to Indo -Pacific, ” The Hill , October 

17, 2019. 

James Jay Carafano, “U.S. Must Prevent Rise of New ISIS Caliphate in Syria Following Our 

Troop Withdrawal ,” Heritage Foundation , October 17 , 2019 .

Jim Cook, “Trump ’s Response to the Crisis in Northern Syria: A Case of Principled Realism in 

Action? ” National Interest , October 17 , 2019 .

Karen DeYoung, J osh Dawsey, and Kareem Fahim, “In Turkey ’s President, Trump Seems to 

Have Found a Soul Mate, ” Washington Post , October 17 , 2019 .

“Donald Trump ’s betrayal of the Kurds is a blow to America ’s c redibility, ” Economist , October 

17, 2019. 

David French, “More Evi dence the Guardrails Are Gone ,” National Review , October 17 , 2019 .

Michael Gerson, “Trum p Is Turning American Ideology into a Sham, ” Washington Post , October 

17, 2019. 

Caroline Houck, “Tracking Trump ’s National -Security Conflicts of Interest, ” Defense One ,

October 17, 2019. 

Fred Kaplan, “Trump ’s Wild Wednesday, ” Slate , October 17 , 2019 .

Joshua Keating, “Trump Gives Turkey Exactly What It Wants, Claims Victory, ” Slate , October 

17, 2019. 

Jonathan Manthorpe, “Trump to Asian Allies: You May Be Abandoned Next, ” Asia Times ,

October 17, 2019. 

William H. McRaven, “Our Republic Is Under Attack From the President, ” New York Times ,

October 17, 2019. 

Daniel Nexon, “Trump ’s a Paper Tiger, and Everyone Knows It, ” Atlantic , October 17 , 2019 .

Stephanie Schwartz, “The End of Asylum; Trump ’s Deals with Central American Countries 

Could Unravel the Global Refugee System as We Know It, ” Slate , October 17 , 2019 .

Jim Talent, “Trump Used the Options He Had in Syria ,” National Review , October 17 , 2019 .

Fareed Zakaria, “Trump ’s Syria Actions Are the Result of a Knowledge -Free Foreign Policy, ”

Washington Post , October 17, 2019. 

Naz El -Khatib and Ashley Wood, “Trump ’s Devastating Silence on China ’s Human Rights 

Abuses, ” Diplomat , October 16 , 2019 .

Jonah Gol dberg, “In S yria Withdrawal, Trump Wings It —as Usual ,” National Review , October 

16, 2019. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 47

Eli Lake, “The Trump Doctrine: American Unexceptionalism, ” Bloomberg , October 16 , 2019 .

Deb Riechmann, “Analysis: Trump Impulsiveness a Theme in Impeachment, Syria, ” Associated 

Press , October 16, 2019. 

Kori Schake, “Trump Is Complicit in Erdoga n Violence, ” Atlantic , October 16 , 2019 .

Liz Sly, “The Hasty U.S. Pullback from Syria Is a Searing Moment in America ’s Withdrawal 

from the Middle East, ” Washington Post , October 16 , 2019 .

James Traub, “The Fire in Syria Is Shedding Light on the United States, ” Foreign Policy , October 

16, 2019. 

Garvan Walshe, “Kobani Today, Krakow Tomorrow, ” Foreign Policy , October 16 , 2019 .

Mohammed Ayoob , “ Who Gains from Trump ’s Sudden Syria Withdrawal? Russia. ” National 

Interest , October 15, 2019. 

Dan Balz, “Trump ’s Decisions on Syria Bear All the Hallmarks of His ‘America First ’ Foreign 

Policy, ” Washington Post , October 15 , 2019 .

James Jay Carafano, “In Syria, Global Spotlight Should Be on Turkey, Not Trump, ” Heritage 

Foundation, October 15, 2019. 

Ted Galen Carpenter , “ Trump ’s Syria Conundrum Is a Sign That America Has Too Many 

Alliances ,” National Interest , October 15 , 2019 .

Dominic Evans, Orhan Coskun, and Tom Perry, “Power Sh ift: Who Gains in the Battle for Syria ’s

Northeast? ” Reuters , October 15 , 2019 .

Conor Friedersdorf, “Trump ’s Middle East Policy Is a Fraud, ” Atlantic , October 15 , 2019 .

Anne Gearan, “Trump ’s Moves In Ukraine and Syria Have a Common Denominator: Both Help 

Russia, ” Washington Post , October 15 , 2019 .

Leon Hadar , “ The Crisis in Syria Is What a Post -U.S. Middle East Looks Like ,” National Interest ,

October 15, 2019. 

Paul Haenle and Sam Bresnick , “ Trump Is Beijing ’s Best Asset ,” Foreign Policy , October 15, 

2019. 

Rich Lowry, “Trump ’s Syria Pullback Is an Obama -Like Blunder, ” National Review , October 15, 

2019. 

Clifford D. May , “ President Trump N ot Ending the Endless War in Syria ,” Washington Times ,

October 15, 2019 .

Peter Navarro, “Peter Navarro: The Trump Guide to Diplomacy, ” New York Times , October 15, 

2019. 

Jay Nordlinger, “‘Decline Is a Choice ,’” National Review , October 15 , 2019 .

Henry Olsen, “Why Trump Won ’t Lose Many Voters Over Syria, ” Washington Post , October 15, 

2019. 

Christopher A. Preble and Doug Bandow , “ America ’s Ill -Fated Syria Intervention: The Lessons 

Washington Must Learn ,” National Interest , October 15 , 2019 .

Michelle Goldberg, “Ukraine Has Become a Vibrant Democracy. No Wonder Trump Hates It. ”

New Y ork Times , October 14, 2019. 

Fred Kaplan, “Trump ’s Worst Betrayal Yet, ” Slate , October 14 , 2019 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 48

Tom Rogan, “Trump Self -Destructs His Middle East Policy ,” Washington Examiner , October 14, 

2019. 

The Editorial Board, “Trump Is Making Syria, and the Middle Ea st, More Dangerous, ” New York 

Times , October 14, 2019. 

The Editorial Board, “Trump ’s Syria Mess, ” Wall Street Journal , October 14 , 2019 .

Walter Russell Mead, “Mike Pompeo ’s Predicament, ” Wall Street Journal , October 14 , 2019 .

Ketti Davison, “Forecast: The Consequences of the U.S. Withdrawal from Syria, ” Institute for the 

Study of War, October 13, 2019. 

Jackson Diehl ,” In a Month, Trump Has Destroyed ‘America First, ’” Washington Post , October 

13, 2019. 

Michelle Goldberg, “‘The Beacon Has Gone Out ’: What Trum p and Giuliani Have Wrought ,” 

New York Times , October 12, 2019. 

Tanner Greer, “Can American Values Survive in a Chinese World? ” Foreign Policy , October 12, 

2019. 

David D. Kirkpatrick, Benn Hubbard, and David M. Halbfinger, “Trump ’s Abrupt Shifts in 

Middle East Unnerve U.S. Allies, ” New York Times , October 12 , 2019 , updated October 14 , 2019 .

Michael Lind, “The Return of Geoeconomics, ” National Interest , October 13 , 2019 .

Washington Examiner , “ Cultivating Alliances Puts America First ,” Washington Examiner ,

Oc tober 12, 2019. 

Anne Applebaum, “U.S. Foreign Policy Is for Sale. Who Else Is Buying? ” Washington Post ,

October 11, 2019. 

Joseph Bosco, “In Syria, Making America Ashamed Again —and Weaker, ” The Hill , October 11, 

2019. 

Robbie Gramer and Amy Mackinnon , “ Pompeo ’s State Department Reels as Impeachment 

Inquiry Sinks Morale ,” Foreign Policy , October 11 , 2019 .

Jasmin Mujanović , “The West Owns Syria ’s Disaster ,” Foreign Policy , October 11 , 2019 .

Grant Newsham, “US Can Be Careless with Loyal Allies, ” Taipei Time s, October 11 , 2019 .

James Phillips, “No, We ’re Not Selling Out the Syrian Kurds. But We Should Mediate Their 

Conflict With Turkey. ” Heritage Foundation, October 11, 2019. 

Tom Rogan, “Trump ‘s Absurd Hypocrisy: Abandon the Kurds, Send Troops to Saudi Arabia ,” 

Washington Examiner , October 11, 2019. 

Lara Seligman , “ Pentagon Chief: ‘We Are Not Abandoning the Kurds ,’” Foreign Policy , October 

11, 2019. 

Bret Stephens, “Goodbye, America. Goodbye, Freedom Man. ” New York Times , October 11, 

2019. 

The Editorial Board, “The Turk and the President, ” Wall Street Journal , October 11 , 2019 .

Jonathan S. Tobin, “The Problem with Trump ’s ‘Normandy Doctrine, ’” National Review , October 

11, 2019. 

Peter Baker and Lara Jakes, “In Syria, Trump Distills a Foreign Policy of Impulse, an d Faces the 

Fallout, ” New York Times , October 10 , 2019 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 49

Michael Brendan Dougherty, “The America -First Chimera, ” National Review , October 10 , 2019 .

Olivia Enos, “The First of (Hopefully) Many Steps to Respond to Human Rights Violations in 

Xinjiang, ” Heritag e Foundation, October 10 , 2019 .

Kay Coles James, “Protecting Religious Liberty, ” Heritage Foundation, October 10, 2019. 

Katie Bo Williams, “Why US Officials Say Trump is Flexing on Foreign Policy, ” Defense One ,

October 10, 2019. 

Matt Beebe, “‘Top Military Officers ’ Misfire In Atlantic Hit On Trump Foreign Policy ,”

Federalist , October 9, 2019. 

Conrad Black, “Trump ’s Wise Turkey Policy, ” National Review , October 9, 2019 .

Eric S. Edelman and Aykan Erdemir, “Trump ’s Capitulation to Erdogan Destroys U.S. 

Credibi lity, ” Foreign Policy , October 9, 2019 .

John Allen Gay, “The Syria Crisis Highlights Precisely What ’s Wrong With U.S. Foreign Policy ,”

Federalist , October 9, 2019. 

Peter Harris , “ Trump ’s Foreign Policy ‘Restraint ’ In Syria Could Be a Train Wreck ,” National 

Interest , October 9, 2019. 

Sylvia Taschka, “Trump ’s America Shines Bright for Europe ’s Radical New Right, ” National 

Interest , October 9, 2019. 

Robert B. Zoellick, “The Foreign Policy Americans Really Want, ” Washington Post , October 9, 

2019. 

Ted Galen Carp enter , “ Yes, Donald Trump Dumped the Kurds (And We Should Not Be 

Shocked) ,” National Interest , October 8, 2019 .

Jim Geraghty, “We ’re Not Exporting Our Values to China —We ’re Importing Theirs, ” National 

Review , October 8, 2019. 

William Saletan, “Guess Who El se Trump Is Colluding With, ” Slate , October 8, 2019 .

Kori Schake, “The Trump Administration Doesn ’t Care About Allies, ” Atlantic , October 8, 2019 .

The Editors, “Trump ’s Syria Mistake, ” National Review , October 8, 2019 .

Jim Gerachty, “Our Foreign Policy Is Muddled, Because Our Public Is Muddled, Because Our 

Leaders Are Muddled, ” National Review , October 7, 2019 .

Tom Rogan, “Foolish Beyond Belief: In Syria, Trump Just Betrayed Our Allies and Helped O ur 

Enemies ,” Washington Examiner , October 7, 2019 .

Tom Rogan, “Trump Has Blown Up His Red Lines. Why Would Turkey Fear His Economic 

Threat? ” Washington Examiner , October 7, 2019 .

Stephen M. Walt, “Welcome to Trump ’s Impeachment Foreign Policy, ” Foreign Policy , October 

7, 2019. 

Peter E. Harrell, “Trump ’s Use of Sanctions Is Nothing Like Obama ’s, ” Foreign Policy , October 

5, 2019. 

Christopher Woody, “China Is Filling a ‘Strategic Vacuum ’ in the Pacific Left by the US and Its 

Allies, and That ’s Bad News for Taiwan, ” Business Insider , October 5, 2019 .

Azeem Ibrahim, “China Has No Room for Dissenting Friends, Small Nations Know They Can 

Break from Washington —But Not from Beijing, ” Foreign Policy , October 4, 2019 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 50

Carol D. Leonnig, Shane Harris, and Josh Dawsey, “Trump ’s Calls with Foreign Leaders Have 

Long Worried Aides, Leaving Some ‘Genuinely Horrified, ’” Washington Post , October 4, 2019 .

Tom Rogan, “Ironically, Trump ’s Silence on Hong Kong May Be Helping Hongkon gers, ”

Washington Examiner , October 4, 2019. 

Colum Lynch, “Trump ’s Whistleblower Attack ‘Undermines ’ U.S. Global Accountability Push, ”

Foreign Policy , October 3, 2019. 

Christopher A. Preble, John Glaser, and A. Trevor Thrall , “ What Ukraine Tells Us about T rump ,” 

Cato Institute, October 3, 2019. 

Robert A. Manning, “Trump ’s Globalism Is a Caricature of Multilateralism, ” Foreign Policy ,

October 2, 2019. 

Christopher A. Preble, John Glaser, and A. Trevor Thrall , “ Fuel to the Fire, How Trump Made 

America ’s Broken Foreign Policy Even Worse (and How We Can Recover), ” Cato Institute, 

October 2, 2019. (Another version of this article was posted by the Cato Institute on September 

21, 2019.) 

Nicole Narea, “America Is Stepping Down as a Global Leader on Refugees, ” Vox , O ctober 1, 

2019. 

Elliot Silverberg and Matthew Sullivan, “Assessing Trump ’s Indo -Pacific Strategy, 2 Years In, ”

Diplomat, October 1, 2019. 

John Glaser, Christopher A. Preble, and A. Trevor Thrall, “Towards a More Prudent American 

Grand Strategy ,” Survival , October -November 2019 .

James Fallows, “The End of the Roman Empire Wasn ’t That Bad, Maybe the End of the 

American One Won ’t Be Either, ” Atlantic , October 2019 .

Michael Gerson, “An American President Who Doesn ’t Understand the Meaning of Amer ica, ”

Washingto n Post , September 30, 2019. 

Asli Aydintasbas, “The Liberal World Order Crumbled a Year Ago . We ’re Still Reeling. ”

Washington Post , September 29, 2019. 

Laura Rosenberger, “China and Russia Are Working to Destroy Democracy, and Our Victory Is 

Not Assured, ” Dallas Morning News , September 29 , 2019 .

Shane Harris and John Hudson, “Jamal Khashoggi ’s Death Made the Saudi Crown Prince a 

Pariah. Trump Has Helped Rehabilitate Him on the World Stage, ” Washington Post , September 

28, 2019. 

Alexis Papazoglou, “Trump Has a Peculiar Definition of Sovereignty, ” Atlantic , September 28, 

2019. 

Anne Applebaum, “Americans Spent Decades Discussing the Rule of Law. Why Would Anyone 

Believe Us Now? ” Washington Post , September 27 , 2019 .

Philip Gordon and Daniel Fried, “The Other Ukraine Scandal: Trump ’s Threats to Our 

Ambassador Who Wouldn ’t Bend, ” Washington Post , September 27 , 2019 .

Brett D. Schaefer, “A U.S. Victory at the Universal Postal Union, ” Heritage Foundation, 

September 27, 2019. 

Hal Brands, “Reckless Choices, Bad Deals, and Dangerous Provocations, ” Foreign Affairs ,

September 26, 2019. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 51

Michael Hirsh, “Trump ’s Call With Zelensky Was Not Out of the Ordinary —for Trump, ” Foreign 

Policy , September 26, 2019. 

Keith Johnson, “Trump Scores a Big Victory —on Stamps, ” Foreign Policy , September 26 , 2019 .

Nick Cumming -Bruce, “U.S. Threat to Withdraw From Postal Treaty Prompts Emergency Talks, ”

New York Times , September 25, 2019. 

Amy MacKinnon and Robbie Gramer, “Trump Blasts Own Ambassador in Call With Ukraini an 

President, ” Foreign Policy , September 25 , 2019 .

Paul Musgrave, “The U.S. Tried to Fix Ukraine ’s Government. We Exported Our Corruption 

Instead. ” Washington Post , September 25 , 2019 .

David Nakamura, “On the World Stage at the United Nations, Trump ’s ‘Ame rica First ’ Foreign 

Policy Gives Way to a ‘Me First ’ Mantra, ” Washington Post , September 25 , 2019 .

Elbridge Colby, “Don ’t Let Iran Distract From China, ” Wall Street Journal , September 24 , 2019 .

Matthew Continetti , “ Trump, the U.N. & ‘Encroaching Control ,’” National Review , September 

24, 2019. 

Michael Crowley, “Trump Celebrates Nationalism in U.N. Speech and Plays Down Iran Crisis, ”

New York Times , September 24, 2019. 

Sarah Dilorenzo (Associated Press ), “ US Steps Up Pressure on China over Treatment of 

Muslim s, ” Washington Post , September 24 , 2019 .

Editorial Board, “Trump Tell s UN the Truth About Globalism and Nationalism, ” New York Post ,

September 24, 2019. 

Anne Gearan and Seung Min Kim, “Trump Condemns Globalism, Touts Nationalistic View of 

Foreign Affairs at U.N., ” Washington Post , September 24 , 2019 .

Fred Kaplan, “Trump Is No Longer Even Pretending to Care About the Ideals of the U.N., ” Slate ,

September 24 , 2019. 

Jen Kirby, “Trump Goes to the United Nations to Argue Against Everything It Stands For —

Again, ” Vox , September 24 , 2019 .

Anita Kumar, “Decoding Trump ’s Speech Before the United Nations, ” Politico , September 24, 

2019. 

Edith M. Lederer, “UN Chief Warn s of a World Divided Between US and China, ” Associated 

Press , September 24, 2019. 

Jonathan Lemire and Deb Riechmann, “Trump Attacks Globalism, While Putting Pressure on 

Iran, ” Associated Press , September 24 , 2019 .

Michael McCaul, “The United States Can ’t C ede the U.N. to China, ” Foreign Policy , September 

24, 2019. 

Caitlin Oprysko and Anita Kumar, “Trump Pushes Aggressive ‘America First ’ Message to World 

Leaders, ” Politico , September 24 , 2019 .

Humeyra Pamuk and David Brunnstrom, “U.S. Leads Condemnation of C hina for ‘Horrific ’

Repression of Muslims, ” Reuters , September 24 , 2019 .

Jennifer Peltz (Associated Press), “NATO Leader: Tricky Times Show Need for International 

Groups, ” Military Times , September 24 , 2019 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 52

Fan Peng, “Why China ’s Politics Scores Above the West ’s, ” Global Times , September 24 , 2019 .

Matthew Petti, “Trump Airs Nationalism and Globalism Gripes at the UN, ” National Interest ,

September 24, 2019. 

Ayesha Rascoe, “Trump To U.N. General Assembly: ‘The Future Does Not Belong To 

Globalists, ’” NPR , September 24 , 2019 .

Tom Rogan, “Trumps Stands Up for Positive Nationalism, But Forgets His UN Audience, ”

Washington Examiner , September 24, 2019. 

Vivian Salama, “At U.N., Trump Urges Nations to Place Their Citiz ens First, Rejects 

‘Globalists, ’” Wall Street Journal , September 24 , 2019 .

Alex Ward, “Trump at UN Offers His Most Forceful Support for Hong Kong Yet, ” Vox ,

September 24, 2019. 

Katie Bo Williams, “Trump Delivers Populist Message to the UN —and US Voters, ” Defense One ,

September 24, 2019. 

Joseph Bosco, “Remembering Otto Warmbier ’s Death, Trump Renews Pressu re on North Korea, ”

The Hill , September 23, 2019. 

Peter Harris, “A Recession Won ’t Stop America ’s Reckless Military Spending, ” National Interest ,

September 23, 2019. 

Emilie Kao and Joel Griffith, “Trump ’s Focus on Religious Freedom at the U.N. Should Lead the 

Way, ” Heritage Foundation, September 23, 2019. 

Anita Kumar, “Trump Tries to make America Relevant Again to the U.N., ” Politico , September 

23, 2019. 

Mai read McArdle , “ Trump Criticizes World Leaders on Religious Freedom, Earmarks $25 

Million ,” National Review , September 23 , 2019 .

Michelle Nichols and David Brunnstrom, “At U.N., Trump Pushes Religious Freedom at Event 

Slamming China over Uighurs, ” Reuters , September 23 , 2019 .

Franco Ordonez, “Trump Returns To The U.N. This Week Facing Growing Unease About U.S. 

Leadership, ” NPR , September 23 , 2019 .

Alex Pascal, “Against Washington ’s ‘Great Power ’ Obsession, ” Atlantic , September 23 , 2019 .

Kelsey Zorzi, “Trump Stands Up for Religious Freedom ,” Wall Street Journal , September 23, 

2019. 

Colum Lynch and Robbie Gramer, “The World Comes to the U.N. —but the U.S. Is largely 

Missing, ” Foreign Policy , September 22 , 2019 .

Ali Wyne, “How Not to Confront China, ” National Int erest , September 22 , 2019 .

Ted Galen Carpenter , “ Interventionists Evade Responsibility for Their Policy Disasters ,” Cato 

Institute, November 20, 2019. 

Hal Brands, “A Filipino Battleground of the China -U.S. Cool War, ” Bloomberg , September 19, 

2019. 

Edward L uce, “Trump Is Serious About US Divorce from China, ” Financial Times , September 

19, 2019. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 53

Josh Rogin, “The Trump Administration Prepares a New Assault on U.S. Soft Power, ”

Washington Post , September 19, 2019. 

Katie Bo Williams, “How Trump is Remaking Repub lican Foreign Policy, ” Defense One ,

September 19, 2019. 

Thomas J. Duesterberg , “ Trump ’s Trade Policy at a Crossroads ,” National Review , September 17, 

2019. 

Jim Townsend, “Trump ’s Defense Cuts in Europe Will Backfire, ” Foreign Policy , September 17, 

2019. 

Grant T. Harris and Michael McFaul, “How Vladimir Putin Is Outplaying the U.S. in Africa, ”

Washington Post , September 17, 2019. 

Kristine Lee, “Coming Soon to the United Nations: Chinese Leadership and Authoritarian 

Values, ” Foreign Affairs , September 16 , 2019 .

David Nakamura, “‘ I Don ’t Blame Kim Jong Un ’: In Dismissing Bolton, Trump Sides with North 

Korean Leader —Again, ” Washington Post , September 12 , 2019 .

Rick Noack, “Why U.S. Foes Around the World Will Welcome Bolton ’s Departure, and Why 

They Shouldn ’t Get Too Excited, ” Washington Post , September 11 , 2019 .

Thomas Wright, “Bolton ’s Departure Signals Trump ’s Foreign -Policy Pivot, ” Atlantic , September 

11, 201 9. 

Charles Edel, “Democracy Is Fighting for Its Life, ” Foreign Policy , September 10 , 2019 .

Dexter Filkins, “How John Bolton Got the Better of President Trump, ” New Yorker , September 

10, 2019. 

Beverly Gage, “The Koch Foundation Is Trying to Reshape Foreign Policy. With Liberal Allies. ”

New York Times , September 10, 2019. 

Dov S. Zakheim, “Donald Trump and the Art of the Perpetual Bluff, ” National Interest ,

September 10, 2019. 

Janusz Bugajski, “The US Can Play China Against Russia, ” The Hill , September 9, 2019 .

Richard Fontaine, “Great -Power Competition Is Washington ’s Top Priority —but Not the 

Public ’s, ” Foreign Affairs , September 9, 2019 .

Greg Myre, “Are The U.S. And China headed For A Cold War? ” NPR , September 9, 2019 .

Nick Wadhams, Glen Carey, and Jennifer J acobs, “Failed Afghan Talks Underscore Trump ’s

Foreign Policy Setbacks, ” Bloomberg , September 9, 2019 .

Katie Bo Williams, “Once Again, Trump Lurches to End a War, But Troops Remain, ” Defense 

One , September 9, 2019. 

Colin Dueck, “The End of the Wilsonian Ce ntury? ” National Interest , September 8, 2019 .

Seth G. Jones and Tom Karako, “Where Did ‘Maximum Pressure ’ Go? ” Wall Street Journal ,

September 8, 2019. 

James Jay Carafano, “Trump Should Use U.N. Meeting to Champion Religious Liberty, ”

Heritage Foundation, S eptember 6, 2019. 

Larry Diamond, “America ’s Silence Helps Autocrats Triumph, ” Foreign Policy , September 6, 

2019. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 54

Seth Kaplan, “When Everything Is a Human Right, Nothing Is, ” Foreign Policy , September 6, 

2019. 

Hunter Marston, “The U.S. -China Cold War Is a Myth, ” Foreign Policy , September 6, 2019 .

Nahal Toosi, “Trump Plan Would Steer Foreign Aid to ‘Friends and Allies, ’” Politico , September 

6, 2019. 

Colum Lynch and Robbie Gramer, “Senior Officials Concede Loss of U.S. Clout as Trump 

Prepares for U.N. Summit, ” Foreign Policy , September 5, 2019 .

Nicholas Phillips, “The Trade War Is Smart Geopolitics, ” National Review , September 5, 2019 .

Dalibor Rohac and Scott Cullinane, “American –European Unity against China Is Ind ispensable ,” 

National Review , September 5, 2019. 

Ted Galen Carpenter , “ The Trump Administration Misses the Point Again about Burden ‐

Sharing ,” Cato Institute, September 3, 2019. 

Walter Russell Mead, “The Rules of Geopolitics Are Different in Asia, ” Wall St reet Journal ,

September 2, 2019. 

Fred Kaplan, “At the G -7, Trump Showed Again That He ’s a Terrible Negotiator, ” Slate , August 

27, 2019. 

William Saletan, “Trump Did Not Represent the U.S. at the G -7, ” Slate , August 27 , 2019 .

Editorial Board, “A G -7 Fiasco t o Remember, Without U.S. Leadership, the World Is a More 

Dangerous Place, ” Bloomberg , August 26 , 2019 .

Uri Friedman and Peter Nicholas, “A Defining Moment for Trump ’s Foreign Policy, ” Atlantic ,

August 23, 2019. 

Peter Nicholas, “America ’s Allies Seem to Be Moving On Without Trump, ” Atlantic , August 26, 

2019. 

Tal Axelrod, “Here Are the US Allies That Have Been Caught in Trump ’s Crosshairs, ” The Hill ,

August 24, 2019. 

Nate Anderson and Jon Soltz, “One Step at a Time: Congress ’ Charge to Reshape American 

Foreign Policy, ” Military Times , August 23 , 2019 .

Fred Kaplan, “This Is What a World Without American Leadership Looks Like, ” Slate , August 

23, 2019. 

Jakub Grygiel , “ The Role of Values in Foreign Policy ,” National Review , August 21 , 2019 .

Michael Hirsh, “Why Trump Fails at Making Deals, ” Foreign Policy , August 21 , 2019 .

Fred Kaplan, “The Greenland Gambit, Trump ’s Latest Obsession Shows What ’s Wrong with 

Treating Every For eign Policy Issue Like a Real Estate Deal, ” Slate , August 21 , 2019 .

Howard Lavine and James Ron, “To Protect Human Rights Aboard, Preach to Trump Voters, ”

Foreign Policy , August 21, 2019. 

Abigail Tracy, “‘ He Had Made Us a Laughing Stock ’: Diplomats Stunned by Trump ’s Feud With 

Denmark, ” Vanity Fair , August 21 , 2019 .

Thomas Wright, “Trump Has Defected, ” Atlantic , August 21 , 2019 .

James Kitfield, “America Adrift: ‘Brin ging The World To Crisis, ’” Breaking Defense , August 20, 

2019. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 55

Richard Haass, “Trump Doesn ’t Negotiate. He Makes Demands. ” Washington Post , August 19, 

2019. 

Edward Wong, “Waning of American Power? Trump Struggles With an Asia in Crisis, ” New York 

Times , August 13, 2019. 

Robbie Gramer, “Hiring Freeze Put U.S. Diplomats Under Threat Worldwide, Repo rt Says, ”

Foreign Policy , August 9, 2019. 

Michael Hirsh, “America Ignored, ” Foreign Policy , August 9, 2019 .

Gideon Rachman, “What Happens When the World Cannot Rely on the US? ” Financial Times ,

August 9, 2019. 

Conrad Black , “ Trump Faces Down the China Thre at ,” National Review , August 8, 2019 .

Eliana Johnson, “Trump ’s Vision Meets Growing Global Chaos, ” Politico , August 8, 2019 .

James Jay Carafano, “Ensuring a Twenty -Second Century America, ” Heritage Foundation, 

August 6, 2019. 

Gideon Rachman, “The Asian Strategic Order is Dying, ” Financial Times , August 5, 2019 .

Anna Applebaum, “Non -Americans, Be Warned: There Will Be No Return to Normal After 

Trump, ” Washington Post , August 4, 2019 .

Christopher A. Preble , “ Is This the End of th e Liberal World Order? ” National Interest , August 3, 

2019. 

David French , “ The Dangerous Folly of Donald Trump ’s Infatuation with Kim Jong -un ,”

National Review , August 2, 2019. 

Jay Nordlinger , “ Hong Kong and Us ,” National Rev iew, August 2, 2019 .

Derek Gross man, “The Biggest Threat to the US Indo -Pacific Strategy? Washington Itself. ”

Diplomat , August 1, 2019. 

Paul R. Pillar, “Diplomatic Meltdown: Why America Has an Ineffective Department of State, ”

National Interest , July 29, 2019. 

Kori Schake, “The Bill for America First Is Coming Due, ” Atlantic , July 27 , 2019 .

Daniel Sneider, “Northeast Asia Unraveling Amid US Retreat, ” Asia Times , July 25 , 2019 .

Walter Russell Mead, “Trump ’s Hesitant Embrace of Human Rights, ” Wall Street Journal , July 

22, 2019. 

Paul R. Pillar, “Mike Pompeo ’s Human Rights Problem, ” National Interest , July 22 , 2019 .

Stephen M. Walt, “Restraint Isn ’t Isolationism —and It Won ’t Endanger America, ” Foreign 

Policy , July 22, 2019. 

Matthew Lee, “Pompeo Takes Aim at China at Religious Freed om Conference, ” Associated 

Press , July 18, 2019. 

Editorial Board, “Pompeo Gets Religion, ” Wall Street Journal , July 17 , 2019 .

Michael Hirsh, “America ’s Road to Reputational Ruin, ” Foreign Policy , July 17 , 2019 .

Ted Galen Carpenter, “America Should Rethink Its Commitments to Allies, ” National Interest ,

July 14, 2019. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 56

Edward Wong, “Trump ’s Asia Gamble: Shatter Enduring Strategies on China and North Korea, ”

New York Times , July 11, 2019. 

Anthony Leonardi, “Pompeo Launches Commission to Review Unalienable Right s in US Foreign 

Policy, ” Washington Examiner , July 8, 2019 .

Eric Tucker, “Trump Administration Reviews Human Rights ’ Role in US Policy, ” Associated 

Press , July 8, 2019. 

Michael Pompeo, “Unalienable Rights and U.S. Foreign Policy, The Foun ders ’ Principles C an 

Help Revitalize Liberal Democracy Worldwide, ” Wall Street Journal , July 7, 2019 .

Thomas Wright, “Trump Couldn ’t Ignore the Contradictions of His Foreign Policy Any Longer, ”

Atlantic , July 5, 2019. 

Nahal Toosi, “Trump ’s ‘Natural Law ’ Human Rights Panel R eadies for Launch, ” Politico , July 3, 

2019. 

Fareed Zakaria, “The Self -Destruction of American Power, ” Foreign Affairs , July/August 2019 .

Editorial Board, “The Trump Doctrine, With This President, the Diplomacy Is Always Personal, ”

Wall Street Journal , June 30, 2019. 

Jay Nordlinger , “ Dictators and Americans ,” National Review , June 30 , 2019 .

Nick Wadhams, “Trump Helps Bring Shunned Authoritarians Back In From the Cold, ”

Bloomberg , June 30, 2019. 

Peter Baker, “Trump Once Again Assails America ’s Friends as He Opens Overseas Visit, ” New 

York Times , June 27, 2019. 

Anne Pierc e, “‘ America First ’ Should Not Translate to ‘Democracy Last, ’” National Interest ,

June 26, 2019. 

Ted Galen Carpenter, “Wr ong: Tru mp is Not An Isolationist, ” National Interest , June 23 , 2019 .

Curt Mills, “The Battle for the Soul of Trump Foreign Policy, ” National Interest , June 22 , 2019 .

Anrew Restuccia, “Trump ’s ‘No Rush ’ Foreign Policy, The President Is Affording Himself Ample 

Room for Protracted Negotiations —and Protecting Himself in Case His Strategy Goes Awry, ”

Politico , June 22, 2019. 

Greg Jaffe, “A Dangerous Confusion at the Heart of Trump ’s Foreign Policy, Washington Post ,

June 21, 2019. 

Kori Schake, “Worse Than Obama ’s Red -Li ne Moment, ” Atlantic , June 21 , 2019 .

Hal Brands, “New U.S. Indo -Pacific Strategy Isn ’t Going to Scare China, ” Bloomberg , June 18, 

2019. 

Peter Harris, “Where is Trump the Realist? For Better or Worse, Donald Trump Listens to His 

Advisors on Foreign Policy. ” National Interest , June 17 , 2019 .

Fred Hiatt, “Trump Inherited America ’s Foreign Policy Riches. He ’s Frittering Them Away. ”

Washington Post , June 16, 2019. 

Christopher Preble, “The Peace Problem: Is America Saving the World or Destroying It? ”

National Int erest , June 16, 2019. 

Zack Beauchamp, “Trump, Election Interference, and Hollow Nationalism, ” Vox , June 13 , 2019 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 57

Francois Delattre, “The World Grows More Dangerous by the Day, ” New York Times , June 13, 

2019. 

Bret Stephens, “Hong Kong and the Future of Freedom, ” New York Times , June 13 , 2019 .

Stephen M. Walt, “Nobody ’s Asking for Trump to Be a Genius, ” Foreign Policy , June 10 , 2019 .

Anne Gearan, Toluse Olorunnipa, and James McAuley, “‘ Don ’t Poke the Bear ’: Euro pean 

Leaders Refine Their Approach to Trump, ” Washington Post , June 7, 2019 .

Matthew Continetti , “ Trump ’s Great D -Day Speech ,” National Review , June 6, 2019 .

Adam Gopnik, “Europe and America Seventy -Five Years After D Day, ” New Yorker , June 6, 

2019. 

Peter Feaver, “The Lessons of 1944 Are in Jeopardy, ” Foreign Policy , June 5, 2019 .

Michael Hirsh, “D-Day ’s Dying Legacy, ” Foreign Policy , June 5, 2019 .

Brett McGurk, “American Foreign Policy Adrift, ” Foreign Affairs , June 5, 2019 .

Jennifer Rubin, “A Low Point fo r America Overseas, ” Washington Post , June 5, 2019 .

Yasmeen Serhan and Peter Nicholas, “Using D -Day to Remind Trump Who His Real Allies Are, ”

Atlantic , June 5, 2019. 

Walter Russell Mead, “Trump ’s Case Against Europe, ” Wall Street Journal , June 3, 2019 .

Dav id Nakamura, “Trump ’s Reliance on Pressure Tactics Is Showing Diminishing Returns, ”

Washington Post , June 1, 2019. 

Fred Kaplan, “Who Speaks for the United States? ” Slate , May 29 , 2019 .

Doug Bandow, “Questionable Alliances: Why America Needs to Reexamine It s International 

Relationships, ” National Interest , May 28 , 2019 .

David Ignatius, “How to Make Sense of the Clown Show That Is Trump ’s Foreign Policy, ”

Washington Post , May 28, 2019. 

Mona Charen , “ What ’s Missing from Trump ’s China Policy ,” National Review , May 24 , 2019 .

Joshua Keating, “Why Would Any Country Trust America Again? ” Slate , May 24 , 2019 .

Fareed Zakaria, “Trump ’s Approach to Foreign Policy Provokes an Anti -American Response, ”

Washington Post , May 16, 2019. 

Max Boot, “Trump ’s Pet Intellectuals Are Embarrassing Themselves, ” Washington Post , May 15, 

2019. 

Eliana Plott, “Ignoring Trump ’s Orders, Hoping He ’ll Forget, ” Atlantic , May 15 , 2019 .

Rebeccah Heinrichs, “Mike Pompeo ’s Meeting With Putin Highlights Trump ’s Reversal Of 

Obama ’s Russia Failures ,” Federalist , May 14 , 2019 .

David Ignatius, “Foreign Adversaries Have Figured Trump Out, ” Washington Post , May 14, 

2019. 

Zack Beauchamp, “Hungary ’s Leader Is Waging War on Democracy. Today, He ’s at the White 

House. ” Vox , May 13 , 2019 .

Akshobh Giridharadas, “Trump: Trade, Tirade and Transatlantic Relations, ” National Interest ,

May 11, 2019. U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress  

> Congressional Research Service 58

Paul Krugman, “Killing the Pax Americana, ” New York Times , May 11 , 2019 .

Anne Applebaum, “Trump Has the Attention Span of a Gnat. It ’s Destroying Our Foreign Policy. ”

Washington Post , May 10, 2019. 

Henry Olsen, “Trump ’s Critics Were Wrong. He ’s Not a Madman in Foreign Policy. ” Washington 

Post , May 10, 2019. 

David Frum, “Trump Has Just One Trick —And It ’s Not Working Anymore, ” Atlantic , M ay 9, 

2019. 

Joshua Keating, “The People Want ‘America First, ’ in Theory, ” Slate , May 9, 2019 .

Robert D. Blackwill, “Trump Deserves More Credit for His Foreign Policies, ” Foreign Policy ,

May 7, 2019. 

Jo seph S. Nye, “American Soft Pow er in the Age of Trump, ” Project Syndicate , May 6, 2019 .

Ralph A. Cossa and Brad Glosserman, “Defining and Refining the Indo -Pacific Concept, ”

Comparative Connections , May -August 2019. 

Karen DeYoung and Josh Dawsey, “For Inured Foreign Officials, the Sting of Trump ’s Tweets 

Has Begun to Dull, ” Washington Post , April 30 , 2019 .

Max Boot, “Trump Again Shows How Easily He ’s Manipulated by Dictators, ” Washington Post ,

April 30, 2019. 

Amy Mackinnon, “Trump May Like Putin. His Administration Doesn ’t. ” Foreign Poli cy , April 

29, 2019. 

Steven A. Cook, “Loving Dictators Is as American as Apple Pie, ” Foreign Policy , April 26 , 2019 .

Sumantra Maitra, “The Case For Continuing Foreign Policy Retrenchment After Trump ,” 

Federalist , April 26, 2019. 

Stephen M. Walt, “America Is n’t as Powerful as It Thinks It Is, ” Foreign Policy , April 26 , 2019 .

Henry Farrell, Abraham Newman, “By Punishing Iran, Trump Is Weakening America, ” Foreign 

Policy , April 24, 2019. 

Christopher A. Preble , “ Adapting to American Decline ,” New York Times , April 21 , 2019 .

Michael Anton, “The Trump Doctrine, An Insider Explains the President ’s Foreign Policy, ”

Foreign Policy , April 20, 2019. 

Alex Horton, “Trump Soured Relations in Latin America. China and Russia Have Welcomed the 

Chaos. ” Washington Post , Apri l 20 , 2019 .

Ted Galen Carpenter, “Trump Should Have Already Left NATO, ” National Interest , April 17, 

2019. 

Jermi Suri, “The Long Rise and Sudden Fall of American Diplomacy, ” Foreign Policy , April 17, 

2019. 

Stephen M. Walt, ” The United States Will Be Shocke d by Its Future, ” Foreign Policy , April 16, 

2019. 

James Jay Carafano, “America ’s Next 5 Moves in the Indo -Pacific Region, Donald Trump Has 

Done Much to Alter U.S. Influence in Asia, ” National Interest , April 7, 2019 .U.S. Role in the World: Background and Issues for Congress       

> Congressional Research Service R44891 · VERSION 47 ·UPDATED 59

# Author Information 

Ronald O'Rourke 

Specialist in Naval Affairs 

Michael Moodie 

Assistant Director and Senior Specialist in Foreign 

Affairs, Defense and Trade 

# Disclaimer 

This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan 

shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and 

under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should n ot be relied upon for purposes other 

than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in 

connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not 

subject to copyr ight protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in 

its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or 

material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permissio n of the copyright holder if you wish to 

copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.
