Title: Skyline Nav AI - News

URL Source: https://www.skylinenav.com/news

Markdown Content:
Latest updates
--------------

Pathfinder Demo in Open Areas (longer flight)

10/12/2025: W e flew a drone across rural Red Springs, North Carolina and achieved precise geolocation—all without GPS, cellular, or Wi-Fi. Pathfinder uses the drone’s onboard camera feed and advanced computer vision to match real-time imagery with precomputed satellite data.

How does Pathfinder work? It detects and identifies terrain features below—trees, roads, buildings, grass, fields, sidewalks—then instantly matches them with predownloaded, up-to-date datasets as you fly. This unlocks real-time, GPS-free localization by leveraging the unique visual fingerprint of your environment.

Pathfinder combines absolute positioning, IMU, and visual odometry—delivering true 100% frame-by-frame coverage and accuracy. Watch the full video here.

Commercial UAV News Features Skyline Nav AI

10/07/2025: “When the Ukraine War kicked off, drones became so important on the front lines,” Singh said. “Then we started seeing GPS jamming happen, and we realized that we needed to do this in the air.”

Ultimately, this led to their Pathfinder Air solution, which was released earlier this year and was among the winners at Commercial UAV Expo 2025’s Pitch the Press competition. Built to add a GPS-independent layer of navigation for drones, Pathfinder Air instead relies on imagery captured during a flight and leverages computer vision algorithms to locate the drone. Read more here.

Pathfinder Demo in Open Areas

09/20/2025: W e flew a drone across rural Red Springs, North Carolina and achieved precise geolocation—all without GPS, cellular, or Wi-Fi. Pathfinder uses the drone’s onboard camera feed and advanced computer vision to match real-time imagery with precomputed satellite data.

How does Pathfinder work? It detects and identifies terrain features below—trees, roads, buildings, grass, fields, sidewalks—then instantly matches them with predownloaded, up-to-date datasets as you fly. This unlocks real-time, GPS-free localization by leveraging the unique visual fingerprint of your environment.

Pathfinder combines absolute positioning, IMU, and visual odometry—delivering true 100% frame-by-frame coverage and accuracy. Watch the full video here.

Skyline Nav AI selected for TechCrunch Startup Battlefield 200

09/15/2025: Skyline Nav AI has been selected for TechCrunch's 2025 Startup Battlefield 200 - the biggest conference of its kind for companies from around the world!

We are looking forward to being there and announcing new product launches in collaboration with our existing and new customers in the transportation, autonomy, aerospace, logistics and related industries. Stay tuned for more!

To attend the conference and see us in action, you can register with a 20% promo code here:https://tcrn.ch/3JQ9iOT

Skyline Nav AI wins Pitch the Press at Commercial-UAV

09/04/2025: During the Commercial-UAV conference, Skyline Nav AI won the Pitch the Press Competition. From hundreds of companies that applied, Skyline Nav AI was one of 17 companies that pitched and 1 of three that won the competition. The judges saw Skyline Nav AI's focus on helping with public safety mission as an important addition to uncrewed systems sector. Learn more here.

We are grateful to our strategic partner, Kearfott Corporation, for joining us at the event and participating in key discussions with potential customers and partners.

Skyline Nav AI presents during Commercial-UAV

09/02/2025: During the Commercial-UAV conference, Skyline Nav AI highlighted the incidents of GPS-jamming and spoofing from around the world, and why we need to prepare for GPS outages here in the United States.

Our team also highlighted how Pathfinder is bringing GPS-independence to drones, aircraft, ground vehicles and maritime use cases by closely partnering with companies and organizations across the commercial and defense ecosystems. We look forward to continued leadership and advocacy in this arena.

Skyline Nav AI and BAE Systems at Fed SuperNova

08/20/2025: We were thrilled to participate in Fed SuperNova 2025 in Austin, TX. Skyline Nav AI exhibited and demoed our latest test results during the Startup Crawl. We were also honored to lead a panel discussion with BAE Systems.

During the panel discussion, we highlighted the power of teaming and collaboration between larger and smaller entities to solve our most pressing national security challenges. Such collaborations foster unique innovations and faster speed to market. Ultimately, this creates win-win opportunities for partnering companies. Thanks to 'FAST Labs, MassChallenge and Capital Factory for bringing us together. Looking forward to next year's event.

MIT CSAIL Features Skyline Nav AI

07/28/2025: According to a 2019 study, large-scale GPS outage would cost the US economy $45B in economic losses in the first 30 days ($57B in 2025 dollars). Singh says, “As a society, we’re underprepared for a large-scale GPS outage. Skyline Nav AI’s mission is to ensure that when—not if—GPS goes down, our economy, our supply chains, and our critical infrastructure keep moving. That’s the responsibility we carry, and that’s what excites us every day.”

This concern is not just theoretical. A December 2024 plane crash in Azerbaijan that killed 38 passengers was partly caused by a GPS outage, and many flights today are rerouted due to military activity that could cause dangerous GPS interference. Read more here.

Pathfinder: Absolute + Relative Localization

07/18/2025:We’re excited to announce that Pathfinder now combines absolute positioning, IMU, and visual odometry—delivering true 100% frame-by-frame coverage and accuracy. Here’s how:

-- Absolute Positioning: When the camera and reference data are enough, Pathfinder gives you precise latitude and longitude, every single frame. This is depicted by the purple color trajectory in the video.

-- Seamless Fallback: If absolute positioning isn’t perfectly confident—say, visibility drops or features are missing—Pathfinder smoothly switches to relative positioning (using IMU and visual odometry) until absolute localization is restored. This is depicted by the red color trajectory in the video.

-- Robust in Any Terrain: This multi-modal approach ensures Pathfinder keeps you on course in urban canyons, open fields, forests, or anywhere GPS fails.

-- No GPS required: Delivers absolute coordinates using only visual data, but always has your back with IMU + odometry.

Pathfinder: Now at 100% accuracy, 100% of frames, in real time. No matter the weather, lighting, or landscape, you stay positioned and confident—with or without GPS. Watch the full video here.

Drone flight with no GPS

07/08/2025: See Pathfinder™ in action! In this demo, we flew a drone over a suburban area and achieved precise geolocation—all without GPS, cellular, or Wi-Fi. Pathfinder relies solely on the drone’s onboard camera feed, using advanced computer vision to match real-time imagery with precomputed satellite data. Pathfinder works by detecting a variety of terrain features below—such as trees, roads, buildings, grass, fields, and sidewalks—and instantly matching them with predownloaded datasets as you fly. This enables real-time, GPS-free localization by leveraging the unique visual patterns of the environment.

*   No GPS required: Pathfinder delivers absolute location coordinates using only visual data.

*   Reliable performance: 95% of video frames provide accurate, real-time localization.

*   Scalable solution: Works anywhere with a clear view, regardless of terrain or connectivity.

*   Low Compute: Pathfinder doesn’t need a supercomputer. You can run it on a Raspberry Pi 5 or an NVIDIA Jetson Nano.

Watch the full video here.

Manufacturing Today Features Kearfott and Skyline Nav AI

07/01/2025: Last year, Kearfott formed an alliance with Skyline Nav AI (Skyline) to build a new navigation and positioning platform. John updates us on the project's progress. "Skyline is one of the world's leading innovators in vision-based navigation utilizing artificial intelligence (AI) with state-of-the-art capabilities. Through this partnership, we are integrating Skyline's advanced technology and capability into our proven foundation, built over a century of experience at Kearfott. Together, we have created a one-of-a-kind synergy; Kearfott alone could not have developed Skyline's capabilities without many years and millions of dollars of investment. Similarly, Skyline cannot bring its technologies and capabilities to market quickly and efficiently without substantial resources. Therefore, collaborating and leveraging our distinct capabilities is truly exceptional. Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI Receives SBIR Phase 2 Award from USAF

05/29/2025: Skyline Nav AI Awarded $1.25M SBIR Phase II Contract to Integrate Pathfinder™ on Various Air Force Platforms. Funding will enable GPS-independent navigation for aerial platforms in contested environments

This award accelerates our mission to provide resilient, scalable, and precise navigation for defense and commercial users alike. We are one step closer to GPS-independence, especially in the wake of persistent GPS-jamming from adversarial nation-states, and other threat actors. Learn more here.

Catch Skyline Nav AI in action at ION's Joint Navigation Conference

05/2 7/2025: Skyline Nav AI will be showcasing its collaborations with Kearfott Corporation and BAE Systems at the Institute of Navigation's 2025 Joint Navigation Conference on Tuesday, June 3, 2025 at 4 pm. Watch Brig Gen (retired) Peter Green's presentation during B7: Complementary PNT: Vision-Based Navigation System Performance.

*   Integrating Visual Navigation with Inertial Sensors for GPS-Denied Environments on Land and Air: Skyline Nav AI and Kearfott Corporation

*   Enhancing Ground-Based Situational Awareness with Visual Geolocation Using 360 MVP Sensors: Skyline Nav AI and Kearfott Corporation

Learn more here.

Skyline Nav AI named finalist for Summerfest Tech Pitch Competition

05/27/2025: Skyline Nav AI is honored to be named a finalist in the Energy & Sustainability category for the 2025 Summerfest Tech Pitch Competition. Selected from a global pool of over 112 applicants, we’ll showcase our GPS-independent navigation technology—delivering unmatched accuracy for drones, vehicles, and more—at Milwaukee’s premier tech event, Summerfest TechAI, on June 25. This year’s competition highlights innovation across four key sectors and features 16 global finalists. We’re excited to join this outstanding group and contribute to the conversation on the future of artificial intelligence and sustainability in mobility. Learn more here.

Best Startup Award by Inside Unmanned Systems

05/22/2025: Skyline Nav AI has been awarded the 2025 Best Startup Award by Inside Unmanned Systems, a leading industry publication dedicated to unmanned and autonomous technologies. This honor, known as the Innovation Vanguard Award, is designed to spotlight companies and visionaries who are driving the next generation of autonomous and uncrewed systems.

Skyline Nav AI’s flagship product, Pathfinder™, was specifically recognized by the judges as a disruptive technology with the ability to significantly reduce society’s dependence on GPS. Pathfinder™ leverages advanced computer vision algorithms and precomputed satellite datasets to deliver precise, real-time positioning and navigation without relying on GPS, cellular, or Wi-Fi connectivity. This capability is especially critical in environments where GPS signals are unreliable or unavailable, such as urban canyons, remote wilderness, or areas affected by jamming and spoofing.

Receiving the Innovation Vanguard Award at the XPONENTIAL 2025 conference in Houston, Skyline Nav AI joins a select group of industry leaders celebrated for transforming the landscape of unmanned and autonomous systems. This recognition not only affirms Skyline Nav AI’s technical excellence but also underscores its role in shaping a future where navigation is smarter, safer, and no longer dependent on satellite-based systems.

Watch Kanwar Singh's video interview by Inside GNSS here. Award announcement here.

Skyline Nav AI wins InnoVets 2025 STRAC Pitch Competition

05/19/2025: Skyline Nav AI secured first place during the InnoVets 2025 STRAC Pitch Competition held at 10 World Trade Center, Boston, MA. This was an important event organized by Mass Fallen Heroes during Patriot Week. Out of five incredible finalists, we are honored to be selected as the best startup during the event. We are tremendously grateful to the judges, organizers, customers and partners for helping made this selection happen. Watch the video interview from the event here.

Skyline Nav AI selected as finalist for Vanguard Awards 2025

05/15/2025: Thank you to Inside Unmanned Systems for selecting us as a finalist for Innovation Vanguard Awards 2025. We are honored to be a finalist across four award categories: Best Startup, Pioneer in Drone Safety, Best Use for Emergency Use and Small UAS. Congratulations to all finalists!!

We look forward to attending XPonential Conference next week in Houston, Texas and meeting with several partners and clients. Learn more about the award ceremony here.

Skyline Nav AI selected for MIT CIO Symposium Innovation Showcase

05/04/2025: Skyline Nav AI has been selected as a finalist for the prestigious 2025 Innovation Showcase at the MIT Sloan CIO Symposium. Our GPS-independent navigation platform, Pathfinder™, will be featured among 10 leading enterprise technologies recognized for delivering cutting-edge innovation. Pathfinder™ uses computer vision and preprocessed geospatial data to provide precise, real-time positioning—without relying on GPS, Wi-Fi, or cellular networks. We look forward to showcasing our breakthrough technology at the event from May 19-20, 2025. Read the full press release here.

Multiple Contract Vehicles to Purchase Pathfinder

04/15/2025: We’re proud to announce that our GPS-independent navigation software, Pathfinder™, is now available for government customers through multiple trusted procurement channels, including Tradewinds, DARPA ERIS Marketplace, Army ITES-SW2, NASA SWEP and GSA. This expanded availability makes it easier than ever for federal agencies and defense partners to access and deploy our cutting-edge technology for mission-critical operations on drones, aircraft, cars, trucks, boats, ships and other use cases. Learn more about how Pathfinder™ is revolutionizing navigation and how your agency can procure it today. Read the full press release here.

17 miles driven with no GPS

03/31/2025: Pathfinder™ by Skyline Nav AI is a groundbreaking, GPS-independent navigation solution that leverages a car's camera and Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) to deliver absolute latitude and longitude coordinates with exceptional accuracy. Tested on a 17-mile drive through Greater Boston, Pathfinder achieved 99.98% accuracy without GPS, ending just 6 meters off target. Unlike traditional systems, it intelligently combines camera and IMU data, seamlessly switching when the camera lacks confidence, ensuring uninterrupted navigation. Remarkably, this was accomplished using low-cost, off-the-shelf sensors. Pathfinder empowers vehicles to navigate complex urban environments or GPS-denied areas with precision, solving real-world challenges where GPS often fails. Watch the accelerated and full videos.

Skyline Nav AI Assessed “Awardable” for DARPA ERIS Marketplace

03/26/2025: Skyline Nav AI, a leader in GPS-independent visual navigation technology, t oday announced that it has achieved “Awardable” status through the DARPA Expedited Research Implementation Series (ERIS) Marketplace. The ERIS Marketplace is a transformative platform designed to accelerate the acquisition of groundbreaking solutions for national security by connecting DoD with awardable, high-impact technologies. Learn more here.

Drive Cars and Ground Vehicles - No GPS Needed!

03/08/2025: W e've transformed the humble camera into an intelligent sensor that sees and understands the world, merging human intuition with breakthrough computer vision to create a GPS-independent navigation system for land. Our revolutionary innovation allows drones and aircraft to geolocate themselves with 99.5% accuracy—without IMU, GPS, Wi-Fi, or Cellular connections—by fusing ground data and detecting key features like trees, buildings, intersections, and more. Comparing these features against detailed 3D satellite datasets, our scalable, low-cost solution leverages existing hardware to guide cars and trucks without using GPS. Please connect with us if you're interested in integrating our industry-first API and SDK into your ground use cases!

Fly Drones and Planes - No GPS Needed!

02/26/2025: W e've transformed the humble camera into an intelligent sensor that sees and understands the world, merging human intuition with breakthrough computer vision to create a GPS-independent navigation system for both air. Our revolutionary innovation allows drones and aircraft to geolocate themselves with 99.5% accuracy—without IMU, GPS, Wi-Fi, or Cellular connections—by fusing ground and aerial data and detecting key features like trees, buildings, intersections, and more. Comparing these features against detailed 2D and 3D satellite datasets, our scalable, low-cost solution leverages existing hardware to guide every phase of flight, from take-off to landing. Please connect with us if you're interested in integrating our industry-first API and SDK into your aerial use cases!

Skyline Nav AI delivers centimeter level accuracy, no GPS needed!

01/30/2025: The future of navigation is here! Pathfinder (formerly known as Skyline Match AI) now delivers centimeter-level accuracy without GPS, Wi-Fi or cellular. In this demo, we take you to Chicago to showcase how our groundbreaking technology can precisely geolocate you in seconds using only a single image from a car, drone or mobile device. See it in action and discover the future of precise navigation. Explore our API here.

Skyline Nav AI finalist for 2025 SXSW Innovation Awards

01/23/2025: We are excited to be one of five companies selected as finalists for the 2025 SXSW Innovation Awards (Urban Experience).

If you're at SXSW in Austin, Texas, check out Skyline Nav AI and our featured clients on Saturday, March 8th at JW Marriott, Griffin Hall from 10 am CT to 5 pm CT. Learn more here.

Skyline Nav AI at the 2025 Detroit Auto Show

01/14/2025: We are excited to showcase how we’re making navigation smarter, faster, and utterly GPS-independent at the Detroit Auto Show this week.

If you're in Detroit, and looking for a solution that says "Urban Canyons? No GPS? No problem", let’s connect!

Skyline Nav AI featured by NASA

01/07/2025: We’re honored to be featured as a winner of the 2023 NASA Entrepreneurs Challenge, highlighted for our groundbreaking GPS-independent navigation technology. At Skyline Nav AI, we’ve worked tirelessly to pioneer a solution that thrives where GPS fails—whether in urban canyons, remote regions, or even on the Moon!

This recognition reinforces our commitment to delivering precise, resilient navigation through our flagship Skyline Match AI™. Whether for autonomous vehicles, military operations, or future space missions, our technology stands ready to enable navigation anywhere.

Thank you to NASA Science Mission Directorate and the editorial team for this recognition. It's a privilege to contribute to a mission that has inspired us. Read the feature here.

Skyline Nav AI at CES 2025

12/31/2024: We are rolling the dice in Vegas for CES 2025! Catch Kanwar and Gen Driscoll in action at the conference from Jan 6 - 10, 2025. We will be showcasing how we are making navigation smarter, faster and utterly independent. If you're at CES and looking for a solution that says, "no GPS? No problem" for drones, cars, aircraft, ships and everything in between, let's connect!

Skyline Nav AI and Garage+: Taipei City, Taiwan

12/09/2024: It was a tremendous experience spending the past week in Taipei City, Taiwan. This was our first venture beyond North America and Europe, and Asia's massive market—especially its automotive and drone sectors—was inspiring. Plus, it reaffirmed why Skyline Match AI™️ is uniquely positioned to thrive in GPS-challenged environments. We look forward to continue to work with the incredible startup and tech community in Taiwan.

Watch interview with Garage+ here.

Tradewinds Tech Transfer Featuring Skyline Nav AI

10/22/2024: Listen in on the experience of Skyline Nav AI as we share the path from IP licensing to awardable product deployment via the Tradewinds Solutions Marketplace. What you'll learn: How Skyline Nav AI developed a commercial solution from military research.

Watch the recording here.

Skyline Nav AI Secures First Place at MOVE America 2024 Pitch Contest

09/25/2024: Skyline Nav AI, a leader in GPS-independent navigation, proudly announces that it has won first place at the MOVE America 2024 Pitch Contest, held during the renowned mobility conference in Austin, Texas. The win further strengthens Skyline Nav AI’s position as an industry disruptor, following its recent victories in other high-profile competitions, such as NASA’s 2023 Entrepreneurs Challenge, continued traction with US military,​ and strategic partnerships with organizations such as BAE Systems, Kearfott Corporation and others.

Read press release here, and feature article here.

Skyline Nav AI Launches "Test our API"

09/13/2024: Skyline Nav AI is pleased to announce the launch of our self-service "Test our API" section where you can experience the power of Skyline Match AI™ firsthand.

Start exploring Chicago and see the difference between traditional GPS and our cutting-edge solution. While GPS can be off as much as 100 meters in dense urban areas, Skyline Match AI™ delivers pinpoint accuracy, typically within 5 meters, 95% of the time.

Want to see it in action? Check it out here!

When GPS can't, Skyline Nav AI can.

Skyline Nav AI Finalist for the 2024 Move America Pitch Competition

09/03/2024: Exciting news! Skyline Nav AI has been selected as a finalist for the 2024 Move America Pitch Competition!

We’re thrilled to be recognized among the most innovative companies in the mobility space. As a thank you to our amazing supporters, we’re raffling off two conference tickets! Want to join us at this incredible event? Simply reach out to us at sales@skylinenav.com for a chance to win.

Thank you for your continued support, and we look forward to seeing you in Austin, Texas from Sep 24-25!

Skyline Nav AI To Attend 2024 Commercial UAV Expo

09/02/2024: Skyline Nav AI will be at the Commercial UAV Expo in Las Vegas from September 4-5!

Kanwar Singh and Christian Melton are eager to connect with industry leaders and innovators in the UAV space.

If you're attending, we would love to meet you and discuss how Skyline Nav AI, Inc's cutting-edge computer vision technology is reshaping the way UAVs navigate challenging environments. When GPS can't, we can!

Skyline Nav AI Assessed 'Awardable' Status for DoD Work in CDAO's Tradewinds Marketplace

08/2 6/2024: We are thrilled to share that Skyline Nav AI's pitch video on Computer Vision GPS-Independent Navigation Solution has been deemed Awardable by the Tradewinds Solutions Marketplace! It’s an honor to be recognized among a competitive field of applicants to the Tradewinds Solutions Marketplace for our innovation, scalability, and potential impact on DoD missions. Government customers, please check out our 5 minute video solution on Tradewinds: tradewindAI.com.

Read the press release here.

Skyline Nav AI and BAE Systems Product Launch

08/21/2024: We're thrilled to launch our innovative Alt-PNT (Alternative Positioning, Navigation, and Timing) technology, powered by BAE Systems cameras. Our combined product offering is redefining navigation and positioning in environments where GPS fails. We are excited for this game-changing collaboration, and the impact it will have on our shared customers. This collaboration was made possible thanks to MassChallenge.

Watch product demo here.

Skyline Nav AI and Kearfott Corporation Unite to Build Next Generation Position and Navigation Platform

07/25/2024: Kearfott Corporation, a leading developer and manufacturer of guidance, navigation, and motion control systems, is proud to announce a strategic alliance with Skyline Nav AI, Inc., a pioneer in visual position and navigation technology. This collaboration aims to jointly produce cutting-edge position and navigation systems that integrate Kearfott’s renowned inertial sensors with Skyline Nav AI’s innovative computer vision technology.

Read more here.

AFRL awards $200,000 in follow-on funding to Skyline Nav AI, Inc.

06/30/2024: Skyline Nav AI, Inc. receives follow-on funding from AFRL to build advance computer vision algorithms for navigation on the Android Team Awareness Kit (ATAK) as well as iOS app.

Read more here.

Air Force Labs Selects Skyline Nav AI

05/28/2024: This program is a unique collaboration between dual-use startups and Hanscom Air Force Base (Mass.) personnel, aimed at tackling some of the most pressing challenges faced by the U.S. Air Force. As a participant, we will be part of an incredible journey to drive defense innovation and develop groundbreaking solutions.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI successfully graduates from CDL Space Stream

05/07/2024: Skyline Nav AI has successfully graduated from Creative Destruction Lab's Space Stream. We look forward to working with the mentors, community members and supporters of CDL as we commercialize our technology for space based use cases for position and navigation on earth, Moon, Mars and beyond, as an alumni. Featured picture from CDL Super-session in Toronto, Canada (June 20, 2024).

Learn more about the program here.

Institute of Navigation selects Skyline Nav AI for 2024 JNC

05/02/2024: The Institute of Navigation has selected Skyline Nav AI to present its innovative and ground-breaking Skyline Match AI product at the 2024 Joint Navigation Conference (JNC). Check us out in action on Tuesday, June 4th in the Complementary PNT: Vision Aided/Optical Ground session.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI selected for BAE Systems Technology Mentorship Program

04/16/2024: Skyline Nav AI, Inc. is thrilled to announce its selection for the BAE Systems Technology Mentorship Program. This MassChallenge run program is designed to foster innovation and development among startups with novel technologies and BAE Systems.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI at SOF Week

04/1 5/2024: Skyline Nav AI, Inc. will be at the 2024 SOF Week May 7 - 9. If you're attending, we would love to meet you. Feel free to message us if you would like to schedule a 1:1 meeting with our team.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI at AI Expo and Ash Carter Exchange

04/1 5/2024: Skyline Nav AI, Inc. will be at the 2024 AI Expo for National Competitiveness May 7 - 8. If you're attending, we would love to meet you. Feel free to message us if you would like to schedule a 1:1 meeting with our team.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI will be presenting at the 2024 MIT Startup Conference

03/17/2024: Skyline Nav AI, Inc. has been invited by MIT Industrial Liaison Program (ILP) to present our game-changing position and navigation technology at MIT's Startup Ecosystem Conference on April 30, 2024.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI has been selected for USSOCOM Technical Experimentation

02/28/2024: Skyline Nav AI, Inc. has been invited by USSOCOM leadership to present its visual positioning and navigation capabilities for the ISR and Tactical Communications Integration focus area at Avon Park Air Force Range, FL. We look forward to demonstrating Skyline Match AI™️ at the event.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI invited for the OUSD (R&E) Solutions Meeting

02/28/2024: Skyline N av AI, Inc. will be showcasing its capabilities in McLean, VA from April 15-16, 2024. The Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering (R&E) has invited Skyline Nav AI to present at their Unleashing Data at Speed and Scale Solutions Meeting.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI has been selected for the 2024 SXSW Pitch

02/06/2024: Skyline Nav AI, Inc. is one of 5 companies selected for the SXSW Pitch in the Innovative World Technologies Category. We look forward to showcasing our recent successes and our vision for the future of position and navigation on land, air, sea and space.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI wins NASA's 2023 Entrepreneurs Challenge

12/08/23: Skyline Nav AI, Inc. is one of 7 companies selected as NASA's 2023 Entrepreneurs Challenge Round 2 winner. This win provides $101,000 in new funding to Skyline Nav AI and creates pathways for the technology to be commercialized on the moon.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI presents at the NSIN Propel Boston Demo Day

Skyline Nav AI, Inc. presented its technology at the NSIN SOCOM propel event on December 1, 2023 at the Gillette Stadium in Foxborough, MA. The company showcased its technology to give Special Operations Forces an asymmetric advantage.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI selected for 2023 Defense TechConnect

Skyline Nav AI has been invited to present during 2023 Defense TechConnect. Join us for the NASA Entrepreneurs Challenge (round 2), MOSA Summit (round 2), Business Pitch Innovation Spotlight and Poster Session in National Harbor, MD from Nov 28 - 30, 2023.

Learn more about the conference here.

MIT Lincoln Lab invites Skyline Nav AI for the 2023 RAAINS Workshop

Skyline Nav AI presented at the 2023 Recent Advanced in AI for National Security (RAAINS) Workshop at the MIT Lincoln Lab on November 14.

Learn more about the workshop here.

Skyline Nav AI presents during NATO's Mobility Innovation Challenge

On November 14, 2023, Skyline Nav AI presented "Addressing the Challenge of Military Mobility in an Age of GPS Denial" at NATO's Mobility Innovation Challenge.

Watch the presentation here. (starts at 4:12:00)

Skyline Nav AI selected for CDL Space Stream

Skyline Nav AI has been accepted into the Creative Destruction Lab's Space Stream. We look forward to working with the mentors, community members and supporters of CDL as we commercialize our technology for space based use cases for position and navigation on Moon, Mars and beyond.

Learn more about the program here.

Skyline Nav AI selected for MOSA Innovation Challenge

Skyline Nav AI has been invited to present at the MOSA Innovation Challenge at the MOSA Industry and Government Summit in Atlanta, GA on September 18, 2023.

Learn more about the program here.

Skyline Nav AI wins xTechSearch Autonomy Competition (Round 1)

Skyline Nav AI, Inc. is one of 40 companies selected as Army's xTechSearch Autonomy competition. Round 1 winners will prepare to present their concepts at an in-person pitch event hosted during round 2.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI wins Round 1 of NASA's 2023 Entrepreneurs Challenge

Skyline Nav AI, Inc. is one of 11 companies selected as NASA's 2023 Entrepreneurs Challenge Phase 1 winner. Round 1 winners will prepare to present their concepts at an in-person pitch event hosted at the Defense TechConnect Innovation Summit and Expo in Washington.

Read more here.

AFRL awards $200,000 in funding to Skyline Nav AI, Inc.

Skyline Nav AI, Inc. receives funding from AFRL to build advance computer vision algorithms for position and navigation on the Android Tactical Assault Kit.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI selected for 2023 MassChallenge Accelerator Program

Skyline Nav AI, Inc. has been selected for the MassChallenge U.S. Early Stage Program! We are thrilled to be part of the amazing group of startups in the MassChallenge ecosystem.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI wins Northstar Campus Pitch Competition

Skyline Nav AI, Inc. has won the Northstar Campus Pitch Competition. This will help accelerator company's research & development efforts.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI, Draper win contract with Air Force Research Lab to add visual navigation to ATAK

The companies have secured a contract from the U.S. Air Force Research Lab (AFRL) to provide GPS-independent localization capability for the ATAK platform. Work on the $750,000, 21-month contract began in March 2022.

Read more here.

Skyline Nav AI Inc. selected for the third NGA Accelerator cohort

The NGA Accelerator powered by Capital Innovators recently selected eight companies from more than 225 applicants to participate in the third cohort of its geospatial accelerator program.

Read more here.

The next big solar storm could fry the grid

The electrons can penetrate satellites, and the resulting charge can build up, damaging electronics. Losing these satellites could cause worldwide disruption of GPS services.

Read more here.

From targeting to navigation, handheld devices are merging tech and tactics

The Army has used the Android Team Awareness Kit. It’s an Android smartphone used as the individual soldier’s tactical hub. The device aids precision targeting, navigation and data sharing through a host of applications.

Read more here.

GPS signals are being disrupted in Russian cities

Multiple major Russian cities appear to have faced widespread GPS disruption during the past week. The signal interference follows Ukraine launching long-range drone attacks deep into Russian territory, and it may act as a way to potentially stop drones that rely upon GPS for navigation, experts say.

Read more here.

Ghost ships, crop circles and shop gold: A GPS mystery in Shanghai

N ew research and previously unseen data show that the Manukai, and thousands of other vessels in Shanghai over the last year, are falling victim to a mysterious new weapon that is able to spoof GPS systems in a way never seen before.

Read more here.

What happened to GPS in Denver?

Something big happened to GPS service in the Denver area on Jan. 21. Air Traffic Control issued a notice advising pilots of problems with GPS reception spanning about 8,000 square miles in the Denver area.

Read more here.

HawkEye 360 detects GPS interference in Ukraine

Shortly before the Russian invasion began, HawkEye 360 analysts detected GPS interference north of Chernobyl, “demonstrating the integration of electronic warfare tactics into Russian military operation to further degrade Ukraine’s ability for self-defense".

Read more here.

Racing the sun to protect America

Despite vulnerability to severe solar activity, a variety of other threats, and its importance to the nation’s economy and security, the U.S. has no backup or alternative plan if GPS is not available.

Read more here.

Truck driver has GPS jammer, accidentally jams Newark Airport

An engineering firm worker in New Jersey has a GPS jammer so his bosses don't know where he is all the time. However, his route takes him close to Newark airport, and his jammer affects its satellite systems.

Read more here.

How AI is taking over our gadgets

In a combat zone, you can’t count on a fast, robust, wireless cloud connection, especially now that enemies often jam wireless communication and GPS signals. When on a mission, processing and image recognition must occur on the company’s drones themselves.

Read more here.

The Russians are jamming US drones in Syria because they have every reason to be

The apparent surge in electronic warfare attacks is just the latest example of the Kremlin's hybrid campaign against US troops in the country.

Read more here.

DOD is developing Positioning, Navigation, and Timing technologies to complement GPS

The DOD plans to keep the GPS at the core of its positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT) solution, using other PNT technology to complement GPS or as an alternative for when GPS is degraded or unavailable.

Read more here.

Modern civilization would be lost without GPS

A 2019 report sponsored by the National Institute of Standards and Technology estimated the loss of GPS would cost the U.S. economy $1 billion a day, or $1.5 billion if the technology failed in the April-May planting season for farmers.

Read more here.

Gladys West: The hidden figure who helped invent GPS

West worked as a mathematician, collecting and analyzing satellite data of the Earth’s surface, until she eventually created a detailed model and helped developed the technology that resulted in GPS.

Read more here.
