Title: Why is there a construction elevator accident in Wuhan? What is the cause of the elevator accident?-Guangdong YuHuaXing Construction Machinery Manufacture Co., Ltd.

URL Source: https://en.gd-yhx.com/news_detail/19990337.html

Markdown Content:
Original title: Why is there a Wuhan construction elevator accident?

Wuhan construction elevator accident

In recent years, accidents involving construction site elevator accidents have occurred. Although the number of casualties is not the same, the cause of the accident involves chaotic safety management, equipment installation, maintenance and maintenance, and lack of supervision by construction units, supervisors and government departments. problem.

On October 30, 2008, the construction elevator crane was dropped at the construction site of Dixin Sunshine City, Xincheng District, Xiapu County, Ningde City, Fujian Province, causing all 12 workers in the cage to die.

On December 27, 2008, the construction elevator crane was dropped at the “Shanghai City” residential community site in Changsha City, Hunan Province, killing 18 people and injuring one person.

On August 16, 2010, the construction elevators of the inpatient department of the Meihekou City Hospital of Tonghua, Jilin Province, fell, causing 11 deaths.

On September 13, 2012, the construction site of the “Donghujingyuan” construction site in Wuhan East Lake Scenic Area, the construction elevator fell, causing 19 deaths.

Construction elevator accidents have been continuous, what is the reason for this situation, every elevator accident will cause multiple injuries and deaths, causing multiple families to rupture.

1. The work site was contracted to the contractor, and the workers often violated the regulations to open the lift.

The elevator has fenced doors, protective doors and cage doors, all of which are wire mesh structures. The console is also equipped with electric locks and alarm devices. If strictly managed and the operator is not present, it is almost impossible for workers to enter and start the lift.

2. Multiple safety devices are invalid, and the effective use period is overdue for two months.

According to industry insiders, construction elevators are frequently used. Usually, there are few people who perform routine maintenance. At most, lubricants are added. Often, only technicians come to repair if there is a fault. The relevant maintenance logs are easy to fake and few people supervise.

According to industry insiders, the construction of lifts is common in use and mature in technology. It is equipped with various safety devices such as anti-fall safety device, short circuit protection, limit protection, broken rope protection, roof protection, overload protection and mechanical and electrical safety protection. Devices, etc., to ensure the safe operation of the construction elevator. If the fall due to a malfunction of the lift equipment means that multiple safety devices are disabled.

3. Employee exposed bolts can not find the nut

Problem bolts have caused many tragedies

At the scene of the incident, a worker holding a bolt to denounce the installation quality of the equipment, he told reporters that the bolt was found in the wreckage of the lift. From the thread of the bolt, there is no trace of friction. "This means that during installation. There is no nut at all."

4. Common illegal lease layer subcontracting

Equipment leasing industry needs to be standardized

The equipment leasing company subcontracted at the same level. “In order to control the cost, the leasing and construction units are not willing to hire professional operators, so the prevention work such as equipment inspection and maintenance is not in place. Some leasing companies and supervisors have different relationships, which also causes The lack of supervision."

The back of each elevator crash not only reflects the lack of supervision of the construction, supervision and administrative authorities, but also highlights the need for the construction equipment rental industry to be standardized.
