Title: 

URL Source: https://www.nyc.gov/assets/nycha/downloads/pdf/Elevator-Action-Plan-FINAL-20200130.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 29 Sep 2025 16:36:29 GMT

Markdown Content:
1

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

New York City Housing Authority 

Action Plan – Elevators 

Obligations: Exhibit B. C.21, C.22, C.23, C.24, C. 25, C.26, C.27, C.28, C.29, C.30, C.31, 

C.32, C.33, C.34 

January 31 , 2020 

Contents 

Executive Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................ 2

Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 4

Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 8

Elevator Criticality and Risk Map ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 12 

A. Single -elevator buildings ................................ ................................ ................................ .......... 12 

B. Operational data and condition ratings ................................ ................................ ............... 12 

C. Vulnerable populations ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 13 

D. Elevator risk heat map ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 14 

Elevator Outage Response ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 15 

A. Elevator Complaint Intake ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 15 

B. Elevator Response Prioritization ................................ ................................ ............................... 16 

C. Elevator Mechanic Maintenance Procedure ................................ ................................ ....... 17 

D. Preventive Maintenance ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 22 

Resident Communications Plan ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 25 

A. Elevator Complaint Intake ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 25 

B. Resident Notification during Outages and No -Service Conditions ................................ .... 25 

C. Additional Protocols for Vulnerable Residents ................................ ................................ ...... 27 

D. Stair Climber Machine Process ................................ ................................ ................................ 28 

E. Future of Reasonable Accommodations ................................ ................................ .............. 29 

Interactions with Internal and External Partners ................................ ................................ ............ 31 

A. Maintenance, Repair, and Skilled Trades (MRST ) Protocol ................................ .................. 31 

B. External Partners – City Agencies ................................ ................................ ........................... 32 

Contracts and Warranties ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 33 

A. Thi rd -party Management Contracts ................................ ................................ ...................... 33 

B. Warranties ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 33 

Performance Improvement Plans ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 34 

A. Capital commitments ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 34 

B. Maintenance commitments ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 38 

C. Other commitments ................................ ................................ ................................ ................. 42 2

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

Executive Summary 1

The New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA) owns, operates, and maintains 3,224 

elevators across 266 deve lopments: 3,163 passenger traction elevators that transport 

residents from lobbies to residential floors and 61 lifts that serve freight needs, 

community centers, and police stations. 

This Action Plan responds to 14 elevator -related obligations in the 2019 Agreement 

between NYCHA, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the 

City of New York. 2

Exhibit B, Paragraph C.21 of the Agreement requires: 

“an Action Plan that identifies, for each building that contains an elevator 

designed for resident use, how NYCHA will respond when all elevators are out of 

service at that building (a “no -service” condition).” 

In addition, Paragraph 35 of the Agreement requires: 

“NYCHA will prepare Action Plans setting forth policies and practices to be 

adopted and specific actions to be taken by NYCHA to achieve the obligations 

set forth in Exhibit A and Exhibit B and comply with the terms of this Agreement.” 

This plan is NYCHA’s comprehensive response to both requirements . It includes a 

detailed step -by -step response plan for all elevator outages and no -service conditions 

to meet Obligation C.21 , and a set of capital and operational commitments designed 

to meet the requirements outlined i n Obligations C.22 -C.34. 

NYCHA’s elevators —managed by the 428 -person Elevator Service and Repair 

Department (ESRD) —pose particular challenges, including high volume use, rapidly 

aging stock, and building envelope decay that has caused structural issues in elevator 

shafts. 

One of the key challenges for the Authority is the prevalence of single -elevator stairhalls 

across the portfolio —resident units accessible only by a single elevator . Of the 3,163 

passenger traction elevators, 1,560 are in single -elevator configurations. Because any 

outage in a single -elevator configuration eliminates all elevator service to affected 

residents, these configurations are un iquely vulnerable to service disruptions and require 

a heighten ed response from mechanics, dispatchers, and property management staff. 

Data limitations and understaffing have created additional difficulties for the elevator 

operation. For example, changes in protocols and outage calculations limit the usability   

> 1For a detailed list of terms and definitions, see Appendix 6
> 2Paragraphs C.21 -C.34 of the 2019 HUD Agreement. For full text of obligations, see Section 9.

3

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

of pr e-2018 elevator operating data for historical analysis . To address these limitations, 

NYCHA will continue working with the Monitor team to define and establish business 

rules associated with data storage and collection. 

A 2016 reduction in elevator mechan ic teams has reduced coverage and lowered 

preventive maintenance completion rates for the m onthly, semi -annual, and annual 

checks . This Action Plan addresses these underlying issues that have historically 

prevented NYCHA’s elevators from operating at the l evels required by the Agreement. 

For example, w hile elevator outages can spike in the evening , ESRD ’s staffing coverage 

model is weighted towards traditiona l weekday business hours of 8am -4:30pm . 130 

elevator mechanic teams are staffed during the primary shift , while 12 teams work the 

4:30pm -12:30am shift and six teams the 12am -8am shift . On the weekends , 12 teams 

work the 8 am -4:30pm shift, 6 teams work 12pm -8pm, 12 teams work 4:30pm -12:30am, 

and 8 te ams work 12am -8am. Given the overlap in shifts, weekend staffing coverage 

peaks at 18 teams between 12pm -8pm. 

With this mismatch of staffing to work volumes, corrective maintenance work orders 

back up and mechanics are unable to complete their preventative maintenance 

schedules. 

Elevator mechanics are assigned to one of four sectors; each sector has close to 800 

elevators and 40 or 41 elevator response teams each. At peak capacity —the 8am -

4:30pm shift —each response team is responsible for corre ctive and preventative 

maintenance on an average of 25 elevators , a ratio of 25:1 . However, during the 12am -

8am shift, that coverage ratio grows to 537:1. 

NYCHA has proposed a new balanced schedule for mechanics, redistributing some 

portion of the 130 tea ms serving the 8am -4:30pm shift to cover alternate shifts on nights 

and weekends . The proposal remains under review by the City’s Office of Labor 

Relations. 3

The remainder of this Action Plan is organized as follows: Sections 2 -4 provide additional 

backg round information and context on NYCHA’s elevator operations, Sections 5 -8

address NYCHA’s operation al response to elevator outages as required by Obligation 

C.21, and Section 9 details the improvement plans underway to ensure NYCHA meets 

the operating met rics outlined in Obligations C.22 -C.34.            

> 3Since the proposed shift change may have an impact on the “economic terms” of the existing labor agreement —and
> Elevator Mechanic is a city -wide title —the city’s Office of Labor Relations must conduct analysis on outside rates of pay
> before proceeding with any negotiation on the existing contract. NYCHA will update the M onitor’s team on progress by
> February 1 4, 2020.

4

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

Introduction 

As noted above, this Action Plan responds to the 14 elevator -related paragraphs of the 

January 31, 2019 agreement between the New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA), 

the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) , and the City of New 

York. The Agreement outlines a number of obligations and requirements for NYCHA’s 

elevat or performance , detailed below: 

Table 1: Agreement Elevator Obligations 

Obligation  Requirements (as stated in the Agreement) 

Action 

Plan 

Sections 

C. 21 

Within 120 days of the Effective Date, NYCHA shall establish an Action Plan 

that identifies, for each building that contains an elevator designed for 

resident use, how NYCHA will respond when all elevators are out of service 

at that building (a “no -service” condition). Such plan shall take into 

account the resident population of each b uilding, any individuals with self -

reported mobility impairments, historical data about prior outages or 

service disruptions, the availability of personnel to assist residents, the terms 

of any elevator support contract, and historical response and repair times. 

Such plans shall be made available to the residents and posted online. 

Sections 

5-8

C. 22 

Within 120 days of the Effective Date, NYCHA shall provide HUD and the 

Monitor with sufficient data to identify elevator service interruptions in the 

prior three years. This data shall be updated at least quarterly. 

Section 9 

C. 23 

Within three years of the Effective Date, NYCHA shall comply with the 

following: 

• (a) 70% of buildings containing more than one elevator will have 

no more than one instance per year where all elevators are out of 

service (whether planned or unplanned) at the same time, and 

no such building shall have more than three instances in a year. 4

• (b) 70% of elevators in all buildings shall have an unplanned 

outage no more than eight times per year, and no elevator shall 

have unplanned outages more than 15 times a year. 

Section 9 

C.24 

Within five years of the Effective Date, NYCHA shall comply with the 

following: 

• (a) 85% of buildings containing more than one elevator will have 

no more than one instance per year where all elevators are out of 

service (whether planned or unplanned) at the same time, and 

no such building shall have more than three instances in a year. 

• (b) 85% of elevators in all buildings shall have an unplanned 

outage no more than eight times per year, and no elevator shall 

have unplanned outages more than 12 times a year. 

Section 9 

C. 25  Notwithstanding anything else herein, NYCHA will take an elevator out of 

service where required for health and safety reasons. 

C. 26 

An outage that NYCHA demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Monitor to 

be the result of an act of vandalism by a third party shall not be counted 

as an outage for purposes of paragraphs 23 and 24, provided that (i) the 

Monitor concludes that NYCHA used an d continues to use best efforts to 5

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

prevent such vandalism in the affected building, and (ii) such outage is 

resolved within the response times set forth herein. 

C.27 

As of one year of the Effective Date, NYCHA shall have no planned 

outages that result in a no -service condition between the hours of 6 a.m. 

and 10 a.m. or between 3 p.m. and 8 p.m., except for planned elevator 

rehabilitation or replacement or outages mandated by another 

governmental agency or regulatory entity .

C.28 

For the first year after the Effective Date, NYCHA shall reduce the duration 

of service outages by 10%, and 75% of no -service conditions shall be 

resolved within 18 hours of the time NYCHA learns of them. The response 

rate shall improve each year thereafte r as determined by the Monitor and 

HUD based on the data NYCHA provides to the Monitor and HUD and the 

steps NYCHA has taken in executing its action plans. 

Section 9 

C.29 

Within five years of the Effective Date, NYCHA shall resolve all outages 

within the following timeframes: 

• (a) For outages that result in a no -service condition: 

o (i) 85% shall be resolved within 4 hours of NYCHA learning 

of such condition, and 

o (ii) no no -service condition shall last more than 12 hours, 

unless the no -service condition is in a one -elevator 

building and results from either (A) an outage due to an 

elevator rehabilitation or replacement or (B) an outage 

for which the industry -accepted repair time is longer than 

12 hours or that requires NYCHA to order unavailable 

parts. 

• (b) For outages that do not result in a no -service condition: 

o (iii) 85% shall be resolved within 10 hours of NYCHA 

learning of such condition, and 

o (iv) no outage shall last more than 18 hours, unless the 

outage results from either (A) an outage due to an 

elevator rehabilitation or replacement or (B) an outage 

for which the industry -accepted repair time is longer than 

18 hours or that requires NYCHA to order unavailable 

parts. 

Section 9 

C.30 

Within six months of the Effective Date, NYCHA w ill institute and maintain a 

system that identifies every elevator outage and the start and end times of 

such outages identified by remote monitoring systems, work -order records, 

or any additional sources of outage information, and make that system 

accessi ble and available to all NYCHA personnel responsible for elevators 

and to other relevant personnel, including all development managers and 

the General Manager. 

Section 9 

C.31  Within five years of the Effective Date, NYCHA will establish continuous 

remote monitoring in 70% of its elevators.  Section 9 

C.32 

Within six months of the Effective Date, NYCHA will establish a system to 

provide residents of buildings affected by a planned outage 24 -hours 

advanced notice, and to provide residents o f buildings affected by an 

unplanned outage notice within two hours of NYCHA learning of the 

outage. Such notice shall include instructions regarding what assistance 

NYCHA has available for individuals with mobility impairments during the 

outage. Notice sh all occur by robocall and via postings within the 

affected building and on NYCHA’s website. 

Sections 

5-8

Section 9 6

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN    

> C.33
> NYCHA will provide the Monitor 24 hours advanced notice of any planned
> outage, and shall notify the Monitor of any unplanned outage wi thin two
> hours of NYCHA learning of the outage. Notice shall occur in the method
> prescribed by the Monitor.
> C.34
> In addition to meeting the requirements of paragraphs 15 to 33, and
> except where otherwise provided in an approved Action Plan, NYCHA
> shall p erform the following tasks:
> (a) NYCHA will adopt a new seven -day, extended schedule for caretakers
> to enable more frequent cleaning of elevator door tracks at the start of
> each shift.
> (b) NYCHA will replace or address at least 425 elevators by 2024:
> o275 elevators will be replaced by December 31, 2024 through its
> capital plan. (108 within three years plus another 167 within five
> years)
> oNYCHA will transfer 150 additional elevators to third -party
> management through the PACT program by December 31, 2024.
> The developer selected through PACT will replace elevators as
> needed in buildings under its purview.
> Section 9

As approved —and updated as necessary —this Action Plan reflects the policies and 

practices NYCHA will adopt, and specific actions NYCHA will undertake to fulfill 

elevator -related requirements under the Agreement. This Action Plan will be reviewed 

and update d at least quarterly , or as necessary per the Agreement’s milestones. 

To ensure implementation and ongoing compliance with this Action Plan, NYCHA 

commits to the following steps: 

1. NYCHA’s IT Department will post this Action Plan on NYCHA’s public -facing 

we bsite, as required by the Agreement, upon approval. 

2. The Elevator Service and Repair Department (ESRD) Director and Senior Vice 

President for Support Services will host trainings for all ESRD Sector Administrators 

and Supervisors of Elevator Mechanics (SEM) . The Director will communicate to 

all SEMs and elevator mechanics the expectations under this plan. 

3. SEMs will distribute copies of the plan to Mechanics and Mechanics Helpers 

within two weeks of approval. 

4. The General Manager will e -mail this Action Plan t o all Property Management 

staff. 

5. The ESRD Director and Senior Vice President for Support Services will host two 

kick -off meetings with the Regional Asset Managers (RAMs) to discuss the Action 

Plan and answer all questions. Follow -up meetings with RAMs will be scheduled 

as necessary to ensure compliance. 7

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

6. Each Property Manager will distribute the Action Plan to development staff 

during their daily morning muster. 

7. The Senior Vice President for Support Services, the ESRD Director, and the 

Community Engagement & Partnerships team will meet with Tenant Association 

Presidents throughout January and February 2020 to discuss the Action Plan and 

answer any questions. 

8. NYCHA will develop a mechanism for ongoing staff and resident feedback to 

refine and improve our servi ce to residents. 8

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

Background 

As noted above, NYCHA owns 3,224 elevators, m aking an estimated 3.2 million trips 

daily. 3,163 elevators provide access to residential hallways, while the remaining 61 

service community centers, freight needs, and police stations. Over 90 percent of 

NYCHA residential units are in stairhalls served by elevators. 

NYCHA elevators are managed by the Elevator Service and Repair Department (ESRD), 

which employs 4 73 full -time staff , including 207 elevator mechanics, 193 elevator 

mechanic helpers , and 23 supervisors of mechanics .5 Thirty -nine ESRD employees have 

NYC Department of Buildings -issued Director, Co -Director, or Inspectors Licenses. The 

department’s total FY19 budget was $74,440,375. 

Elevators are essential in the portfolio’s taller buildings —Atlantic Terminal is the tallest in 

the portfolio at 31 stories —and are particularly important to residents with mobility 

impairments who cannot easily navigate and traverse stairs. The mission of NYCHA’s 

elevator operation is to ensure safe, reliable, and consistent service. 6

Outages and No -Service Conditions 

An elevator outage is a disruption in service for a single elevator that prevents a 

resident from using that specific car to reach their floor. A no -service condition is a full 

disruption to all elevator service to a residential floo r. For single -elevator stairhalls, each 

outage is a no -service condition. In a two -elevator stairhall, a no -service condition 

means simultaneous outages in both elevators. As discussed in detail below, no -service 

conditions receive a high priority response relative to outages that do not trigger a no -

service condition. 

Single -elevator configurations pose a particular challenge since each outage is also a 

no -ser vice condition. Of NYCHA’s 3,163 passenger traction elevators, 1,560 are the only 

elevator serving a specific stairhall.     

> 5These numbers include the 20 new response teams that were approved in 2019 and detailed in Section 9 . 10 mechanic
> teams are fully dedicated to inspections conducted under an MOU with the Department of Buildings.
> 6For a detailed regulatory overview , see A ppendices 8 -10

9

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

EXHIBIT 1: Single -elevator configuration at Boulevard Houses 7

EXHIBIT 2: Multiple -elevator configuration at Linden Houses    

> 7Outage numbers and operational metrics in this Plan, including in Exhibits 1 and 2, are as reported by NYCHA and have
> not been confirmed by the Monitor’s team.

10 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

Organizational Roles 8

While the day -to -day responsibility for preventive and corrective maintenance lies with 

the Elevator Service and Repair Department (ESRD), providing safe, reliable, and 

consistent elevator service at NYCHA requires work from a wide variety of departments. 

Descriptions of each relevant department are below. 

1. Elevator Service and Repair Department – principal front -line responsib ility for all 

preventive and corrective maintenance on NYCHA’ s elevators, as well as 

inspections and some equipment installation . ESRD has a staff of 473 . ESRD 

reports through the Senior Vice President of Support Services, who reports to the 

General Manager. ESRD includes the following teams: 

• Elevator dispatch : intakes all elevator complaints, prioritizes responses, and 

routes individual work orders to elevator mechanic teams .

• Elevator response teams : 2 -person teams of an elevator mechanic and 

mechanic’s helper that conduct corrective and preventive maintenance 

on NYCHA’s elevators . Response teams are assigned to one of f our 

geographic sectors, each serving roughly 800 elevators each. 

• Special Teams/Major Repairs: NYCHA’s most experienced mechanics 

who focus on particularly challenging outages and long -term shutdowns 

that require lengthy repairs. This team also focuses on developments with 

frequent outages to identify patterns and solutions. 

• Inspections/Violations Unit: performs all DOB -mandated elevator 

inspections, including Category 1 and Category 5. 

2. Property Management – responsible for the day -to -day operation of NYCH A’s 

developments and provides accommodations to residents during elevator 

service disruption s. Caretakers —members of the property maintenance staff —

are responsible for cleaning elevator tracks as part of their daily routine. Each 

development’s property maintenance staff reports up through a Property 

Maintenance Superintendent, who in turn reports to the Property Manager. The 

Property Manager reports through the Regional Asset M anager, Borough 

Director, and Vice President of O perations.    

> 8For additional detail on responsibilities by individual roles, see Section XV of Appendix 2: NYCHA Standard Procedure
> 060.62.1: Elevator Service, Maintenance, and Repair.

11 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

3. Capital Projects Division (CPD) – responsible for NYCHA’s capital investment 

program, including elevator replacements and other capital repairs to a building 

that permit elevators to run (e.g., roof repairs to prevent flooding in elevator 

shaft s) . CPD develops the elevator replacement pipeline using condition ratings 

and operational data. The CPD Project Management team is responsible for 

overseeing vendors who perform the modernization and replacement work. The 

Vice President of Capital Plannin g and Vice President of Proj ect Management 

report to the Executive Vice President of Capital Projects. 

4. Maintenance, Repair, and Skilled Trades (MRST) – responsible for providing 

plumbing, electrical, and other skilled trades assistance duri ng elevator re pairs as 

required. MRST also leads some equipment installat ion work, including the air 

conditioning unit installations in elevator motor rooms. MRST is led by a Director 

who reports to the Senior Vice President of Support Services, who reports to the 

General Manager. 

5. Emergency Services Department (ESD) – responsible for responding to some 

corrective maintenance work orders after normal business hours. ESD mechanic 

teams check elevator conditions, address immediate hazards, and post out -of -

service notices for unplanned outages. ESD teams do not, however, perform 

actual repairs on NYCHA elevators. Some major incidents —including pit flooding 

and wat er -damaged cabs —may require ESD assistance. ESD also receives 

notifications of all outages and communicates with outside partners —including 

FDNY and NYPD. 

For organizational charts of each of the divisions listed above, see Appendix 7 .12 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

Elevator Critical ity and Risk Map 

With an expansive portfolio and finite resources, NYCHA must identify those elevators 

that require the most attention and service. NYCHA will use the factors below to build 

an elevator risk map to help manage the portfolio and deploy reso urces where they 

are most needed. 

For a full list of NYCHA elevators with physical condition ratings, operational data and 

population overlays, see Appendix 1. 

A. Single -elevator buildings 

As noted above , 1,5 60 NYCHA elevators are functionally “single elevators” —the only 

elevator providing access to a specific set of residential floors. 1,516 of these ar e true 

“single elevator stairhall s,” with only one elevator within a stairhall. The other 44 are 

configured to provide high -rise or low -rise se rvice only. For example, at 68 Cumberland 

Walk —a 13 -story building at the Walt Whitman Houses in Brooklyn —there are two 

elevators, but one serves the lower floors and one serves the upper floors. An outage to 

either elevator is functionally equivalent to a n outage in a single -elevator building. The 

44 high -rise/low -rise elevators are spread across three developments —Ingersoll, 

Whitman, and East River, all built in the early to mid -1940s. 9

The 1,516 single -elevator stairhalls are spread across 10 3 developm ents, most often 

serving six -story buildings built in the 1940s and 1950s 10 . Single elevators are particularly 

vulnerable to an outage, since any individual outage also represents a no -service 

condition, precluding all elevator access to an y residential fl oor. Single elevators 

receive a high -priority response from ESRD dispatchers, but NYCHA will also explore 

committing additional resources to reducing outage frequency at single -elevator sites. 

B. Operational data and condition ratings 

NYCHA’s elevator stock is old —the longest -running traction elevators in the portfolio 

were installed in 1990, and 954 elevators are at or beyond their useful life of 20 years as 

of this plan’s publishing . An additional 1,237 will reach the end of their useful life in the 

next five years. The 2017 P hysical Needs Assessment (“PNA”) generated individual 

condition ratings for each elevator, ranging from 1 -5, with 5 being the worst. 525 NYCHA 

elevators have a “5” condition rating; 500 received a “4.” All passenger tract ion 

elevators with a “4” or “5” rating are beyond their useful life as of this plan’s publishing.   

> 9Ingersoll and Whitman were built as a single development known as the Fort Greene Houses
> 10 These developments include (ordered by number of elevators): Marcy, Woodside, Pomonok, Queensbridge South,
> Queensbridge North, Reed Hook East, Vladeck I, and Ravens wood.

13 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

EXHIBIT 3: NYCHA’s aging elevator stock 

Operational data, including the frequency and duration of outages, is also important in 

assessing the vulnerab ility of an elevator. Appendix 1 includes operational data for 

each elevator dating back to 2016. Outage frequency , however, does not always 

correlate with equipment age. 

C. Vulnerable populations 

Consistent elevator service is particularly important for our senior and mobility -impaired 

residents. NYCHA has over 80,000 residents above the age of 62 —over 76,000 of them 

reside in elevator buildings. Nearly 40% of NYCHA households are headed by a resid ent 

over 62. NYCHA operates 41 senior -only dev elopments, along with 13 senior -only 

build ings, although many seniors live in units within non -senior -designated 

developments as well. NYCHA elevators also serve over 31,000 mobility -impaired 

residents. 11 12 

When service interruptions occur, property management staff can access NYCHA’s 

Tenant Data System to identify all affected senior and mobility -impaired residents . A  

> 11 The senior and mobility -impaired populations are not mutually exclusive and have significant overlap.
> 12 The columns for senior residents and mobility -impaired residents in Appendix 1 will not sum to the totals listed here
> because Appendix 1 lists e ach elevator individually. For example, there are two elevators that serve 2440 Boston Road;
> the 270 senior residents and 87 mobility -impaired residents will appear on two lines.

14 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

communications plan for senior and mobility -impaired residents in the event of an 

elevator n o-service condition is detailed in the Resident Communications section. 

D. Elevator risk heat map 

With all of these inputs, NYCHA will work with the Monitor’s team to develop an elevator 

risk map by April 1, 2020 —identifying those elevators in the portfolio that require 

additional resources, including the stocking of frequently -used parts within proximate 

store rooms, prioritized preventative maintenance schedules, and prioritized capital 

replacements. NYCHA parti cipants will include members of the Performance Tracking & 

Analytics team, ESRD personnel, and Project Managers from Support Services. 

Identifying high -priority elevators will require numerous overlays of operational data, 

physical condition information, a nd population data. A preliminary set of input data is 

included in Appendix 1. 

The elevator risk map will become a day -to -day and long -term planning tool for ESRD 

leadership, providing easy access to information that can be used to allocate 

resources and trigger specific interventions. 15 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

Elevator Outage Response 

The following sectio ns outline the steps NYCHA will take in response to an elevator 

outage or no -service condition. For additional detail, see Appendix 2: NYCHA Standard 

Procedure 060.62.1: E levator Service, Maintenance, and Repair. 

A. Elevator Complaint Intake 

An elevator outage is routed to the ESRD response team through the following steps: 

1. A resident calls the CCC to report an elevator complaint .

2. The CCC customer service agent generates and sub mits a service request that 

includes the development name, building address, elevator location, and other 

details of the elevator complaint. 

3. Siebel —NYCHA’s customer relationship management system —automatically 

transfers the service reques t information into Maximo, which creates a corrective 

maintenance ( CM ) work order containing the basic information about the 

elevator complaint, the actual reported time, as well as the elevator problem 

codes and service priority levels. 13 

4. The customer ser vice agent provides the resident with the C M work order 

number before ending the call. 

5. If the condition is a HAZARD (including stuck passengers, fires, open hatch 

doors —full list below ), the customer service agent calls 911 and escalates the 

elevator compl aint to FDNY .14 

a. the customer service agent notes in the Siebel service request that FDNY is 

responding to the elevator complaint. 

b. the elevator dispatcher reviews the elevator’s service condition in the 

Remote Elevator Monitoring System ( REMS ), if the elevator is remotely 

monitored. 

c. the elevator dispatcher assigns an ESRD response team as soon as 

possible.   

> 13 The duration of elevator outages is measured from the time the first compla int was received.
> 14 If the hazard is first noticed by a NYCHA employee, the employee must call 911 and the Emergency Services
> Department directly.

16 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

6. When FDNY cannot respond to a hazardous service condition complaint: 

a. the customer service agent notes the ID number of the FDNY dispatcher 

along w ith the statement that “FDNY cannot respond.” 

b. the customer service agent calls ESRD dispatch operations and advises 

the dispatcher of the hazardous service condition and that FDNY cannot 

respond. 

c. the elevator dispatcher reviews the elevator’s service condi tion in REMS, if 

the elevator is remotely monitored. 

d. The elevator dispatcher assigns the CM work order to the elevator 

response team and provides the team with the following information: 

development name, building address, elevator car, and details of the 

elevator service condition and service priority. 

7. If the condition is not a HAZARD , the elevator dispatcher reviews the corrective 

maintenance work order in Maximo and assigns an ESRD response team based 

on the prioritization below. 15 

B. Elevator Response Pri oritization 

To ensure NYCHA is properly allocating its resources in responding to elevator outages 

and no -service condition s, ESRD follows clear prioritization rules that account for the 

resident population and building characteristics. 16 The elevator dispatching system 

follows a strict rubric in assigning specific Maximo flags and priority codes, based on the 

severity of the problem and impact on our residents. 

Tabl e 2: Priority code details 

Circumstance  Details 

Maximo 

Failure 

Code 

Maximo 

Flag 

Priority 

Level 

Maximo 

Code 

Immediate threat 

to life, limb, or 

property 

Stuck passengers, 

fires, accidents, 

NYPD pit searches, 

and open hatch 

doors. Often 

requires 

coordinated 

response with 

FDNY and NYPD. 

ELEVOOO  HAZARD  HIGH 

PRIORITY 

“Super 

9”     

> 15 ESRD dispatchers are trained on elevator response prioritization and routing individual work order tickets to the
> appropriate mechanic team.
> 16 Also see p. 117 of Appendix 2: NYCHA Standard Procedure 060.62.1: Elevator Service, Maintenance, and Repair.

17 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

No -service 

condition 17 

An outage or 

outages have 

disrupted all 

elevator service to 

a residential floor. 

ELEVOOO  NSC  HIGH 

PRIORITY  9

Senior building 

Elevator outage in 

a building 

restricted to senior 

residents. 

ELEVOOO  SNR  HIGH 

PRIORITY  9

Mobility -impaired 

residents 

Mobility -impaired 

resident observed 

waiting in lobby; 

service request 

from mobility -

impaired resident. 

ELEVOOO  WHL  HIGH 

PRIORITY  9

Outages not 

triggering an NSC 

An elevator 

outage that does 

not trigger an NSC 

and does not have 

any of the flags 

above. 

ELEVOOO  PRIORITY  5

Elevator running 

with a problem 

An elevator issue 

that has not 

disrupted service. 

ELEVRWP  LOW 

PRIORITY  3

Outages with higher priority codes receive faster responses and thus are generally 

shorter in duration. From 2016 -2018, an outage coded “high priority” lasted an average 

of 6.8 hours, while an outage coded “priority” had an average duration of 15.3 hours. 

As noted in Section 9, adding new teams will reduce durations across priority codes and 

close the gap between high priority and priority responses. 

Table 3: Outage duration by priority code 18 

Priority Level  Maximo Code  Average Duration 

(Hrs; 2016 -2018) 

Median Duratio n

(Hrs; 2016 -2018) 

High Priority  9 6.8  3.5 

Priority  5 15.3  6.4 

C. Elevator Mechanic Maintenance Procedure 

ESRD response teams primarily work from 8:00AM to 4:30PM. 19 At the beginning of each 

shift, elevator response teams address any outstanding corrective maintenance work 

orders, and conduct preventive maintenance in the absence of any pending    

> 17 ESRD Dispatch Operations prioritizes NSCs in high -rise buildings (6+ stories) before NSCs in low -rise buildings (6 or fewer).
> 18 The operational data throughout this Action Plan relies on NYCHA’s Maximo data, which has not been independently
> verified by th e Monitor.
> 19 The proposed shift change detailed in the Executive Summary and Section 9 would spread ESRD coverage more
> evenly throughout the day.

18 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

co rrective maintenance. For additional detail on the steps below, see Section VII.E in 

Appendix 2: NYCHA Standard Procedure 060.62.1: Elevator Service, Maintenance, and 

Repair .

1. At the start of every shift, the elevator response team checks their handheld 

device for any outstanding work orders at their location. If clarification is 

required, they contact the elevator dispatcher. 

2. If there are no open corrective maintenance work orders , the elevator response 

team follows their preventive main tenance schedule and procedure. See 

Section D “Preventive Maintenance” below. 

3. When an outage occurs during a shift and a new work order is created , the 

elevator dispatcher calls the elevator response team and assigns them to the 

work order .

4. Upon arrival at the location, the elevator response team presses “Start” on the 

Maximo work order to start the job and record the work start time. 

5. The elevator response team locates the elevator and determines if there is a 

hazardous elevator service condition (e.g. open hatch, passenger entrapment, 

alarm ringing, car drifting, fire, etc.) 

a. If there is an open hatch , the elevator mechanic helper must remain on 

site while the elevator mechanic posts the required notices , visits the 

motor room, and takes control of the elevator following Section VII. 8(b) in 

Appendix 2: NYCHA Standard Procedure 060.62.1: Elev ator Service, 

Maintenance, and Repair. 

b. If a passenger is trapped in the elevator , the elevator response team 

travels to the floor nearest the inoperative car, speaks to the passengers, 

and determines if anyone has been injured. 

i. If someone is injured, the elevator response team calls 911 and the 

supervisor of elevator mechanics (SEM) to advise that 911 was 

called 

ii. The elevator response team advises passengers that steps are 

being take n to release them as soon as possible and instructs 

passengers to keep clear of all doors and remain in the car until 

directed. 

iii. The elevator mechanic proceeds to the machine room to take 

control of the elevator and take action to safely remove the 

passengers, while the elevator mechanic helper remains with the 

elevator car and in contact with passengers. 19 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

c. If there is a hazard, but no passengers are trapped , the elevator 

mechanic helper stays with the car to ensure no one enters, while the 

elevator mechanic takes control of the elevator. 

6. The elevator response team notifies the Property Maintenance Superintendent of 

the outage and estimated time to complete. 

7. If there is a flood condition and the elevator is operating normally , the elevator 

response team moves the elevator car one floor above the flood before 

conduct ing any repairs. 

8. If the elevator is water damage d, the elevator response team follows separate 

protocols detailed in Appendix 2: NYCHA Standard Procedure 060.62.1: Elevator 

Service, Maintenance, and Repair before performing work on the elevator. 

9. The eleva tor response team performs a series of operational checks, including: 

a. All hatch, cab doors, and interlocks. 

b. Proper leveling at all floor stops with a maximum of ½ inch at each 

landing. 

c. All alarm bells. 

d. The stop switch. 

e. The machine brake monitor. 

f. The door r e-opening device (safety edge). 

g. The car door restrictor (zone lock). 

h. The Fireman Service Operation – Phase I and II. 

i. The machine room door lock. 

j. The car and hall call operation. 

k. All hatch and cab door glass and grills. 

l. All hatch doors, and the door checks for swing doors. 

10. After the operational checks, if the elevator is operating normally , the elevator 

response team enters the observation time into the handheld and closes the 

work order as “RUNNING ON ARRIVAL.” 20 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

11. If the outage results in a no -service c ondition, Maximo immediately 

autogenerates a separate robocall to residents in the affected building who 

have provided NYCHA with their phone numbers , notifying them of the no -

service condition and providing instructions regarding what assistance NYCHA 

has for individuals for mobility impairments (see the Resident Communications 

section below). 

a. The SEM or ESRD sector administrator must call and inform the Property 

Manager, Property Maintenance Superintendent, and the Emergency 

Services Department. 

12. If the elevator response team has not yet confirmed the outage, but 2 hours 

have elapsed since it was reported , Maximo autogenerates a robocall to 

residents i n the affected building, notifying them of the outage. 20 

13. If the elevator need s repairs , the elevator mechanic helper stays with the 

elevator car to ensure no one enters until instructed by the elevator mechanic .21 

a. The elevator response team selects “Yes” o n the handheld device to 

confirm the outage, triggering a robocall to affected residents who have 

provided NYCHA with their phone numbers and building -specific 

notifications on the NYCHA website .

b. The elevator response team posts NYCHA Form 061.091 Emergenc y Notice 

– Elevator Out of Service , on elevator doors on all floors .

14. The elevator response team begins repairing the elevator. 

15. If a no -service condition has reached 2 hours in duration , the SEM or ERSD sector 

administrator must call and update the Property Manager, Property 

Maintenance Superintendent , and the Emergency Services Department. 

a. The Emergency Services Department sends a page with no -service 

condition information to FDNY and NYPD, informing them of the service 

disruption and current statu s. 

16. If repairs require a skilled trades craft , the elevator response team notifies the 

sector SEM and ESRD sector administrator, who coordinates with the required 

department (for additional detail on commun ication with skilled trades, see the 

Interactions w ith Internal and External Partners section below ).    

> 20 As noted below, NYCHA has recently implemented interactive voice response to existing robocalls, allowing re sidents
> to indicate if they are mobility -impaired or in need of assistance.
> 21 The mechanic’s helper stays with the car due to prevent danger to residents, especially children. NYCHA has not
> found any alternative means of prevent access to the elevator cab upon the start of repairs.

21 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

17. If repairs are not completed within 90 minutes of arrival , the elevator response 

team notifies the sector SEM of the problem .22 

a. The sector SEM provides troubleshooting tips to the elevator response 

team to attempt to resolve the problem. 

b. The elevator response team attempts to troubleshoot the problem and 

informs the sector SEM if still unsuccessful in restoring the elevator to 

service. 

c. The secto r SEM determines the next steps to restore elevator service, 

which includes the following: 

i. Providing additional troubleshooting tips to the elevator response 

team. 

ii. Assigning a different elevator response team , if the Special Teams 

or Major Repairs units ar e required. 

iii. Contacting the special team or major repair team SEM to request 

the assignment of either team to the CM work order. 

d. If a different elevator response team is assigned, the original elevator 

response team follows the lockout procedure in Appendix 2: NYCHA 

Standard Procedure 060.62.1: Elevator Service, Maintenance, and Repair ,

complete the machine room log entry, and sign out of the machine room 

on NYCHA Form 060.142 Elevator Machine Rooms Visits Regis ter . The 

lockout procedure will vary depending on the controller type, but will 

require mechanics to apply locks to all energy isolation points (e.g. a 

control switch in the control panel). 

18. When repairs are completed , the elevator response team restores th e elevator to 

service following the steps in Section VII.A of Appendix 2: NYCHA Standard 

Procedure 060.62.1: Elevator Service, Maintenance, and Repair .

19. The elevator response team enters the corrective maintenance information into 

the Maximo work ord er on t he handheld device and closes the work order. 

20. If a repair is not possible due to a separate structural or building issue , the 

elevator response team enters corrective maintenance actuals in the Maximo 

work order and notif ies the SEM and the ES RD Sector Administrator. The ESRD 

Sector Administrator notifies the ESRD Director and SVP of Support Services for 

possible coordination with the Capital Projects Division.    

> 22 The SEM is involved in discussions with the elevator response team throughout and will generally know of a repair issue
> prior to this threshold; 90 minutes is the upper limit at which the response team must notify the SEM.

22 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

As noted throughout, for additional detail on specific maintenan ce procedures or 

contingencies, see Appendix 2: NYCHA Standard Procedure 060.62.1: Elevator Service, 

Maintenance, and Repair .

While the steps above are followed for all outages beginning during normal business 

hours —8:30 AM to 4:30pm, Monday through Frida y—corrective maintenance work 

orders outside these hours are routed to the ESRD Afte r Hours elevator response teams. 

In some cases, the CCC dispatcher will route after -hours corrective maintenance work 

orders to the Emergency Services Department (ESD), who se mechanic teams can 

perform operational checks, address immediate hazards, and post notifications of 

unplanned outages. ESD mechanics do not, however, perform repairs. All REMS -

triggered corr ective maintenance work orders are also routed to ESRD’s after -hours 

coverage. 

D. Preventive Maintenance 

Preventive maintenance is critical to breaking the cycle of disrepair in NYCHA’s 

elevators and making sustainable improvements in performance. Completing monthly, 

semi -annual, and annual preventive maintenance allows mechanics to address 

vulnerabilities prior to a service disruption and keeps machines in good working order. 

Preventative maintenance takes approximately 2 hours on a six -story build ing and can 

take upwards of six hours on a 31 -story building like Atlantic Terminal. 23 

An outline of the preventative maintenance procedure NYCHA will follow is below. 

For the full procedure NYCHA will follow , see Section VII.G of Appendix 2: NYCHA 

Stand ard Procedure 060.62.1: Elevator Service, Maintenance, and Repair .

1. Maximo automatically generates PM work orders for each elevator on the first 

day of the month. The PM work order lists the monthly, semi -annual, and annual 

preventive maintenance tasks and any open deficiencies identified during an 

inspection. 24 

2. At the start of the elevator response teams’ shift, the elevator dispatcher 

provides them with a list of elevators scheduled for preventive maintenance 

during their shift. 

3. During the course of their shift as they plan to perform preventive maintenance 

work as scheduled, the elevator response team provides the elevator dispatcher    

> 23 See the Monthly Preventative Maintenance Guide in Appendix 2: NYCHA Standard Procedure 060.62.1: Elevator
> Service, Maintenance, and Repair .
> 24 With additional staff coverage and higher preventive maintenance completion rates, NYCHA can use data collected
> during maintenance to inform resource allocation in the future.

23 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

with the development name, building address, and elevator car where the work 

will be performed. 

4. The elevator dispatcher assigns the elevator response team to the PM work 

order for that location and provides the elevator response team with the status 

of preventive maintenance work remaining for that elevator. 

5. The elevator response team goes to the lo cation and performs preventive 

maintenance. Upon arrival at the location, the elevator response team presses 

the Start tab on the Maximo work order on the handheld device to start the job. 

6. The elevator response team notifies residents of the preventive ma intenance 

outage per Section VII.B of Appendix 2: NYCHA Standard Procedure 060.62.1: 

Elevator Service, Maintenance, and Repair .

7. The elevator response team takes control of the elevator in the motor room. 

8. The elevator response team begins to work through their Maximo preventive 

maintenance checklist: 

a. Monthly Checks: 

i. Motor Room : Check hoist motor , generator/drive unit, gears, 

sheaves, controller, governor ropes, hoist ropes, brake, rope 

gripper, brake monitor switch, inspection switch, governor switch, 

main line switch. 

ii. Hatch : Check hatch doors, door locks, car door operator, zone 

restrictor, limit switches, IP Gibbs, gate switch, kick off blocks, 

emergency exit/switch, tiller ropes, traveling cable, car & 

counterweight guide shoes/rollers, swit ches (final limit, normal limit, 

slowdown limit), compensation sheave, emergency top -of -car 

stop, plank, safety operated switch, top of car inspection, car top. 

iii. Cab: Check car station buttons, door open button, 

acknowledgment lamps, alarm bell, emergency in -car stop switch, 

car door operation, hall stations, PI, door re -opening devices, 

handrails, mirror, floor leveling, saddles, in -car communication, cab 

lighting. 

i. Pit: Clean pit. Check limit switches, buffers, pit switches, governor 

tension sheave, pit lights, pit ladder, whisper flex. 

ii. Fireman Service Phase I : Test phase I and repair as needed. 24 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

iii. Fireman Service Phase II : Test phase II and repair as needed. 

b. Semi -Annual Checks: Check motor, governor, traveling cables, door 

operator cams, car safeties, tiller ropes, safety & safety switches, hatch 

switches. 

c. Annual Checks: Check rope gripper & check unintended motion, 

controller, compensation system. Perform brake maintenance. Iron Work: 

Check rails, fish plates, brackets, bed plate, pit steel. 

9. If preventive maintenance scheduled for the shift cannot be started because 

there is insufficient time due to unanticipated delays :

a. The elevator dispatch team contacts the SEM and the elevator dispatcher 

to advise them of the schedule preventive mainten ance that could not 

be started. 

b. The sector SEM resched ules the preventive maintenance following th e

notification protocols in Section VII.B of Appendix 2: NYCHA Standard 

Procedure 060.62.1: Elevator Service, Maintenance, and Repair .25 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

Resident Communications Plan 

Elevator outage s and no -service conditions are a serious burden on our residents; 

NYCHA will improve communication with residents during all service disruptions. In 

addition to the steps outlined below, NYCHA will work closely with residents to continue 

enhancing our communication plans. 

For additional detail on resident communications or accommodations that NYCHA will 

provide , see Appendix 2: NYCHA Standard Procedure 060.62.1: Elevator Service, 

Maintenance, and Repair .

A. Elevator Complaint Intake 

Residents play a critical role in identifying elevator outages :

1. The resident telephones the CCC to report an elevator complaint .

2. The CCC customer service agent documents all information in Siebel and 

provides the customer with the CM work order number prior to ending the call. 

3. The MyNYCHA application allows residents to report non -hazardous elevator 

conditions directly through the app .

4. The resident can notify a member of the Property Management Staff, who will 

create a corrective maintenance work order or call the elevator dispatcher. 

B. Resident Notification d uring Outages and No -Service Conditions 

As detailed in the steps below, o nce an outage has begun, ESRD and property 

management staff communicate with residents to relay safety information, updates on 

repairs, and offer various accommodations. 

1. Once the elev ator response team arrives at a location, the elevator mechanic 

helper stays with the car to ensure no resident enters the car while the elevator 

mechanic posts the required notices .

2. Once the elevator response team confirms an outage , OR if two hours have 

passed since a reported outage :

a. Maximo automatically triggers a robocall to all residents in the building 

whose phone numbers have been provided to NYCHA , informing them of 

the service disruption. 

b. The outage is logged in the Elevator Outage section of NYCHA’s public -

facing website .26 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

c. NYCHA Alerts (a notification function of MyNYCHA) sends emails to all 

affected residents that have an active e -mail address on file (email 

addresses stored in Siebel and sourced from annual reviews and the 

MyNYCHA app) 

3. For all no -service conditions during 8am -4:30pm , the Property M anager will call 

the Te nant Association President —or their designee —of the affected 

development to inform them of the outage and relay any information on repair 

status and accommodation plan s. 25 After hours, ESD will contact the Tenant 

Association President. 

4. If the outage result s in a no -service condition , Maximo automatically triggers a 

robocall to all residents in the building who have provided NYCHA with their 

phone numbers , providing instructions regarding what assistance NYCHA has for 

individuals with mobility impaired residents. 

a. NOTE: NYCHA has released an enhanced no -service condition robocall 

using interac tive voice response technology that follows this script: 

Hello, this is the New York City Housing Authority calling to inform 

you that there has been an int erruption in elevator service due at 

your building on (Date/Time). We will inform you when the work has 

been completed. If you are mobility impaired or require additional 

assistance, please press 1 now. For more information, please check 

MyNYCHA online or call the CCC. Thank you. 

5. The elevator response team posts NYCHA Form 061.091: Emergency Notice –

Elevator Out of Service on the elevator doors at each landing. The team must 

check the “Out for Repairs” box and add the date removed from service, and 

the est imated return to service. 

6. Residents who have opted -in to MyNYCHA push notifications will receive real -

time updates to elevator outages and no -service conditions. 

7. If a no -service condition existed , once the repairs are completed Maximo 

automatically triggers a robocall to all residents in the building who have 

provided NYCHA with their phone numbers , informing them that elevator service 

has been restored to the building. 

8. NYCHA’s public -facing website lists details for every current ele vator outage and 

no -service condition, including: development, address, planned/unplanned 

status, reported time, status, and impact.  

> 25 NYCHA is also exploring the use of resident networks to disseminate information during all types of outages.

27 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

C. Additional Protocols for Vulnerable Residents 

In addition to the communication plan for all residents listed abov e, NYCHA will 

conduct supp lemental outreach to senior and mobility -impaired residents during no -

service conditions. Each Property Manager has access to the Tenant Data System, 

which includes a list of senior and mobility -impaired residents in their development —

also known as the Tenant Data System Disability/Handicap Detail and Life Sustaining 

Equipment/ Wheelchair Report . The database includes information submitted during 

annual reviews, interim recertifications, and other touch points between residents and 

property management staff. Property Managers and Housing Assistants access the 

system during all service interruptions to ensure those who need assistance will receive 

it. 

For data on the number of seniors and mobility -impaired residents served by each 

elevator, see Appendix 1. When a no -service condition begins during normal business 

hours , NYCHA will take the following steps —in addition to the steps listed above. 

1. The Property Manager and Property Maintenance Superintendent are informed 

by the elevator response team of an outage triggering a no -service condition .

2. The Housing Assistant or their designee accesses the Tenant Data System and 

identifies the units with senior or mobility -impaired residents .

3. The Housing Assistant or their designee will contact all residents who pressed “1” 

in response to the robocall. 

4. After the robocall is triggered, the Housing Assistant or their designee will call 

each resident who did not pick up the robocall. 

5. The Housing Assistant or their designee will then conduct a welfare check at 

each unit of senior or mobility -impaired residents who did not answer the 

robocall or individual call. 

6. If the resident has not picked up either phone call or answered the door, the 

Housing Assistant or their designee leaves written notification of the no -service 

condition. 

7. All communications with residents —including the robocall, door notice , and in -

person interactions —will offer residents access to the accommodations available 

during no -service conditions. 

8. If a no -service condition is anticipated to, or has, lasted more than four hours , the 

Property Manager will trigger a broader reasonable accommodation policy, 

including operation of the stair climber machine, assistance with carrying 

groceries, and coordination of medical needs. 28 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

D. St air Climber Machine Process 

NYCHA currently uses stair climbers to assist residents in the event of a no -service 

condition. Due to civil service title and union contract restrictions, t he operation of stair 

climber machines and the transport of resident -owned motorized and portable 

wheelchairs and walkers is performed on a voluntary basis by trained property 

management staff. 26 Individual developments and the Emergency Service Department 

(ESD) recruit volunteers through staff meetings, postings on employee bulletin boards, 

and issuance of NYCHA form 040770: Stair Climber Machine Operator Volunteer She et. 

Each development maintains a list of trained stair climber machine volunteers on 

NYCHA Form 040.773. If a development is unable to provide sufficient staf f to operate 

the stair climber, Property Managers are required to use alternate measures to 

accommodate residents. 

When a no -service condition occurs, the following steps are taken to ensure residents 

have access to stair climbers: 

1. The elevator response team or SEM notifies the Property Manager and Property 

Maintenance Superintendent of a no -service condition that is expected to last 

more than two hours 

2. The Property Maintenance Superintendent radios the building Caretaker to 

check if any wheelcha ir -bound or mobility -impaired residents are waiting in the 

lobby. 

3. The Property Manager or Assistant Property Manager directs the Housing 

Assistant to access the TDS Disability/Handicap Detail and Life Sustaining 

Equipment/Wheelchair Report to verify the li st of wheelchair -bound or mobility -

impaired residents who might require stair climber service during the no -service 

condition. 

4. If the Housing Assistant identifies residents who are mobility -impaired, the y advise 

the Property Maintenance Supervisor , who arr anges for the pickup of the 

appropriate type of stair climber from the cluster -based storage locations. For a 

list of cluster -based stair climber locations, please see Appendix 4 .

5. A resident may inform any member of the Property Management staff to request 

use of the stair climber; staff members must inform the Property Maintenance 

Supervisor .    

> 26 NYCHA will explore alternate titles to operate stair climber machines and has re leased an RFEI for ambulette services to
> augment current capacity. By April 1, 2020, NYCHA will report this information to the Monitor, to allow for the
> development of an Action Plan amendment.

29 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

6. The Property Maintenance Supervisor notifies trained stair climber volunteer staff 

when a resident i s in need of stair climber service. 

7. If the resident uses a wheelchair or walker , the Property Management staff 

ensure s that appropriate volunteer staff is available to carry equipment up or 

down stairs. 

8. If a no -service condition is likely to last beyond 2 4 hours , Property Management 

Staff may invoke NYCHA Standard Procedure 040.00.9: Elevator Modernization –

Reasonable Accommodations For Residents with Disabilities, enabling temporary 

relocation if possible. 

After regular business hours, all stair climber needs ar e routed to ESD . For additional 

details on NYCHA’ stair climber protocol, see Appendix 4: Memorandum 

DGM#20090016, Stair Climber Service Procedure for Authority and Privately Managed 

Developments During Unanticipated Elevator Service Interruptions. 

E. Future of Reasonable Accommodations 

NYCHA is reevaluating the use of stair climber machines, which present logistical and 

safety challenges. The use of stair climbers can be physically strenuous on staff as well 

as tenants and the machines are not suitable for residents with motorized wheelchairs 

or those who exceed weight limits. 

NYCHA is unable to require development staff to operate stair climbers due to 

restrictions in civil service titles and labor agreements . However, each property 

management office maintain s a list of volunteer staff who operate the machines when 

needed. Between December 2018 and May 2019 , stair climbers were used on 10 

occasions. NYCHA will continue to look for measures to ensure consistent stair climber 

service, while also seeking out vendor -provided alternatives. 

NYCHA —in consultation with the Mayor’s Office, city agencies, other public housing 

authorities, and priva te landlord organizations —has researched a variety of possible 

solutions to serve mobility -impaired residents during NSCs. 

NYCHA Support Services released a Request for Expression of Interest (RFEI) to 

determine the capabilities of suppliers to provide se rvices for assisting mobility -impaired 

residents during extended NSCs. The RFEI was released in November and remained 

open until January 14, 2020, receiving one response. Support Services is evaluating this 

response and will explore re -issuing an RFEI or R FP if appropriate. 

The RFEI outlined the following goals: 

• Provide research and identify alternatives to stair climbers and make 

recommendations as to new equipment type and number of units required. 30 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

• Perform a needs analysis of anticipated usage of stair climbers and/or other 

equipment and develop a staffing plan for NYCHA employees to address that 

usage. 

• Identify alternative means and methods Responder would utilize instead of or in 

addition to stair chairs to assist mobility impaired residents to enter a nd exit their 

apartments and their buildings. 

• Secure third -party services for the transport of mobility impaired residents for a 

number of years, as needed. 

• Provide strategies for expedient and efficient activation of the mobility service to 

residents at individual developments throughout NYC, as needed by NYCHA. 

For additional details on the RFEI, see Appendix 3 .

NYCHA will continue to improve its provision of reasonable accommodations during 

NSCs and reduce the frequency and duration of outages that trigger these conditions. 

All the strategies outlined above are designed to reduce outage frequency and 

minimize outage duration, thus reducing the frequency and duration of mobility -

impaired residents being displaced from —or stuck in —their apartments. 

NYCHA will provide a report to the Monitor on the results of assessment described in this 

section by March 1, 2020 , so that an amended Action Plan may be developed. 31 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

Interactions with Internal and External Partners 

A. Maintenance, Repair, and Skilled Trades (MRST) Protocol 

Occasionally an elevator repair job will require the assistance of another craft. In those 

situation s, the following steps will be taken to ensure coordination and limited disruption: 

1. The elevator response team notifies the sector SEM of the problem 

2. The elevator response team enters the corrective maintenance details into the 

Maximo work order on the handheld device and notify the dispatch er to 

interrupt the work order. 

3. The sector SEM notifies the ESRD sector administrator .

4. The sector SEM directs the elevator dispatcher to create a parent corrective 

maintenance work order for the required craft .

5. The ESRD sector administrator or designee contacts the relevant department to 

confirm availability and provide them with a work order number .

a. For a Maintenance Worker, the ESRD sector administrator calls the 

Property Maintenance Superintendent .

b. For a Skilled Trades Worker, the ESRD sector administrator calls the 

Maintenance, Repair, and Skilled Trades Department (MRST) .

c. If an MRST Skilled Trades wor ker is unavailable, the ESRD sector 

administrator calls the Property Management Department’s Planning Unit 

at the Borough to confirm additional availability. 

6. The Maintenance Worker or Skilled Trades Worker performs the required work .

7. The Maintenance Worker or Skilled Trades Worker enters the corrective 

maintenance details and closes the maintenance or skilled traded work order. 

8. The Maintenance Worker or Skilled Trades Worker calls the sector SEM or ESRD 

sector administrator when the work order is closed .

9. Th e sector SEM calls the elevator dispatcher to reassign the elevator response 

team to the corrective maintenance work order in order to restore the elevator 

to service. 32 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

B. External Partners – City Agencies 

As noted above, NYCHA contacts FDNY when there is a hazard condition in an 

elevator. NYPD is contacted when a pit search or motor room search is required. When 

a no -service condition exists, the Emergency Services Department sends an inter -

agency notificat ion —recipients include FDNY and NYPD —to inform our partners of 

service disruptions and the latest status on repairs. 33 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

Contracts and Warranties 

A. Third -party Management Contracts 

Of NYCHA’s 3,224 elevators, 27 are at sites managed by third -parties. NYCHA has active 

management contracts with Kraus Management and Building Management 

Associates, both of which are developing their own action plans to ensure ongoing 

compliance with the Agreement. NYCHA will ensure these pla ns are consistent with this 

Action Plan and both plans will be released publicly once approved by the Monitor. 

The terms of the private management contracts require the firms to conduct all 

necessary preventive and corrective maintenance for the elevators in those buildings. 

However, there may be occasions when the private management teams are unable to 

correct an issue and will reach out to NYCHA through the Emergency Services 

Department. 

Under the terms of the contracts with Kraus and Building Managemen t Associates, both 

parties are required to employ or sub -contract elevator corrective maintenance staff. 

Per the NYCHA -Kraus contract: 

“Notices are posted in the buildings and the Supers/Porters knock on all doors 

informing residents of the service interr uption…the list of Handicapped tenants is 

kept on site, for quick access. If there is a need for those tenants to leave their 

apartment, security is called, and safe transportation for the handicapped 

tenant(s) down the stairs is arranged.” 

If the correct ive maintenance repair cannot be made immediately, “NYCHA 

emergency service hotline is called and NYCHA personnel is informed.” 

While Kraus and BMA manage the corrective maintenance for these 27 elevators, ESRD 

conducts the required Category 1 and Categor y 5 inspections. 

B. Warranties 

Currently NYCHA does not systematically track or use warranties on elevator cars, 

machinery, or parts. Recognizing the need to implement new controls over warranty 

management —and the potential to use those warranties to deliver improved service to 

our residents —the Maximo team has begun integrating all warranties tracked in the 

Apex system —used by Capital Projects to store all warranties and guarantees. Once 

this integration is complete, Capital Projects wil l be required to directly input any new 

elevator warranties directly into the Maximo system. This integration will be completed 

by February 29, 2020. 34 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

Performance Improvement Plans 

The spending plan below outlines a number of improvement initiatives designed to 

meet the operating metrics in Obligations C.22 -C.34 of the Agreement. NYCHA will use 

capital and operating funds to improve elevator performance —reducing the 

frequency and dur ation of outages and no -service conditions. The chart below also 

includes anticipated ESRD personnel costs to provide a holistic view of NYCHA’s total 

investment in elevators through 2024. 

A. Capital commitments 

1. Five -year capital plan 

While the elevator capital plan is a standalone Agreement obligation (C.34), it is also a 

primary strategy for reducing outages across the portfolio. The Agreement requires a 35 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

minimum of 275 elevator replacements by 2024; currently, 281 are scheduled in that 

window. 

These elevator replacements include 99 state -funded modernizations under the 

General Disbursement Agreement Action Plan, approved on November 6, 2019 . For 

additional detail on the GDA, see Appendix 8: General Disbursement Agreement 

Action Plan . 27 

The Ca pital Projects Division (CPD) and ESRD built the elevator replacement schedule 

using the following inputs: 

• Condition rating of elevator (blended), which includes: 

o Physical Needs Assessment rating based on remaining useful life and other 

deficiencies 

o Operat ions rating data based on number of outages, work order tickets, 

and availability of parts 

• Number of residents impacted by the investment 

NYCHA will perform the following 281 elevator replacements in the timeframe listed in 

tables 4 and 6 below: 

Table 4: Schedule of elevator replacements through 2024 

2019 

(calendar)  2020  2021  2022  2023  2024  TOTAL 

Elevator 

replacements  0 4 102  40  121  14  281 

Funding 

source 

City, 

Federal 

City, 

Federal  State  State, 

Federal  Federal 

City, 

State, 

Federal 

The 281 scheduled replacements will i mpact 36,358 residents across 21 developments, 

including 9,209 seniors and mobility -impaired residents. Of the 21 developments 

receiving elevator replacements: 

• 1 is in the construction phase 

• 1 is being re -bid for construction 

• 6 are awaiting City OMB and Compt roller design funding approv al 

• 11 ar e beginning design survey work 

• 2 are awaiting Project Management task orders.  

> 27 The GDA also includes the replacement of 49 elevators at Qu eensbridge North, tentatively scheduled for completion
> in 2024. Those elevators are not included in this asset plan’s schedule in case project delays push completion to 2025.

36 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

Table 5: Residents impacted by elevator replacements 

2019 

(calendar)  2020  2021  2022  2023  2024  TOTAL 

Federal  272  1,428  4,918  2,403  9,021 

State  4,003  11,903  15,906 

City  451  10,980  - - - 11,431 

Total  723  12,408  4,003  16,821  2,403  36,358 

Table 6: List of elevator replacements by development; 2020 -2024 

Development  Borough  Funding 

source 

Year 

completed 

# of 

elevators 

Residents 

impacted 

Senior or 

mobility -

impaired 

residents 

Boston Rd  BX  Federal  2020  2 272  270 

McKinley  BX  Federal  2021  10  1,428  341 

Morrisania Air Rights  BX  Federal  2023  13  1,677  693 

Queensbridge South  QN  Federal  2023  49  3,241  843 

Lafayette  BK  Federal  2023  14  2,403  462 

TOTAL FEDERAL  88  9,021  2,609 

Highbridge Gardens  BX  State  2022  12  1,611  390 

Richmond Terrace  SI  State  2022  12  1,250  175 

Unity Plaza  BK  State  2022  16  1,142  195 

Atlantic Terminal  BK  State  2023  3 566  192 

Butler  BX  State  2023  18  4,282  661 

Carey Gardens  BK  State  2023  9 1,617  461 

Coney Island (4&5)  BK  State  2023  6 501  146 

Coney Island (1B)  BK  State  2023  3 997  198 

Mitchel  BX  State  2023  20  3,940  896 

TOTAL STATE  99  15,906  3,314 

Hylan  BK  City  2020  2 451  119 

Adams  BX  City  2021  14  2,295  486 

Amsterdam  MN  City  2021  30  2,211  715 

Dyckman  MN  City  2021  14  2,249  745 

Saratoga Village  BK  City  2021  2 297  59 

St. Nicholas  MN  City  2021  28  3,422  801 

Hernandez/Meltzer  MN  City  2021  4 506  361 

TOTAL CITY  94  11,431  3,286 

TOTAL  281  36,358  9,209 

During the design phase, CPD will ensure that the equipment specified is suitable for 

NYCHA’s needs —including integration with existing Remote Elevator Monitoring 

Systems. Prior to, and during construction, the CPD Project Manager will communicate 

with dev elopment staff to implement resident notification protocols. For example, when 

a service outage is unavoidable, the contractor must provide written notification to the 37 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

development Superintendent five days in advance, and no more than one elevator 

may be re moved from service at a time in multiple -elevator buildings. 

Upon completion of the work, CPD specifications require that the contractor 

coordinate with ESRD to provide four eight -hour training sessions on maintenance and 

service of the equipment. Contrac tors must also provide manuals and any software 

required. 

2. Permanent Affordability Commitment Together Plan 

Like the capital plan, addressing elevators through the Permanent Affordability 

Commitment (PACT) program is both a standalone obligation (C.34) a nd a strategy for 

reducing outages. NYCHA uses HUD’s Rental Assistance Demonstration (RAD), Section 

18, and 2 CFR Part 200 programs to raise capital for needed repairs —including 

elevators. The RAD program requires that transactions address all physical nee ds arising 

now and for the 20 -year period after conversion —a standard NYCHA has applied to all 

PACT transactions. For any elevator building included in PACT, the 20 -year window will 

likely require full replacement of existing elevators. 

To date, NYCHA has transferred 53 elevators under PACT. 

The PACT planning process used several criteria to build the preliminary five -year 

pipeline, including capital needs and operating metrics —elevator outages were one of 

the key criteria in identifying potentia l developments. 

Under the latest five -year PACT plan, an additional 500 -600 elevators will be addressed 

by 2024. 28 

Table 7: Elevators addressed through PACT by 2024 

2019  2020  2021  2022  2023  2024 

NYCHA 

elevator 

portfolio -

start of year 

3,27 7 3,224  3,137  3,067  2,94 9 2,835 

Elevators 

addressed 

through 

PACT 

(5 3)  (8 7)  (70)  (118)  (114)  (138) 

NYCHA 

elevator 

portfolio –

end of year 

3,224  3,137  3,067  2,94 9 2,835  2,697  

> 28 Selected developments and timing are subject to change if required by exigent circumstances —including XRF lead
> testing results and other action plan items.

38 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

B. Maintenance commitments 

1. Elevator mechanic shift change 

Elevator outages can occur at any time of day and across all days of the week. ESRD’s 

current coverage model is concentrated between 8:30am and 4:30pm on Monday 

through Friday; outages that occur outside of these hours have longer durations given 

the reduc ed coverage model over nights and weekends. 

NYCHA has proposed a new shift model that would more evenly distribute ESRD 

response teams across the day and week . Under the current schedule —with 130 teams 

on the primary weekday shift and as few as 6 teams o n weekend nights —many 

outages beginning on weekends are not addressed until Monday, given resource 

constraints, prioritization obligations, and outage volumes. 

The shift change could cost as much as $4.4 million dollars annually, which may be 

partially offset by reduced overtime. This remains under negotiation with the City’s 

Office of Labor Relations. 

NYCHA will provide a report to the Monitor on the results o f this negotiation by February 

14, 2020 , so that an amended Action Plan may be developed. 

For current elevator mechanic shifts , see Appendix 5. 

2. Water -resistant elevator door operators 

Flooding and other water -related conditions are ongoing threats to reliable elevator 

service. Not only can water cause immediate outages, these conditions can have a 

long tail of effects on elevator operations, despite not being captured in Maximo 

causal codes. For example, if a major flood incident causes an i mmediate outage, it 

will be coded as “INCIDENTALWATERDM.” That same incident, however, may cause 

long -term corrosion and rusting of the cables and rails, leading to future outages. When 

those future outages are coded in Maximo, they will likely not have th e same code in 

the absence of a proximate water condition. 

Water -resistant elevator door operators can reduce the likelihood of a water -related 

incident causing an immediate elevator outage. NYCHA has begun —and will 

continue —installing water -resistant ele vator door operators on 52 elevators that have 

frequent flooding and other water -related conditions, with portfolio -wide replacement 

scheduled by 2024. Heavy rain, snowfall, and melting ice can all cause mechanical 

and electrical damage if roof leakage occ urs. Water resistant elevator door 

operators —which sit on top of the elevator cab and mechanically open the doors 

upon arrival at a landing —contain fully enclosed drive units with optical sensors as well 39 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

as water -resistant motors. These operators will repl ace old units that have well -worn 

mec hanical contacts and resistors. 

Table 8 : Water resistant door operator installation              

> 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 TOTAL
> TOTAL $193,077 $2,397,024 $2,397,024 $2,397,024 $2,397,024 $2,397,024 $12,178,197

Installations will be managed by ESRD staff and may trigger overtime costs that are not 

included in the above table. NYCHA and ESRD will also explore additional solutions that 

can mitigate the impact of water on elevator operations. 

NYCHA has installed 37 waterproof door operators to date and will complete 640 

installations each year through December 31, 2024. 

NYCHA will ensure that the specifications for new elevators being purchased are 

consistent with continued use of these door operators. 

3. Motor room air conditioner installation 

NYCHA elevators experience a spike in outages during the summer months, due to 

overheating conditions in motor rooms and occasional voltage issues. Motor rooms are 

located at the top of a building and can run many degree s warmer than outdoor 

temperatures and internal temperatures at lower floors. High heat can cause lasting 

damage to elevator systems —reducing reliability in older relay systems and melting 

processors in newer solid state systems. 

NYCHA will install air co nditioners in elevator motor rooms to reduce the frequency of 

heat -related outages. Phase I began in March 2019 with machine room surveys to 

assess room size and identify ventilation fans in need of repair or replacement. The 

motor room survey identified 2 ,972 motor rooms in need of AC installation. MRST has 

completed installation of 734 motor room ai r conditioners as of December 6, 2019, 

leaving 2, 238 motor rooms still in need of AC units. 250 additional units were delivered in 

December 2019 and MRST conti nues to install an average of 4 new units per workday .

NYCHA will complete the installation of these remaining AC units by October 31, 2020. 

Maintenance of air conditioner units will occur during monthly Preventive Maintenance. 

This task will include remo ving the front cover of the Air Conditioner, removing the filter 

that’s behind the front cover and removing dirt, or dust particles that may be present 

on the filter and air conditioning coils. 40 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

Table 9: Motor room AC installation                      

> 2019 2020 TOTAL
> Phase I –materials $158,050 $158,050
> Phase I –labor $355,294 $355,294
> Phase II –materials $1,397,800 $1,397,800
> Phase III –materials $598,850 $598,850
> TOTAL $513,344 $1,996,650 $2,509,994

4. Hoist motor and generator replacement 

In August 2019, over 30% of NYCHA elevator outages were caused by issues in the 

motor room, which includes the hoist motor, generator, and controller. NYCHA elevators 

experience high usage throughout the day, creatin g acute strain on mechanical 

systems. While hoist motors and generators are replaced during capital elevator 

replacements, NYCHA has not installed a new elevator since 2016. 

NYCHA will contract with vendors to repair and replace 2,112 hoist motors and 

gen erators across the portfolio. The 2,112 elevators exclude all elevators modernized in 

the last 10 years, all elevators in the capital and PACT p lans, and all wheelchair lifts. 

Hoist motors are electrically powered and provide the mechanical means of oper ating 

the elevator. Generators provide electricity to power the hoist motor on some 

equipment. ESRD will utilize a service contract to replace and repair hoist motors and 

generators on an ongoing basis. ESRD and the Technical Services Division have 

engaged an A/E firm on the scope . ESRD plans to release a solicitation in February 2020. 

Installation of generators and hoist motors will be completed by December 31, 202 3, 

with 528 installations each year. 

Table 10 : Hoist motor and generator replacement                                          

> 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 TOTAL
> Generators -materials $1,848,000 $1,848,000 $1,848,000 $1,848,000 $7,392,000
> Generators -labor $670,180 $670,180 $670,180 $670,180 $2,680,719
> Hoist motors -materials $1,161,600 $1,161,600 $1,161,600 $1,161,600 $4,646,400
> Hoist motors -labor $670,180 $670,180 $670,180 $670,180 $2,680,719
> TOTAL $0 $4,349,960 $4,349,960 $4,349,960 $4,349,960 $0 $17,399,838

5. REMS installation 

Remote Elevator Monitoring Systems are connected to elevator controllers and cabs, 

providing dispatchers with notifications each time a “fault” is detected. The dispatcher 

can then use these faults to create a new work order or confirm an existing work ord er. 

REMS are also a powerful tool for diagnosing systemic issues underlying breakdowns 41 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

and can be used to inform predictive maintenance. Under the Agreement, 70% of 

NYCHA elevators must be equipped with REMS by 2024. NYCHA and ESRD will install 

REMS for 10 0% of the portfolio by 2024, ensuring consistency in systems and monitoring 

strategies. 

Table 11 : REMS installation                                      

> 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 TOTAL
> Phase I -materials $1,395,000 $1,395,000 $2,790,000
> Phase I -labor $147,554 $147,554 $295,107
> Phase II -materials $8,478,000 $8,478,000 $16,956,000
> Phase II -labor $896,747 $896,747 $1,793,493
> Phase III -labor $3,484,173 $3,484,173
> TOTAL $0 $1,542,554 $1,542,554 $9,374,747 $9,374,747 $3,484,173 $25,318,773

The scope for REMS installations was finalized on November 4, 2019 and the final A&E 

estimates were received by the Technical Services Department on December 10, 2019. 

ESRD will trigger the procurement process and issue a solicitation release a January 

2020. 

Under the Capital Plan, CPD will install 281 new elevators by 2024, all of which will be 

equipped with REMS. By 2024, ESRD will use a vendor to install REMS in all remaining 

elevators. 171 REMS will be installed by December 31, 2021 and 94 2 additional REMS will 

be installed by December 31, 2023 . 1,830 elevators are already equipped with REMS but 

will require an upgrade to a cloud -based system by December 31, 2024. 

6. Additional elevator mechanic teams 

Reductions in elevator mechanics and hel pers have strained ESRD’s coverage, often 

delaying or deferring preventive maintenance that could inoculate the elevator from 

future problems. Currently, if an ESRD team is working on a preventive maintenance 

ticket and a corrective maintenance work order is triggered in their sector, they are 

often forced to stop their preventive maintenance work, put the elevator back in 

service, and travel to the corrective maintenance need. Their ability to complete the 

preventive maintenance work is entirely depending on the volume of corrective 

maintenance calls. 

NYCHA will add elevator response teams to increase overall maintenance capacity —

increasing preventive maintenance rates and likely reducing outage duration. An 

additional 20 teams have been approved for FY20 —at a preliminary cost of $3 Million 

annually. NYCHA and the Monitor team will jointly evaluate performance over six 

months to determine if additional resources are required. 42 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

Table 12 : Additional elevator mechanic teams                    

> 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 TOTAL
> Additional teams $3,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 $15,000,000
> TOTAL $0 $3,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 $15,000,000

C. Other commitments 

1. Maximo enhancements (fully funded )

Maximo is the system used to manage and track elevator related work orders. 

ESRD and the Maximo team have worked on several upgrades to enhance ESRD’s 

analytical and reporting capabilities. The system has been modified to provide elevator 

work orders with more distinct causes to bette r identify trends and issues. With better 

data controls , ESRD and the Monitor can establish a baseline of performance as 

operations data is submitted each quarter, per Obligation C. 22. 

Completed 2019 updates 

• As of July 30, 2019, the following features we re released: 

o Mechanic or Maintenance workers can confirm outages by flagging WO 

as a “True Outage” on their handheld devices for unplanned outages. 

o Maximo will allow users to create planned elevator outage work orders. 

• As of July 31, 2019, the following features wer e released: 

o Robocalls are triggered based on planned/unplanned outage and no 

service conditions. 

• As of August 2019, elevator mechanics can close work orders on their handhelds. 

This will further reduce discrepancies in work order creation, closing of ti ckets, 

and the recorded length of an outage. 

Elevator Dashboard 

A new Elevator -specific dashboard will provide real -time data on the number of 

outages and no service conditions. It will also list the number of apartments impacted 

by no service conditions. It will provide the total work orders open, including the number 

of outages, “Super -9” hazardous work orders (i.e. Accidents, passenger stuck, etc.) 

Reporting will be provided by elevator sector and will be able to be drilled down to 

managing developments and developments. The dashboard is in beta testing and 

ESRD will integrate it into daily operations once testing is complete. 

Remote Elevator Monitoring systems (REMS) will be incorporated into the Dashboard. 

REMS “open critical” and “open -hazardous” warn ings of a priority 2 or 3 will be 43 

New York City Housing Authority 

ELEVATOR RESPONSE ACTION PLAN 

illustrated on the Dashboard. The drill down will include the warning type, the location 

and device identifier. REMS notifications will include all notifications within 24 hours 

throughout NYCHA and will provide a drill do wn to the locations and devices. 

One Maximo upgrade previously scheduled for July 2019 —a clear delineation between 

NSCs and other outages —was released in September 2019 and currently undergoing 

data validation. 

2. Alternative work schedule 

The Authority has implemented a new schedule that provides a wider range of hours 

where NYCHA caretakers are in the buildings. Alternative Work Schedule (AWS) is a new 

way of scheduling certain front -line staff to ensure coverag e from 6 AM to 7 PM at our 

developments, 7 days a week, through 5 staggered schedules. The fourth and final 

phase of the AWS rollout will occur approximately February 23, 2020. 

Cleaning elevator door tracks is a daily responsibility for NYCHA Caretakers, a s noted in 

NYCHA’s Janitorial Operations Guide —additional cleanings should aid in reducing 

outage frequency from debris .

3. Door lock monitoring 

The NYC Department of Buildings has mandated that each passenger and freight 

elevator in New York City be equipped with door lock monitoring by January 1, 2020. To 

date, NYCHA has installed 793 door lock monitors, with 2409 installations pending. 

NYCHA has secured a vendor to perform 1400 installations and has ordered parts to 

sel f-install the remainder. NYCHA will complete all installations by December 31, 2021. 

NYCHA has been in communication with the Department of Buildings about its progress 

and will provide quarterly updates to the Monitor team .
