Title: 

URL Source: https://www.dia.mil/Portals/110/Documents/News/Military_Power_Publications/Challenges_Security_Space_2022.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 12 Apr 2022 15:10:11 GMT

Markdown Content:
D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y Committed to Excellence in Defense of the Nation C H A L L E N G E S T O 

# SECURITY IN SPACE 

# Space Reliance in an Era of  Competition and Expansion 

# 2022 This report contains copyrighted material. Copying and disseminating the contents are prohibited 

without the permission of the copyright owners. Images and other previously published material 

featured or referenced in this publication are attributed to their source. 

ISBN 978-0-16-095566-2 

This report is available online at www.dia.mil/Military-Power-Publications 

For media and public inquiries about this report, contact DIA-PAO@dodiis.mil 

For more information about the Defense Intelligence Agency, visit DIA’s website at www.dia.mil 

Information cutoff date, March 2022 

> DIA_E_00039_A

Cover image, Cislunar space domain viewed from beyond the far side of the Moon: 

Shutterstock, Unsplash 

II C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E SCOPE NOTE 

Challenges to Security in Space  was first published in early 2019 to address the main threats to the array of 

U.S. space capabilities, and examine space and counterspace strategies and systems pursued primarily by 

China and Russia and, to a lesser extent, by North Korea and Iran. This second edition builds on that work and 

provides an updated, unclassi fi ed overview of the threats to U.S. space capabilities, particularly from China 

and Russia, as those threats continue to expand. 

Between 2019 and 2021 the combined operational space fleets of China and Russia have grown by 

approximately 70 percent. This recent and continuing expansion follows a period of growth (2015– 

2018) where China and Russia had increased their combined satellite fleets by more than 200 percent. 

The drive to modernize and increase capabilities for both countries is reflected in nearly all major space 

categories—satellite communications (SATCOM), remote sensing, navigation-related, and science and 

technology demonstration. 

Since early 2019, competitor space operations have also increased in pace and scope worldwide, China’s 

and Russia’s counterspace developments continue to mature, global space services proliferate, and orbital 

congestion has increased. As a result, DIA has published this new edition to: 

• Expand its examination of competitor space situational awareness (SSA), and command and 

control (C2) capabilities; 

• Detail the profiles of organizations operating space and counterspace systems based on new information; 

• Deepen our characterization of new space and counterspace systems deployed and in development; 

• Focus on China's and Russia's interests in exploring the Moon and Mars; 

• Provide a new section on the use of space beyond Earth orbit and its implications; 

• Widen our treatment on the threats posed to all nations’ space operations from space debris. 

Growth of All Chinese and Russian Satellites In-Orbit, 2019–2021 

CHINESE SATELLITES RUSSIAN SATELLITES        

> 2019 2020 2021 2019 2020 2021 Science, Technology Development, or Other SATCOM Remote Sensing Navigation-related 0100 200 300 400 500 0100 200 300 400 500

End of year totals are represented for 2019 through 2021. China’s and Russia’s combined, in-orbit satellite fleets 

will continue to grow.  Source: Union of Concerned Scientists, 1 January 2022, Satellite Database.                         

> 2110-30293 DEFENSEINTELLIGENCEAGENCY

III EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

# Space Reliance In An Era Of Competition And Expansion 

Capabilities.  Space-based capabilities impact many day-to-day aspects of the American way of life. These 

capabilities enable functions that affect our homes, transportation, electric power grids, banking systems, 

and our global communications. Satellites provide access to a broad range of information and enable many 

services in real time, from watching breaking news to monitoring our deployed armed forces around the 

world day or night. These and other benefits enabled by space systems are the result of more than 60 years 

of dedicated work by government agencies—military and civilian—supported by many commercial space 

providers. Space systems also enable the United States and our allies to project combat power to areas of 

conflict and instability and allow our armed forces to collect vital intelligence on foreign threats, to navigate 

and maneuver rapidly, and to communicate with each other anywhere around the globe to ensure our 

security and quick response to international military and humanitarian crises. 

Competition.  Space competition between the United States and the former Soviet Union began in 

earnest with Moscow’s launch of the world’s first artificial satellite, Sputnik-1, in 1957. China’s emergence 

as a space power in the late 20th and early 21st century and Russia’s post-Soviet resurgence have 

expanded the militarization of space as both countries integrate space and counterspace capabilities 

into their national and warfighting strategies to challenge the United States. Adversaries have observed 

more than 30 years of U.S. military operations supported by space systems and are now seeking ways to 

expand their own capabilities and deny the U.S. a space-enabled advantage.  1

China and Russia, in particular, are developing various means to exploit the perceived U.S. reliance on 

space-based systems and challenge the U.S. position in the space domain.  2 Beijing and Moscow seek 

to position themselves as leading space powers, intent on creating new global space norms. Through 

the use of space and counterspace capabilities, they aspire to undercut U.S. global leadership. Iran and 

North Korea will continue to develop and operate electronic warfare (EW) capabilities to deny or degrade 

space-based communications and navigation. 3

Proliferation.  Space capabilities are increasing across a growing list of nations, including: missile warning, 

geolocation and tracking of friendly and adversary activities, target identification, and navigation services 

for their citizens and armed forces. Expanding constellations of remote-sensing satellites are reducing all 

countries' ability to conceal sensitive tests, evaluation activities, and military exercises and operations.  4, 5 

Space commercialization is also growing as companies augment or replace government-provided launch, 

communications, SSA, remote-sensing—also referred to intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 

(ISR)— and human spaceflight services. These firms are opening access to space technologies, services, 

and products to government and nongovernment entities that can pay for their capabilities.  6,7,8  The 

growth of viable commercial space enterprises best represents how the use of space has expanded in 

scope, scale, and importance across the globe. 

Counterspace.  Space is being increasingly militarized. Some nations have developed, tested, and 

deployed various satellites and some counterspace weapons. China and Russia are developing new 

space systems to improve their military effectiveness and reduce any reliance on U.S. space systems such 

IV C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E as the Global Positioning System (GPS). Beijing and Moscow have also created separate space forces. As 

China’s and Russia’s space and counterspace capabilities increase, both nations are integrating space 

scenarios into their military exercises. They continue to develop, test, and proliferate sophisticated 

antisatellite (ASAT) weapons to hold U.S. and allied space assets at risk. At the same time, China and 

Russia are pursuing nonweaponization of space agreements in the United Nations.  9 Russia regularly 

expresses concern about space weapons and is pursuing legal, binding space arms control agreements 

to curb what it sees as U.S. strength in outer space.  10,11  The expansion of Chinese and Russian space and 

counterspace weapons combined with the general rise of other foreign space capabilities is driving many 

nations to formalize their space policies to better position themselves to secure the space domain and 

facilitate their own space services. 12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25 

Collisions.  The probability of collisions of massive derelict objects in low Earth orbit (LEO) is growing 

and almost certainly will continue through at least 2030 because of rising numbers of space launches— 

especially those with multiple payloads—and continuing fragmentation from collisions, battery 

explosions, and further ASAT testing events. D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

VINTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E CONTENTS 

Scope Note  III 

Executive Summary  IV 

Space Capabilities  2

Denying Space  4

China  8

Russia  20 

Emerging Challenges  30 

Iran  30 

North Korea  31 

Key Space Issues through 2030 and Beyond  34 

Growth of Reusable Space Technology: 

Commercial Opportunities and Military Advantage  34 

Human Spaceflight and Cislunar Operations  35 

Challenge to Space Operations: Debris and Orbital Collisions  37 

Outlook  40 

Appendix: Space and Counterspace Concepts  41 

Glossary of Acronyms  48 

Sources/Endnotes  49 D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

VII Active Foreign Satellites 

Countries/Multinational Owned Space Assets 

SATCOM ISR and Earth Observation Navigation-related Science, Technology Development, or Other China Russia Other Foreign States 874 

## 87 61 

# 563 118 334 

## 269 192 17 125 32 726 262 28 49 41 

Countries/Consortiums 

# 51 50 5 44 

Source: Union of Concerned Scientists, 1 January 2022, Satellite Database 

> 2008-26360

1C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E Space-based remote-sensing, communication, 

and navigation systems are used for various com -

mercial, civilian, and military applications. Many 

nations, including China and Russia, have recog -

nized the benefits of investing in and using space 

technologies. Those space capabilities include: 

• Space-based remote-sensing or ISR satellites 

gather data of security concern and support intel -

ligence and military activities, such as tracking and 

monitoring military forces and observing related 

events and locations. Space-based remote-sensing 

also supports civilian activities, such as crop and 

weather monitoring, as well as disaster response 

sites and operations. 26 

• Satellite communications is used for beyond-line-

of-sight communications, including voice and televi -

sion services. Communications satellites also enable 

Internet and other communications to reach remote 

areas without direct connectivity. Military SATCOM 

improves C2, allowing for greater mobility over 

greater distances by eliminating the need for ground-

based infrastructure. 27 

• Positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT) services 

transmit timing signals for various applications, 

including air, land, sea, and space navigation; asset 

tracking; and precision weapons guidance. PNT also 

supports civilian transportation; precision farming; 

autonomous vehicle guidance; time synchroniza -

tion for electrical power grids and banking transac -

tions; communications across wireless Internet and 

emergency medical, fire, and police services; as well 

as navigation services for rail, road, air, and ocean 

cargo operations. 28 

• Space launch vehicles (SLVs) place objects in Earth 

orbit or put them on trajectories to explore the far -

thest reaches of space. For decades, this capability 

was restricted to a few spacefaring nations. The num -

ber of organizations able to launch satellites is small 

and placing satellites in orbit has usually been the 

largest expense in space operations. However, during 

the past 10–12 years, other nations have been devel -

oping SLVs, and increasing numbers of commercial 

entities worldwide have steadily fielded new capabili -

ties. As a result, the average price, and thus barrier, to 

entry into space, has declined. 29 

As more nations and more services depend on space-

based capabilities—especially in critical social and 

economic sectors, such as medical, disaster response, 

weather forecasting, and  fi nancial transactions— 

the loss or degradation of those capabilities will 

increasingly disrupt daily life. 30  Space asset disruption 

will probably lead to degradation of critical military and 

intelligence capabilities. Such disruptions can deny 

access to space for scientific purposes and negatively 

impact technological innovation. 31,32,33 

[See the Appendix on Space and Counterspace Concepts 

for additional details.] S P A C E 

# C A P A B I L I T I E S D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

2Counterspace Threat Continuum 

Space Situational Awareness Electronic Warfare Denial & Deception Directed Energy Weapons Orbital Threats Ground Site Attacks Cyber Attacks Kinetic Energy Weapons Nuclear Detonation 

NONREVERSIBLE REVERSIBLE 

The counterspace continuum represents the range of threats to space-based services, arranged from 

reversible to nonreversible effects. Reversible effects from denial and deception and EW are nondestruc -

tive and temporary, and the system is able to resume normal operations after the incident. Directed energy 

weapons (DEW), cyberspace threats, and orbital threats can cause temporary or permanent effects. 

Permanent effects from kinetic energy attacks on space systems, physical attacks against space-related 

ground infrastructure, and nuclear detonation in space would result in degradation or physical destruction 

of a space capability. 

> 2008-26370

3C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E Competitor nations have capabilities to deny others 

the use of space assets. Space is a critical enabler 

for U.S. and allied military forces during operations, 

exercises, and logistics around the world provid -

ing for near-instantaneous communications, situa -

tional awareness, and precision navigation for our 

forces. Military and civilian space services are not 

easily separated. Actions taken by any nation to 

interfere with space services used by the military 

probably would deny civilian space services as well, 

either accidentally or with purpose. Although many 

counterspace weapons are intended to degrade 

space services temporarily, others can damage or 

destroy satellites permanently. 

• Physical or cyberattacks against ground sites and 

infrastructure supporting space operations can 

threaten satellite services. 

• Space situational awareness sensors predict when 

satellites pass overhead. This allows for tracking, 

warning, and, if necessary, targeting of space-

based systems. 

• Adversaries can jam global navigation and communi -

cations satellites used for C2 of naval, ground, and air 

forces as well as manned and unmanned vehicles. 

• Adversary DEWs that target ISR satellites almost 

certainly are able to temporarily or permanently 

blind imagery satellites and other strategic sensors, 

thereby denying the ability to monitor, track, and tar -

get forces. 

• Adversary ASAT missiles can be used to attack satel -

lites in LEO and would produce massive amounts of 

debris that can remain in orbit for decades or even 

centuries. China tested an ASAT missile against its 

own defunct weather satellite in 2007, which cre -

ated a debris cloud that poses a threat to satellites 

in nearby orbits today. 34  Russia used an ASAT missile 

as recently as 15 November 2021 to destroy one of 

its derelict satellites in orbit. 35 

• Other space-based weapons can deliver temporary 

or permanent effects on other satellites. 

Countries with nuclear weapons can launch a war -

head on a long-range booster, such as an intercon -

tinental ballistic missile (ICBM) or SLV, and probably 

conduct a high-altitude nuclear detonation, which 

would create widespread electromagnetic disrup -

tions in space and on Earth leading to potential dam -

age or destruction of satellites. 36 DE NYING  SP ACE DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 

4Orbit Types and Uses 37,38 

Highly Elliptical Orbit (HEO) Geosynchronous Earth Orbit (GEO) Medium Earth Orbit (MEO) Low Earth Orbit (LEO) 

Orbit  Altitude*  Uses 

Low Earth Orbit  Up to 2,000 kilometers 

- Communications 

- ISR 

- Human Spaceflight  †

Medium Earth Orbit  Approx. 2,000 to 20,000 kilometers 

- Communications 

- Positioning, Navigation, 

and Timing 

Highly Elliptical Orbit 

LEO altitudes at perigee 

(nearest to Earth) 

Approx. 40,000 kilometers at 

apogee (farthest from Earth) 

- Communications 

- ISR 

- Missile Warning 

Geosynchronous 

Earth Orbit  Approx. 36,000 kilometers 

- Communications 

- ISR 

- Missile Warning 

* The advantages of higher orbits for communications and ISR are near-persistent coverage of most of the Earth in view of the satellite, 

with the exception of Earth’s polar regions where it is limited. LEO satellites cover all parts of the world, including the poles, but for 

shorter periods based on the speed of the satellite. 

† With the exception of nine U.S. Apollo missions to the Moon, all human spaceflight has been completed in LEO. 

> 2008-26357

5C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK Long March-5 (LM-5) carrying China's Tianwen-1 mission to Mars, launching from Wenchang Space Launch Center. 

> Image Source: Noel CELIS/AFP

7C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E China has devoted considerable economic and 

technological resources to growing all aspects of its 

space program, improving military space applica -

tions, developing human spaceflight, and conduct -

ing lunar and Martian exploration missions. 41  During 

the past 10 years, China has doubled its launches 

per year and the number of satellites in orbit. 42,43 

China has placed three space stations in orbit, two 

of which have since deorbited, and the third of which 

launched in 2021. 44,45,46,47,48  Furthermore, China has 

launched a robotic lander and rover to the far side 

of the Moon; 49  a lander and sample return mission 

to the Moon; 50,51,52,53  and an orbiter, lander, and rover 

in one mission to Mars. 54,55,56  China has also launched 

multiple ASAT missiles that are able to destroy sat -

ellites and developed mobile jammers to deny SAT -

COM and GPS. 57,58,59,60,61,62,63 

Beijing’s goal is to become a broad-based, fully 

capable space power. 64  Its rapidly growing space 

program—second only to the United States in the 

number of operational satellites—is a source of 

national pride and part of Chairman Xi Jinping’s 

“China Dream” to establish a powerful and pros -

perous China. The space program, managed by the 

People's Liberation Army (PLA), supports both civil -

ian and military interests, including strengthening 

its science and technology sector, growing interna -

tional relationships, and modernizing the military. 

China seeks to rapidly achieve these goals through 

advances in the research and development of space 

systems and space-related technology. 65,66,67,68,69 

China will continue to launch a range of satellites 

that substantially enhance its ISR capabilities; field 

advanced communications satellites able to trans -

mit large amounts of data; increase PNT capabili -

ties; and deploy new weather and oceanographic 

satellites. 70  China has also developed and probably 

will continue to develop weapons for use against 

satellites in orbit to degrade and deny adversary 

space capabilities. 71,72,73 

Exploring the vast universe, developing space 

programs, and becoming an aerospace power 

have always been the dream we have been 

striving for. 

—Xi Jinping, General Secretary of the Chinese 

Communist Party, 24 April 2016, 

Remarks on the first China Space Day 39 

The Beijing Aerospace Control Center (BACC) during the 

2 August 2020 launch of the Tianwen-1 mission to Mars.  Image Source: Xinhua via AFP 

Space has already become a new domain of 

modern military struggle; it is a critical factor for 

deciding military transformation; and it has an 

extremely important influence on the evolution 

of future form-states, modes, and rules of war. 

Therefore, following with interest the military 

struggle circumstance of space and strengthening 

the study of the space military struggle problem is 

a very important topic we are currently facing. 

—China’s  Science of Military Strategy , 2020 

National Defense University  40 CHINA DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 

8Space Strategy and Doctrine 

China officially advocates for the peaceful use of space 

and is pursuing agreements in the United Nations on 

the nonweaponization of space. 78  China also contin -

ues to improve its counterspace weapons capabilities 

and has enacted military reforms to better integrate 

cyberspace, space, and EW into joint military opera -

tions. China’s space strategy is expected to evolve 

over time, keeping pace with the application of new 

space technology. These changes probably will be 

re fl ected in published national space strategy docu -

ments, through space policy actions, and in programs 

enacted by political and military leadership. 

The PLA views space superiority, the ability to con -

trol the space-enabled information sphere and to 

deny adversaries their own space-based informa -

tion gathering and communication capabilities, as 

a critical component to conduct modern “informa -

tized warfare.” 79,80,81,82  China’s first public mention of 

space and counterspace capabilities came as early 

as 1971, largely from academics reviewing foreign 

publications on ASAT technologies. However, Chi -

nese science and technology efforts on space began 

to accelerate in the 1980s, most likely as a result of 

the U.S. space-focused Strategic Defense Initiative 

to defend against the former Soviet Union’s nuclear 

weapons. 83  Subsequently, after observing the U.S. 

military’s performance during the 1991 Gulf War 

through actions in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and the 

second Iraq War, the PLA embarked on an effort 

to modernize weapon systems, across all domains 

including space, and update its doctrine to focus 

on using and countering adversary information-en -

abled warfare. 84 

China’s perceptions of the importance of space-en -

abled operations to the United States and its allies 

has shaped integral components of PLA military 

planning and campaigns. In addition, space is a crit -

ical enabler of beyond-line-of-sight operations for 

deployed Chinese forces, and the PLA probably sees 

counterspace operations as a means to deter and 

counter a U.S. intervention during a regional mili -

tary conflict. 85,86  China has claimed that “destroying 

or capturing satellites and other sensors” would 

make it difficult for the U.S. and allied militaries to 

use precision-guided weapons. 87  Moreover, Chi -

nese defense academics suggest that reconnais -

sance, communication, navigation, and early warn -

ing satellites could be among the targets of attacks 

designed to “blind and deafen the enemy.” 88 

## Military Strategic Guidelines 

In 2015, Beijing’s official release of  China’s Military Strategy  directed the PLA to research and give priority to 

strategies to win “informatized local wars” and emphasized “maritime military struggle.” 74  Chinese military 

strategy documents also emphasize the growing importance of offensive air, long-distance mobility, and 

space and cyberspace operations. China expects its future wars to be fought mostly outside its borders and 

in the maritime domain. China promulgated its military strategy and the supporting documents through its 

most recent update to its military strategic guidelines, the top-level directives that Beijing uses to define con -

cepts, assess threats, and set priorities for planning, force posture, and modernization. 75 

The PLA uses “informatized warfare” to describe the process of acquiring, transmitting, processing, and 

using information to conduct joint military operations across the land, sea, air, space, and cyberspace 

domains and the electromagnetic spectrum during a conflict. PLA writings guide much of China’s mili -

tary modernization today and highlight the benefit of near-real-time shared awareness of the battlefield 

in enabling quick, unified efforts to seize tactical opportunities. In November 2020, China’s Central Mili -

tary Commission issued a trial update to PLA joint doctrine to codify warfighting reforms and will almost 

certainly improve its ability to conduct joint operations. 76  Space-based systems will play an increasingly 

important role in support of these goals. 77 

9C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E Space and Counterspace 

# Organizations 

China’s space program comprises organizations in 

the military, political, defense-industrial, and com -

mercial sectors. The PLA historically has managed 

China’s space program and continues to invest in 

improving China’s capabilities in space-based ISR, 

SATCOM, satellite navigation, human spaceflight, and 

robotic space exploration. 89  Although state-owned 

enterprises are China’s primary civilian and military 

space contractors, China is placing greater emphasis 

on decentralizing and diversifying its space industry 

to increase competition. 90 

In 2015, China established the Strategic Support 

Force (SSF) to integrate cyberspace, space, and EW 

capabilities into joint military operations as part of 

its military reforms. 91,92,93  The SSF forms the core 

of China’s information warfare force, supports 

the entire PLA, and reports directly to the Central 

Military Commission. 

The SSF, led by PLA General Ju Qiansheng, 94  is 

divided into two major departments: the Space 

Systems Department (SSD), very likely consolidating 

the majority of the PLA’s space functions, and the 

Network Systems Department (NSD), very likely 

in charge of cyberspace operations and EW. 95,96 

The SSD focuses primarily on satellite launches 

and operations to support ISR, navigation, and 

communication requirements. 97  The SSD’s China 

Launch and Tracking Control (CLTC) operates all 

four launch sites, in addition to Yuanwang space 

support ships, two major satellite control centers— 

Xian Satellite Control Center (XSCC) and the BACC— 

and the PLA telemetry, tracking, and control (TT&C) 

system for all Chinese satellites. 98,99  The EW functions 

of the PLA before 2015 were probably transferred to 

the NSD when it was stood up in 2015 as well. 100,101 

The State Council’s State Administration for Science, 

Technology, and Industry for National Defense 

(SASTIND) is the primary civilian organization 

that coordinates and manages China’s space 

activities, including allocating space research and 

development funds. 102  It also maintains a working 

relationship with the PLA organization that oversees 

China’s military acquisitions. SASTIND guides 

and establishes policies for state-owned entities 

conducting China’s space activities. 103 

The China National Space Administration (CNSA), 

subordinate to SASTIND, serves as the public face of 

China’s civilian space efforts. 104  China is increasingly 

using CNSA efforts to bolster relationships with 

countries around the world, providing opportunities 

to cooperate on space issues. 105,106,107  As of 2019, 

China had more than a hundred cooperative space-

related agreements with more than three dozen 

countries and four international organizations. 108,109 

Many space technologies can serve a civilian and mil -

itary purpose and China emphasizes “military-civil 

fusion”—a phrase used, in part, to refer to the use of 

dual-use technologies, policies, and organizations for 

military benefit. 110  The SSF works with civilian organi -

zations like universities and research organizations 

to incorporate civilian support to military efforts since 

there is an already high demand for aerospace talent 

and competition for finite human resources. 111  Chi -

na’s commercial space sector features partially state-

owned enterprises such as Zhuhai Orbita, Expace, 

Galactic Energy, and OK-Space for remote sensing, 

launch, and communication services. 112,113,114,115 

# Acquisition of Foreign 

# Space and Counterspace 

# Technologies 

The PLA continues to rely on overt and covert acqui -

sition of foreign space and counterspace technol -

ogies to build Chinese knowledge and advance 

technological modernization as a supplement to its 

domestic research. China uses traditional technical 

espionage and cyberespionage techniques as well 

as its open-source collection network, technology 

transfer organizations, and exploitation of overseas 

scholars.  Acquisition of foreign technology is used D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

10 to circumvent the costs of research and facilitate 

“leapfrog” development by exploiting the creativity 

of other nations. 116 

# ISR Satellite Capabilities 

China employs a robust space-based ISR capabil -

ity designed to enhance its worldwide situational 

awareness. Used for military and civilian remote 

sensing and mapping, terrestrial and maritime sur -

veillance, and intelligence collection, China’s ISR sat -

ellites are capable of providing electro-optical and 

synthetic aperture radar (SAR) imagery as well as 

electronic and signals intelligence data. 117  China also 

exports its satellite technology globally, including its 

domestically developed remote-sensing satellites. 

As of January 2022, China’s ISR satellite fleet contained 

more than 250 systems—a quantity second only to 

the United States, and nearly doubling China's in-orbit 

systems since 2018. 118,119  The PLA owns and operates 

about half of the world’s ISR systems, most of which 

could support monitoring, tracking, and targeting of 

U.S. and allied forces worldwide, especially through -

out the Indo-Pacific region. These satellites also allow 

the PLA to monitor potential regional flashpoints, 

including the Korean Peninsula, Taiwan, Indian Ocean, 

and the South China Sea. 120,121,122 

Recent improvements to China’s space-based ISR 

capabilities emphasize the development, procure -

ment, and use of increasingly capable satellites with 

digital camera technology as well as space-based 

radar for all-weather, 24-hour coverage. These 

improvements should increase China’s monitoring 

capabilities—including observation of U.S. aircraft car -

riers, expeditionary strike groups, and deployed air 

wings, making them more susceptible to long-range 

strikes. Space capabilities probably will enhance 

potential PLA military operations farther from the Chi -

nese coast. 123,124,125,126  These capabilities are being aug -

mented with electronic reconnaissance satellites that 

monitor radar and radio transmissions. 127 

# Satellite Communications 

China owns and operates more than 60 communi -

cations satellites, at least 4 of which are dedicated 

to military use. 128  China produces its military-ded -

icated satellites domestically. Its civilian commu -

nications satellites incorporate off-the-shelf com -

mercially manufactured components. 129  China is 

fielding advanced communications satellites capa -

ble of transmitting large amounts of data. 130  Existing 

and future data relay satellites and other beyond-

line-of-sight communications systems could con -

vey critical targeting data to Chinese military 

operation centers. 131,132,133 

In addition, China is making progress on its ambi -

tious plans to propel itself to the forefront of the 

global SATCOM industry. 134,135,136  China is continuing 

to test next-generation capabilities like its Quan -

tum Experimentation at Space Scale (QUESS) space-

based quantum-enabled communications satellite, 

which could supply the means to field highly secure 

communications systems. 137,138  In June 2020, a team 

of Chinese scientists claimed to achieve quantum 

supremacy, reporting successful satellite-based dis -

tributions of entangled photon pairs at a distance 

of more than 1,200 kilometers and that the photon 

pairs’ integrity remained intact after traveling such 

distances. Testing satellite-based quantum entan -

> A 10 December 2016 satellite-to-Earth link from Ali,
> Tibetan Autonomous Region to China's Micius Quan -
> tum Teleportation Satellite Experiment.
> Image Source: Xinhua via AFP

11 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E glement represents a major milestone in building a 

practical, global, ultrasecure quantum network, but 

the widespread deployment and adoption of this 

technology still faces hurdles. 139,140 

China also intends to provide SATCOM support 

to users worldwide and plans to develop at least 

seven new SATCOM constellations in LEO. How -

ever, as these constellations are still in the early 

stages of development their effectiveness remains 

uncertain. 141,142,143,144,145 

# PNT Capabilities 

China’s satellite navigation system, known as Bei -

Dou, is an independently constructed, developed, 

and exclusively China-operated PNT service. Chi -

na’s priorities for BeiDou are to support national 

security and economic and social development 

by adopting Chinese PNT into precise agriculture, 

monitoring of vehicles and ships, and aiding with 

civilian-focused services across more than 100 coun -

tries in Africa, Asia, and Europe. 146,147  BeiDou pro -

vides all-time, all-weather, and high-accuracy PNT 

services to users domestically, in the Asia-Pacific 

region, as well as globally and consists of 49 oper -

ational satellites. 148,149,150,151,152,153,154  Initially deployed 

to facilitate regional PNT services, BeiDou achieved 

worldwide initial operating capability in 2018. 155,156 

In June 2020, China successfully launched the 

final satellite in the BeiDou satellite constellation, 

completing its global navigation system. 157  Chi -

na’s military uses BeiDou’s high-accuracy PNT ser -

vices to enable force movements and precision-

guided munitions delivery. 161,162 

BeiDou has a worldwide positional accuracy stan -

dard of 10 meters; accuracy in the Asia-Pacific region 

is within 5 meters. 163  In addition to providing PNT, 

the BeiDou constellation offers unique capabilities, 

including text messaging and user tracking through 

its Regional Short Message Communication service to 

enable mass communications among BeiDou users. 

The system also provides additional military C2 capa -

bilities for the PLA. 164,165,166 

China intends to use its BeiDou constellation to offer 

additional services and incentives to countries taking 

part in its Belt and Road Initiative emphasizing build -

ing strong economic ties to other countries to align 

partner nations with China’s interests. 167,168  As of May 

2021, China is predicting Beidou products and ser -

vices will be worth $156 billion by 2025, and poten -

tially export BeiDou products to more than 100 million 

users in 120 countries. 169 

# Human Spaceflight 

# and Space Exploration 

Following uncrewed missions that began in 1999, 

China became the third country to achieve indepen -

dent human spaceflight when it successfully orbited 

the crewed Shenzhou-5 spacecraft in 2003. 170,171,172 

In 2011, China then launched its first space station, 

Tiangong-1, and in 2016, it launched its second 

space station, Tiangong-2. 173,174,175  In 2020, China 

conducted its first orbital test of the New-Gen -

eration Manned Spaceship, which is expected to 

replace the Shenzhou series of crewed spacecraft. 176 

On 29 April 2021, China launched the first element, 

Tianhe, of its new Tiangong space station. 177  Beijing 

launched the first supply vessel, Tianzhou, and has 

launched two Chinese crews since then. 178,179 

China has also taken on a greater role in deep space 

exploration and space science and has made nota -

ble accomplishments during the past several years. 

China has demonstrated its interest in working with 

Russia and the European Space Agency (ESA) to con 

China's Zhurong rover and Tianwen lander on Utopia 

Planitia, Mars, 11 June 2021. 158,159,160                         

> Image Source: Xinhua via AFP DEFENSEINTELLIGENCEAGENCY

12 China: Space Exploration Missions 

Mission  Description  Launch Date 

Yinghou-1  Mars orbiter launched aboard Russian  Phobos-Grunt  space -

craft. Mission failed to exit LEO. 180  2011 

XPNAV-1 

The world’s first X-ray navigation satellite test—uses distant 

X-ray pulsars to navigate and determine its location in the solar 

system within 5 kilometers. 181 

2016 

SISASAIL-1  Solar sail technology test for future deep-space missions. 182  2019 

Chang'e-4 

First-ever landing on lunar far side; mission included a rover 

and lander and the lunar relay satellite, which was launched in 

May 2018. 183,184,185,186 

2019 

Tianwen-1  Martian orbiter, lander, and rover. 187,188,189,190  2020 

Chang'e-5  Robotic mission landed on the Moon, collected samples, and 

returned them to Earth. 191,192,193,194  2020 

Tiangong  Modular space station designed to host Chinese and foreign 

payloads and astronauts. 195,196,197,198,199,200  2021–2022 

Chang'e-6  Robotic mission to land, collect samples from the Moon’s 

south pole, and return to Earth. 201  2023 

Chang'e-7 

Orbiter, relay satellite, lander, rover, and flyby craft. The lander 

and rover will have ground-penetrating radar, surface magne -

tometer, and a spectrometer for lunar exploration. 202 

2024 

Chang'e-8  Test and verification mission for future lunar expeditions. 203  TBD 

Lunar Robotic 

Mission  Robotic research station on the Moon. 204,205  2025 

Human Lunar 

Program 

Human lunar exploration program to put astronauts on the 

Moon. 206,207,208  Mid-2030s 

Lunar 

Research and 

Development 

Base 

Establish a research base on the Moon, primarily supported 

by robotic technology and capable of supporting human 

visits. 209,210 

By 2050 

13 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E Chinese Space Launch Vehicles  Meters 

> Medium-Lift
> 2–20 metric tons
> Heavy-Lift
> 20–50 metric tons
> Super Heavy-Lift
> >50 metric tons
> Light-Lift
> <2 metric tons
> *Developmental Depicted payload capacity is approximate and varies depending on planned orbit
> Kuaizhou  (KZ) -1
> Hyperbola-1
> Kaituo  (KT) -2
> Long March  (LM) -6
> LM-11
> LM-2C/-2D
> LM-4B/-4C
> LM-8
> LM-2F
> LM-3A
> LM-3C
> LM-3B
> LM-7/-7A
> LM-5/-5B
> LM-9*

The launch vehicles depicted are representative of China’s launch capabilities. Additional light-, medium-, and 

heavy-lift vehicles are in development. China uses its light-lift vehicles to place small payloads into LEO and its 

medium-lift—specifically the LM-2, LM-3, and LM-4—to place larger satellites into LEO and MEO and smaller sat -

ellites in GEO. The LM-5 heavy-lift SLV supports launching crewed space station components to LEO and heavy 

payloads to GEO. The developmental super heavy-lift LM-9 primarily will support missions to the Moon and Mars. 

> 2008-26363

duct deep-space exploration. 211,212  China is the third 

country to place a robotic rover on the Moon and 

was the first to land a rover on the lunar far side in 

2019, which is communicating through the Queqiao 

relay satellite that China launched the year before 

to a stable orbit around an Earth-Moon Lagrange 

point [See Cislunar Chart, page 35]. 213,214 

# Space Launch Capabilities 

China is improving its space launch capabilities to 

ensure it has an independent, reliable means to 

access space and to compete in the international 

space launch market. China continues to improve 

manufacturing efficiencies and launch capabilities 

overall, supporting continued human spaceflight 

and deep-space exploration missions—including to 

the Moon and Mars. 215  New modular SLVs that allow 

China to tailor an SLV to the specific configuration 

required for each customer are beginning to go 

into operation, leading to increased launch vehicle 

reliability and overall cost savings for launch 

campaigns. 216  China is also in the early stages of 

developing a super heavy-lift SLV similar to the U.S. 

Saturn V or the newer U.S. Space Launch System 

to support proposed crewed lunar and Mars 

exploration missions. 217 

In addition to land-based launches, in 2020 China 

demonstrated the ability to launch a Long March-11 

(LM-11) from a sea-based platform. This capability, 

if staged correctly, would allow China to launch 

nearer to the equator than its land-based launch D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

14 sites, increase the rocket’s carrying capacity, and 

potentially lower launch costs. 218 

China has developed quick-response SLVs to 

increase its attractiveness as a commercial small 

satellite launch provider and to rapidly recon -

stitute LEO space capabilities, which could sup -

port Chinese military operations during a conflict 

or civilian response to disasters. Compared with 

medium- and heavy-lift SLVs, these quick-re -

sponse SLVs are able to expedite launch cam -

paigns because they are transportable via road 

or rail and can be stored launch-ready with solid 

fuel for longer periods than liquid-fueled SLVs. 

Because their size is limited, quick-response SLVs 

such as the Kuaizhou-1 (KZ-1), LM-6, and LM-11 

are only able to launch relatively small payloads 

of up to approximately 2 metric tons into LEO. 

Chinese Space Launch, SSA, Satellite Control Centers, Command and Control, 

and Data Reception Stations 219,220    

> All locations are approximate. Boundary representation is not necessarily authoritative. Depiction of claims on this map is without prejudice to U.S. non-recognition of any such claims. 0500 1,000 Kilometers

Data Reception Station Deep Space Tracking Network Large Phased Array Radar (LPAR) Satellite Control Center Space Launch Site Telemetry, Tracking, and Control (TT&C) 

> East China Sea

N. KOR. MONGOLIA 

CHINA 

KYR. BHU. INDIA NEPAL BURMA VIET. JAPAN BANGL. S. KOR. PAK. KAZAKHSTAN RUSSIA LAOS THAI. 

> Aksai Chin

Beijing 

Beijing Taiyuan Xian Wenchang Xichang Jiuquan Haiyang Port Kunming Zhejiang Changchun Nanning Weinan Jiamusi Sanya Kashgar Shandong Zhanyi Kashgar Qingdao Korla Miyun Lingshui 

China has four fixed launch sites. The newest, Wenchang on Hainan Island, has a launch latitude closer to the Equator, 

which provides a more efficient path to launch satellites into GEO. In 2020, China launched a LM-11 from a barge based 

in Haiyang Port. China's main satellite control center is in Xian, and its primary control center for human space flight 

and lunar missions is in Beijing. The PLA operates four large phased array radars (LPAR) most likely used for missile 

warning and SSA. Additionally, there are at least six ground stations used for satellite C2—including one in Neuquén, 

Argentina, and five for receiving remote sensing data from satellites—including one located in Kiruna, Sweden. 

> 2108-29551

15 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E In June 2020, China announced its intention to 

upgrade the payload capacity of the LM-11 in the 

new LM-11A, designed for land or sea launches, 

beginning in 2022. 221,222,223,224 

The expansion of nonstate-owned Chinese launch 

vehicle and satellite operation companies in China’s 

domestic market since 2015 suggests that China is 

successfully advancing military-civil fusion efforts. 

Military-civil fusion blurs the lines between these 

entities and obfuscates the end users of acquired 

foreign technology and expertise. 225 

# Space Situational Awareness 

China has a robust network of space surveillance 

sensors capable of searching, tracking, and char -

acterizing satellites in all Earth orbits. This net -

work includes a variety of telescopes, radars, 

and other sensors that allow China to support its 

missions including intelligence collection, counter -

space targeting, ballistic missile early warning 

## Chinese International SSA Efforts Collaboration and 

## Overseas Tracking, Telemetry, and Control Sites 

China leads the Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization (APSCO), a mul -

tilateral organization with rotating leadership whose members include China, 

Bangladesh, Iran, Mongolia, Pakistan, Peru, Thailand, and Turkey with Egypt, 

Indonesia, and Mexico as associate members. 226  APSCO oversees a space sur -

veillance project known as the Asia-Pacific Ground-Based Optical Space Object 

Observation System (APOSOS). As part of the project, China provided to Iran, 

Pakistan, and Peru 15-cm telescopes that are able to track objects in LEO and 

GEO. All tasking information and subsequent observation data collected is 

funneled through the Chinese Academy of Science’s National Astronomical 

Observatory of China. APOSOS has near full coverage of LEO and GEO. The 

organization is planning to improve optical system capabilities, coverage, and 

redundancy as well as data sharing networks. 227,228,229 

China has established locations worldwide to aid in TT&C of space missions 

both around the Earth as well as in cislunar and deep space. There are ground 

stations in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Ethiopia, France, Green -

land, Kenya, Kiribati, Namibia, Norway, Pakistan, South Africa, Spain, and 

Sweden. There are also four sites in Antarctica that can provide similar sup -

port as well as a BeiDou reference station: Great Wall, Kunlun, Taishan, and 

Zhongshan Stations. 230 

> Image Source: Xinhua via AFP

The four Chinese Yuanwang space tracking ships— 

based in Jiangyin, near Shanghai, and usually sup -

porting space launch operations from positions in the 

Pacific and Indian Oceans—are part of China’s SSA 

network. In early 2020, China’s Yuanwang-7 con -

ducted operations in the Atlantic Ocean, a first for 

Yuanwang space support vessels. D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

16 (BMEW), spaceflight safety, satellite anomaly resolu -

tion, and space debris monitoring. 231,232 

# Electronic Warfare 

# Capabilities 

The PLA considers EW capabilities to be critical 

assets for modern warfare, and its doctrine 

emphasizes using EW to suppress or deceive enemy 

equipment. 233  The PLA routinely incorporates in its 

exercises jamming and antijamming techniques 

that probably are intended to deny multiple types 

of space-based communications, radar systems, 

and GPS navigation support to military movement 

and precision-guided munitions employment. 234 

China probably is developing jammers dedicated 

to targeting SAR, including aboard military 

reconnaissance platforms. Interfering with SAR 

satellites very likely protects terrestrial assets by 

denying imagery and targeting in any potential 

conflict involving the United States or its allies. 235,236 

In addition, China probably is developing jammers 

to target SATCOM over a range of frequency 

bands, including military-protected extremely high 

frequency communications. 237,238 

# Cyberthreats 

The PLA emphasizes offensive cyberspace 

capabilities as a major component of integrated 

warfare and could use its cyberwarfare capabilities 

to support military operations against space-

based assets. 239,240  For example, the PLA could 

employ its cyberattack elements to establish 

information dominance in the early stages of 

a conflict to constrain an adversary’s actions 

or slow its mobilization and deployment by 

targeting network-based command, control, 

communications, computers, intelligence, 

surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR); logistics; 

and commercial activities. 

The PLA also conducts cyberespionage against 

foreign space entities, consistent with broader 

state-sponsored industrial and technical espionage, 

to increase its level of technologies and expertise 

available to support military research, develop -

ment, and acquisition. The PLA unit responsible 

for conducting signals intelligence has supported 

cyberespionage against U.S. and European satellite 

and aerospace industries since at least 2007. 241,242 

# Directed Energy Weapons 

During the past two decades, Chinese defense 

research has proposed the development of several 

reversible and nonreversible counterspace DEWs 

for reversible dazzling of electro-optical sensors and 

even potentially destroying satellite components. 

China has multiple ground-based laser weapons 

of varying power levels to disrupt, degrade, or 

damage satellites that include a current limited 

capability to employ laser systems against satellite 

sensors. 243  By the mid- to late-2020s, China may field 

higher power systems that extend the threat to the 

structures of nonoptical satellites. 244,245,246,247,248 

# ASAT Missile Threats 

In 2007, China destroyed one of its defunct 

weather satellites more than 800 kilometers 

above the Earth with an ASAT missile. The effect 

of this destructive test generated more than 

3,000 pieces of trackable space debris, of which 

more than 2,700 remain in orbit and most will 

continue orbiting the Earth for decades. 249,250 

The PLA’s operational ground-based ASAT mis -

sile system is intended to target LEO satellites. 

China’s military units have continued training with 

ASAT missiles. 251,252 

China probably intends to pursue additional ASAT 

weapons that are able to destroy satellites up to 

GEO. In 2013, China launched an object into space 

on a ballistic trajectory with a peak orbital radius 

above 30,000 kilometers, near GEO altitudes. No 

new satellites were released from the object, and 

the launch profile was inconsistent with traditional 

17 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E SLVs, ballistic missiles, or sounding rocket launches 

for scientific research, suggesting a basic capability 

could exist to use ASAT technology against satellites 

at great distances and not just LEO. 253,254 

# Orbital Threats 

China is developing other sophisticated space-based 

capabilities, such as satellite inspection and repair. At 

least some of these capabilities could also function 

as a weapon. China has launched multiple satellites 

to conduct scientific experiments on space main -

tenance technologies and is conducting research 

on space debris cleanup; the most recent launch 

was the Shijian-21 launched into GEO in October 

2021. 255,256,257  In January 2022, Shijian-21 moved a 

derelict BeiDou navigation satellite to a high grave -

yard orbit above GEO. 258  The Shijian-17 is a Chinese 

satellite with a robotic arm. Space-based robotic arm 

technology could be used in a future system for grap -

pling other satellites. 259 

Since at least 2006, the government-affiliated aca -

demic community in China began investigating 

aerospace engineering aspects associated with 

space-based kinetic weapons—generally a class of 

weapon used to attack ground, sea, or air targets 

from orbit. Space-based kinetic weapons research 

included methods of reentry, separation of pay -

load, delivery vehicles, and transfer orbits for tar -

geting purposes. 260,261,262,263,264,265  China conducted 

the first fractional orbital launch of an ICBM with 

a hypersonic glide vehicle from China on 27 July 

2021. This demonstrated the greatest distance 

flown (~40,000 kilometers) and longest flight time 

(~100+ minutes) of any Chinese land attack weap -

ons system to date. 266 

The 15 September 2020 LM-11 launch from the 

Yellow Sea carrying nine satellites including the Jilin-1 

Gaofen 03-1.                         

> Image Source: Xinhua via AFP DEFENSEINTELLIGENCEAGENCY

18 Image Source: Sputnik via AFP 

Russian Space Agency ROSCOSMOS launch of a Soyuz-2.1b from Vostochnyy Cosmodrome. Vostochnyy is 

Russia's newest space launch facility, located in the Russian Far East. It is partially operational with con -

struction still ongoing and once complete, this location will reduce Russia's reliance on the Baikonur Cos -

modrome in Kazakhstan to access orbits which are unreachable from its more northerly main space launch 

center, Plesetsk. 

19 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E Russia views its space program as a longstanding 

example of its leadership on the international 

stage. Russia is a pioneer of space dating back to 

the former Soviet Union launching the first satellite, 

Sputnik-1, in 1957 and placing the first person into 

Earth orbit, Yuri Gagarin, in 1961. The International 

In the new, 21st century, Russia must maintain its status as a leading nuclear and space power because 

the space industry is directly linked with defence [sp] and I would like to remind you of this. Today, we will 

discuss issues related to long-term priorities of space exploration and will analyse [sp] what we must do to 

strengthen our positions in this truly strategic area. 

—Russian President Vladimir Putin, 12 April 2021 269 

Slowly but surely, we are heading toward [mili -

tarization of space]. Roscosmos has no illusions 

about this. Everyone is working on it. 

—Dimtry Rogozin, Chief, 

Russian State Corporation Roscosmo s270 

> Image Source: Russia Ministry of Defense/Creative Commons 4.0 Copyright

General Colonel Aleksandr Golovko, the first and current Commander of Russia’s Aerospace Forces, is seen here 

at the launch of a Global Navigation Satellite System-M (GLONASS M) satellite in November 2018. 267,268 RUSSIA DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 

20 Space Station’s (ISS) reliance on Russian launch 

vehicles to carry astronauts to and from the station 

from 2011 to 2020 reinforced the perception of 

Moscow as a global leader in space, which garnered 

Russia a measure of prestige and economic support 

for its space program. 271 

Russia’s space program is robust but more narrowly 

focused than China’s. Additionaly, Moscow’s budget is 

more limited than Beijing’s because of competing pri -

orities within Russia’s broader military modernization 

efforts. 272  In the years following the end of the Cold 

War, a combination of economic constraints and tech -

nological setbacks caused a decay of Russian space 

capabilities, including space-based remote sensing 

and satellite navigation. 273  Nonetheless, during the 

past two decades, Moscow has continued to pursue 

space services in support of terrestrial applications 

while developing a suite of counterspace weapon 

capabilities, including EW to deny, degrade, and dis -

rupt communications and PNT and DEWs to deny the 

use of space-based imagery. 274,275  Russia is developing 

a mobile missile that is able to destroy satellites and 

crewed space vehicles. 276,277,278,279 

# Space Strategy and Doctrine 

Russia openly supports space arms control agree -

ments to prevent weaponization of space, even as 

Russian military doctrine and authoritative writings 

clearly articulate that Russia views space as a war -

fighting domain and that achieving supremacy in 

space will be a decisive factor in winning future con -

flicts. 280,281,282,283,284  Russian military thinkers believe 

the importance of space will continue to expand 

because of the growing role of precision weapons 

and satellite-supported information networks in all 

types of conflict. 285,286  Moscow regularly expresses 

concern about space weapons and is pursuing legal, 

binding space arms control agreements to curb what 

it sees as U.S. strength in outer space. 287,288,289  At the 

same time, Russia is developing an arsenal of coun -

terspace capabilities to attack U.S. and allied assets. 

> 290,291,292,293,294,295,296,297,298,299,300,301,302,303,304,305,306

As Russia continues to modernize its military, it will 

increasingly integrate space services into its armed 

forces. Russia has a strong foundation of technical 

knowledge and expertise fostered by more than 60 

years of experience in space. However, Moscow sees 

overreliance on space as a potential vulnerability and 

is determined to avoid becoming excessively depen -

dent on space to conduct its national defense mis -

sion. 307,308,309,310  Russia has developed terrestrial redun -

dancies to complement or replace space services that 

may be denied in a wartime environment. 311 

Russia views space as a critical enabler of U.S. preci -

sion-strike and military force projection capabilities. 

Russia believes that U.S. missile defense systems 

paired with U.S. space-enabled, conventional preci -

sion-strike capabilities undermine strategic stabil -

ity. 312,313  At the same time, Russia perceives the U.S. 

dependence on space as its Achilles’ heel, which 

can be exploited to achieve Russian conflict objec -

tives. 314  Russia is therefore pursuing counterspace 

systems to neutralize or deny U.S. space-based ser -

vices, both military and commercial, as a means of 

offsetting a perceived U.S. military advantage. 315,316 

The Nedelin-class missile range instrumentation ship 

(AGM)  Marshal Krylov , subordinate to Russia’s Pacific 

Fleet. AGM  Marshal Krylov  supports space and missile 

instrumentation tracking and range support missions. 

> Image Source: U.S. National Archives

21 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E Russian counterspace doctrine involves employing 

ground-, air-, cyber-, and space-based systems to tar -

get an adversary’s satellites with attacks ranging from 

temporary jamming or sensor blinding to destruc -

tion of enemy spacecraft and supporting infrastruc -

ture. 317,318,319,320  Moscow believes that developing and 

fielding counterspace capabilities will deter aggres -

sion from adversaries reliant on space. 321  If deter -

rence fails, Russia believes its counterspace forces 

will offer its military leaders the ability to control 

escalation of a conflict through selective targeting of 

adversary space systems. 322,323 

# Space and Counterspace 

# Organizations 

In 2015, Russia created the Aerospace Forces 

by merging the former Air Force and Aerospace 

Defense Troops. This new force includes the Space 

Forces, Russia’s military element that conducts 

space launches and operates the BMEW, the sat -

ellite control network, and the space surveillance 

network. 324,325,326  Russia’s defense minister stated 

that the change was “prompted by a shift in the 

center of gravity toward the aerospace sphere” 

and as a counter to the U.S. Prompt Global Strike 

doctrine. 327,328  To accomplish space and counter -

space operational tasks, Russia’s Space Forces 

were organized into the 15th Special Purpose Aero -

space Army, which consists of the 820th Main Mis -

sile Attack Warning Center, the 821st Main Space 

Reconnaissance Center, and the 153rd Titov Main 

Test and Space Systems Control Center. 329,330,331,332,333 

The Space Forces also operate the Plesetsk Cos -

modrome, where they launch military satellites, 

and the Mozhayskiy Military Space Academy, where 

they train officers and enlisted personnel in strate -

gic and operational military operations theory and 

aerospace engineering specialties. 334,335,336 

The reorganization of Russia’s civilian space program 

was designed to improve upon inefficiencies across 

the sector and readjust from the loss of control 

over former Soviet space production enterprises in 

Ukraine. Today the Russian space industry is almost 

exclusively state owned. 337  The state-owned corpo -

ration Roscosmos is the executive body responsi -

ble for overall management of the space industry 

and for carrying out Russia’s civilian space program. 

The space industry primarily comprises 75 design 

bureaus, enterprises, and companies that carry out 

research, engineering development, and production 

of Russia’s space technologies, satellites, and SLVs 

for both civilian and military purposes. 338,339 

During the past few years, Russia has faced several 

obstacles to its space program. Corruption has been 

prevalent and has stalled developments, 340  budget 

cuts and sanctions have delayed projects, 341,342,343 

and negligible private space investment has stymied 

growth and innovation. 344 

# Acquisition of Foreign 

# Space and Counterspace 

# Technologies 

Moscow directs a whole-of-government approach to 

select and acquire foreign space and counterspace 

technologies in support of Russia’s economic and 

military goals. Following the imposition of sanctions 

by the United States, western Europe, Australia, and 

Japan in response to Russia’s 2014 invasion of the 

Crimean Peninsula, Moscow has exploited multiple 

collection paths to mitigate U.S. and European Union 

(EU) restrictions on Russia’s access to space tech -

nology, information, and expertise, but sanctions 

are still affecting space systems production. 345,346 

Russia relies on acquisition of Western components 

because of the decline of its domestic microelectron -

ics industry and because of its inability to realize its 

import substitution program goals. 347,348,349,350,351,352,353 

# ISR Satellite Capabilities 

Russia designs and employs some of the world’s most 

capable individual ISR satellites, despite funding short -

falls and technological setbacks limiting the number 

of such systems in orbit. The fleet contains more than D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

22 30 satellites providing electro-optical imagery, a new 

radar observation platform, missile warning, and elec -

tronic and signals intelligence. 354,355,356  At least half of 

these systems are owned and operated by the Rus -

sian Defense Ministry. Space-based sensors provide 

Russia strategic warning of ballistic missile launches, 

support targeting of Russian antiship cruise mis -

siles, 357  and support electro-optical imagery require -

ments for Russian military operations in Syria. 358,359 

Setbacks have hindered Russia’s ability to launch and 

maintain its military-dedicated ISR satellites, leading to 

increased use of its civilian and commercial satellites 

to fulfill military tasks. 360 

# Satellite Communications 

Russia owns and operates a diverse constellation 

of commercial and military communications sat  -

ellites capable of providing mobile and fixed SAT  -

COM services from various orbital altitudes. In 

spite of lagging behind other competitors, and the 

instituting of Western sanctions in 2014, Russia 

continues to replace aging communications sat  -

ellites with modern and more capable satellites 

to preserve and expand its SATCOM capabilities, 

including through partnerships with European 

satellite manufacturers. 361,362  The satellites are 

able to support worldwide military and paramil  -

itary deployments, enabling Moscow to maintain 

C2 over its military units to support its national 

objectives. 363,364,365,366,367,368 

# PNT Capabilities 

GLONASS provides Russia worldwide satellite nav -

igation services and supports Russia’s economic 

development and national security interests. 369  Fol -

lowing the GLONASS constellation’s deterioration in 

the late 1990s, Russia committed to reconstituting 

GLONASS during the 2000s. 370  Full operating capa -

bility was regained in 2011; Russia now launches sat -

ellites as needed to maintain the constellation while 

developing next-generation GLONASS satellites. 371 

Russia’s military also uses GLONASS to enable mili -

tary system deployments, force movement, and pre -

cision-guided munitions delivery. 372,373,374 

# Human Spaceflight and 

# Space Exploration Efforts 

Russia’s human spaceflight program started in the 

late 1950s and had its first major milestone with the 

launch of Yuri Gagarin aboard the  Vostok-1  space -

craft in 1961. 375  Since that historic launch, the former 

Soviet Union and then Russia has launched the Salyut, 

Almaz, and Mir Space Stations, multiple elements of 

the ISS, and several Mars exploration missions; how -

ever, only two Mars missions were successful—the 

last in 1971. 376  Although Russia has talked about with -

drawing from the ISS as late as April 2021, it is commit -

ted to the effort through at least 2025. 377 

Russia’s Luch relay satellites allow Moscow to com -

municate between the ISS and Earth without reli -

ance on National Aeronautics and Space Adminis -

tration’s (NASA) and U.S. SATCOM systems. 378  Since 

the manned launch of SpaceX’s Crew Dragon to the 

ISS in May 2020, Russia has offered to sell Soyuz 

seats to other international partners, such as the 

United Arab Emirates, to make up revenue from 

losing U.S. astronaut transportation requirements 

to the ISS. 379,380 

Like other spacefaring nations, Russia has ambi -

tious plans for lunar exploration and settlement 

Russia's Luch 5A relay satellite in the Space Pavilion at 

the Cosmonautics and Aviation Center at the Exhibi -

tion of Achievements of the National Economy. 

> Image Source: Sputnik via AFP

23 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E Russia: Space Exploration Missions 381,382,383 

Mission  Description  Launch Date 

Nauka  Russian ISS science module. 384,385  July 2021 386 

Luna-25  Joint lunar lander project with ESA. 387  2022 388 

Prichal  Russian ISS docking module. 389  2021 

ExoMars  Joint Mars lander with ESA. 390,391  TBD 

Luna-Grunt  Lunar lander and sample return. 392  2024 

Luna-27 

First mission to explore the lunar south pole, where 

frozen water lies under the surface and where Russia 

intends to build a base. 393 

2025 394 

Luna-26  Lunar orbital mapping mission. 395  2024 

Luna-28  Lunar sample return mission. 396  2027–2028 

Luna-29  Lunar rover mission. 397  2028 

Expedition-M  Phobos sample return mission. 398  2026–2035 

International 

Lunar Research 

Station 

Establish a research base on the Moon, primarily sup -

ported by robotic technology and capable of supporting 

human visits. 399 

2025–2035 

during the next 40 years. 401  Russia has discussed 

partnering with China, the EU, and the United States 

to achieve its lunar aspirations. 402  China and Russia 

signed a memorandum of understanding in March 

2021 to work together on the International Lunar 

Research Station (ILRS). 403 ,404 

# Space Launch Capabilities 

Russia is updating and improving its space launch 

capabilities to enhance reliability, alleviate environ -

mental concerns, increase manufacturing efficien -

cies, and support future human spaceflight and 

Russian Aerospace Forces monitor GLONASS satel -

lites at the Titov Main Test and Space Systems Control 

Center in Krasnoznamensk outside Moscow. 400                         

> Image Source: Russia Ministry of Defense/Creative Commons 4.0 Copyright DEFENSEINTELLIGENCEAGENCY

24 Russian Space Launch Vehicles 

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 

Meters 

> Angara-1.2
> Soyuz-2.1A
> Soyuz-2.1B
> Soyuz-2.1V
> Soyuz-5 Angara-A5 Proton-M Energia-5

Medium-Lift 

2–20 metric tons 

Heavy-Lift 

20–50 metric tons 

Super Heavy-Lift 

>50 metric tons tons 2–20 tons –50 tons Lift >50 tons 

Russia has focused on maintaining its own military and civil strategies, using heavier rockets into LEO. Russia’s 

heavy-lift vehicles are mostly used for launching into GEO or HEO. The developmental Energia SLV, designed to 

boost the Russian space shuttle into orbit, was discontinued in the 1980s. However, it was revived in 2016 to sup -

port proposed lunar missions and renamed "Yensei." 

> 2008-26366

Russian Space Agency ROSCOMOS launches Progress MS-14 on Soyuz-2.1a from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan. 

> Image Source: Sputnik via AFP

25 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E Russian Space Launch, SSA, Satellite Control Centers, and Command and 

Control Stations 405,406,407,408,409,410,411,412,413,414,415,416,417,418,419,420,421,422,423,424,425,426,427,428,429,430,431,432,433 

Russia owns two of its launch sites and leases one from Kazakhstan. The European Space Agency has con -

tracted Russia to conduct launches from Kourou, French Guiana. Inactive spaceports include Kapustin Yar and 

Svobodny Spaceports. Russia’s space control sites are spread across Russia to enable effective satellite C2. 

GLONASS TT&C stations are similarly spread across Russia to ensure timely control of the navigation constella -

tion. Moscow has spread nine radars at eight locations of various types across its landmass to enable a dual-role 

BMEW and SSA mission. 

> 2108-29556

deep-space exploration missions. 434,435 

Russia’s updates to its medium- and heavy-lift 

launch fleets include modular SLVs, which allow 

Russia to tailor SLVs to the specific configuration 

required for each customer. Unlike China, Rus -

sia has not focused on new light-lift SLV designs, 

instead usually choosing to launch small satel -

lites in multipayload launches on larger rockets. 

Russia is also in the early stages of developing a 

super heavy-lift SLV similar to the U.S. Saturn V or 

the newer U.S. Space Launch System to support 

proposed crewed lunar and Mars exploration mis -

sions. 436  In 2019, Moscow retired the Soyuz-FG and 

Rokot, and it has since focused on newer SLVs with 

similar capabilities. 437,438 

Russia’s commercial launch industry acquired the 

launch systems of a previously Russia-Ukraine-U.S. 

consortium called Sea Launch. This capability fea -

tures a mobile  fl oating platform for space launches; 

however, this e ff ort is plagued by  fi nancial hardship 

and is on hold. 439 

A ban on U.S. purchases of Russian rocket engines is 

currently set to take e ff ect in 2022, but Russian enter -

prises probably began to see negative consequences 

beginning in 2020, as the U.S. demand for these 

engines decreased. In 2018, 17 of the 19 total engines 

on order were destined for the United States. Roscos -

mos has offered to cut prices by 30 percent. 440 

# Space Situational Awareness 

Russia’s space surveillance network, managed by 

the 821st Main Space Reconnaissance Center, is 

composed of a variety of telescopes, radars, and 

other sensors, and is capable of searching for, track -

ing, and characterizing satellites in all Earth orbits. 

This network allows Russia to support its various 

missions including intelligence collection, counter -D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

26 space targeting, spaceflight safety, satellite anom -

aly resolution, and space debris monitoring. Some 

of these sensors also perform a BMEW function as 

their primary mission. 444 

# Electronic Warfare Capabilities 

The Russian military views EW as an essential tool 

for gaining and maintaining information superior -

ity over its adversaries, allowing Russia to seize the 

operational initiative by disrupting adversary C4ISR 

capabilities. Russia has fielded a wide range of 

ground-based EW systems to counter GPS, tactical 

communications, SATCOM, and radars. 446  Mobile 

jammers target radar and communications satel -

lites. Russia has developed and fielded a full spec -

trum of EW capabilities with mobility, automation, 

and performance improvements able to counter 

Western space-enabled C4ISR and weapons guid -

ance systems. 447,448,449 

In February 2020, Russian military officials con -

firmed that Russia is actively employing EW capa -

bilities in Syria to counter GPS-enabled capabilities 

such as drones. 450,451,452 

# Cyberthreats 

Since at least 2010, the Russian military has placed 

a priority on the development of forces and capa -

bilities, including cyberspace operations, for what it 

## Russian International SSA Collaboration 

Russia leads the nongovernmental organization International Scientific 

Optical Network (ISON), which is the largest foreign network of ground-

based optical space surveillance sensors. ISON was established in 2001, 

and participants include international academic and scientific organizations 

and government entities such as Roscosmos. Russia’s Keldysh Institute of 

Applied Mathematics coordinates sensor tasking and combines information 

from nearly 100 ground-based optical sensors of varying sizes at 40 obser -

vatories across 16 countries—Australia, Bolivia, China, Georgia, Germany, 

Italy, Kyrgyzstan, Mexico, Moldova, Mongolia, Russia (seven locations) Spain, 

Switzerland, Ukraine (4 locations), the United States, and Uzbekistan. 441,442,443 

Russia has invested heavily in developing sophisticated 

EW capabilities, including this Krashuka-4 jammer. 

> Image Source: Russia Ministry of Defense/Creative Commons 4.0 Copyright

Deployed SATCOM jammer in the field. 445 

> Image Source: NASA Spaceflight Online Forum

27 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E a The name Burevestnik is also associated with a Russian developmental nuclear-powered cruise missile. [Source: National Air and Space  

> Intelligence Center; 2020; 2020 Ballistic and Cruise Missile Threat Report ; p.36.]

Russian Peresvet laser weapon probably is 

intended for use against satellites (July 2018). 

> Image Source: SPUTNIK/AFP

terms “information confrontation”—a holistic con -

cept for ensuring information superiority. The wea -

ponization of information is a critical aspect of this 

strategy and is employed in times of peace, crisis, 

and war. Russia considers the information sphere, 

especially space-enabled information collection and 

transmission, to be strategically decisive and has 

taken steps to modernize its military’s information 

attack and defense organizations and capabilities. 453 

# Directed Energy Weapons 

Directed energy weapons pose a direct threat to 

space operations. Russia has several ground-based 

lasers, for example, that can blind satellite sensors. 454 

By July 2018, Russia began delivering the Peresvet 

laser weapon system to its Aerospace Forces. Russian 

leaders indicate that Peresvet has an ASAT mission. In 

public statements, Russian President Vladimir Putin 

called it a “new type of strategic weapon,” and the 

Russian Defense Ministry asserted that it is capable 

of “fighting satellites in orbit.” 455,456,457,458  In December 

2019, Russian Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu stated 

that this laser weapon has been deployed to five stra -

tegic missile divisions. 459,460,461  Additional press report -

ing indicates that the ground-mobile Peresvet laser 

system is designed to blind enemy optical tracking sys -

tems, including those on satellites, with its laser. 462,463 

The system is meant to mask the movement of strate -

gic missile systems, according to Moscow Interfax. 464 

Russia probably will field lasers that are more capable 

of damaging satellites in the mid-to-late 2020s. 465  By 

2030, Russia may also field higher power systems that 

extend the threat to the structures of all satellites, not 

just electro-optical ISR. 466 

# ASAT Missile Threats 

Russia is also developing ASAT missile systems. These 

missiles can destroy U.S. and allied space systems in 

LEO, threatening ISR and communications satellites. 

Russia is developing and testing a mobile missile 

defense complex referred to as Nudol, which Russian 

sources describe as capable of destroying ballistic 

missiles and low-orbiting satellites. 467,468,469,470,471,472 

Although Russia publicly describes Nudol as a ballis -

tic missile defense system, it has an inherent counter -

space capability. Deputy Prime Minister, then Deputy 

Defense Minister, Yuri Borisov remarked in 2018 that 

Nudol is a “counterspace attack complex” for the Rus -

sian military. 473  This weapon system—most recently -

tested in November 2021—created over 1,500 pieces 

of trackable space debris and tens of thousands of 

pieces of lethal but nontrackable debris. This debris 

endangers spacecraft of all nations in LEO, including 

astronauts and cosmonauts on the ISS and China's 

Tiangong space station. With this test, Russia demon -

strated the capability of the missile to destroy satel -

lites in LEO. 474,475 

MiG-31BM taking off from Zhukovskiy with potential 

Burevestnik ASAT missile.                         

> Image Source: The Space Review (Alex Snow) DEFENSEINTELLIGENCEAGENCY

28 Russia is reportedly developing an air launched ASAT 

weapon called Burevestnik a, targeting spacecraft in 

LEO. This system is based on the Soviet-era system 

called “Contact” that was designed for launching an 

ASAT missile from a MiG-31 fighter aircraft. 476,477  In 

September 2018, a MiG-31 was photographed in flight 

at the Zhukovskiy aircraft test site near Moscow carry -

ing a large missile that could be related to air-launched 

ASAT weapon testing. 478  An Aerospace Forces squad -

ron commander remarked that Russia would deploy 

an ASAT weapon on a MiG-31 ballistic missile “capable 

of destroying targets in near-space.” 479 

# Orbital Threats 

In 2020, Russia tested a space-based ASAT weapon 

and continues to research and develop sophisti -

cated orbital capabilities that could serve dual-use 

purposes. For example, inspection and servicing 

satellites can closely approach satellites to inspect 

and repair malfunctions; this same technology 

could also be used to conduct an attack on other 

countries’ satellites, resulting in temporary or 

permanent damage. 480 

In 2017, Russia deployed what it described as 

an “inspector satellite capable of diagnosing the 

technical condition of a Russian satellite from the 

closest possible distance,” possibly as part of its 

Nivelir program. However, the satellite’s behav -

ior has been inconsistent with on-orbit inspec -

tion or SSA activities. 481,482,483  In November 2019, 

Russia deployed two satellites, Cosmos 2542 

and 2543. 484,485  After the launch, one of the satel -

lites appeared to begin following a U.S. national 

security satellite, approaching close enough to 

create potentially dangerous operating con -

ditions. 486,487,488  In July 2020, Russia ejected an 

object into orbit from Cosmos 2543 near another 

Russian satellite in a test of a space-based ASAT 

weapon. 489,490  Additionally, Cosmos 2504 and Cos -

mos 2536 are prototype Russian ASAT weapons 

that could kinetically kill satellites in LEO. 491 

According to Russian press reporting, Roscosmos 

is creating a satellite intended for GEO operations, 

which will have orbital servicing capabilities. The 

same report also recognizes the ASAT capabilities 

of servicing satellites in all orbits.  492 

29 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E Iran 

Iran’s pursuit of a national space program sup -

ports both its civilian and military goals, including 

boosting national pride, economic development, and 

military modernization. 494,495,496  Tehran states it has 

developed sophisticated capabilities, including SLVs 

as well as communications and remote-sensing sat -

ellites; 497  however, its SLVs are only able to launch 

small satellites into LEO and have proven unreliable. 

The Iranian Space Agency (ISA) and Iranian Space 

Research Center (ISRC)—subordinate to the Ministry 

of Information and Communications Technology— 

along with the Ministry of Defense and Armed Forces 

Logistics (MODAFL) oversee part of the country’s sat -

ellite development programs. 498,499  ISA and ISRC work 

with Iranian universities, private industry, and foreign 

partners to develop satellites to test communications 

and remote-sensing technologies. 500,501,502  However, 

Iran’s limited space launch capacity has led to a signifi -

cant backlog of built-but-unlaunched satellites. 503 

To ensure access to space-based ISR, Iran’s Project 

505 is probably an attempt to buy an ISR system 

from Russia that started in August 2015; however, 

this system is not yet in orbit. 504,505  A Russian aero -

space company, NPK Barl, and the All-Russian Scien -

tific Research Institute of Electromechanics would 

provide the ground system and the satellite respec -

tively which would be operated by the Iranian state-

run trade company, Bonyan Danesh Shargh. 506,507 

MODAFL and the IRGC-ASF oversee Iran’s SLV devel -

opment programs. MODAFL’s first launch attempt, 

the two-stage Safir SLV in 2008, 508  was followed by 

four successful launches, numerous failures, and 

retirement in 2020. 509,510 

In 2016, MODAFL tested the larger liquid-fu -

eled Simorgh SLV, and as of March 2020, 

MODAFL planned to use the Simorgh’s tech -

nologies to develop other larger more capa -

On 22 April 2020, Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard 

Corps-Aerospace Force (IRGC-ASF) successfully 

launched the Ghased SLV, placing the Noor-1 satellite 

into LEO. 493 

> Image Source: IRNA

# C H A L L E N G E S E M E R G I N G D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

30 ble SLVs, including the Sarir and Soroush. 511 

Iran conducted launches of the IRGC-ASF–devel -

oped hybrid liquid- and solid-fueled Ghased SLV 

in 2020 and 2022. 512  The IRGC-ASF subsequently 

announced its intent to continue SLV development, 

including a future SLV with GEO launch capabil -

ity. 513,514,515,516,517,518,519  Iran has also revealed plans 

for a larger four-stage Ghaem SLV, which could 

serve as a test bed for developing ICBM technolo -

gies. Because of inherent overlapping technology 

between ICBMs and SLVs, some Western analysts 

are concerned that Iran’s development of booster 

technology for larger, more capable SLVs will 

improve Iran’s ICBM potential. 520,521,522,523  On 12 June 

2021, Iran launched an unknown SLV and was pre -

paring a second SLV for launch in late-June. 524 

Iran recognizes the strategic value of space and 

counterspace capabilities and will attempt to deny 

an adversary use of space during a conflict. 525  Tehran 

has publicly acknowledged it has developed capabil -

ities to jam space-based communications and GPS 

signals. 526,527,528  Iran may also contribute to the pro -

liferation of such jamming equipment. Since 2010, 

state-owned Iran Electronics Industries has marketed 

several GPS jammers on its website. 529  Advance -

ments in SLV technology could also be applied to 

developing a basic ground-based ASAT missile, if Iran 

chooses to do so in the future. 530,531,532,533 

Iran has improved its domestic space domain 

awareness capabilities, establishing its first 

space-monitoring center in 2013. 534  In 2005, Iran 

joined China-led APSCO to access SSA from other 

countries and hopes to expand its cooperation 

with the organization. 535,536,537,538 

# North Korea 

North Korea’s space program is administered by a 

state-run civilian agency, the National Aerospace 

Development Administration. 539  North Korea’s 

space launch complex on the west coast, Sohae 

Satellite Launching Station, and associated space 

tracking facilities in Pyongyang supported satellite 

launch cycles in 2012 and 2016. In January 2021, 

North Korean leader Kim Jong Un announced that 

Pyongyang—in an attempt to secure its own space-

based reconnaissance capability—had completed 

its design of a satellite and will launch it in the near 

future. Kim Jong Un emphasized that North Korea 

is undertaking, “full scale work,” toward space capa -

bilities, suggesting development of new or mod -

ified SLVs or a satellite intended for operational 

use. 541,542  An older space launch site on the east 

coast, Tonghae, has not been used for a launch 

since 2009. 543,544  North Korea has demonstrated 

Launch of Unha-3 SLV. 540 

> Image Source: KCTV

31 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E nonkinetic counterspace capabilities, including GPS 

and SATCOM jamming, and probably intends to 

deny space-based navigation and communications 

during a conflict. 545,546,547 

In 2020, North Korean actors conducted numer  -

ous cyberoperations against our foreign part  -

ners’ defense industries and attempted to com  -

promise various U.S. Government networks. 548 

Multiple North Korean hacker groups have 

targeted the aerospace industries potentially 

including space technologies. 549,550,551  This activ -

ity, if left unchecked, could enable North Korea’s 

weapons and space system development and 

procurement programs. 552,553,554,555,556 

North Korea’s ballistic missiles and SLVs, such 

as the Unha-3 SLV, in theory could be used to 

target satellites in a conflict. 557  North Korea has 

placed two satellites in orbit and has articu -

lated further space ambitions. Its space program 

has also enabled testing of technology used 

in ballistic missiles under the guise of peace -

ful use of space. 558,559,560  These systems provided 

North Korea with valuable data applicable to 

the development of long-range and multistage 

ballistic missiles. 561 DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 

32 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E KE Y SPACE ISSU ES 

# THROUG H 2030 AND B E YOND Growth of Reusable 

# Space Technology: 

# Commercial 

# Opportunities and 

# Military Advantage 

Access to space has traditionally required the use 

of expendable spacecraft: single-use launch vehi -

cles, satellites, and capsules that are designed to 

maximize performance and then be discarded. 

Reliance on expendable vehicles has made access 

to space expensive and exclusive. Reusable tech  -

nologies, while even more difficult and expensive 

to develop and build, stand to greatly reduce the 

cost of spaceflight by recovering, refurbishing, 

and reusing rocket stages, fairings, and capsules. 

Foreign nations increasingly seek to repeat U.S. 

successes in reusable technologies by developing 

their own reusable SLVs (R-SLVs) and spacecraft. 

The state-owned enterprise, China Academy of 

Launch Vehicle Technology, modified the LM-8— 

launched for the first time on 22 December 2020— 

into an R-SLV. 562  The Chinese company, i-Space, 

plans to launch the country’s first commercially 

developed R-SLV, called Hyperbola-2, in late-2021, 

but a Hyperbola-1 failure probably delayed that 

launch. 563,564  China is also developing two partially 

reusable capsules: the New-Generation Manned 

Spaceship intended to replace the Shenzhou cap  -

sule, and the New-Generation Reusable Recov -

erable Satellite as an inexpensive platform for 

microgravity experiments and rapid space equip -

ment testing. 565,566 

In 2019, the chief designer for NPO Energomash, one 

of Russia’s rocket propulsion companies, said that 

the company is moving forward with a proposal to 

create an R-SLV. 567  NPO Energomash has also stated 

that it hopes to modify its successful RD-180 engine 

to be reusable as many as 10 times. 568  Another Rus -

sian space corporation, Myasishchev, is designing an 

R-SLV first-stage that will return to its launch center 

after second stage separation. 569 

Space planes are another form of reusable technol -

ogy. Space planes also feature enhanced maneuver -

ability, making them uniquely suitable for certain 

missions as compared with traditional satellites. 

Developing a space plane requires overcoming the 

obstacles of hypersonic flight, a rarified atmospheric 

environment, and extreme external heating. China 

has developed hypersonic glide vehicles for ballis -

tic missile warhead delivery probably enabling fur -

ther achievements in space application. 570  China 

is developing the Shenlong and Tengyun space 

planes. In 2020, China launched into orbit its first-

ever prototype of a space plane, which stayed in 

orbit for 2 days before returning to Earth. Bei -

jing stated its space plane was testing reusable 

spacecraft technologies as part of advancing the 

peaceful use of space. 571,572  The Shenlong pro -

gram previously conducted a drop test as early as 

2011, and Tengyun has only completed a model 

wind tunnel test. 573,574  Russia announced multiple 

space plane projects during the past two decades, 

but it has made no serious progress following the 

one and only flight of Buran, a copy of the U.S. Space 

Shuttle, in 1988. 575,576,577,578 

Reusable spaceflight technology will also enable the 

commercial space tourism industry, both for subor -

bital and orbital flight. The cost savings provided by D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

34 Cislunar Chart 

## DRO LLO NRHO 

## YX

## L Halo LMoon L

## DRO - Distant Retrograde Orbit 

## LLO - Low Lunar Orbit 

## NHRO - Near-Rectilinear Halo Orbit 

## L - Lagrange Point 1 

## L - Lagrange Point 2 

## To Earth 

Most satellites operate in orbits near Earth to provide services for users on the ground. Satellite orbits are 

selected to best serve their application, for example, satellites that are required to remain over a single region 

on Earth are placed in GEO. Satellites will be placed in various cislunar orbits in the near future. In addition 

to direct orbits around the Moon, there are other points in the Earth-Moon system that are useful for sat -

ellite operations. Lagrange points are stable positions in space between two celestial bodies. Gravitational 

pull equals the centripetal force required for a smaller object to orbit there, and subsequently reduces fuel 

requirements to remain in these positions. L1 and L2—between the Moon and Earth and the far side of the 

Moon respectively—are depicted  here. There are three other Lagrange points associated with the Earth-Moon 

system, L3-L5. 579 

> 2008-26359

reusable technology will be key for lowering ticket 

prices and widening the market. British, Japanese, 

and Russian firms are among those developing 

tourist spacecraft. 580,581 

# Human Spaceflight and 

# Cislunar Operations 

Human spaceflight and space operations of most 

types to and beyond the moon will very likely 

increase in the future. Threats to U.S. and allied 

military space capabilities will persist as humanity 

expands its reach into space. Nations are motivated 

to pursue new scientific missions, compete for mil -

itary advantage, expand communications and data 

processing, and obtain greater national and inter -

national prestige. Economic competition to exploit 

the potentially large amount of natural resources on 

the Moon, Mars, or even asteroids, while a nascent 

endeavor today, will become a driver for more 

space-capable states or consortiums in the future. 

35 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E A China National Space Agency graphic depicting the Proposed Chinese-Russian International Lunar Research 

Station. The individual elements are  1 lunar surface tracking & command station;  2 survey module;  3 mobile 

survey module;  4 leaping module;  5 lunar orbit module;  6 test platform;  7 Russia’s Luna-27;  8 relay module; 

9 assembly robot; and  reconnaissance robot. 

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

> 10
> Image Source: China National Space Administration (CNSA)

## New Competition for Space Beyond Earth's Orbit 

Deep-space operations beyond Earth orbit, sometimes called xGEO, 587  are focused on scientific mis -

sions and exploration of the Moon and other celestial bodies. Spacecraft in xGEO are much harder to 

track and characterize, and could threaten U.S. or allied high-value satellites.  588  Adversaries could also 

place operational or reserve satellites in deep space so they are much harder to monitor for later use 

in lower orbits. 589 

Space exploration initiatives are also opportunities 

for many nations to cooperate and benefit from 

scientific discoveries and technological innovation. 

This trend will expand and feed the presence of 

nations beyond Earth orbit on a level greater than 

that already demonstrated by the operation of 

interplanetary probes to date. 

During the past two decades, foreign competitors 

have looked to lunar missions as major demonstra -

tions of technological sophistication and national 

strength. Other nations have been involved in 

human spaceflight—more than 40 nations have 

orbited astronauts with Russian or U.S. human 

spaceflight missions. 582,583  Many nations have con -

tributed to the scientific knowledge of Earth with 

deep-space probes and missions to the Moon and 

Mars. 584,585,586 D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

36 Challenge to Space 

# Operations: Debris 

# and Orbital Collisions 

The probability of collision between massive dere -

lict objects in LEO is rising and almost certainly will 

continue to rise until at least 2030 as a result of frag -

mentation events such as collisions or battery explo -

sions, ASAT testing, and a rapidly increasing num -

ber of space launches worldwide. 590,591,592,593,594,595 

The collision risk is to all civilian, commercial, and 

government satellites of all nations. This adds to the 

difficulty of ensuring safe space operations and the 

overall stability of the space environment. 

Debris in Orbit.  Collisions between and explosions 

of massive derelict objects almost certainly will con -

tinue to add to the amount of space debris in orbit. 

As of January 2022, more than 25,000 objects of at 

least 10 centimeters in size were tracked and cata -

loged in Earth’s orbit to include active satellites. 596,597 

The primary risk to spacecraft in orbit is from uncat -

aloged lethal nontrackable debris (LNT), which are 

objects between 5 millimeters and 10 centimeters 

in size. An estimated 600,000 to 900,000 pieces of 

uncataloged LNT are in LEO. 598 

Prior to 2007, most debris came from explosions 

of upper stages of SLVs. Today, nearly one-half 

of all cataloged debris are fragments from three 

major events: China’s destruction of its own defunct 

weather satellite in 2007, the accidental collision 

between a U.S. communications satellite and a dead 

Russian satellite in 2009, and the 2021 Russian Nudol 

ASAT test. 599,600 

Threats of Massive Object Collision.  Of the cataloged 

objects, there are nearly 1,300 massive—greater than 

the size and weight of an automobile—derelict objects 

in LEO that pose a unique threat to LEO space oper -

ations. These objects approach each other within 5 

kilometers daily, some passing well within 1 kilometer 

monthly, at 10–15 kilometers per second. 601 

Computer rendering of tracked objects greater than 10 centimeters in Earth’s orbit. Red, yellow, and 

green objects are representations of active satellites in the GEO orbital belt and in MEO. [Note: The 

objects are not drawn to scale; the objects are approximately 10,000 times greater than actual size.] 

37 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E Massive Derelict Cluster Collision Probabilities 

Cluster*  In-Cluster 

PC**  (Per Year) 

In-Cluster 

PC Increase 

by 2030 

No. of 

Likely 

Catalogued 

Fragments 

LNT Likely 

Produced  Comments 

C615  ~1/280  5–7%  ~5,500  ~80,000 

Short-lived debris 

(years to decades). 

Near many satellites. 

C775  ~1/715  2–3%  ~4,500  ~70,000 

Moderate-lived debris 

(decades). 

Near many satellites. 

C850  ~1/800  8–15%  ~15,000  ~225,000  Long-lived debris 

(many decades). 

Fewer satellites than 

C775 or C615. C975  ~1/120  16–26%  ~3,500  ~55,000 

C1,500  ~1/5,000  ~1%  ~6,000  ~75,000 

Very long-lived debris 

(many centuries). 

Not near many satellites  

> * Cluster number represents orbital radius to the center of the cluster in kilometers, for example C850 is centered at 850
> kilometers in altitude
> ** P Cis probability of collision

A collision between these objects almost certainly 

would create 3,500–15,000 cataloged fragments 

and 55,000–225,000 LNT fragments, whereas a typ -

ical satellite breakup generally creates about 250 

pieces of cataloged debris. 602  The annual probability 

of collision for massive derelict objects clustered at 

1,500 kilometers is 1 in 5,000 and for separate clus -

ter objects at 850 kilometers in altitude is 1 in 800. 

Although the debris contribution for a collision at 850 

kilometers would nearly double the LEO catalog pop -

ulation (i.e., generate ~15,000 trackable fragments), 

the debris from a collision at 1,500 kilometers would 

remain in orbit potentially for thousands of years. 

Threats Posed by Debris.  Space debris can cause 

damage and destruction to satellites and crewed 

spacecraft, as well as increase costs if satellite manu -

facturers add additional shielding to withstand small 

fragment impacts and fuel to allow for more frequent 

avoidance maneuvers. The cost of any maneuvers 

increases fuel usage, adds to operational complex -

ity and expense, and shortens spacecraft lifetimes 

which may require more space launches to main -

tain the same level of capability. Between 1998 and 

2022, the ISS, in LEO, maneuvered at least 30 times to 

avoid potential collisions with orbital debris. 603  With 

an expected increase in large constellations of sat -

ellites and space debris, there is higher potential for 

satellite collisions, particularly in LEO. 604 

Orbital Lifetime of Debris.  The time that debris 

remains in orbit depends largely on its size and alti -

tude— the smaller objects are and the higher they 

orbit, the longer they remain in space. Fragments D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

38 from explosions and collisions will tend to be smaller 

and exist in lower orbits, and therefore, will have 

shorter orbital lifetimes than abandoned payloads 

and rocket bodies. Atmospheric drag acts as a natu -

ral cleaner by causing most debris at lower altitudes 

to reenter Earth’s atmosphere and burn up. Some 

intact objects at 500 kilometers can remain in orbit 

for about 10 years. As the altitude gets closer to 

1,500 kilometers, derelicts and debris can remain for 

more than 10,000 years. 605 

Orbital collisions tend to occur at high relative 

velocities (i.e., greater than 25,000 miles per hour 

in LEO and disperse fragments into many different 

orbital altitudes). A collision of two objects at 975 

kilometers—the most likely of the collision proba -

bilities at about 1 in 120 chance per year—would 

leave many fragments in orbit for more than a 

thousand years. 606 

Postmission Disposal (PMD).  In 1993, the United 

States set debris guidelines for space operators, 

which were adopted by many nations and the 

UN-affiliated Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordi -

nation Committee. In LEO, all objects were to be 

placed in orbits allowing for their eventual decay 

within 25 years of the end of mission. The usual 

PMD maneuver placed objects at or below 650 

kilometers. 607  However, even if international and 

national guidelines were made legally binding, 

mitigation thresholds were made more stringent, 

or if compliance were even close to 100 percent; 

there would still be a formidable debris problem 

from the remnants of the first 63 years of space 

operations. 608,609  While U.S. compliance is higher, 

current worldwide compliance with this guideline 

is well under 50 percent. The increase in the num  -

ber of objects in orbit has implications for policy  -

makers worldwide and is encouraging the devel  -

opment of space debris remediation technology. 

39 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E The advantages space provides will drive some 

nations to improve their ability to access and oper -

ate in space. Additionally, some nations will pursue 

new and improved counterspace capabilities to tar -

get the perceived U.S. and allied reliance on space-

based assets. 

Space services will continue to proliferate world -

wide as technological and cost barriers fall and 

international partnerships for space support 

increase. State, non-state, and commercial actors 

will increasingly gain access to data and services 

emanating from space. 610,611  The number of space 

launch companies and satellite service providers 

will expand at least through 2025. And with more 

groups—commercial, academic, and even private— 

now able to reach orbit, the growth of satellites and 

debris in space is expected to increase. This growth 

of orbital objects will drive a need for more satellite 

tracking—commercial and government—to help 

distinguish threats from nonthreats, and to predict 

and prevent collisions which will prove to be an 

even greater task. 612,613 

China and Russia value superiority in space. As a 

result, they will seek ways to strengthen their space 

and counterspace programs, and determine ways to 

better integrate them into their respective militaries. 

Both nations are also seeking to broaden their space 

exploration initiatives—together and individually— 

outside Earth’s orbit with plans to explore the Moon 

and Mars during the next 30 years. Lunar explora -

tion by China and Russia aims to expand their scien -

tific knowledge and prestige. If successful, it will likely 

lead to attempts by China and Russia to exploit the 

Moon's natural resources. 

Iran and North Korea will focus on increasing their 

capabilities in the civil and military domains to 

counter space-based services such as communica -

tions and navigation. 614  Both will maintain their abil -

ity to conduct EW against adversaries and theoreti -

cally could use their missile and SLV advancements 

to target orbiting satellites. 

The combination of increasing counterspace capabil -

ities—especially those of China and Russia—a gen -

eral growth in numbers of space objects, and the 

proliferation of requirements for space-enabled ser -

vices will make space an increasingly competitive and 

crowded environment for the foreseeable future. 

As the number of spacefaring nations grows and 

space and counterspace capabilities become more 

integrated into military operations, the U.S space 

posture will be increasingly challenged and on orbit 

assets will face new risks. 

Deep space operations will pose potential challenges 

to space assets due to the inherent difficulty in track -

ing and monitoring spacecraft at distances beyond 

GEO. 615,616  Moreover, the growing incorporation of 

dual-use technology will continue as the develop -

ment and testing of government and commercial 

satellite servicing spacecraft increases—some with 

potential counterspace capabilities. 617 

# OUTLOOK D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

40 APPENDIX: 

# Space and Counterspace Concepts 

# Satellite C2 Architecture 

Satellite C2 architecture uses TT&C to communicate 

with and control satellites. The control center uses 

an uplink to deliver commands to a spacecraft. The 

spacecraft sends data via a downlink to a ground 

station with the necessary antennas, transmitters, 

and receivers to receive the data. Some satellite 

constellations use relay satellites, which enable 

communication between satellites outside the 

reception area of a ground station. 618  Any component 

of the architecture is vulnerable to attack, ranging 

from physical vulnerabilities of a ground site to 

EW disrupting the connection between the space 

segment and the operator. 

# Remote Sensing 

Remote sensing—generally called ISR—satellites col -

lect images, electronic emissions, and other data of 

the Earth’s land, sea, and atmosphere. Civilian and 

commercial applications are used for activities such 

as environmental monitoring, urban planning, and 

disaster response. 

High demand for this data and falling costs for capa -

ble technology have spurred the rapid growth and 

proliferation of these satellites. A decade ago, foreign 

ISR satellites numbered nearly 100, and by January 

2022, that number reached more than 550. ISR sat -

ellites support a variety of military activities by pro -

viding signals intelligence, enabling battle damage 

assessments, and assisting military operations. 619,620 

They have reduced the ability of all countries to per -

form sensitive military activities undetected. 

Some countries’ militaries use space-based ISR. For 

example, militaries use space-based sensors to aug -

ment terrestrial platforms as part of their missile 

attack warning networks and can enable defensive 

or offensive operations in response. Space-based 

sensors usually provide the first indication of a mis -

sile launch, and ground-based radars provide fol -

low-on information and confirm the attack. 

# Satellite Communications 

Global communications networks rely on commu -

nications satellites for worldwide voice communi -

cations, television broadcasts, broadband Internet, 

mobile services, and data transfer for civilian, mil -

itary, and commercial users worldwide. SATCOM 

systems are rapidly deployable, expandable, and 

increasingly affordable as the demand for services 

continues to rise globally. 621 

Today, most communications satellites operate in 

GEO more than 36,000 kilometers above the Earth. 

This distance provides wider coverage of the globe 

with fewer satellites; however, it is more expensive 

to place satellites in orbit at this distance. To reduce 

cost and gain new markets, SATCOM service pro -

viders have proposed future constellations with 

tens of thousands of satellites in low and medium 

altitude LEO. 622  Better technology promises greater 

affordability, efficiency, and flexibility for civilian 

government, and military users worldwide. 

# Satellite Positioning, 

# Navigation, and Timing 

Satellite navigation constellations provide PNT data 

that enable civilian, commercial, and military users 

to determine their precise location and local time. 623 

Satellite navigation services—with applications in 

navigation, munitions guidance, communications, 

agriculture, banking, and power supply—are critical 

41 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E to military and civilian users worldwide. 624  Advances 

in satellite navigation technology offer foreign coun -

tries improved military situational awareness and 

accuracy in precision-guided munitions. 625 

The 1991 Gulf War and subsequent U.S. military 

operations illustrated the value of the U.S. GPS sat -

ellite navigation system for troop movement, force 

tracking, and precision munition delivery. 626  This 

prompted other countries to develop their own sat -

ellite navigation systems. Today, satellite navigation 

constellations of China, Russia, the European Union 

and the United States offer global coverage, and 

Japan and India operate regional systems. 627,628,629  The 

rise of foreign satellite navigation services reduces 

dependence on GPS and provides worldwide users 

multiple satellite navigation options. 630,631,632 

# Space Launch Capabilities 

Space launch is the ability to deliver payloads into 

space. SLVs place satellites in orbit to deploy, sustain, 

augment, or reconstitute constellations in support of 

military, civilian, or commercial customers. 633 

Many countries developed space launch capabil -

ities to compete in the international market or to 

advance national security strategies that require 

domestic access to space. Many commercial entities 

are attempting to enter the launch industry with the 

assistance of a state with established launch capa -

bilities. Some commercial entities are independently 

developing space launch means. D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

42 Space Situational Awareness Space Situational Awareness 

SPACE-BASED RADIO FREQUENCY OPTICS RADAR LASER 

> 2008-26371

Space situational awareness (SSA) is the detection 

and characterization of a space object, including its 

location, and the ability to track it, identify it, and pre -

dict its future location. 634  Terrestrial and space-based 

sensors search the sky for foreign satellites and 

record their orbits, allowing for the prediction of their 

orbits and determination of the object’s function and 

operational status. This continuous process is the 

first in a sequence of steps that potential adversaries 

will use to target satellites, attack space assets with 

counterspace weapons, and assess the effectiveness 

of those attacks. Countries without advanced space 

tracking sensors can attain basic SSA by purchasing 

commercially available data. 

# Cyberthreats to Space Systems 635 

With sophisticated knowledge of satellite C2 and 

data distribution networks, actors can use offensive 

cyberspace capabilities to enable a range of revers -

ible to nonreversible effects against space sys -

tems, associated ground infrastructure, users, and 

the links connecting them. Satellite command and 

data dis  tribution networks expose space systems, 

ground infrastructure, users, and the links connect -

ing these segments to cyber threats. 

43 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E Electronic Warfare 636 

TARGET COMSAT 

UPLINK JAMMING TRANSMITTER JAMMER RECEIVER TRANSMITTER EARTH STATION/ DOWNLINK SITE 

TARGET COMSAT 

DOWNLINK JAMMING 

> JAMMING SIGNAL INTENDED COMMS SIGNAL JAMMING COMBINED WITH THE INTENDED COMMS SIGNAL

MOBILE JAMMER DOWNLINK JAMMER 

> 2008-26372

Foreign competitors are able to conduct electronic 

attacks to disrupt, deny, deceive, or degrade space 

services. Electronic warfare includes using jamming 

and spoofing techniques to control the electro -

magnetic spectrum. Jamming prevents users from 

receiving intended signals and can be accomplished 

by two primary meth ods: uplink jamming and down -

link jamming. Uplink jamming is directed toward the 

satellite and impairs services for all users in the satel -

lite reception area. Downlink jamming has a localized 

effect because it is directed at ground users, such 

as a ground forces unit using satellite navigation 

to determine their loca tion. Spoofing deceives the 

receiver by introducing a fake signal with erroneous 

information. EW can be challenging to attribute and 

distinguish from unintentional interference. D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

44 DIRECTED ENERGY WEAPONS 

HIGH-POWER MICROWAVES 

> 2011-27066

Directed energy weapons are designed to produce 

reversible or nonreversible effects against space 

systems to disrupt, damage, or destroy enemy 

equipment and facilities. 637  Directed energy weap -

ons systems include lasers, high-power microwave 

weapons, and other types of radiofrequency weap -

ons. Reversible effects include temporarily blinding 

optical sensors to deny imagery of targeted military 

forces. Nonreversible effects include permanently 

damaging or destroying sensors or other satellite 

components, which causes the operators to lose 

data and time and face the burdens of replacement 

or reliance on lesser assets. 

# Directed-Energy Weapons 

45 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E Ground-Based ASAT Missiles 

GROUND-BASED KINETIC ENERGY THREATS 

> 2011-27066

Antisatellite missiles are designed to destroy sat -

ellites without placing the weapon system or any 

of its components into orbit. These systems typi -

cally consist of a fixed- or mobile-launch system, 

a missile, and a kinetic kill vehicle. These weap -

ons could also be launched from aircraft or ships 

at sea. Once released, the kinetic kill vehicle uses 

an onboard seeker to intercept the target satellite. 

Ground-based ASAT missile attacks are more eas -

ily attributed than other counterspace weapons 

because launches are detectable, and their effects 

can create orbital debris. D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

46 LASERS HIGH-POWER MICROWAVES CHEMICAL SPRAYERS RADIOFREQUENCY JAMMERS KINETIC KILL VEHICLES ROBOTIC MECHANISMS 

> 2008-26374

Orbital or space-based weapons are satellites that 

can attack other spacecraft, delivering temporary 

or permanent damage. These systems can include 

radiofrequency jammers, kinetic kill vehicles, lasers, 

robotic mechanisms, chemical sprayers, and high-

power microwaves. Some of these systems—such as 

robotic technology for satellite servicing and repair 

or space debris removal—have peaceful uses but 

can also be used in ASAT operations. 

# Space-based Weapons 

47 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E Glossary of Acronyms 

AGM  missile range instrumentation ship  ISS  International Space Station 

APOSOS  Asia-Pacific Ground-Based Optical Space 

Object Observation System  KZ  Kuaizhou 

APSCO  Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization  LEO  low Earth orbit 

ASAT  antisatellite  LM  Long March 

BACC  Beijing Aerospace Control Center  LNT  lethal nontrackable debris 

BMEW  ballistic missile early warning  MEO  medium Earth orbit 

C2  command and control  MODAFL  Ministry of Defense and Armed Forces 

Logistics 

C4ISR  command, control, communications, computers, 

intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance  NASA  National Aeronautics and Space 

Administration 

CLTC  China Launch and Tracking Control 

(PLA SSF SSD)  NSD  PLA SSF Network Systems Department 

CNSA  China National Space Administration  PLA  People’s Liberation Army 

DEW  directed energy weapon  PMD  post-mission disposal 

ESA  European Space Agency  PNT  positioning, navigation, and timing 

EW  electronic warfare, also referred to as 

“electromagnetic warfare”  QUESS  Quantum Experimentation at Space 

Scale 

GEO  geosynchronous Earth orbit  SAR  synthetic aperture radar 

GLONASS  Global Navigation Satellite System  SASTIND 

State Administration for Science, 

Technology, and Industry for National 

Defense 

GPS  Global Positioning System  SATCOM  satellite communications 

HEO  highly elliptical orbit  SLV  space launch vehicle 

ICBM  intercontinental ballistic missile  SSA  space situational awareness 

ILRS  International Lunar Research Station  SSD  PLA SSF Space Systems Department 

IRGC-ASF  Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps – 

Aerospace Force  SSF  PLA Strategic Support Force 

ISA  Iranian Space Agency  TT&C  telemetry, tracking, and control 

ISON  International Scientific Optical 

Network  xGEO  deep space orbits beyond 35,000 kilo -

meters, but in the Earth-Moon system 

ISR  intelligence, surveillance, and 

reconnaissance  XSCC  Xian Satellite Control Center 

ISRC  Iranian Space Research Center D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

48 1 Greenemeier, Larry; 8 February 2016; “GPS and the World’s First 

‘Space War’”;  Scientific American;  https://www.scientificamerican. 

com/article/gps-and-the-world-s-first-space-war/. Accessed 2 

August 2021.  

> 2

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 13 February 2018; 

Statement for the Record:  Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community,  p. 13.  

> 3

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 13 February 2018; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community , p. 13.  

> 4

Chin, Carrey A.; June 2011;  A Study on the Commercialization of 

Space-based Remote Sensing in the Twenty-First Century and Its 

Implications to United States National Security;  Naval Postgraduate 

School; http://faculty.nps.edu/thuynh/Theses/11Jun_Chin.pdf. 

Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 5

Army Space & Missile Defense Command; 2003; “Space – An 

Enabler”;  Army Space Journal ; https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/ 

u2/a525767.pdf. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 6

Sellers, Jerry Jon; 2015;  Understanding Space: An Introduction to 

Astronautics, 4th Edition , pp. 59-60, 657-659; CEI: United States.  

> 7

Weinbaum, C., Berner, S., and McClintock, B.; PE273; 2017; 

“SIGINT for Anyone: The Growing Availability of Signals Intelligence 

in the Public Domain”;  RAND Corporation ; https://www.rand. 

org/content/dam/rand/pubs/perspectives/PE200/PE273/RAND_ 

PE273.pdf. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 8

Satellite Industry Association; June 2020; SIA:  State of the 

Satellite Industry Report ; https://brycetech.com/reports/report-doc -

uments/SIA_SSIR_2020.pdf. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 9

United Nations Conference on Disarmament; 10 October 1967; 

“Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the 

Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other 

Celestial Bodies”; http://disarmament.un.org/treaties/t/outer_space. 

Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 10

United Nations Conference on Disarmament; CD/1839; 29 

February 2008; “Letter Dated 12 February 2008 from the Perma -

nent Representative of the Russian Federation and the Permanent 

Representative of China to the Conference On Disarmament 

Addressed to the Secretary-General of the Conference Transmitting 

the Russian and Chinese Texts of the Draft ‘Treaty on Prevention of 

the Placement of Weapons in Outer Space and of the Threat or Use 

of Force Against Outer Space Objects (PPWT)’ Introduced by the 

Russian Federation and China”; https://undocs.org/pdf?symbol -

=en/CD/1839. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 11

United Nations Conference on Disarmament; CD/1985; 12 June 

2014; “Letter dated 10 June 2014 from the Permanent Representa -

tive of the Russian Federation and the Permanent Representative of 

China to the Conference on Disarmament addressed to the Acting 

Secretary-General of the Conference transmitting the updated 

Russian and Chinese texts of the draft ‘Treaty on Prevention of 

the Placement of Weapons in Outer Space and of the Threat or 

Use of Force Against Outer Space Objects (PPWT)’ introduced by 

the Russian Federation and China”; https://undocs.org/CD/1985. 

Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 12

UK Ministry of Defense; 11 November 2015;  National Security 

Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015 , p. 19; 

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/sys -

tem/uploads/attachment_data/file/478933/52309_Cm_9161_NSS_ 

SD_Review_web_only.pdf. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 13

UK Ministry of Defense; 28 March 2018;  National Security 

and Capability Review , p. 19; https://assets.publishing.service. 

gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/ 

file/705347/6.4391_CO_National-Security-Review_web.pdf. Ac -

cessed 2 August 2021.  

> 14

UK Ministry of Defense; 17 June 2020;  Toward a Defence Space 

Strategy ; https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/ 

uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/712376/MOD_Pock -

et_Tri-Fold_-_Defence_Space_Strategy_Headlines.pdf. Accessed 2 

August 2021.  

> 15

Lye, Harry; 2 April 2020; “Will the UK get a Space Command?” 

Airforce Technology ; https://www.airforce-technology.com/features/ 

will-the-uk-get-a-space-command/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 16

Chuter, Andrew; 15 January 2020; “Former Fighter Pilot Picked 

to Lead British Military’s Space Command”;  Defense News ; https:// 

www.defensenews.com/global/europe/2020/01/15/former-fighter-

pilot-picked-to-lead-british-militarys-space-command. Accessed 2 

August 2021.  

> 17

EuroNews; 13 July 2019; “France’s Macron announces creation 

of French Space Force”; https://www.euronews.com/2019/07/13/ 

france-s-macron-announces-creation-of-french-space-force. Ac -

cessed 2 August 2021.  

> 18

Blenkin, Max; 3 February 2020; “Germany signs up for multi -

national Combined Space Operations Initiative”;  Space Connect ;

https://www.spaceconnectonline.com.au/operations/4116-germa -

nysigns-up-for-multinational-combined-space-operations-initiative. 

Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 19

Miles, Cody, Maj.; 11 February 2020; “German delegation visits 

Vandenberg, discusses future of space operations”;  Combined 

Force Space Component Command Public Affairs ; https://www. 

spacecom.mil/MEDIA/NEWS-ARTICLES/Article/2081290/ger -

man-delegation-visits-vandenberg-discusses-future-space-coop -

eration/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 20

Jungholt, Thorsten; 21 August 2019; “Armament in Space – Still 

Without Weapons”;  Die Welt ; https://www.welt.de/politik/deutsch -

land/plus198779675/Bundeswehr-So-laeuft-die-Aufruestung-im-

Weltraum.html. Accessed 2 August 2021. 

# SOURCES/ENDNOTES 

49 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E 21  AP News; 21 September 2020; “German military opens new 

space operations center”; https://apnews.com/article/national-se -

curity-germany-europe-archive-russia-94aaa4939c5c736e268f -

388700b49c6b. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 22

Johnston, Eric; 2 June 2020; “Japan’s New Space Squadron 

Takes a Giant Leap Forward”;  The Japan Times ; https://www. 

japantimes.co.jp/news/2020/06/02/national/japan-space-force-

self-defense-forces/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 23

Republic of Korea Ministry of National Defense; 11-1290000-

000446-11; 31 December 2018;  2018 Defense White Paper , p. 

19; https://www.mnd.go.kr/user/mnd/upload/pblictn/PBLICTNE -

BOOK_201907110548253080.pdf. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 24

DOD News; 5 September 2014; “DoD Agrees to Share Space 

Data with South Korea”; https://www.defense.gov/Explore/News/ 

Article/Article/603194/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 25

Republic of Korea Ministry of National Defense; 11-1290000-

000446-11; 31 December 2018;  2018 Defense White Paper , p. 

74; https://www.mnd.go.kr/user/mnd/upload/pblictn/PBLICTNE -

BOOK_201907110548253080.pdf. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 26

Joint Chiefs of Staff; 26 October 2020;  Joint Publication 3-14: 

Space Operations  (10 April 2018, Incorporating Change 1), p. II-4 

– II-5.  

> 27

Joint Chiefs of Staff; 26 October 2020;  Joint Publication 3-14: 

Space Operations  (10 April 2018, Incorporating Change 1), p. II-4 

- II-5.  

> 28

Joint Chiefs of Staff; 26 October 2020;  Joint Publication 3-14: 

Space Operations  (10 April 2018, Incorporating Change 1), p. II-3 

- II-4.  

> 29

Joint Chiefs of Staff; 26 October 2020;  Joint Publication 3-14: 

Space Operations  (10 April 2018, Incorporating Change 1), p. II-8, 

II-17 – II-18.  

> 30

The Chicago Tribune; 21 May 1998; “Satellite Outage Felt By 

Millions”; https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-1998-05-

21-9805210138-story.html. Accessed 28 July 2021.  

> 31

Brinson, Linda C.; March 2011; “What breakthroughs in 

medicine came from NASA?”  How Stuff Works ; https://science. 

howstuffworks.com/innovation/nasa-inventions/nasa-break -

throughs-in-medicine.htm. Accessed 28 July 2021.  

> 32

International Space Exploration Coordination Group;  Ben -

efits Stemming from Space Exploration ; September 2013; 

https://www.nasa.gov/sites/default/files/files/Benefits-Stem -

ming-from-Space-Exploration-2013-TAGGED.pdf. Accessed 2 

August 2021.  

> 33

NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory;  20 Inventions We Wouldn’t 

Have Without Space Travel ; https://www.jpl.nasa.gov/infographics/ 

infographic.view.php?id=11358. Accessed 28 July 2021.  

> 34

Joint Chiefs of Staff; 26 October 2020;  Joint Publication 3-14: 

Space Operations  (10 April 2018, Incorporating Change 1), p. I-13.  

> 35

U.S. Space Command Public Affairs; 15 November 2021; 

“Russian direct-ascent anti-satellite missile test creates significant, 

long-lasting space debris”; https://www.spacecom.mil/news/ 

article-display/article/2842957/russia-direct-ascent-anti-satel -

lite-missile-creates-significant-long-last/#.yzrxfviqul4. Accessed 16 

November 2021.  

> 36

Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Organization; 5 No -

vember 2020; “9 July 1962: ‘Starfish Prime’, Outer Space”; https:// 

www.ctbto.org/specials/testing-times/9-july-1962starfish-prime-

outer-space. Accessed 5 August 2020.  

> 37

Joint Chiefs of Staff; 26 October 2020;  Joint Publication 3-14: 

Space Operations  (10 April 2018, Incorporating Change 1), p. I-11 

– I-12.  

> 38

Riebeek, Holli; 4 September 2009; “Catalog of Earth Satellite 

Orbits”;  NASA ; https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/features/Orbits -

Catalog. Accessed 5 August 2020.  

> 39

The State Council of the People’s Republic Of China; 28 

December 2016;  Full text of white paper on China’s space 

activities in 2016 ; http://english.www.gov.cn/archive/white_pa -

per/2016/12/28/content_281475527159496.htm. Accessed 2 

August 2021.  

> 40

Xiao Tianliang, Lt. Gen., ed.; September 2020;  The Science of Mil -

itary Strategy  (2020 Edition), p. 142; PLA National Defense University.  

> 41

Gebhardt, Chris; 22 July 2020; “China seeks ‘Heavenly 

Questions’ with ambitious Tianwen-1 mission to Mars”;  NASA 

Spaceflight ; https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2020/07/china-am -

bitious-tianwen1-mars/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 42

Bryce Space and Technology; 31 October 2020;  2020 Year in 

Review ; https://www.brycetech.com/reports/report-documents/ 

Bryce_2020_Year_In_Review.png. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 43

Bryce Space and Technology; 31 December 2019;  “China’s Orbital 

Launch Activity” ; https://brycetech.com/reports/report-documents/ 

China_Orbital_Launch_Activity_2020.pdf. Accessed 21 March 2022.  

> 44

Krebs, Gunther; 14 September 2020; “Tiangong-1 (TG-1)”; 

Gunther’s Space Page ; https://space.skyrocket.de/doc-sdat/tg-1. 

htm. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 45

Howell, Elizabeth; 26 March 2018; “Tiangong-1: China’s First 

Space Station”;  Space.com ; https://www.space.com/27320-tian -

gong-1.html. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 46

Krebs, Gunther; 14 September 2020; “Tiangong-2 (TG-2)”; 

Gunther’s Space Page ; https://space.skyrocket.de/doc-sdat/tg-2. 

htm. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 47

Nowakowski, Tomasz; 22 May 2016; “China reveals design for 

planned Tiangong 3 space station”;  Space Flight Insider ; https:// 

www.spaceflightinsider.com/missions/human-spaceflight/china-

reveals-design-planned-tiangong-3-space-station/. Accessed 3 

August 2021.  

> 48

Graham, William and Gebhardt, Chris; 28 June 2021; “China 

launches Tianhe module, start of ambitious two-year station con -

struction effort”;  NASA Spaceflight ; https://www.nasaspaceflight. 

com/2021/04/china-station-construction-begins/. Accessed 30 

June 2021. D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

50 49  Chang, Kenneth; 7 December 2018; “China’s Chang’e-4 

Launches on Mission to the Moon’s Far Side”;  The New York 

Times ; https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/07/science/china-

moon-change-4.html. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 50

Amos, Jonathan; 16 December 2020; “China’s Chang’e-5 Moon 

mission probe touches down”;  BBC ; https://www.bbc.com/news/ 

science-environment-55148998. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 51

Burghardt, Thomas; 23 November 2020; “China launches 

world’s first lunar sample return mission since 1976”;  NASA Space -

flight ; https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2020/11/change5-sample-

return-launch/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 52

Gebhardt, Chris; 1 December 2020; “China lands on Moon after 

causing deep confusion by stopping broadcast”;  NASA Spaceflight ;

https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2020/12/china-preparing-to-land-

sample-return-mission-on-the-moon/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 53

AP News; 17 December 2020; “Chinese capsule returns to 

Earth carrying moon rocks”; https://apnews.com/article/tech -

nology-china-moon-da510a5fd9a97505296ddbdb5749c393. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 54

Gebhardt, Chris; 22 July 2020; “China seeks ‘Heavenly 

Questions’ with ambitious Tianwen-1 mission to Mars”;  NASA 

Spaceflight ; https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2020/07/china-am -

bitious-tianwen1-mars/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 55

Gebhardt, Chris; 10 February 2021; “China, with Tianwen-1, be -

gins tenure at Mars with successful orbital arrival”;  NASA Spaceflight ;

https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2021/02/china-ready-to-begin-mars-

tenure-with-tianwen-1-orbit-insertion/. Accessed 12 February 2021.  

> 56

Hanneke, Weitering; 14 May 2021; “China’s 1st Mars rover 

‘Zhurong’ lands on the Red Planet”;  Space.com ; https://www. 

space.com/china-mars-rover-landing-success-tianwen-1-zhurong. 

Accessed 14 May 2021.  

> 57

Joint Chiefs of Staff; 26 October 2020;  Joint Publication 3-14: 

Space Operations  (10 April 2018, Incorporating Change 1), p. I-13.  

> 58

18 Space Control Squadron; “Box Score”; Space-Track.org; 

https://www.space-track.org/#boxscore. Accessed 19 March 2022.  

> 59

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 11 May 2017; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community , p. 9.  

> 60

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 13 February 2018; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community , p. 13.  

> 61

Office of the Secretary of Defense; April 2015;  Annual Report 

to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the 

People’s Republic of China 2015 , p. 14; https://dod.defense.gov/ 

Portals/1/Documents/pubs/2015_China_Military_Power_Report. 

pdf. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 62

Newman, Scott and Kuhn, Anthony; 10 April 2018; “Beijing 

Reportedly Installs Communications Jamming Equipment in South 

China Sea”;  National Public Radio ; https://www.npr.org/sections/ 

parallels/2018/03/02/589876233/the-u-s-positions-warships-in-

tense-asia-pacific-waters. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 63

Martini, Paul; 21 September 2016; “Cybersecurity is threatening 

America’s military supremacy”;  Crunch Network  (Reposted on  Resilient 

Navigation and Timing Foundation  blog); https://rntfnd.org/2016/09/26/ 

china-jamming-us-forces-gps/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 64

The State Council of the People’s Republic Of China; 28 De -

cember 2016;  Full text of white paper on China’s space activities in 

2016 ; http://english.www.gov.cn/archive/white_paper/2016/12/28/ 

content_281475527159496.htm. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 65

The State Council of the People’s Republic Of China; 28 January 

2022; Full Text: China’s Space Program: A 2021 Perspective; 

http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/20220128/eb9fb038eb -

fe4a3d93887b9f120ef74a/c.html. Accessed 28 January 2022.  

> 66

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020;  Annual 

Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving 

the People’s Republic of China 2020 , pp. 63-65; https://media.de -

fense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-

MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 67

U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission; 8 

September 2017;  China’s Position on a Code of Conduct in Space ,

p. 2; https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Research/USCC_Chi -

na’s%20Position%20on%20a%20Code%20of%20Conduct%20 

in%20Space.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 68

Kulaki, Gregory and Lewis, Jeffery G.; January 2009;  A Place 

for One’s Mat: China’s Space Program, 1956-2003 , p. 15; 

Carnegie Corporation; https://media.carnegie.org/filer_pub -

lic/34/26/34264093-10f5-4f7c-a02c-6611514f5ee7/ccny_grant -

ee_2009_china.pdf. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 69

Goswami, Namrata; 15 October 2018; “Waking Up to China’s 

Space Dream”;  The Diplomat ; https://thediplomat.com/2018/10/ 

waking-up-to-chinas-space-dream/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 70

Stokes, M., Alvarado, G., Weinstein, E., Easton, I.; 30 March 

2020; “China’s Space and Counterspace Capabilities and Activ -

ities”, p. 28;  Project 2049 Institute prepared for The U.S.-China 

Economic and Security Review Commission ; https://www.uscc. 

gov/sites/default/ files/2020-05/China_Space_and_Counterspace_ 

Activities.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 71

Joint Chiefs of Staff; 26 October 2020;  Joint Publication 3-14: 

Space Operations  (10 April 2018, Incorporating Change 1), p. I-13.  

> 72

18 Space Control Squadron; “Box Score”; Space-Track.org; 

https://www.space-track.org/#boxscore. Accessed 19 March 2022.  

> 73

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 11 May 2017; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community, p. 9.  

> 74

The State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic 

of China; 26 May 2015;  China’s Military Strategy (2015) , pp. 6, 

11, 16-17; http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2015-05/26/con -

tent_20820628.htm. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 75

The State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of 

China; 26 May 2015;  China’s Military Strategy (2015) , p. 3; http:// 

www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2015-05/26/content_20820628.htm. 

Accessed 2 August 2021. 

51 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E 76  Defense Intelligence Agency; 26 April 2021;  Statement of the 

Record Worldwide Threat Assessment , pp. 8-9.  

> 77

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020;  Annual 

Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving 

the People’s Republic of China 2020 , p. 82; https://media.defense. 

gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-MILI -

TARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 78

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 13 February 2018; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community , p. 13.  

> 79

Pollpeter, Kevin, et al; 2017; “The Creation of the PLA Strate -

gic Support Force and Its Implications for Chinese Military Space 

Operations”, p. ix, 7;  RAND Corporation ; https://www.rand.org/ 

content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR2000/RR2058/ 

RAND_RR2058.pdf. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 80

MacDonald, B.W., Blair, D., Cheng, D., Mueller, K., and Samp -

son, V.; 2016;  Crisis Stability in Space: China and Other Chal -

lenges ; Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, 

Foreign Policy Institute.  

> 81

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 13 February 2018; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community , p. 13.  

> 82

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020;  Annual 

Report to Congress; Military and Security Developments Involving 

the People’s Republic of China 2020 , pp. 81-82; https://media.de -

fense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-

MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 83

Kulacki, Greg; 1 July 2009; “Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Technology in 

Chinese Open-Source Publications”;  Union of Concerned Scien -

tists ; https://ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/2019-09/Kulacki-Chi -

nese-ASAT-Literature-6-10-09.pdf. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 84

Xianqi, Chang Maj. Gen., ed.; January 2005;  Military Astronau -

tics , pp. 247-266; Academy of Equipment Command Technology.  

> 85

Pollpeter, Kevin, et al; 2 March 2015; “China Dream, Space 

Dream – China’s Progress in Space Technologies and Implications 

for the United States”, p. iv;  U.S.-China Economic and Security 

Review Commission ; https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/ 

Research/China%20Dream%20Space%20Dream_Report.pdf. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 86

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020;  Annual 

Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving 

the People’s Republic of China 2018 , pp. 72, 74; https://media. 

defense.gov/2018/Aug/16/2001955282/-1/-1/1/2018-CHINA-MIL -

ITARY-POWER-REPORT.PDF. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 87

Chang Long; 28 October 2003; “Grasp the Trend of New Military 

Changes – Review and Prospect from the Gulf War to Iraq War”; 

Jiefangjun Bao . 

> 88

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020;  Annual 

Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving 

the People’s Republic of China 2020 , p. 65; https://media.defense. 

gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-MILI -

TARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 89

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020;  Annual 

Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving 

the People’s Republic of China 2020 , p. 63; https://media.defense. 

gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-MILI -

TARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 90

Xinhua; 15 November 2013; “China to tackle monopolies, 

introduce competition: CPC”; http://www.globaltimes.cn/con -

tent/825209.shtml. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 91

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020;  Annual 

Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving 

the People’s Republic of China 2020 , pp. viii, 61; https://media.de -

fense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-

MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 92

Costello, John; 8 February 2016; “The Strategic Support Force: 

China’s Information Warfare Service”;  The Jamestown Foundation ;

https://jamestown.org/program/the-strategic-support-force-chi -

nas-information-warfare-service/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 93

Pollpeter, Kevin, et al; 2017; “The Creation of the PLA Strate -

gic Support Force and Its Implications for Chinese Military Space 

Operations”, p. ix;  RAND Corporation ; https://www.rand.org/ 

content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR2000/RR2058/ 

RAND_RR2058.pdf. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 94

Xinhua; 6 July 2021; “Xi promotes four military offi -

cers to rank of general”; http://www.xinhuanet.com/en -

glish/2021-07/06/c_1310044470.htm. Accessed 23 July 2021.  

> 95

Ni, Adam and Gill, Bates; 29 May 2019; “The People’s Liberation 

Army Strategic Support Force: Update 2019”;  The Jamestown 

Foundation: China Brief, Vol. 19, Iss. 10 , pp. 13-16; https:// 

jamestown.org/program/the-peoples-liberation-army-strategic-sup -

port-force-update-2019/. Accessed 23 July 2021.  

> 96

Chopra, Anil; 8 March 2021; “People’s Liberation Army Strategic 

Support Force – A Comprehensive Look”;  Air Power Asia ; https:// 

airpowerasia.com/2021/03/08/peoples-liberation-army-strate -

gic-support-force-a-comprehensive-look/. Accessed 23 July 2021.  

> 97

Pollpeter, Kevin, et al; 2017; “The Creation of the PLA Strate -

gic Support Force and Its Implications for Chinese Military Space 

Operations”, p. ix;  RAND Corporation ; https://www.rand.org/ 

content/dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR2000/RR2058/ 

RAND_RR2058.pdf. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 98

Wood, P., Stone, A., and Lee, T.A.; 1 March 2021; “China’s 

Ground Segment: Building the Pillar of a Great Space Power”, p. 

22;  China Aerospace Studies Institute;  https://airuniversity.af.edu/ 

portals/10/casi/documents/research/space/2021-03-01 chinas 

ground segment.pdf?ver=z4ogy_mrxadurwvt-r9j6w%3d%3d. 

Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 99

Ni, Adam and Gill, Bates; 29 May 2019; “The People’s Liberation 

Army Strategic Support Force: Update 2019”;  The Jamestown 

Foundation: China Brief, Vol. 19, Iss. 10 , pp. 13-16; https://https:// 

jamestown.org/program/the-people’s-liberation-army-strate -

gic-support-force-update-2019/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 100

Ni, Adam and Gill, Bates; 29 May 2019; “The People’s Libera -

tion Army Strategic Support Force: Update 2019”;  The Jamestown D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

52 Foundation: China Brief, Vol. 19, Iss. 10 , pp. 16-17; https://https:// 

jamestown.org/program/the-peoples-liberation-army-strategic-sup -

port-force-update-2019/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 101

Chopra, Anil; 8 March 2021; “People’s Liberation Army Strategic 

Support Force – A Comprehensive Look”;  Air Power Asia ; https://air -

powerasia.com/2021/03/08/peoples-liberation-army-strategic-sup -

port-force-a-comprehensive-look/. Accessed 26 July 2021.  

> 102

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China; 6 October 

2014;  State Administration for Science, Technology and Industry 

for National Defense ; http://english.www.gov.cn/state_coun -

cil/2014/10/06/content_281474992893468.htm. Accessed 2 

August 2021.  

> 103

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020;  Annual 

Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving 

the People’s Republic of China 2020 , p. 142; https://media.de -

fense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-

MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 104

Jones, Andrew; 25 May 2018; “China appoints new space 

agency administrator”;  GB Times ; https://www.spacetechasia.com/ 

zhang-kejian-appointed-administrator-of-chinas-space-agency/. 

Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 105

The State Council of the People’s Republic Of China; 28 

January 2022; Full Text: China’s Space Program: A 2021 Perspec -

tive; http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/20220128/eb9fb038eb -

fe4a3d93887b9f120ef74a/c.html. Accessed 28 January 2022.  

> 106

UNOOSA; 28 May 2018; “Handbook: China Space Station 

and its Resources for International Cooperation”, pp. 8, 27-28; 

http://www.unoosa.org/documents/doc/psa/hsti/CSS_1stAO/ 

CSS_1stAO_Handbook_2018.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 107

Luxembourg Ministry of Economy; 17 January 2018; T he 

National Space Science Center of the Chinese Academy of 

Sciences to establish a Research Laboratory in Luxembourg ;

https://gouvernement.lu/en/actualites/toutes_actualites/commu -

niques/2018/01-janvier/17-schneider-agreement-china-en.html. 

Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 108

Wood, P., Stone, A., and Lee, T.A.; 1 March 2021; “China’s 

Ground Segment: Building the Pillar of a Great Space Power”, p. 

62;  China Aerospace Studies Institute ; https://airuniversity.af.edu/ 

portals/10/casi/documents/research/space/2021-03-01 chinas 

ground segment.pdf?ver=z4ogy_mrxadurwvt-r9j6w%3d%3d. 

Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 109

Prague Security Studies Institute; 31 March 2019; S tate Actor 

Strategies in Attracting Space Sector Partnerships: Chinese and 

Russian Economic and Financial Footprints , p. 11.  

> 110

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020;  Annual 

Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving 

the People’s Republic of China 2020 , p. 138; https://media.de -

fense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-

MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 111

Herbert, Natalie; February 2021; “Achieving the PLA’s Strategic 

Support Force talent needs through MCF”;  China Aerospace 

Studies Institute ; https://airuniversity.af.edu/portals/10/casi/docu -

ments/research/casi articles/2021-02-01 achieving the plassf talent 

needs through mcf.pdf?ver=r2p5iwlumz_bvmqohmtwuw%3d%3d. 

Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 112

OK-Space; 5 May 2017; “OKW and CASC 1st Academy carry 

out cooperation and exchange”.  

> 113

China Spaceflight Blog; 16 September 2017; “Orbita”.  

> 114

Barbosa, Rui; 8 November 2020; “Introducing China’s new 

commercial rocket, Ceres-1”;  NASA Spaceflight ; https://www. 

nasaspaceflight.com/2020/11/introducing-chinas-new-commer -

cial-rocket-ceres-1/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 115

Expace Technology Co Ltd. “KZ Promotional Flier”.  

> 116

Hannas, W.C., Mulvenon, J.C., Puglisi, A.B.; 2013;  Chinese 

Industrial Espionage : Technology Acquisition and Military Modern -

ization , pp. 19, 22-23, 33-34, 78, 176, 189, 204-205, 216.  

> 117

Harvey, Brian; 2013;  China in Space: The Great Leap Forward , pp. 

105-119, 184-214; Springer Science + Business Media: New York.  

> 118

18 Space Control Squadron; “Catalog”; Space-Track.org; 

https://www.space-track.org/#catalog. Accessed 19 March 2022.  

> 119

Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS); 1 January 2022; 

“Satellite Database”; https://www.ucsusa.org/nuclear-weapons/ 

space-weapons/satellite-database. Accessed 19 March 2022.  

> 120

Keluo Liaofu; 8 October 2015; “Jilin-1 Satellite Liftoff into Space: 

US Aircraft Carrier has Nowhere to Hide”;  Dingsheng Military Forum.  

> 121

Sina (China Youth Network Reprint); 4 October 2015; “China’s 

High Score 4 satellite will be able to lock down U.S. aircraft carriers 

by global surveillance at the end of the year”.  

> 122

Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS); 1 January 2022; 

“Satellite Database”; https://www.ucsusa.org/nuclear-weapons/ 

space-weapons/satellite-database. Accessed 7 December 2021.  

> 123

Stokes, M., Alvarado, G., Weinstein, E., Easton, I.; 30 March 

2020; “China’s Space and Counterspace Capabilities and Activ -

ities”, p. 33;  Project 2049 Institute prepared for the U.S.-China Eco -

nomic and Security Review Commission , https://www.uscc.gov/ 

sites/default/files/2020-05/China_Space_and_Counterspace_Activ -

ities.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 124

Pan Changpeng, Gu Wenjin, and Chen Jie, 2006; “An Anal -

ysis on the Capabilities of Military Satellites to Support an ASBM 

in Offense and Defense Operations”;  Winged Missiles Journal ,

No. 5 (2006).  

> 125

Gao Fei, Hu Xujie, Gao Lungyun, and Liu Xiangmin; 19 March 

2008; “An Analysis on the Influence of Military Satellite Information 

Systems on Missile Operations”;  Defense Science and Technology, 

Vol. 29, No.4 (2008) . 

> 126

Stokes, M., Alvarado, G., Weinstein, E., Easton, I.; 30 March 

2020; “China’s Space and Counterspace Capabilities and Activ -

ities”, p. 33;  Project 2049 Institute prepared for the U.S.-China 

Economic and Security Review Commission ; https://www.uscc. 

gov/sites/default/files/2020-05/China_Space_and_Counterspace_ 

Activities.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021. 

53 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E 127  Stokes, M., Alvarado, G., Weinstein, E., Easton, I.; 30 March 

2020; “China’s Space and Counterspace Capabilities and Activ -

ities”, p. 28;  Project 2049 Institute prepared for the U.S.-China Eco -

nomic and Security Review Commission ; https://www.uscc.gov/ 

sites/default/files/2020-05/China_Space_and_Counterspace_Activ -

ities.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 128

Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS); 1 January 2022; 

“Satellite Database”; https://www.ucsusa.org/nuclear-weapons/ 

space-weapons/satellite-database. Accessed 19 March 2022.  

> 129

Stokes, Mark A. and Cheng, Dean; 26 April 2012; “China’s 

Evolving Space Capabilities: Implications for U.S. Interests”, p. 36; 

Project 2049 Institute prepared for the U.S.-China Economic and 

Security Review Commission ; https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/ 

files/Research/USCC_China-Space-Program-Report_April-2012. 

pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 130

Stokes, M., Alvarado, G., Weinstein, E., Easton, I.; 30 March 

2020; “China’s Space and Counterspace Capabilities and Activ -

ities”, p. 28;  Project 2049 Institute prepared for the U.S.-China 

Economic and Security Review Commission ; https://www.uscc. 

gov/sites/default/files/2020-05/China_Space_and_Counterspace_ 

Activities.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 131

Xinhua; 25 April 2008; “China Blasts Off First Data Relay Satellite”.  

> 132

Chen Lihu, Wang Shilian, and Zhang Eryang; 1 June 2007; 

“Modeling and Simulation of Missile Satellite-Missile Link Channel 

in Flying-Control Data-Link”,  Systems Engineering and Electronics ,

Vol. 29: Issue 6 (2007).  

> 133

Wu Ting-yong, Wu Shi-qi, and Ling Xiang, December 2005; 

“A MEO Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System Constellation 

Scheme for China”,  Journal of Aerospace Electronic Information 

Engineering, Control , pp. 248-252.  

> 134

The State Council of the People’s Republic Of China; 28 

January 2022; Full Text: China’s Space Program: A 2021 Perspec -

tive; http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/20220128/eb9fb038eb -

fe4a3d93887b9f120ef74a/c.html. Accessed 28 January 2022.  

> 135

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 16 May 2018;  Annual Report 

to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the 

People’s Republic of China 2018 , p. 85-86; https://media.defense. 

gov/2018/Aug/16/2001955282/-1/-1/1/2018-CHINA-MILITARY-

POWER-REPORT.PDF. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 136

Chan, Minnie; 6 November 2016; “Chinese Aerospace Giant 

Unveils First Smartphone for Country’s Satellite Communica -

tions Network”;  South China Morning Post ; http://www.scmp. 

com/news/china/article/2042978/chinese-aerospace-giant-un -

veils-first-smartphone-countrys-satellite. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 137

Conover, Emily; 13 December 2017; “A quantum commu -

nications satellite proved its potential in 2017”;  Science News ;

https://www.sciencenews.org/article/global-quantum-communica -

tion-top-science-stories-2017-yir. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 138

Krebs, Gunther; 14 September 2020; “QSS (QUESS, Mozi)”; 

Gunther’s Space Page ; https://space.skyrocket.de/doc_sdat/qss. 

htm. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 139

Makichuk, Dave; 17 June 2020; “China claims quantum 

supremacy with satellite test”;  Asia Times ; https://asiatimes. 

com/2020/06/chinese-team-claim-quantum-supremacy-with-satel -

lite-test/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 140

Stokes, M., Alvarado, G., Weinstein, E., Easton, I.; 30 March 

2020; “China’s Space and Counterspace Capabilities and Activi -

ties”, pp. 64-65;  Project 2049 Institute prepared for the U.S.-China 

Economic and Security Review Commission ; https://www.uscc. 

gov/sites/default/files/2020-05/China_Space_and_Counterspace_ 

Activities.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 141

Curcio, Blaine; 4 December 2020; “Constellation Watch: Chi -

na’s Incubating Answer to Starlink”;  Satellite Markets ; http://satelli -

temarkets.com/constellation-watch-china-incubating-answer-star -

link. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 142

Economic Times of India; 16 July 2018; “China to build 300 

satellite communications constellation in low Earth orbit”; https:// 

economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/international/world-news/ 

china-to-launch-300-satellites-to-provide-worldwide-low-or -

bit-communications/articleshow/65005723.cms?from=mdr. 

Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 143

China National Administration of GNSS and Applications; 10 

November 2017; “China’s Rainbow Project Will Launch 156 Small 

Satellites to Build Space-Based Internet”.  

> 144

Ok-Space; 29 January 2018; “National Constellation – We have 

been helping”.  

> 145

Jones, Andrew; 21 April 2021; “China is developing plans for a 

13,000-satellite megaconstellation”;  Space News ; https://space -

news.com/china-is-developing-plans-for-a-13000-satellite-commu -

nications-megaconstellation/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 146

Jones, Andrew; 28 February 2020; “China to complete its 

answer to GPS with Beidou navigation satellite launches in March, 

May”;  Space News ; https://spacenews.com/china-to-complete-its-

answer-to-gps-with-beidou-navigation-satellite-launches-in-march-

may/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 147

Wencheng, Gao; 23 June 2020; “Commentary: China’s BeiDou 

system primed for serving whole world;  Xinhua . 

> 148

Yuanxi Yang, Weiguang Gao, Shuren Guo, Yue Mao, Yufei 

Yang; 11 December 2018; “Introduction to BeiDou-3 navigation 

satellite system”;  Navigation . 

> 149

Betz, J. Mingquan Lu, Morton, Y.T. J., Yuanxi Yang; 3 January 

2019; “Introduction to the special issue on the BeiDou navigation 

system”;  Navigation . 

> 150

Mingquan Lu, Wenyi Li, Zheng Yao, Xiaowei Cui; 16 December 

2018; “Overview of BDS III new signals”;  Navigation . 

> 151

Barbosa, Rui; 22 June 2020; “China Launches final Beidou-3 

with Long march 3B Return to Flight”;  NASA Spaceflight ; https:// 

www.nasaspaceflight.com/2020/06/china-complete-beidou-con -

stellation-long-march-3b/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 152

International GNSS Service; 11 August 2020; “BeiDou”; http:// 

mgex.igs.org/IGS_MGEX_Status_BDS.php. Accessed 2 August 2021. D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

54 153  Beidou Navigation Systems; 19 March 2020; “China Successfully 

Launched the 54th BDS Satellite”; http://en.beidou.gov.cn/WHATS -

NEWS/202004/t20200401_20279.html. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 154

Jones, Andrew; 28 February 2020; “China to complete its 

answer to GPS with Beidou navigation satellite launches in March, 

May”;  Space News ; https://spacenews.com/china-to-complete-its-

answer-to-gps-with-beidou-navigation-satellite-launches-in-march-

may/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 155

China Satellite Navigation Office; 5 March 2018; “Development 

of BeiDou Navigation Satellite System (BDS) – A System Update 

Report (2017-2018)”;  Munich Satellite Navigation Summit 2018 

Proceedings . 

> 156

Xinhua; 27 December 2018; “China’s BeiDou navigation 

system starts global service”; http://www.xinhuanet.com/en -

glish/2018-12/27/c_137702496.htm. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 157

Howell, Elizabeth; 23 June 2020; “China launches final Beidou 

satellite to complete GPS-like navigation system”;  Space.com ;

https://www.space.com/china-launches-final-beidou-naviga -

tion-satellite.html?jwsource=cl. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 158

Gebhardt, Chris; 10 February 2021; “China, with Tianwen-1, 

be gins tenure at Mars with successful orbital arrival”;  NASA Space -

flight ; https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2021/02/china-ready-to-

begin-mars-tenure-with-tianwen-1-orbit-insertion/. Accessed 20 

July 2021.  

> 159

Hanneke, Weitering; 14 May 2021; “China’s 1st Mars rover 

‘Zhurong’ lands on the Red Planet”;  Space.com ; https://www. 

space.com/china-mars-rover-landing-success-tianwen-1-zhurong. 

Accessed 20 July 2021.  

> 160

Woo, Ryan and Sun Yilei; 22 May 2021; “China says Martian 

rover takes first drive on surface of Red Planet”;  Reuters ; https:// 

www.reuters.com/lifestyle/science/china-says-martian-rover-takes -

first-drive-surface-red-planet-2021-05-22/. Accessed 20 July 2021.  

> 161

China Central Television; 28 August 2020; “China PLA 74th 

Group Army’s Amphibious Brigade Holds Joint Land-Sea-Air Island 

Landing Drill”.  

> 162

Liu Jiasheng, Sun Datong, and Peng Fubing; 1 February 2019; 

“Building Strategic Projection Carrying Tools Based on National Se -

curity Requirements”;  Journal of Military Transportation University . 

> 163

BeiDou Navigation Systems; December 2019; “Development of 

the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System (Version 4.0)”.  

> 164

Cang Wei and Song Wenwei; 26 May 2014; “Beidou to help 

safeguard fisherman on the high seas”;  Xinhua . 

> 165

Xinhua; 17 May 2012; “Beidou Navigation System Installed on 

More Chinese Fishing Boats”.  

> 166

BeiDou Navigation Systems; December 2019; “Development of 

the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System (Version 4.0)”.  

> 167

The State Council of the People’s Republic of China; 16 June 

2016; “Full Text: China’s BeiDou Navigation Satellite System”.  

> 168

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020;  Annual 

Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving 

the People’s Republic of China 2020 , p. 64; https://media.defense. 

gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-MILITARY-

POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 169

Lianping Gao and Ryan Woo; 26 May 2021; “China ’s Beidou 

navigation system to serve $156 billion home market by 2025”;  Re -

uters  (Yahoo Finance reprint); https://finance.yahoo.com/news/chi -

nas-beidou-navigation-system-serve-053827138.html. Accessed 

20 July 2021.  

> 170

Krebs, Gunther; 23 May 2020; “Shenzhou Flight History”; 

Gunter’s Space Page ; https://space.skyrocket.de/doc_sat/shen -

zhou_hist.htm. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 171

Krebs, Gunther; 14 September 2020; “Shenzhou 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 

6, 7 (SZ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7)”;  Gunther’s Space Page ; https://space. 

skyrocket.de/doc_sdat/sz-1.htm. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 172

Krebs, Gunther; 14 September 2020; “Shenzhou 8, 9, 10, 11, 

12 (SZ 8, 9, 10, 11, 12)”;  Gunther’s Space Page ; https://space.sky -

rocket.de/doc_sdat/sz-8.htm. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 173

Krebs, Gunther; 14 September 2020; “Tiangong-1 (TG-1)”; 

Gunther’s Space Page ; https://space.skyrocket.de/doc-sdat/tg-1. 

htm. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 174

Howell, Elizabeth; 26 March 2018; “Tiangong-1: China’s First 

Space Station”;  Space.com ; https://www.space.com/27320-tian -

gong-1.html. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 175

Krebs, Gunther; 14 September 2020; “Tiangong-2 (TG-2)”; 

Gunther’s Space Page ; https://space.skyrocket.de/doc-sdat/tg-2. 

htm. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 176

China Daily; 8 May 2020; “Spacecraft re-entry Model Test 

Successful”.  

> 177

Graham, William and Gebhardt, Chris; 28 June 2021; “China 

launches Tianhe module, start of ambitious two-year station con -

struction effort”;  NASA Spaceflight ; https://www.nasaspaceflight. 

com/2021/04/china-station-construction-begins/. Accessed 20 

July 2021.  

> 178

Graham, William; 29 May 2021; “China launches Tianzhou 

2, first cargo mission to new space station”;  NASA Spaceflight ;

https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2021/05/tianzhou-2-launch/. 

Accessed 20 July 2021.  

> 179

Xinhua; 16 October 2021; “China Embarks on Longest Ever 

Crewed Mission for Space Station Construction”.  

> 180

Jones, Morris; 17 November 2011; “Yinghuo Was Worth It”; 

Space Daily ; https://www.spacedaily.com/reports/Yinghuo_Was_ 

Worth_It_999.html. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 181

Krebs, Gunther; 11 December 2020; “XPNAV 1 (Maichong Xing 

Shiyan Weixing)”; https://space.skyrocket.de/doc-sdat/tg-1.htm. 

Accessed 31 January 2022.  

> 182

Xiang Bo; 30 December 2019; “China’s First Solar Sail Verifies 

Key Technologies in Orbit;”  Xinhua ; http://www.xinhuanet.com/ 

english/2019-12/30/c_138667092.htm. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 183

David, Leonard; 14 December 2013; “China Lands On The 

Moon: Historic Robotic Lunar Landing Includes 1st Chinese Rov -

55 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E er”;  Space.com ; https://www.space.com/23968-china-moon-rov -

er-historic-lunar-landing.html#:~:text=China%20has%20land -

ed%20its%20first%20robotic%20lander%20on,to%20make%20 

a%20soft-landing%20on%20Earth%27s%20celestial%20neigh -

bor. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 184

Wong, Catherine; 3 January 2019; “China’s Chang’e 4 lunar 

probe sends first photo of far side of the moon after historic soft 

landing”;  South China Morning Post ; https://www.scmp.com/ 

news/china/article/2180453/chinas-change-4-lunar-spacecraft-

poised-touch-down-dark-side-moon. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 185

Chang, Kenneth; 7 December 2018; “China’s Chang’e-4 

Launches on Mission to the Moon’s Far Side”;  The New York 

Times ; https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/07/science/china-

moon-change-4.html. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 186

Clark, Stephen; 7 December 2018; “China launches historic 

mission to land on far side of the moon”;  Spaceflight Now ; https:// 

spaceflightnow.com/2018/12/07/china-launches-historic-mission-

to-land-on-far-side-of-the-moon/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 187

Wu Nan; 24 June 2014; “Next stop - Mars: China aims to 

send rover to Red Planet within six years”;  South China Morning 

Post ; https://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1539568/next-

stop-mars-china-aims-send-rover-red-planet-within-six-years/. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 188

China National Space Administration; 24 April 2020; “China’s 

first Mars mission named Tianwen 1”; http://www.cnsa.gov.cn/ 

english/n6465652/n6465653/c6809448/content.html. Accessed 3 

August 2021.  

> 189

Jones, Andrew; 23 July 2020; “Tianwen-1 launches for Mars, 

marking dawn of Chinese interplanetary exploration”;  Space News ;

https://spacenews.com/tianwen-1-launches-for-mars-mark -

ing-dawn-of-chinese-interplanetary-exploration/. Accessed 3 

August 2021.  

> 190

Huang, Kristin and Chik, Holly; 24 July 2020; “China’s Mars 

Probe Blasts off on Mission Fraught with Risks: Tianwen-1 has Em -

barked on Ambitious Project to Chart the Red Planet, but it Faces 

Many Obstacles”;  South China Morning Post ; https://www.scmp. 

com/news/china/science/article/3094343/china-launches-first-mis -

sion-mars. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 191

Amos, Jonathan; 16 December 2020; “China’s Chang’e-5 

Mission Returns Moon Samples”;  BBC ; https://bbc.com/news/sci -

ence-environment-55323176. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 192

Burghardt, Thomas; 23 November 2020; “China launches 

world’s first lunar sample return mission since 1976”;  NASA Space 

flight ; https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2020/11/change5-sample-

return-launch/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 193

Gebhardt, Chris; 1 December 2020; “China lands on Moon after 

causing deep confusion by stopping broadcast”;  NASA Spaceflight ;

https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2020/12/china-preparing-to-land-

sample-return-mission-on-the-moon/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 194

AP News; 17 December 2020; “Chinese capsule returns to 

Earth carrying moon rocks”; https://apnews.com/article/tech -

nology-china-moon-da510a5fd9a97505296ddbdb5749c393. 

Accessed 17 December 2020.  

> 195

Robitski, Dan; 8 October 2020; “China Names 18 More Crew -

members for its Upcoming Space Station”;  Futurism.com ; https:// 

futurism.com/the-byte/china-names-18-crewmembers-upcom -

ing-space-station. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 196

Ji QiMing; 2018; “China Space Station and International Coop -

eration”;  China Manned Space Agency.  

> 197

Sputnik News; 8 August 2018; “China to launch space station 

Tiangong in 2022, welcomes foreign astronauts”; https://sput -

niknews.com/science/201808071067030662-china-to-launch-

space-station-tiangong/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 198

Jones, Andrew; 29 April 2020. “Long March 5B rolled out 

for crewed spacecraft, space station test launch”;  Space News ;

https://spacenews.com/long-march-5b-rolled-out-for-crewed-

spacecraft-space-station-test-launch/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 199

Jones, Andrew; 11 September 2019. “China’s Space Station 

Core Module Passes Review but Faces Delays”;  Space News ;

https://spacenews.com/chinese-space-station-core-module-pass -

es-review-but-faces-delays/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 200

Jones, Andrew; 21 June 2019; “China’s Moon, Mars and 

Space Station Missions May be Facing Delays”;  Space News ;

https://spacenews.com/chinas-moon-mars-and-space-station-

missions-may-be-facing-delays/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 201

China Daily; 25 November 2020; “(U) Future Probes Already 

Mapped Out By Administration”; http://www.chinadaily.com. 

cn/a/202011/25/WS5fbdeec9a31024ad0ba965fa.html. Accessed 

3 August 2021.  

> 202

China Daily; 25 November 2020; “(U) Future Probes Already 

Mapped Out By Administration”; http://www.chinadaily.com. 

cn/a/202011/25/WS5fbdeec9a31024ad0ba965fa.html. Accessed 

3 August 2021.  

> 203

China Daily; 25 November 2020; “(U) Future Probes Already 

Mapped Out By Administration”; http://www.chinadaily.com. 

cn/a/202011/25/WS5fbdeec9a31024ad0ba965fa.html. Accessed 

3 August 2021.  

> 204

Mo Hong’e; 13 March 2018; “China to launch Chang’e 4 this 

year, eyeing lunar base in 2025”;  ECNS Wire ; http://ecns.cn/cns-

wire/2018/03-13/295615.shtml. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 205

Liu Jia; 3 May 2016; “Senior Officer Expects Moon Visit by 

2036”;  Chinese Academy of Sciences ; http://english.cas.cn/ 

newsroom/china_research/201605/t20160503_162635.shtml. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 206

Mo Hong’e; 13 March 2018; “China to launch Chang’e 4 this 

year, eyeing lunar base in 2025”;  ECNS Wire ; http://ecns.cn/cns-

wire/2018/03-13/295615.shtml. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 207

Liu Jia; 3 May 2016; “Senior Officer Expects Moon Visit by 

2036”;  Chinese Academy of Sciences ; http://english.cas.cn/ 

newsroom/china_research/201605/t20160503_162635.shtml. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 208

Xinhua; 25 April 2018; “China Outlines Roadmap for 

Deep Space Exploration”; http://www.xinhuanet.com/en -D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

56 glish/2018-04/25/c_137136188.htm. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 209

Xinhua; 25 April 2018; “China Outlines Roadmap for 

Deep Space Exploration”; http://www.xinhuanet.com/en -

glish/2018-04/25/c_137136188.htm. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 210

Jones, Andrew; 26 April 2021; “China, Russia open moon 

base project to international partners, early details emerge”;  Space 

News ; https://spacenews.com/china-russia-open-moon-base-

project-to-international-partners-early-details-emerge/. Accessed 

20 July 2021.  

> 211

The State Council of the People’s Republic Of China; 

28 January 2022; Full Text: China’s Space Program: A 2021 

Perspective; http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/20220128/ 

eb9fb038ebfe4a3d93887b9f120ef74a/c.html. Accessed 28 

January 2022.  

> 212

Xinhua; 25 April 2018; “China Outlines Roadmap for 

Deep Space Exploration”; http://www.xinhuanet.com/en -

glish/2018-04/25/c_137136188.htm. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 213

Chang, Kenneth; 7 December 2018; “China’s Chang’e-4 

Launches on Mission to the Moon’s Far Side”; The  New York 

Times ; https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/07/science/china-

moon-change-4.html. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 214

Clark, Stephen; 7 December 2018; “China launches historic 

mission to land on far side of the moon”;  Spaceflight Now ; https:// 

spaceflightnow.com/2018/12/07/china-launches-historic-mission-

to-land-on-far-side-of-the-moon/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 215

GlobalSecurity.org; “Chinese Space Launch Vehicles”; https:// 

www.globalsecurity.org/space/world/china/launch-intro.htm. Ac -

cessed 26 July 2021.  

> 216

GlobalSecurity.org; “Chinese Space Launch Vehicles”;  https:// 

www.globalsecurity.org/space/world/china/launch-intro.htm . Ac -

cessed 26 July 2021.  

> 217

Jones, Andrew; 5 July 2018; “China reveals details for super-

heavy-lift Long March 9 and reusable Long March 8 rockets”; 

Space News ; https://spacenews.com/china-reveals-details-for-su -

per-heavy-lift-long-march-9-and-reusable-long-march-8-rockets/. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 218

China Daily; 1 August 2019; “New Port Will Host Sea Based 

Space Launches”; http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/201908/01/ 

WS5d4238f8a310d830564021f8.html. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 219

Wood, P., Stone, A., and Lee, T.A.; 1 March 2021; “China’s 

Ground Segment: Building the Pillar of a Great Space Power”, 

pp. 66, 75, 79-81;  China Aerospace Studies Institute ; https:// 

airuniversity.af.edu/portals/10/casi/documents/research/ 

space/2021-03-01 chinas ground segment.pdf?ver=z4ogy_mrxa -

durwvt-r9j6w%3d%3d. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 220

U.S. Geological Survey; “The Aerospace Information Research 

Institute (AIR)”; https://landsat.usgs.gov/snc. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 221

GlobalSecurity.org; “Chinese Space Launch Vehicles”; https:// 

www.globalsecurity.org/space/world/china/launch-intro.htm. Ac -

cessed 26 July 2021.  

> 222

U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission; Novem -

ber 2015;  2015 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China Economic and 

Security Review Commission , Chapter 2, Section 2; https://www. 

uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Annual_Report/Chapters/Chapter%20 

2,%20Section%202%20-%20China’s%20Space%20and%20Coun -

terspace%20Programs.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 223

Barbosa, Rui C.; 9 January 2017; “Chinese Kuaizhou-1A rocket 

launches several small satellites”;  NASA Spaceflight ; https://www. 

nasaspaceflight.com/2017/01/chinese-kuaizhou-1a-launches-sev -

eral-small-satellites/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 224

Xinhua; 5 June 2020; “China Plans to Develop New Sol -

id Fueled Carrier Rocket”; http://www.xinhuanet.com/en -

glish/2020-06/05/c_139116817.htm. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 225

Herbert, Natalie; February 2021; “Achieving the PLA’s Strategic 

Support Force talent needs through MCF”;  China Aerospace 

Studies Institute ; https://airuniversity.af.edu/portals/10/casi/docu -

ments/research/casi articles/2021-02-01 achieving the plassf talent 

needs through mcf.pdf?ver=r2p5iwlumz_bvmqohmtwuw%3d%3d. 

Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 226

National Institute for Defense Studies, Japan; November 2020; 

NIDS China Security Report 2021: China’s Military Strategy in the 

New Era , p. 59; https://nids.mod.go.jp. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 227

Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization (APSCO) and 

Chinese Academy of Science National Astronomical Observatories 

(NAOC); 13 January 2016;  APOSOS Program Review: Annual 

Report of APOSOS Project, 2015 . 

> 228

APSCO;  Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization Bro -

chure , p. 5 . 

> 229

Xinhua News; 15 November 2018; “China to Enhance Space 

Science, Technology Sharing in Asia-Pacific”.  

> 230

Wood, P., Stone, A., and Lee, T.A.; 1 March 2021; “China’s 

Ground Segment: Building the Pillar of a Great Space Power”, pp. 

75, 79-81;  China Aerospace Studies Institute; https://airuniversity. 

af.edu/portals/10/casi/documents/research/space/2021-03-01 chi -

nas ground segment.pdf?ver=z4ogy_mrxadurwvt-r9j6w%3d%3d. 

Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 231

Griesbach, Jacob and Vallado, David; 4 August 2011; “Simulat -

ing Space Surveillance Networks”, pp. 8-9;  Proceedings from the 

American Astronautical Society (AAS) Conference ; https://www. 

agi.com/getmedia/8e3d8763-08c9-465d-a500-cba8b1300050/ 

Simulating-Space-Surveillance-Networks.pdf?ext=.pdf. Accessed 

26 July 2021.  

> 232

National Military Standard of the People’s Republic of China; 

25 May 2009; GJB 6776-2009:  Space Objects Orbits Cataloging 

Method . 

> 233

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020; 

Annual Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments 

Involving the People’s Republic of China 2020 , pp. 73, 83-84; 

https://media.defense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-

1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. 

Accessed 3 August 2021. 

57 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E 234  Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020;  Annual 

Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving 

the People’s Republic of China 2020 , pp. 82-83; https://media.de -

fense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-

MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 235

Wang, X. and Zheng, K.; 1 May 2015; “Deception Jamming 

Power Against SAR”;  Electronic Information Warfare Technology, 

Vol. 30, No. 3 , pp. 35-38, 53.  

> 236

Hou, W., Ji, Z., Lu, C., and Leng, K.; March 2017; “Research 

on SAR deception jamming on engineering design”;  Aerospace 

Electronic Warfare, No. 3 , pp. 34-37.  

> 237

Lin, J., Feng, T., Chen, B., and Jiang, C.; March 2010; “Study 

on Countermeasure against Satellite Adaptive Null-Steering Tech -

nique”;  Aerospace Electronic Warfare, Vol. 26, No. 3 , pp. 1-4.  

> 238

Wang, H.; “Analysis on Anti-jamming Measures of Mobile User 

Objective System”;  Radio Communications Technology , Vol. 35, 

No. 2; 2009, pp. 46-49.  

> 239

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020;  Annual 

Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving 

the People’s Republic of China 2020 , pp. 82-83, 118; https:// 

media.defense.gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-

CHINA-MILITARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. Accessed 13 

January 2022.  

> 240

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 13 February 2018; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community , p. 13.  

> 241

CrowdStrike Global Intelligence Team; May 2014;  CrowdStrike 

Intelligence Report: PUTTER PANDA , p. 5; https://cdn0.vox-cdn. 

com/assets/4589853/crowdstrike-intelligence-report-putter-panda. 

original.pdf. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 242

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 16 May 2018;  Annual Report 

to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the Peo -

ple’s Republic of China 2018 , pp. 53, 88; https://media.defense. 

gov/2018/Aug/16/2001955282/-1/-1/1/2018-CHINA-MILITARY-

POWER-REPORT.PDF. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 243

Office of Director of National Intelligence; 11 December 2020; 

“Support to U.S. Space Command Messaging”.  

> 244

Li Ying, Zhou Bingyu; 1 April 2002; “Ground High Power Laser 

Anti-Satellite Reconnaissance Technology”;  53rd Institute of Elec -

tronic Research . 

> 245

Gao Guiqing, Xiang Jin, Li Yongxiang, Zhou Yong; February 

2010; “Efficiency research on laser jamming photoelectric detector 

in early-warning satellite of infrared”;  Laser & Infrared, Vol. 40 No. 2 . 

> 246

Wang Shiyong, Fu Youyu, Guo Jin; January 2002; “Evaluation 

of high energy laser effecting on remote distance photoelectron 

sensor system”;  Optical Technique, Vol. 28, No 1 . 

> 247

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 13 February 2018; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community , p. 13.  

> 248

PLA Strategic Strike Force in 21st Century; September 2009; 

“Rise of Great Power – East Asia Rising: Focus on People’s Libera -

tion Army in New Century”; Lbac Consultant.  

> 249

Joint Chiefs of Staff; 26 October 2020;  Joint Publication 3-14: 

Space Operations  (10 April 2018, Incorporating Change 1), p. I-13.  

> 250

18 Space Control Squadron; “Box Score”; Space-Track.org; 

https://www.space-track.org/#boxscore. Accessed 19 March 2022.  

> 251

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 11 May 2017; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community , p. 9.  

> 252

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 13 February 2018; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community , p. 13.  

> 253

Office of the Secretary of Defense; April 2015;  Annual Report 

to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the 

People’s Republic of China 2015 , p. 14; https://dod.defense.gov/ 

Portals/1/Documents/pubs/2015_China_Military_Power_Report. 

pdf. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 254

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 1 September 2020;  Annual 

Report to Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving 

the People’s Republic of China 2020 , p. 65; https://media.defense. 

gov/2020/Sep/01/2002488689/-1/-1/1/2020-DOD-CHINA-MILI -

TARY-POWER-REPORT-FINAL.PDF. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 255

Jones, Andrew; 29 October 2021; “China launches classified 

space debris mitigation technology satellite”;  Space News ; https:// 

spacenews.com/china-launches-classified-space-debris-mitiga -

tion-technology-satellite/. Accessed 1 November 2021.  

> 256

Jiayu Liu, Qiang Huang, Tao Yang, Xuechao Chen, and 

Yanbo Wang; 8 February 2018; “Whole-body compliance for 

multi-arm space robotic capturing of large tumbling target in 

connection compliant phase”;  Advances in Mechanical Engi -

neering, Vol. 10(4) 1–19 . 

> 257

Gong, Zizheng; October 2018; “Mission Planning and Simu -

lation System Study on Active Debris Removal with Space-based 

Laser  System”;  69th International Astronautical Congress 2018.  

> 258

Jones, Andrew; 27 January 2022; “China’s Shijian-21 Towed 

Dead Satellite to a High Graveyard Orbit”;  Space News ; https:// 

spacenews.com/chinas-shijian-21-spacecraft-docked-with-and-

towed-a-dead-satellite/. Accessed 19 March 2022.  

> 259

Office of Director of National Intelligence; 11 December 2020; 

“Support to U.S. Space Command Messaging”.  

> 260

Qin Hui, Zhao Jian-Kang; November 2006; “Conceptual Re -

search on Space to Ground Release Technologies for Spacecrafts”; 

National University of Defense Technology . 

> 261

Yuan Guoxiong, Bai Tao, and Ren Zhang; 1 September 2005; 

“A Hybrid Reentry Guidance Method for Space-Based Ground 

Attack Weapon System”;  Control Technology and Tactical Missile.  

> 262

Kang Xingwu, Chen Gang, Qiao Yang, and Chen Shilu; 

25 March 2008; “A Terminal Guidance Law Applied to 

Space-to-Surface Precision Attack Weapons”;  Journal of 

Solid Rocket Technology .D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

58 263  Hu Zhengdong, Ding Hongbo, Cao Yuan, Guo Caifa, Cai Hong; 

1 August 2009; “Application of Pseudo-Spectral Method in Rapid 

Orbit Optimization for Space-To-Ground Kinetic Weapons”;  Aero -

space Control, Vol. 27, No. 4 . 

> 264

Duan Junhong, Gao Xiaoguang; July 2009; “Simulation Re -

search on Attacking Process of a Space-based Weapon to Fixed 

Ground Target”;  Journal of System Simulation , Vol. 21, No. 14.  

> 265

Zhang Wei, Wu Hua, Wang Zhengjun, and Fang Juan; 1 Janu -

ary 2017; “Research on Attack Mode of Space-to-ground Kinetic 

Weapon”;  Journal of Tactical Missile Technology . 

> 266

179614-21.  

> 267

Russian Ministry of Defense; 4 November 2018; “Aerospace Forc -

es successfully launch Soyuz-2 vehicle from Plesetsk Cosmodrome”.  

> 268

Bodner, Matthew; 3 August 2015; “Russian Military Merges Air 

Force and Space Command”;  Moscow Times Online . 

> 269

Official website of the Russian Federation president; 12 April 

2021; “Meeting On Long Term Priorities Of Space Exploration”.  

> 270

Interfax; 30 August 2019; “Future militarization of space un -

avoidable – Roscosmos head”.  

> 271

Izvestia; 27 June 2020; “Roscomos Named Crew Dragon’s 

Weaknesses”.  

> 272

Bodner, Matthew; 4 October 2017; “60 years after Sputnik, Rus -

sia is lost in space”;  Space News ; https://spacenews.com/60-years-

after-sputnik-russia-is-lost-in-space/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 273

Siddiqi, Asif; 21 March 2017; “Russia’s Space Program Is Strug -

gling Mightily”;  Slate ; https://slate.com/technology/2017/03/russias-

space-program-is-in-trouble.html. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 274

Defense Intelligence Agency; 28 June 2017;  Russia Military 

Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations , pp. 

35-37, 42; https://www.dia.mil/Portals/27/Documents/News/Mili -

tary%20Power%20Publications/Russia%20Military%20Power%20 

Report%202017.pdf?ver=2017-06-28-144235-937. Accessed 3 

August 2021.  

> 275

Interfax-AVN; 5 December 2018; “Peresvet combat laser can 

fight satellites – Russian Defense Ministry”.  

> 276

Milkavkaz.net; 23 December 2015; “Russia: Aerospace Forces 

Order of Battle”.  

> 277

Izvestiya; 4 June 2019; “Expert Spots the Russian VKS’s New 

Missile Interceptor”.  

> 278

Interfax; 4 June 2019 “New missile of Russian missile defense 

system successfully test-launched at Kazakh firing range – Russian 

Defense Ministry”.  

> 279

Ramm, Alexei; 19 April 2019; “Targeting Stars: What is Known 

about the New ASAT Weapon? Project NUDOL”;  Izvestiya . 

> 280

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 13 February 2018; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community , p. 13.  

> 281

Bozhov, Oleg; 9 August 2016; “How They Will Wage War in the 

Future: Tanks Rumbled Across the Sky”;  Moskovskiy Komsomolets . 

> 282

Official website of Russian Federation President; 26 December 

2014; “Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation, approved by 

Russian Federation President V. Putin”.  

> 283

Chekinov, S.G. Col. (Res) and Bogdanov, S.A. Lt. Gen. (Ret); 

1 October 2013; “The Nature and Content of a New-Generation 

War”;  Moscow Military Thought Vol 4. (2013) . 

> 284

Chekinov, S.G. Col. (Res) and Bogdanov, S.A. Lt. Gen. (Ret); 1 

October 2015; “A Forecast for Future Wars: Meditations on What 

They Will Look Like”;  Military Thought Vol.4 (2015 ).  

> 285

Official website of Russian Federation President; 26 December 

2014; “Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation, approved by 

Russian Federation President V. Putin”.  

> 286

Bozhov, Oleg; 9 August 2016; “How They Will Wage War in the 

Future: Tanks Rumbled Across the Sky”;  Moskovskiy Komsomolets . 

> 287

Zhongguo Taikong Wang; 17 October 2017; “China Plans To 

Ban Space Weaponization, Manage Debris, Ensure Research, 

Work With Russia”.  

> 288

Luzin, Pavel; 25 October 2017; “Space Power: What is Russia’s 

Military Strategy in Outer Space?”  Warsaw Intersection . 

> 289

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation; 6 July 

2017; “MFA Website Provides Overview of Policy on Prevention of 

Placement of Weapons in Outer Space”.  

> 290

Milkavkaz.net; 23 December 2015; “Russia: Aerospace Forces 

Order of Battle”.  

> 291

Izvestiya; 4 June 2019; “Expert Spots the Russian VKS’s New 

Missile Interceptor”.  

> 292

Interfax; 4 June 2019; “New missile of Russian missile defense 

system successfully test-launched at Kazakh firing range – Russian 

Defense Ministry”.  

> 293

Ramm, Alexei; 19 April 2019; “Targeting Stars: What is Known 

about the New ASAT Weapon? Project NUDOL”;  Izvestiya . 

> 294

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 11 May 2017; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the 

U.S. Intelligence Community ; p. 9.  

> 295

Vyatkin, Yaroslav; 16 April 2015; “Russian Potential for Com -

bating, Acquiring Prompt Global Strike Capability Examined”; 

Argumenty Nedeli . 

> 296

Ramm, Alexei; 19 April 2019; “Targeting Stars: What is Known 

about the New ASAT Weapon? Project NUDOL”;  Izvestiya . 

> 297

Claus, Malcom; 9 November 2018; “New Russian missile likely 

to be part of anti-satellite system”;  Jane’s Intelligence Review.  

> 298

O’Connor, Tom; 12 March 2018; “Russia’s Military has Laser 

Weapons that Can Take out Enemies in Less than a Second”; 

Newsweek ; http://www.newsweek.com/russia-military-la -

ser-weapons-take-out-enemies-less-second-841091. Accessed 

2 August 2021.  

> 299

Interfax; 19 July 2018; “Space Forces Get Combat Laser System”.  

> 300

Nebehay, Stephanie; 14 August 2018; “U.S. Warns on Russia’s 

59 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E new space weapons”;  Reuters ; https://www.reuters.com/article/us-

russia-usa-space-idUSKBN1KZ0T1. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 301

Interfax-AVN; 5 December 2018; “Peresvet combat laser can 

fight satellites – Russian Defense Ministry”.  

> 302

Poblete, Yleem D.S.; 14 August 2018; “United States Remarks 

at the Conference on Disarmament as Delivered by Assistant 

Secretary of State for Arms Control, Verification, and Compliance”; 

U.S. State Department ; https://eneva.usmission.gov/2018/08/14/ 

remarks-by-assistant-secretary-yleem-d-s-poblete-at-the-confer -

ence-on-disarmament/. Accessed 30 July 2021.  

> 303

Interfax; 26 October 2017; “Russia Tests Military Satellite Capa -

ble of Approaching other Spacecraft – Newspaper”.  

> 304

Hendrickx, Bart; 27 September 2018; “Russia Develops Co-Or -

bital Anti-Satellite Capability”;  Jane’s Intelligence Review . 

> 305

Hennigan, W.J.; 10 February 2020; “Exclusive: Strange 

Russian Spacecraft Following U.S. Spy Satellite”;  Time ; https:// 

time.com/5779315/russian-spacecraft-spy-satellite-space-force/. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 306

Interfax; 6 December 2019; “Russian military experts stage 

experiment in separating satellite from universal space platform”.  

> 307

Krivoruchek, Aleksey; 5 August 2013; “Skorpion System to 

Replace GLONASS”;  Izvestiya.  

> 308

Vozdushno-Kosmicheskaya Oborona; 14 July 2009; “Impact of 

Information and Space Superiority on High-Tech Military Operations”.  

> 309

Official website of Russian Federation President; 26 December 

2014; “Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation, approved by 

Russian Federation President V. Putin”.  

> 310

Chekinov, S.G. Col. (Res) and Bogdanov, S.A. Lt. Gen. (Ret); 

20 June 2013 “Russia: Asymmetrical Actions to Maintain Russia’s 

Military Security”;  Military Thought Volume 1 (2010) . 

> 311

Moscow Izvestiya; 14 August 2013; “Russia Building Ground-

Based Backup For Glonass”.  

> 312

Rossiyskaya Gazeta; 15 October 2017; “Missile Defense 

Missiles and Visas – The US Refused Russian General Staff Officers 

Entry into the Country”.  

> 313

Bogdanov, Konstantin; 15 June 2018; “The Clowns Are Demol -

ishing the Circus: US Missile Defense and the International Security 

System in Crisis”;  Izvestiya . 

> 314

Sputnik News; 30 January 2016; “This is the Achilles’ Heel of 

Washington’s Military Power”; https://sputniknews.com/military/201 

601301033971479-us-space-satellites/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 315

Bozhov, Oleg; 9 August 2016; “How They Will Wage War in the 

Future: Tanks Rumbled Across the Sky”;  Moskovskiy Komsomolets . 

> 316

Tuchkov, Vladimir; 28 October 2018; “Star Wars: Will Russia 

Find an Antidote to the X-37; the Space Arms Race Enters a New 

Orbit”;  Svobodnaya Pressa . 

> 317

Tuchkov, Vladimir; 28 October 2018; “Star Wars: Will Russia 

Find an Antidote to the X-37; the Space Arms Race Enters a New 

Orbit”;  Svobodnaya Pressa . 

> 318

Selivanov, V.V. and Ilyin, Y.D. Col.; 31 December 2017; “Choos -

ing Priorities in Developing Kinetic Energy Weapons for Military 

Conflicts”;  Military Thought, Volume 4 (2017) . 

> 319

Izvestiya; 14 December 2017; “Space Is a Battlefield: 

Krasukha-2 Counter-Space Broadband Jamming System, US 

Space Efforts”.  

> 320

Gazeta; 27 August 2016; “Russian Missile Defense Advances, 

Status of A-235 NUDOL Advanced Missile Defense System”.  

> 321

Selivanov, V.V. and Ilyin, Y.D. Col.; 31 December 2017; “Choos -

ing Priorities in Developing Kinetic Energy Weapons for Military 

Conflicts”;  Military Thought, Volume 4 (2017) . 

> 322

Chekinov, S.G. Col. (Res) and Bogdanov, S.A. Lt. Gen. (Ret); 31 

December 2011 – 30 March 2012 “Strategic Deterrence and Rus -

sia’s National Security Today”;  Military Thought, Volume 1 (2012) . 

> 323

Selivanov, V.V. and Ilyin, Y.D. Col.; 31 December 2017 “Choos -

ing Priorities in Developing Kinetic Energy Weapons for Military 

Conflicts”;  Military Thought, Volume 4 (2017).  

> 324

Bodner, Matthew; 3 August 2015; “Russian Military Merges Air 

Force and Space Command”;  The Moscow Times ; https://www. 

themoscowtimes.com/2015/08/03/russian-military-merges-air-

force-and-space-command-a48710. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 325

Voyennoye Obozreniye; 25 March 2011; “Russia’s Space 

Troops: Armaments and Facilities”; https://en.topwar.ru/3884-kos -

micheskie-vojska-rossii-vooruzhenie-i-obekty.html. Accessed 3 

August 2021.  

> 326

Durnovo, Aleksey; 9 December 2014; “Aerospace Defense 

Troops Space Command’s Primary Mission Is to Ensure Russia’s 

Security in Space”;  Ekho Moskvy . 

> 327

Golts, Alexander; 10 August 2015; “Russia’s Aerospace Forces 

Will Never Take Off”;  The Moscow Times ; https://www.themoscow -

times.com/2015/08/10/russias-aerospace-forces-will-never-take-

off-op-ed-a48868. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 328

Bodner, Matthew; 3 August 2015; “Russian Military Merges Air 

Force and Space Command”;  The Moscow Times ; https://www. 

themoscowtimes.com/2015/08/03/russian-military-merges-air-

force-and-space-command-a48710. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 329

Wincewicz-Bosy, Marta and Gonciarz, Artur; 16 December 

2019; “The Network of the Aerospace Forces of the Russian Fed -

eration”;  Scientific Journal of the Military University of Land Forces, 

Volume 51 Number 4 ; pp. 717-732.  

> 330

Russian Ministry of Defense; 31 July 2019;  Space Forces ;

http://eng.mil.ru/en/structure/forces/cosmic/structure.htm. Ac -

cessed 20 July 2021.  

> 331

RIA Novosti; 2010; “Russian Space Force”; https//sputniknews. 

com/infographics/20111004167368531/. Accessed 5 August 2020.  

> 332

Russian Ministry of Defense; 31 July 2019;  Space Forces ;

http://eng.mil.ru/en/structure/forces/cosmic/structure.htm. Ac -

cessed 20 July 2021.  

> 333

A. Kopik; 28 February 2003; “Russian Space Forces”;  Novosti 

Kosmonavtiki ; web.archive.org/web/20090201000712/http://novo -D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

60 sti-kosmonavtiki.ru/content/numbers/243/30.shtml. Accessed 27 

July 2021.  

> 334

Mozhayskiy Military Space Academy Website; 19 February 2019; 

“Academy named after A.F. Mozhaysky”; http://academy-mozhays -

kogo.ru/istoricheskaja.spravka. Accessed 20 August 2020.  

> 335

Russian Ministry of Defense; 31 July 2019;  Space Forces ;

http://en.mil.ru/forces/cosmic. Accessed 20 July 2021.  

> 336

A. Kopik; 28 February 2003; “Russian Space Forces”;  Novosti 

Kosmonavtiki ; web.archive.org/web/20090201000712/http://novo -

sti-kosmonavtiki.ru/content/numbers/243/30.shtml. Accessed 27 

July 2021.  

> 337

Bodner, Matthew; 23 January 2015; “Putin Approves Roscos -

mos Merger with Conglomerate”;  Space News ; http://www.space -

news.com/putin-approves-roscosmos-merger-with-conglomerate/. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 338

Interfax; 16 November 2015; “State Space Corporation to 

Hire 500 Staff”.  

> 339

State Corporation Roscosmos Website; “State Corporation 

Organizations”; http://www.roscosmos.ru/24028/. Accessed 3 

August 2021.  

> 340

Interfax; 28 November 2019; “Illegal enrichment schemes 

existed in Roscosmos enterprise for decades – Head of State 

Corporation’s Internal Audit Service”.  

> 341

Luzin, Pavel; 22 June 2021; “Roscosmos Suffers From Russia’s 

Confrontation With the US”;  Jamestown.org ; https://jamestown.org/ 

program/roscosmos-suffers-from-russias-confrontation-with-the-us/. 

Accessed 17 December 2021.  

> 342

Interfax; 1 July 2015; “Russian Deputy PM Admits Sanctions 

Affect Defence Industry”.  

> 343

Cheberko, Ivan; 26 September 2016; “Glonass’ Satellites Will 

Be Built from Russian Components by 2020”;  Izvestiya . 

> 344

Svarovskaya, Anastasiya; 3 April 2018; “Russian state-run and 

private space industry: problems and cooperation”;  Space Watch . 

> 345

Cheberko, Ivan; 27 September 2020; “Cosmic Scale of Import 

Substitution: What’s Going on with GLONASS”;  Vedomosti . 

> 346

Interfax; 16 June 2021; “U.S. sanctions on microelectronics 

supplies affect dozens of Russian satellites – Rogozin”.  

> 347

Sputnik News; 30 May 2018; “Russian State Space Giant Ros -

cosmos May Curb Space Program Due to Lack of Funds”; https:// 

sputniknews.com/science/201805301064927907-roscosmos-

funds-change-state-program/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 348

Smirnov, Leonid; 5 January 2021; “United States Finds Russia’s 

Weak Spot”;  Saint Petersburg Rosbalt . 

> 349

Cheberko, Ivan; 27 September 2020; “Cosmic Scale of Import 

Substitution: What’s Going On With GLONASS”;  Vedomosti . 

> 350

Fedorov, Yevgeniy; 19 February 2020; “The ‘Era’ Military 

Technopolis: The Attempt to Make Up for What Has Been Lost in 

Microelectronics”;  Voyennoye Obozreniye . 

> 351

Dokuchayev, Dmitriy; 08 July 2019; “Russian Growth Model 

Doomed to Failure: Economist Yakov Mirkin’s Assessment of Half 

Year Results”;  MK Online.  

> 352

Borisov, Yuriy Ivanovich; 15 October 2018; “Yuriy Borisov: 

The Director Corps Should not Have the Incentive That All of 

Their Debts Will Be Written Off. The Deputy Prime Minister 

Talked About the Solutions to the Problem of the OPK’s Debt 

Load, About the Situation in Aircraft Manufacturing, and About 

the Plans to Bring the Electronic Sector Out of the Protracted 

Crisis”;  Svobodnaya Pressa.  

> 353

Polunin, Andrey; 15 October 2018; “Zhirinovskiy’s Frightener: 

Instead of the S-700 Russia Threatens the West With Fakes. Why 

We Will Not Be Seeing Even a Modernized Version of the S-500 in 

the Foreseeable Future”;  Svobodnaya Pressa.  

> 354

Interfax-AVN; 27 May 2019; “Roscosmos to spend over 3 bln 

rubles within 3 years on operating remote sensing satellites”.  

> 355

Ramm, Alexei and Kretsul, Roman; 8 May 2019; “All Liana 

Space Reconnaissance System Satellites Will Be Placed Into Orbit 

by 1 January”;  Izvestiya.  

> 356

Kotlyar, Mikhail; 6 July 2020; “Unified Space System Com -

munications, Surveillance Satellites To Be Deployed by 2024”; 

RBK Online.  

> 357

Tuchkov, Vladimir; 10 March 2020; “Domestic Space Recon -

naissance is on Top of the Game Again”;  Izvestiya.  

> 358

Izvestiya; 22 September 2017; “Military Expert Anton Lavrov 

Documents Need for Optical Reconnaissance Satellite Array”.  

> 359

TASS; 17 November 2015; “Russia involves 10 reconnaissance 

satellites in Syria operation – General Staff”; http://tass.com/sci -

ence/837273. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 360

Kommersant; 28 July 2016; “Defense Ministry Orders New 

Space-Based Electro-Optical Reconnaissance System”.  

> 361

Interfax; 29 April 2014; “Ban on U.S. high-tech exports won’t 

hurt Russian companies – Siluanov”.  

> 362

Interfax; 29 April 2014; “U.S. Sanctions against Russia will hit 

ESA – Rogozin”.  

> 363

Zak, Anatoly; 22 February 2019; “The Meridian military commu -

nications satellite”;  Russian Space Web ; http://www.russianspace -

web.com/meridian.html. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 364

Gonets Satellite Company; 2018; “‘Gonets Satellite Company’ 

Public Corporation”.  

> 365

Zak, Anatoly; 15 June 2019; “Yamal Satellite Series”;  Russian 

Space Web ; http://www.russianspaceweb.com/yamal.html. Ac -

cessed 3 August 2021.  

> 366

State Corporation Roscomos; 5 June 2020; “Russia – Reshet -

nev Company: Express AMU7 Satellite was Assembled”.  

> 367

Zak, Anatoly; 23 April 2020; “Russian communications satel -

lites”;  Russian Space Web ; http://www.russianspaceweb.com/ 

spacecraft_comsats.html. Accessed 3 August 2021. 

61 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E 368  Defense Intelligence Agency; 28 June 2017;  Russia Military 

Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations ,

pp. 35-37; https://www.dia.mil/Portals/27/Documents/News/Mili -

tary%20Power%20Publications/Russia%20Military%20Power%20 

Report%202017.pdf?ver=2017-06-28-144235-937. Accessed 3 

August 2021.  

> 369

Aronov, Dmitry Dr. and Zheltonogov, Egor; 5 October 2018; 

“GLONASS Status Update”;  Geyser Telecom.  

> 370

ISS Reshetnev; 12 October 2018; “Glonass-K Project”; https:// 

www.iss-reshetnev.ru/projects. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 371

Revnivykh, Ivan; 12 October 2016; “GLONASS Programme 

Update”;  International Committee on Global Navigation Satellite 

Systems (ICG): Annual Meeting 2016 ; http://www.unoosa.org/pdf/ 

icg/2016/icg11/01.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 372

Serov, Sergei; 31 August 2020; “Eliminating Targets: Air Bombs 

are Quickly Becoming Smarter”;  Rossiyskaya Gazeta.  

> 373

Surovtsev, Oleg; 20 November 2020; “Secrets of Mastery of ‘Gods 

of War’: Interview with Colonel Sergey Ivantey, chief of the Eastern 

Military District Missile Troops and Artillery”;  Suvorovskiy Natisk.  

> 374

Strazh Baltiki; 20 November 2020; “Khrizantemas in Battle Order”.  

> 375

NASA; “Yuri Gagarin: First Man in Space”; https://www.nasa. 

gov/mission_pages/shuttle/sts1/gagarin_anniversary.html. Ac -

cessed 3 August 2021.  

> 376

Zak, Anatoly; 30 July 2020; “Robotic Missions to Mars”; 

Russian Space Web ; http://www.russianspaceweb.com/space -

craft_planetary_mars.html. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 377

Pavlushchenko, Katya; 30 April 2021; “Roscosmos discusses 

ISS withdrawal strategy and new space station for mid-2020s”; 

NASA Spaceflight ; https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2021/04/ros -

cosmos-future-for-mid-2020s/. Accessed 2 May 2021.  

> 378

Interfax; 1 July 2020; “Russia working on own communications 

channel with ISS”.  

> 379

Interfax; 2 July 2020; “Russian Segment of ISS to be Provided 

with Independent Channel of Communication with Earth – Roscos -

mos CEO Rogozin”.  

> 380

Izvestiya; 31 May 2020; “Roscosmos Representative Spoke 

About the Plans to Test New Rockets in 2020”.  

> 381

Grush, Loren; 12 October 2020; “Head of Russian 

space program calls for more international cooperation in 

NASA’s Moon plans”;  The Verge ; https://www.theverge. 

com/2020/10/12/21512712/nasa-roscosmos-russia-dmitry-ro -

gozin-artemis-moon-interntational-cooperation. Accessed 17 

December 2020.  

> 382

Interfax; 22 August 2019; “Russia’s lunar program to be re -

vealed by end of this fall – Rogozin”.  

> 383

Interfax; 14 September 2019; “Russia’s lunar program to be 

completed in 2040 – Roscomos”.  

> 384

Atkinson, Ian; 19 August 2020; “Russia’s Nauka ISS module 

arrives at Baikonur for final launch preparations”;  NASA Spaceflight ;

https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2020/08/nauka-arrives-baikonur-

final-preps/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 385

Cox, Thomas; 27 June 2020; “The ‘Science’ Module Will Be 

Launched To The ISS In The Second Quarter Of 2021”;  List23. 

com ; https://list23.com/2397-the-quot-science-quot-module-will-

be-launched-to-the-iss-in-the-second-quarter-of-2021/. Accessed 

19 April 2021.  

> 386

Pultarova, Tereza; 21 July 2021; “Russia launches huge Nauka 

science module to space station after years of delays”;  Space.com ;

https://www.space.com/russia-launches-nauka-space-station-re -

search-module. Accessed 21 July 2021.  

> 387

Whittington, Mark; 6 September 2020; “Russia makes bid to 

become a space power with Luna-25 mission to the moon”;  The 

Hill ; https://www.msn.com/en-us/news/politics/russia-makes-bid-

to-become-a-space-power-with-luna-25-mission-to-the-moon/ 

ar-BB18L8O9. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 388

Roskosmos; 6 November 2021; “Development of an Instrument 

for Geological Exploration of the Moon From Orbit”.  

> 389

Harding, Pete; 26 November 2021; “Russian assembly com -

plete: Roscosmos attaches new docking node to station”;  NASA 

Spaceflight ; https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2021/11/prichal-

launch/#more-82189. Accessed 26 November 2021.  

> 390

Zak, Anatoly; 1 September 2019; “ExoMars-2020 (formerly 

ExoMars-2018)”;  Russian Space Web;  http://russianspaceweb. 

com/exomars2018.html. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 391

Amos, Jonathan; 12 March 2020; “ExoMars Rosalind Frank -

lin: Rover mission delayed until 2022”;  BBC News;  https://www. 

bbc.com/news/science-environment-51844030. Accessed 2 

August 2021.  

> 392

Zak, Anatoly; 23 July 2019; “Luna-Grunt sample return mission 

(Luna-28)”;  Russian Space Web;  http://russianspaceweb.com/ 

luna_grunt.html. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 393

Globalsecurity.org; February 2019; “Russian Lunar Landing 

Programs and Plans”; https://www.globalsecurity.org/space/world/ 

russia/lunar.htm. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 394

Roskosmos; 6 November 2021; “Development of an Instrument 

for Geological Exploration of the Moon From Orbit”.  

> 395

Roskosmos; 6 November 2021; “Development of an Instrument 

for Geological Exploration of the Moon From Orbit”.  

> 396

Roskosmos; 6 November 2021; “Development of an Instrument 

for Geological Exploration of the Moon From Orbit”.  

> 397

Globalsecurity.org; February 2019; “Russian Lunar Landing 

Programs and Plans”; https://www.globalsecurity.org/space/world/ 

russia/lunar.htm. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 398

Interfax; 18 January 2019; “Russian scientists plan to send 

research satellite to Mars, Phobos after 2026”.  

> 399

Jones, Andrew; 26 April 2021; “China, Russia open moon 

base project to international partners, early details  emerge”; 

Space News;  https://spacenews.com/china-rus sia-open-moon-D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

62 base-project-tointernational-partners-early-details-emerge/. 

Accessed 2 May 2021.  

> 400

Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation; 4 October 2017; 

“Titov Main Test and Space Systems Control Centre marks 60th 

anniversary”.  

> 401

WAM; 24 September 2019; “Mohamed bun Zayed learns about 

final preparations for First Emirati Astronaut’s Expedition to ISS”.  

> 402

Grush, Loren; 12 October 2020; “Head of Russian 

space program calls for more international cooperation in 

NASA’s Moon plans”;  The Verge ; https://www.theverge. 

com/2020/10/12/21512712/nasa-roscosmos-russia-dmitry-ro -

gozin-artemis-moon-interntational-cooperation. Accessed 17 

December 2021.  

> 403

Jones, Andrew; 26 April 2021; “China, Russia open moon 

base project to international partners, early details emerge”; 

Space News ; https://spacenews.com/china-russia-open-moon-

base-project-to-international-partners-early-details-emerge/. 

Accessed 2 May 2021.  

> 404

Jones, Andrew; 9 March 2021; “China, Russia enter MOU 

on international lunar research station”;  Space News ; https:// 

spacenews.com/china-russia-enter-mou-on-international-lunar-re -

search-station/. Accessed 20 March 2021.  

> 405

Roberts, Thomas G.; 13 March 2019; “Spaceports of the 

World”, pp. 43, 45;  Center for Strategic and International Studies, 

Aerospace Security Project;  https://www.researchgate.net/profile/ 

Thomas_Roberts24/publication/332211453_Spaceports_of_the_ 

World/links/5ca6590a4585157bd322dc39/Spaceports-of-the-

World.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 406

Bratsky, Jan; 8 May 2021; “Russian complex ‘Okno-M’ de -

tected increased space Activity”;  Zvezda TV;  https://tvzvezda.ru/ 

news/202158931-66F05.html. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 407

Russian Ministry of Defense—Aerospace Defense Forces; 

“Optical-electronic complex ‘Okno’”; http://www.structure.mil. 

ru/structure/forces/cosmic/weapons/more.htm?id=10342893@ 

morfmilitarymodel. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 408

Federation of American Scientists; 30 December 2008;  Source -

book on the Okno (Fpn 52168), Krona (Fpn 20096) and Krona-N 

(Fpn 20776) Space Surveillance Sites ; https://fas.org/spp/military/ 

program/track/okno.pdf. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 409

IMINT & Analysis; June 2008; “Soviet & Russian Space Surveil -

lance Facilities”; http://geimint.blogspot.com/2008/06/soviet-rus -

sian-space-surveillance.html. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 410

Podvig, Pavel; 21 June 2011; “Daryal-U radar in Mishelevka 

demolished”;  Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces;  http://russian -

forces.org/blog/2011/06/daryal-u_radar_in_mishelevka_d.shtml. 

Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 411

Holm, Michael; 2011; “46th independent Radio-Technical Unit”; 

Soviet Armed Forces 1945–1991 ; http://www.ww2.dk/new/pvo/ 

radar/46ortu.htm. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 412

SityShooter; 2011; “ Radar ‘Dniester’ – ‘Dnepr-M’ ”; https:// 

www.webcitation.org/6cc28t10i?url=http://www.panoramio.com/ 

photo/58798723. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 413

Podvig, Pavel; 23 December 2009; “Radar in Lekhtusi accept -

ed for service”;  Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces;  http://russian -

forces.org/blog/2009/12/radar_in_lekhtusi_accepted_for.shtml. 

Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 414

Podvig, Pavel; 23 December 2009; “Radar in Lekhtusi accept -

ed for service”;  Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces;  http://russian -

forces.org/blog/2009/12/radar_in_lekhtusi_accepted_for.shtml. 

Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 415

Podvig, Pavel; 14 February 2009; “Two radars at Armavir”;  Rus -

sian Strategic Nuclear Forces;  http://russianforces.org/blog/2009/02/ 

two_radars_at_armavir.shtml. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 416

RIA Novosti; 15 December 2011; “Russia’s Bal -

tic radar to be fully operational by 2014”; http://en.rian.ru/ 

news/20111215/170284350.html. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 417

Podvig, Pavel; 21 June 2011; “Daryal-U radar in Mishelevka 

demolished”;  Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces;  http://russian -

forces.org/blog/2011/06/daryal-u_radar_in_mishelevka_d.shtml. 

Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 418

Lenta; 12 December 2011; “Upgrading early warning ra -

dars in the Northwest District will begin in 2015”; http://lenta.ru/ 

news/2011/12/12/modernize/. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 419

TASS; 2 June 2013; “Construction of a missile warning 

radar system began in Altay”; http://www.tasstelecom.ru/news/ 

one/20215. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 420

TASS; 2 December 2012’ “Three advanced early warning 

radars enter service in Russia”; http://tass.com/defense/981965. 

Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 421

Interfax; 14 January 2013; “RTI General Director Boyev on New 

Missile Attack Warning System Radars”.  

> 422

RIA Novosti; 9 February 2012; “St. Petersburg Ra -

dar to be Put on Alert in Feb”; http://en.rian.ru/mlitary_ 

news/20120209/171237484.html. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 423

Izvestiya; 11 August 2011; “Russia restores the ‘missile umbrella’”; 

http://vz.ru/news/2011/8/11/513987.html. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 424

Air and Space Defense; 1 July 2012; “Warning abdout Attack on 

our Territory”.  

> 425

Arms Trade; 16 June 2015;“TSAMTO/ Of the news / Vladimir 

Putin appeared at the ceremony of the discovery of international 

military technical forum ‘the army-2015’”; http://www.armstrade. 

org/includes/periodics/news/2015/0616/165029697/detail.shtml. 

Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 426

Russian Military News; 29 September 2016; “Interfax-agency 

of the Servicemen of Novostei” ; http://www.militarynews.ru/story. 

asp?rid=1&nid=361288. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 427

Podvig, Pavel; 22 March 2012; “New Voronezh-M radar in 

Mishelevka entered trials”;  Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces;  http:// 

russianforces.org/blog/2012/03/new_voronezh-m_radar_in_mishel. 

shtml. Accessed 27 July 2021. 

63 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E 428  Russian Ministry of Defense; 27 December 2014; “Archived 

copy”; http://function.mil.ru/news_page/country/more.ht -

m?id=12004148@egnews. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 429

Podvig, Pavel; 2 June 2014; “Voronezh-DM radar in Yeni -

seysk”;  Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces;  http://russianforces.org/ 

blog/2014/06/voronezh-dm_radar_in_yeniseysk.shtml. Accessed 

27 July 2021.  

> 430

Podvig, Pavel; 17 September 2014; “Location of the Barnaul 

early-warning radar”;  Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces;  http://rus -

sianforces.org/blog/2014/09/location_of_the_barnaul_early-.shtml. 

Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 431

Podvig, Pavel; 19 September 2014; “Voronezh-M early-warning 

radar in Orsk located”;  Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces;  http:// 

russianforces.org/blog/2014/09/voronezh-m_early-warning_radar. 

shtml. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 432

Revnivykh, Sergey; 16 September 2008; “GLONASS Status 

and Progress”;  ROSCOMOS;  http://www.navcen.uscg.gov/pdf/ 

cgsicmeetings/48/reports/international subcommittee/%5b24%5d 

glonass cgsic 16.09.2008.pdf. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 433

European Space Agency; 18 September 2014; “GLONASS 

Ground Segment”; https://gssc.esa.int/navipedia//index.php/ 

GLONASS_Ground_Segment. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 434

GlobalSecurity.org; “Russian Space Launch Vehicles”; https:// 

www.globalsecurity.org/space/world/russia/launch.htm. Accessed 

3 August 2021.  

> 435

RIA-Novosti; 2012; “Russian Plans to Explore Solar System”.  

> 436

Energia Corporation; 29 June 2019; “2018 Energia 

Annual Report”.  

> 437

Gebhardt, Chris; 8 April 2020; “Russia conducts first Soyuz 

2.1a human launch; MS-16 crew arrives at Station”;  NASA Space -

flight;  https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2020/04/soyuz-2-1a-hu -

man-launch-ms-16/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 438

Graham, William; 26 December 2019; “Rokot conducts 

final launch – carries three Gonets-M satellites to orbit”;  NASA 

Spaceflight;  https://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2019/12/rokot-final-

launch-three-gonets-m-satellites/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 439

Foust, Jeff; 24 April 2020; “Sea Launch ‘frozen’ after ships moved 

to Russia”;  Space News;  https://spacenews.com/sea-launch-frozen-

after-ships-moved-to-russia/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 440

Bodner, Matthew; 10 July 2018; “Energomash raises alarm 

over U.S. ban on Russian rocket engines”;  Space News;  https:// 

spacenews.com/energomash-raises-alarm-over-u-s-ban-on-rus -

sian-rocket-engines/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 441

Agapov, Vladimir; 27 March 2018; “Second Fragmentation of 

Titan 3C Transtage SSN#2692,” p. 5;  IAA Space Debris Committee 

Meeting ; https://iaaspace.org/wp-content/uploads/iaa/Scientif -

ic%20Activity/debrisminutes031816.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 442

Mokhatkin, A., Molotov, I., Voropaev, V., Borovin, S. Andrievsky, 

N., Dorokhov, N., and Agletdinov, V.; 21 April 2017; “Performance 

Analysis of the Large Space Debris Tracking Telescope in the North 

Caucasus After the Second First Light”;  Proceedings of the 7th 

European Conference on Space Debris, Darmstadt, Germany ;

https://conference.sdo.esoc.esa.int/proceedings/sdc7/paper/299/ 

SDC7-paper299.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 443

Schmaltz, S., Molotov, I, Voropaev, V., Krugly, Y., Kouprian -

ov, V., Elenin, L., Graziani, F., Erofeev, D., Kudak, V, and Wolf, 

A.; 24 January 2019; “ISON’S Sub-Network of Small Aperture 

Telescopes for Observations of NEOS, Space Debris and Mete -

ors”;  First Near Earth Objects and Debris Detection Conference, 

Darmstadt, Germany ; https://conference.sdo.esoc.esa.int/ 

proceedings/neosst/paper/NEOSST1-paper442.pdf. Accessed 

27 July 2021.  

> 444

NASA Spaceflight Forum; 15 November 2020; “Rus -

sian space-related electronic warfare projects”; https:// 

forum.nasaspaceflight.com/index.php?topic=52194.ms -

g2154087#msg2154087. Accessed 5 December 2021.  

> 445

Griesbach, Jacob and Vallado, David; 4 August 2011; “Simu -

lating Space Surveillance Networks,” p. 9; Analytical Graphics, Inc.; 

Proceedings from the American Astronautical Society (AAS) Con -

ference;  https://www.agi.com/getmedia/8e3d8763-08c9-465d-

a500-cba8b1300050/Simulating-Space-Surveillance-Networks. 

pdf?ext=.pdf. Accessed 26 July 2021.  

> 446

Defense Intelligence Agency; 28 June 2017;  Russia Military 

Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations,  p. 

42; https://www.dia.mil/Portals/27/Documents/News/Military%20 

Power%20Publications/Russia%20Military%20Power%20Re -

port%202017.pdf?ver=2017-06-28-144235-937. Accessed 3 

August 2021.  

> 447

Military News; 1 May 2015; “Radioelectronic Warfare Assets 

have been Developed that can Hide Topol Launch Positions 

from Space Surveillance”; http://militarynews.ru/story.as -

p?rid=1&nid=374975. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 448

UAWire; 28 October 2018; “Russia tests satellite jammer sys -

tem”; https://uawire.org/russia-tests-mobile-anti-satellite-system. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 449

Ramm, Alexey; 27 April 2018; “New Systems Will be Able to 

Effectively Solve Problems Without Human Intervention: Interview 

with Col. Yuri Gubskov”;  Izvestiya . 

> 450

Varfolomeeva, Anna; 1 May 2018; “Signaling strength: Russia’s 

real Syria success is electronic warfare against the US”;  Defense 

Post ; https://www.thedefensepost.com/2018/05/01/russia-syr -

ia-electronic-warfare/. Accessed 4 August 2021.  

> 451

Stupples, David; 9 October 2015; “Syria is Becoming a Test 

Bed for High-Tech Weapons of Electronic Warfare”;  Gizmodo ;

https://gizmodo.com/syria-is-becoming-a-test-bed-for-high-tech-

weapons-of-e-1735595580. Accessed 20 July 2021.  

> 452

Defense World; 3 February 2020; “Russian Electronic Warfare 

System Brings Down Hostile Drones in Syria”; https://www.de -

fenseworld.net/news/26265/Russian_Electronic_Warfare_System_ 

Brings_Down_Hostile_Drones_in_Syria. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 453

Defense Intelligence Agency; 28 June 2017;  Russia Military 

Power: Building a Military to Support Great Power Aspirations, D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

64 pp. 37-41; https://www.dia.mil/Portals/27/Documents/News/ 

Military%20Power%20Publications/Russia%20Military%20 

Power%20Report%202017.pdf?ver=2017-06-28-144235-937. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 454

Office of Director of National Intelligence; 11 December 2020; 

“Support to U.S. Space Command Messaging”.  

> 455

O’Connor, Tom; 12 March 2018; “Russia’s Military has Laser 

Weapons that Can Take out Enemies in Less than a Second”; 

Newsweek;  http://www.newsweek.com/russia-military-la -

ser-weapons-take-out-enemies-less-second-841091. Accessed 

3 August 2021.  

> 456

Interfax; 19 July 2018; “Space Forces Get Combat 

Laser System”.  

> 457

Nebehay, Stephanie; 14 August 2018; “U.S. Warns on Russia’s 

new space weapons”;  Reuters;  https://www.reuters.com/article/us-

russia-usa-space-idUSKBN1KZ0T1. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 458

Interfax-AVN; 5 December 2018; “Peresvet combat laser can 

fight satellites – Russian Defense Ministry”.  

> 459

Interfax; 18 December 2019; “Peresvet combat lasers protect -

ing road-mobile strategic missile complexes - General Staff chief”.  

> 460

Interfax; 24 December 2019; “Peresvet combat lasers deployed 

in 5 divisions of Russian Strategic Missile Forces – Shoigu”.  

> 461

Azanov, Roman; 24 December 2019; “‘Armament Is Not a 

Chess Game.’ What Equipment the Russian Army Received in 

2019: TASS on Principal Deliveries of Military Equipment and Arms 

to the Country’s Armed Forces Arms and Branches According to 

the Year’s Results”;  TASS . 

> 462

Zvezda Television; 29 December 2019; “Russia to deploy 

airborne Peresvet laser”.  

> 463

Gundarova, Lyudmila; 27 May 2021; “Star/Junk Wars: How to 

Blind the Enemy and Not Blind Yourself”;  Nezavisimoye Voyennoye 

Obozreniye ; https://nvo.ng.ru. Accessed 20 July 2021.  

> 464

Interfax; 30 December 2019; “Peresvet combat laser to be 

mounted on aircraft”.  

> 465

Office of Director of National Intelligence; 11 December 2020; 

“Support to U.S. Space Command Messaging”.  

> 466

Yezhenedelnik Zvezda; 29 September 2020; “Russian Military 

Industrial Complex: Debt, Red Tape Impact the Execution of the 

State Defense Order”.  

> 467

Milkavkaz.net; 23 December 2015; “Russia: Aerospace Forces 

Order of Battle”.  

> 468

Izvestiya; 28 May 2019; “An Expert Has Spotted the Russian 

VKS’s New Missile Interceptor”.  

> 469

Interfax; 4 June 2019; “New missile of Russian missile defense 

system successfully test-launched at Kazakh firing range – Russian 

Defense Ministry”.  

> 470

Ramm, Alexei; 19 April 2019; “Targeting Stars: What is Known 

about the New ASAT Weapon? Project NUDOL”;  Izvestiya.  

> 471

Dickinson, James H., Gen.; 21 April 2021; United States 

Space Command Presentation to the Subcommittee on Strategic 

Forces, House Armed Services Committee, U.S. House of Rep -

resentatives: Fiscal Year 2022 Priorities and Posture of the United 

States Space Command, p. 6; https://docs.house.gov/meetings/ 

AS/AS29/20210421/112467/HHRG-117-AS29-Wstate-Dickin -

sonJ-20210421.pdf. Accessed 31 January 2022.  

> 472

Vyatkin, Yaroslav; 16 April 2015; “Russian Potential for Com -

bating, Acquiring Prompt Global Strike Capability Examined”; 

Argumenty Nedeli.  

> 473

Gazeta; 28 July 2018; “In Russia new strategic weapons are 

being created”.  

> 474

U.S. Space Command Public Affairs; 15 November 2021; 

“Russian direct-ascent anti-satellite missile test creates significant, 

long-lasting space debris”; https://www.spacecom.mil/news/ 

article-display/article/2842957/russia-direct-ascent-anti-satel -

lite-missile-creates-significant-long-last/#.yzrxfviqul4. Accessed 16 

November 2021.  

> 475

Khodarenok, Mikhail; 19 June 2020; “Russia: Defense 

Industry Source Provides Delivery Schedule for S-500 Pro -

metey, Nudol Systems”;  Gazeta;  https://www.gazeta.ru/ 

army/2020/06/19/13123189.shtml. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 476

Ramm, Alexei; 19 April 2019; “Targeting Stars: What is Known 

about the New ASAT Weapon? Project NUDOL”;  Izvestiya.  

> 477

Claus, Malcom; 9 November 2018; “New Russian missile likely 

to be part of anti-satellite system”;  Jane’s Intelligence Review.  

> 478

Mizokami, Kyle; 1 October 2018; “Russia’s MiG-31 Spotted 

with Possible Anti-Satellite Missile”;  Popular Mechanics;  https:// 

www.popularmechanics.com/military/weapons/a23549729/rus -

sias-mig-31-spotted-with-possible-anti-satellite-missile/. Accessed 

3 August 2021.  

> 479

Ramm, Alexei; 19 April 2019; “Targeting Stars: What is Known 

about the New ASAT Weapon? Project NUDOL”;  Izvestiya.  

> 480

Mizokami, Kyle; 16 August 2018; “Is Russia’s Mysterious New 

Satellite a Space Weapon?”  Popular Mechanics;  https://www.pop -

ularmechanics.com/military/weapons/a22739471/is-russias-myste -

rious-new-satellite-a-space-weapon/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 481

Poblete, Yleem D.S.; 14 August 2018; “United States Remarks 

at the Conference on Disarmament as Delivered by Assistant 

Secretary of State for Arms Control, Verification, and Compliance”; 

U.S. State Department ; https://eneva.usmission.gov/2018/08/14/ 

remarks-by-assistant-secretary-yleem-d-s-poblete-at-the-confer -

ence-on-disarmament/. Accessed 30 July 2021.  

> 482

Interfax; 26 October 2017; “Russia Tests Military Satellite Capa -

ble of Approaching other Spacecraft – Newspaper”.  

> 483

Hendrickx, Bart; 27 September 2018; “Russia Develops Co-Or -

bital Anti-Satellite Capability”;  Jane’s Intelligence Review.  

> 484

TASS; 6 December 2019; “The Ministry of Defense Conduct -

ed an Experiment in Space to Separate a Small Satellite from 

Another Device”. 

65 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E 485  Zak, Anatoly; 26 November 2019; “Soyuz-2-1v launches a 

secret satellite”;  Russian Space Web;  http://russianspaceweb.com/ 

napryazhenie.html. Accessed 5 August 2020.  

> 486

Hennigan, W.J.; 10 February 2020; “Exclusive: Strange Russian 

Spacecraft Shadowing U.S. Spy Satellite, General Says”;  Time; 

https://time.com/5779315/russian-spacecraft-spy-satellite-space-

force/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 487

Interfax; 6 December 2019; “Russian military experts stage 

experiment in separating satellite from universal space platform”.  

> 488

Agence France Presse; 14 August 2018; “Geneva – US 

dismisses ‘hypocritical’ draft space weapons treaty”; https://www. 

shephardmedia.com/news/digital-battlespace/us-dismisses-hypo -

critical-draft-space-weapons-trea/. Accessed 5 August 2020.  

> 489

U.S. Space Command Public Affairs; 23 July 2020; “Russia 

conducts space-based anti-satellite weapons test”; https://www. 

spacecom.mil/MEDIA/NEWS-ARTICLES/Article/2285098/russia-

conducts-space-based-anti-satellite-weapons-test/. Accessed 5 

August 2020.  

> 490

Hennigan, W.J.; 23 July 2020; “America Really Does Have a 

Space Force. We Went Inside to See What It Does”;  Time;  https:// 

time.com/5869987/spaceforce/. Accessed 5 August 2020.  

> 491

Office of Director of National Intelligence; 11 December 2020; 

“Support to U.S. Space Command Messaging”.  

> 492

Interfax; 17 September 2019; “Russia developing new 

inspector-satellite”.  

> 493

NASA Spaceflight; 22 April 2020; “Topic:Qased –Noor 

– Shahrud – April 22, 2020, 03:59 UTC”; https://forum. 

nasaspaceflight.com/index.php?topic=50687.0. Accessed 3 

August 2021.  

> 494

Office of the Supreme Leader; 16 October 2006; “20-Year 

Vision of the Islamic Republic of Iran 1384-1404”.  

> 495

Tehran Times; 9 April 2019; “Space Tech-Domestic Industry 

Should be Connected – Minister”.  

> 496

E’remad ; 16 February 2020; “Ali Rabiei: I negate news on 

Rouhani’s Resignation Until Mordad 1400”.  

> 497

Fars News Agency; 21 October 2018; “Official: Iran Among 9 

Top Satellite Manufacturers”.  

> 498

Tarikhi, Parviz; 2 June 2008; “Iran’s Ambition in Space”; 

Position Magazine.  

> 499

Iran Space Research Center; 18 June 2019; “IRSC About Us”. 

Accessed 5 August 2020.  

> 500

Mehr News Agency; 17 August 2019; “SRI to Deliver Home -

grown Pars-1 Satellite in Dec”.  

> 501

Tehran Times 14 November 2018; “Iran to Involve Private Sec -

tor in Space Projects”.  

> 502

Iran National Space Administration; 29 March 2019;  Iran Space 

Agency;  http://www.insa.isti.ir. Accessed 5 August 2020.  

> 503

Tabnak; 13 January 2019; “Glance at Long Row of Iranian 

Satellites Ready for Launch – Plus Details”.  

> 504

Warrick, Joby; 11 June 2021; “Russia is preparing to supply 

Iran with an advanced satellite system that will boost Tehran’s ability 

to surveil military targets, officials say”;  Washington Post;  https:// 

www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/iran-russia-satel -

lite/2021/06/10/d28978f0-c9ab-11eb-81b1-34796c7393af_story. 

html. Accessed 20 July 2021.  

> 505

Hendrickx, Bart; 21 June 2021; “Scrutinizing the Russian-Irani -

an satellite deal”;  The Space Review;  https://www.thespacereview. 

com/article/4199/1. Accessed 20 July 2021.  

> 506

TASS; 25 August 2015; “Russia to create satellite for remote 

sensing of the Earth for Iran”; https://tass.ru/kosmos/2210115. 

Accessed 20 July 2021.  

> 507

VNIIEM; 25 August 2015; http://www.vniiem.ru/ru/index. 

php?option=com_content&view=article&id=718:2015-08-26-04-

14-18&catid=36:2008-03-09-13-50-48&itemid=50. Accessed 20 

July 2021.  

> 508

Krebs, Gunther; 12 March 2020; “Safir”;  Gunter’s Space 

Page;  https://space.skyrocket.de/doc_lau/safir.htm. Accessed 3 

August 2021.  

> 509

Tabnak; 13 January 2019; “Glance at Long Row of Iranian 

Satellites Ready for Launch – Plus Details”.  

> 510

Mashregh News; 23 March 2020; “What is Iran Pursuing 

in Space?”.  

> 511

Mashregh News; 28 March 2020; “Get Familiar with Iranian 

Satellite Launch Vehicles”.  

> 512

Graham, William; 8 March 2022; “Iran Carries Out Military 

Launch with Qased Rocket and Noor-2 Satellite”;  NASA Space -

flight ; https://www.NASASpaceflight.com/2022/03/iran-military-qa -

sed-noor-2/. Accessed 19 March 2022.  

> 513

Xinhua; 22 April 2020; “Iran ‘successfully’ puts 1st 

military satellite in orbit”; http://www.xinhuanet.com/en -

glish/2020-04/22/c_138999480.htm. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 514

Krebs, Gunter; 12 March 2020; “Simorgh (Safir-2)”;  Gunter’s 

Space Page;  https://space.skyrocket.de/doc_lau/simorgh.htm. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 515

Clark, Stephen; 22 April 2020; “Iran Places Military Satellite in 

Orbit”;  Spaceflight Now;  https://spaceflightnow.com/2020/04/22/ 

iran-places-military-satellite-in-orbit/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 516

Kalbasi, Khorso; 4 February 2020; “Islamic Republic Working 

on Two Small Satellite Launch Vehicles”;  Financial Tribune;  https://fi -

nancialtribune.com/articles/sci-tech/102021/islamic-republic-work -

ing-on-two-satellite-launch-vehicles. Accessed 24 July 2021.  

> 517

Todd, David; 22 April 2020; “Iran launches new Qased rocket 

type with Noor military sat aboard”;  Seradata Ltd (Space Equip -

ment Research & Analysis);  https://www.seradata.com/iran-

launches-new-qased-rocket-type-with-noor-military-sat-aboard/. 

Accessed 24 July 2021.  

> 518

Grush, Loren; 22 April 2020; “Iran claims it has successfully 

launched a military satellite”;  The Verge;  https://www.theverge. 

com/2020/4/22/21230847/iran-military-satellite-rocket-launch-is -D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

66 lamic-revolutionary-guard-corps. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 519

Todd, David; 22 April 2020; “Iran launches new Qased rocket 

type with Noor military sat aboard”;  Seradata Ltd ; https://www. 

seradata.com/iran-launches-new-qased-rocket-type-with-noor-mil -

itary-sat-aboard/. Accessed 24 July 2021.  

> 520

Iran Military Forum; 15 February 2020; “Qaem solid propellant 

space launcher”; https://iran-military.com/index.php?threads/qa -

em-solid-propellant-space-launcher.1537/. Accessed 24 July 2021.  

> 521

Harrison, Todd, et al; 20 March 2020; “Space Threat Assess -

ment 2020”, p. 30;  Center for Strategic and International Studies; 

https://aerospace.csis.org/sta2020. Accessed 22 March 2020.  

> 522

Jane’s Intelligence Review; 14 April 2011; “Republic space – 

Iran’s satellite programme accelerates”.  

> 523

World Politics Review; 29 September 2016; “Don’t Count Iran’s 

Nascent Space Capabilities Out”; www.worldpoliticsreview.com/ 

trend-lines/20067/don-t-count-iran-s-nascent-space-capabilities-

out. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 524

Cohen, Zachary and Liebermann, Oren; 22 June 2021; 

“Pentagon tracked failed Iranian satellite launch and new im -

ages reveal Tehran is set to try again”; CNN; https://www.cnn. 

com/2021/06/22/politics/iran-failed-satellite-launch/index.html. 

Accessed 20 July 2021.  

> 525

Fars News; 13 November 2018; “DM: Iran to Give Crushing 

Response to Enemies Space Threats”.  

> 526

Sadequi, Susan; 16 July 2018; “Iran: Official Says Satellite 

Jamming Signals, Radio Frequency Radiation Levels not Health 

Concern”;  IRNA.  

> 527

Fars News Agency; 26 September 2018; “Iran Unveils New 

Achievements in Drone Industry”.  

> 528

Harrison, Todd, et al; 20 March 2020; “Space Threat Assess -

ment 2020”, pp. 32-33;  Center for Strategic and International Stud -

ies;  https://aerospace.csis.org/sta2020. Accessed 22 March 2020.  

> 529

Iran Electronics Industries; 12 January 2011; “Products”.  

> 530

Fars News Agency; 21 October 2018; “Official: Iran Among 9 

Top Satellite Manufacturers”.  

> 531

Harrison, Todd, et al; 20 March 2020; “Space Threat Assess -

ment 2020”, p. 30;  Center for Strategic and International Studies; 

https://aerospace.csis.org/sta2020. Accessed 22 March 2020.  

> 532

Jane’s Intelligence Review; 14 April 2011; “Republic space – 

Iran’s satellite programme accelerates”.  

> 533

World Politics Review; 29 September 2016; “Don’t Count Iran’s 

Nascent Space Capabilities Out”; www.worldpoliticsreview.com/ 

trend-lines/20067/don-t-count-iran-s-nascent-space-capabilities-

out. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 534

Spacewatch Global; September 2019; “Iran and APSCO to 

create a space situational awareness network”; https://space -

watch.global/2016/09/iran-apsco-create-space-situational-aware -

ness-network/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 535

Financial Tribune; 18 September 2017; “Iran Plans to Join 2 

APSCO Projects”; https://financialtribune.com/articles/econo -

my-sci-tech/72519/iran-plans-to-join-2-apsco-projects. Accessed 

3 August 2021.  

> 536

Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization; “Signing of APS -

CO Convention”; http://www.apsco.int/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 537

Tehran Times; 23 June 2018; “Iranian Space Agency Seeks 

Further Co-op With APSCO”.  

> 538

Iran National Space Administration; 29 March 2019; “Imam 

Ja’far Sadeq Space Monitoring Center.  

> 539

Kooser, Amanda; 2 April 2014. “North Korea Names Space 

Agency ‘NADA,’ Mimics NASA Logo”;  CNET.com;  https://www. 

cnet.com/news/north-korea-names-space-agency-nada-mimics-

nasa-logo/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 540

Krebs, Gunther; Accessed 8 Dec 20; “Unha-3”;  Gunter’s Space 

Page;  space.skyrocket.de/doc_lau_unha.htm. Accessed 3 August 

2021.  

> 541

Agence France Presse (Yahoo News Reprint); 2 February 

2016; “N. Korea confirms Imminent Satellite Launch”; https://news. 

yahoo.com/n-korea-issues-shipping-warning-satellite-launch-

imo-152605329.html. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 542

Zwirko, Colin; 11 October 2021; “North Korea boasts of 

‘full-scale’ work towards space capabilities“;  North Korea News ;

https://www.nknews.org/2021/10/north-korea-boasts-of-full-

scale-work-towards-new-space-capabilities/. Accessed 19 

October 2021.  

> 543

Dominguez, Gabriel; “Increased Activity spotted at North Ko -

rea’s Sohae rocket launch site: 38 North”;  Jane’s Defense Weekly ;

10 October 2016.  

> 544

Bermudez, Joseph and Cha, Victor; 17 December 2019; 

“December 2019 Update: Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground”; 

Beyond Parallel;  https://beyondparallel.csis.org/decem -

ber-2019-update-tonghae-satellite-launching-ground/. Accessed 

3 August 2021.  

> 545

Waterman, Shaun; 23 August 2012; “North Korean Jamming 

of GPS shows system’s weakness”;  The Washington Times; 

https://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2012/aug/23/north-

korean-jamming-gps-shows-systems-weakness/. Accessed 5 

August 2020.  

> 546

Williams, Martyn; 17 November 2012; “Report: DPRK Jams 

South Korean Satellite Comms”;  North Korea Tech;  https://www. 

northkoreatech.org/2012/11/17/report-dprk-jams-south-kore -

an-satellite-comms/. Accessed 6 August 2020.  

> 547

Shim, Elizabeth; 31 March 2016; “North Korea Jamming 

GPS Signals in South; Can Affect Planes, Cellphones”;  United 

Press International;  http://www.upi.com/Top_News/World-

News/2016/03/31/North-Korea-jamming-GPS-signals-in-South-

can-affect-planes-cellphones/2551459443059/. Accessed 5 

August 2020.  

> 548

Paganini, Pierluigi; 19 November 2020; “Nation-state Ac -

67 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E tors From Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea Target Canada”; 

Security Affairs Blog ; https://securityaffairs.co/wordpress/111182/ 

cyber-warfare-2/canada-nation-state-actors.html. Accessed 17 

December 2021.  

> 549

HHS Cybersecurity Program; 25 March 2021; North Korean 

Cyber Activity;  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.  

> 550

Ciampanu, Catalin; 30 July 2020; “US defense and aerospace 

sectors targeted in new wave of North Korean attacks”;  Zero Day 

Net;  https://www.zdnet.com/article/us-defense-and-aerospace-

sectors-targeted-in-new-wave-of-north-korean-attacks/. Accessed 

27 July 2021.  

> 551

Min Chao Choy and Weisensee, Nils; 19 June 2020; North Ko -

rean hackers targeted aerospace, defense companies via Linkedin: 

experts;  NK News;  https://www.nknews.org/2020/06/north-ko -

rean-hackers-targeted-aerospace-defense-companies-via-linke -

din-experts/. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 552

Alyac EST Security; 17 November 2020; “APT Hackers Use 

Biden Era North Korea Denuclearization Documents for Attack”.  

> 553

Paganini, Pierluigi; 19 November 2020; “Nation-state actors 

from Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea target Canada”;  Secu -

rity Affairs;  https://securityaffairs.co/wordpress/author/paganinip. 

Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 554

Canada Centre for Cyber Security; November 2020; “Canada 

Centre for Cyber Security warns of risks related to state-sponsored 

programs from China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea”; https://www. 

canada.ca/en/communications-security/news/2020/11/canadi -

an-centre-for-cyber-security-releases-the-canadian-national-cy -

ber-threat-assessment-2020.html. Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 555

U.S. Justice Department; 17 February 2021; “Three North 

Korean Military Hackers Indicted in Wide-Ranging Scheme to 

Commit Cyberattacks and Financial Crimes Across the Globe”; 

https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/three-north-korean-military-hack -

ers-indicted-wide-ranging-scheme-commit-cyberattacks-and. 

Accessed 27 July 2021.  

> 556

Center for Strategic and International Studies; 8 July 2021; 

“Significant Cyber Incidents”; https://www.csis.org/programs/stra -

tegic-technologies-program/significant-cyber-incidents. Accessed 

27 July 2021.  

> 557

Harrison, Todd, et al; 20 March 2020; “Space Threat Assess -

ment 2020”, p. 38;  Center for Strategic and International Studies; 

https://aerospace.csis.org/sta2020. Accessed 22 March 2020.  

> 558

Office of the Secretary of Defense; 5 January 2016;  Report to 

Congress: Military and Security Developments Involving the Demo -

cratic People’s Republic of Korea 2015 , pp. 4, 10, 13, 19; https:// 

www.hsdl.org/?view&did=790165. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 559

Harrison, Todd, et al; 20 March 2020; “Space Threat Assess -

ment 2020”, pp. 35-36;  Center for Strategic and International Stud -

ies;  https://aerospace.csis.org/sta2020. Accessed 22 March 2020.  

> 560

Lotto Persio, Sophia; 30 October 2017; “Star Wars: North Ko -

rea Unveils Five-Year-Plan to Conquer Space”;  Newsweek;  https:// 

www.newsweek.com/star-wars-north-koreas-unveils-5-year-plan-

conquer-space-695896. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 561

Defense Intelligence Ballistic Missile Analysis Committee/Na -

tional Air and Space Intelligence Center; 11 January 2021;  Ballistic 

and Cruise Missile Threat 2020, pp. 2, 27 ; https://www.nasic. 

af.mil/Portals/19/images/Fact%20Sheet%20Images/2017%20 

Ballistic%20and%20Cruise%20Missile%20Threat_Final_small. 

pdf?ver=2017-07-21-083234-343. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 562

Jones, Andrew; 22 December 2020; “China launches first Long 

March 8 from Wenchang spaceport”;  Space News;  https://spa -

cenews.com/china-launches-first-long-march-8-from-wenchang-

spaceport/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 563

Global Times (China); 29 May 2020; “China’s liquid rocket 

engine completes key restart function test”.  

> 564

Jones, Andrew; 4 August 2021; “Mystery Surrounds Chinese 

Private Rocket Launch Attempt”;  Space News ; https://space -

news.com/mystery-surrounds-chinese-private-launch-attempt/. 

Accessed 19 March 2022.  

> 565

Quan Xiaoshu, Yu Fei, and Li Guoli; 08 May 2020; “China 

Focus: Return Capsule of China’s Experimental Manned Spaceship 

Comes Back Successfully”;  Xinhua.  

> 566

China Daily; 15 July 2019; “China Daily: New Recover -

able Satellite to Lift Off in 2020”; http://www.chinadaily.com. 

cn/a/201907/16/WS5d2cb0a7a3105895c2e7d8e3.html. Ac -

cessed 3 August 2021.  

> 567

Levochkin, Petr; 12 April 2019; “Russia: Energomash Chief 

Designer: We are Ready to Supply Reusable Engines for Russian 

Rockets”;  Interfax-AVN . 

> 568

TASS; 26 August 2019; “Russia Orders Engine for Krylo Reus -

able Rocket Programme”.  

> 569

Defense Intelligence Agency; 26 April 2021;  Statement of the 

Record Worldwide Threat Assessment, p. 7.  

> 570

Xinhua; 6 September 2020; “China’s Reusable Experimental 

Spacecraft Back to Landing Site”.  

> 571

Xinhua; 4 September 2020; “China Launches Reusable Experi -

mental Spacecraft”.  

> 572

Jane’s Strategic Weapon Systems; 9 March 2011; “Satellite 

Launch Vehicle Programmes: China: Air-launched Satellite Vehicle”.  

> 573

China Hangtian; 21 October 2019; “China: CASC Completes Wind 

Tunnel Free Separation Test for Two-Stage-to-Orbit Space Plane”.  

> 574

Interfax-AVN; 22 January 2009; “RSC Energia Considers Creat -

ing Tourist Space Plane”.  

> 575

Moscow Vesti; 23 April 2010; “Russia’s Space Plane Said Much 

Cheaper Than US Shuttle”.  

> 576

RIA-Novosti; 7 June 2005; “Russia: Space Official Says Buran 

Space Shuttle Could be Revived”.  

> 577

Moscow Agentstvo Voyennykh Novostey; 27 December 2007; 

“Russia not to Revive Buran Spacecraft Programme”.  

> 578

Karpukhin, Sergei; 29 May 2019; “Russian Space Tourism D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

68 Firm to Send Dummy for First Flight in Returnable Capsule”;  TASS; 

https://tass.com/science/1060575. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 579

Space Facts; 6 January 2021;  Astronauts and cosmonauts 

(sorted by first Mission);  http://wwwspacefacts.de/english/e_first. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 580

Japan Economic Newswire; 1 September 2018; “Japanese 

Startup aims for Commercial Space Travel in 2023”.  

> 581

NASA; 27 March 2018; “What is a Lagrange Point?”;  NASA 

Solar System Exploration ; https://solarsystem.nasa.gov/resourc -

es/754/what –is-a-lagrange-point/. Accessed 22 July 2021.  

> 582

Kakaes, Konstantin; 30 January 2017; “International Collabo -

rations in Space Always Reflect Politics on Earth: A Brief History of 

the Countries that Send People to Space, and Why”;  Slate;  https:// 

www.slate.com/technology/2017/03/a_brief_history_of_the_coun -

tries_that_send_people_to_space_and_why.html. Accessed 3 

August 2021.  

> 583

European Space Agency;  Mission Navigator;  https://www.esa. 

int/ESA/Our_Missions. Accessed 22 March 2021.  

> 584

Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA);  JAXA: 

Missions;  https://global.jaxa.jp/projects/index.html. Accessed 22 

March 2021.  

> 585

Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO);  List of Scientific and 

Exploration Spacecraft;  http://www.isro.gov.in/spacecraft\list-of-sci -

entific-and-exploration-spacecraft. Accessed 22 March 2021.  

> 586

Trevithick, Joseph; 5 June 2020; “Air Force Is Looking Beyond 

Traditional Orbits To Get An Upper Hand In Space”;  The War 

Zone;  https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/33888/air-force-is-

looking-beyond-traditional-orbits-to-get-an-upper-hand-in-space. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 587

Secure World Foundation; January 2017;  The United 

States, China, and Space Security: Issues for the Trump Ad -

ministration;  https://swfound.org/media/205709/jw_uschi -

naspacesec_17012017.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 588

Secure World Foundation; January 2017;  The United 

States, China, and Space Security: Issues for the Trump Ad -

ministration;  https://swfound.org/media/205709/jw_uschi -

naspacesec_17012017.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 589

18 Space Control Squadron; Space-Track.org; “Catalog”; 

https://www.space-track.org/#catalog. Accessed 19 March 2022.  

> 590

NASA; 2001;  U.S. Government Orbital Debris Mitigation Stan -

dard Practices;  https://orbitaldebris.jsc.nasa.gov/library/usg_od_ 

standard_practices.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 591

Federal Communications Commission; November 2019;  U.S. 

Government Orbital Debris Mitigation Standard Practices;  https:// 

orbitaldebris.jsc.nasa.gov/library/usg_orbital_debris_mitigation_stan -

dard_practices_november_2019.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 592

Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee (IADC); 

IADC-02-01; September 2007;  IADC Space Debris Mitigation 

Guidelines;  https://orbitaldebris.jsc.nasa.gov/library/iadc_mitiga -

tion_guidelines_rev_1_sep07.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 593

National Aeronautics and Space Administration; IG-21-011; 

27 January 2021;  NASA’s Efforts to Mitigate the Risks Posed by 

Orbital Debris.  https://oig.nasa.gov/docs/ig-21-011.pdf. Accessed 

3 August 2021.  

> 594

European Space Operations Centre (ESOC); GEN-DB-LOG-

00288-OPS-SD, Version 4.0; 27 May 2021;  ESA’s Annual Space 

Environment Report , pp. 68-71; https://www.sdo.esoc.esa.int/en -

vironment_report/Space_Environment_Report_latest.pdf. Accessed 

3 August 2021.  

> 595

18 Space Control Squadron; Space-Track.org; “Box Score”; 

https://www.space-track.org/. Accessed 19 March 2022.  

> 596

Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS); 1 January 2022; 

“Satellite Database”; https://www.ucsusa.org/nuclear-weapons/ 

space-weapons/satellite-database. Accessed 19 March 2022.  

> 597

McKnight, D., Macdonald, J., Arora, R., Pelton, J., Jenniges, 

J., and Martinez, P.; S2468-8967(20)30006-9; May 2019; “The 

Global Risk Continuum (GRC)”;  The Journal of Space Safety En -

gineering, JSSE 104,  International Association for the Advance -

ment of Space Safety (IAASS) Space Safety Conference, Los 

Angeles, CA, May 2019.  

> 598

McKnight, D., Macdonald, J., Arora, R., Pelton, J., Jenniges, 

J., and Martinez, P.; S2468-8967(20)30006-9; May 2019; “The 

Global Risk Continuum (GRC)”;  The Journal of Space Safety Engi -

neering, JSSE 104,  International Association for the Advancement 

of Space Safety (IAASS) Space Safety Conference, Los Angeles, 

CA, May 2019.  

> 599

18 Space Control Squadron; Space-Track.org; “Box Score”; 

https://www.space-track.org/. Accessed 19 March 2022.  

> 600

McKnight, D., Matney, M., Walbert, K., Behrend, S. Casey, P., 

and Speaks, S.; 25 September 2017; “Preliminary Analysis of Two 

Years of the Massive Collision Monitoring Activity”;  International 

Astronautical Congress.  

> 601

Rossia, A., Petita, A., and McKnight, D.; 8 June 2020; “Short-

term space safety analysis of LEO constellations and clusters”; 

Acta Astronautica 175.  

> 602

Dr. Liou, J.-C.; 9 February 2018; “U.S. Space Debris Environ -

ment, Operations, and Research Updates”;  UN Office on Outer 

Space Activities;  http://www.unoosa.org/documents/pdf/copuos/ 

stsc/2018/tech-14E.pdf. Accessed 5 August 2020.  

> 603

McFall-Johnsen, Morgan; 4 December 2021; “Russia push -

es the International Space Station away from '90s US rocket 

debris — the 2nd space-junk scare this week”;  Business Insid -

er ; https://www.businessinsider.com/international-space-sta -

tion-swerves-to-avoid-rocket-debris-2021-12. Accessed 19 March 

2022.  

> 604

McKnight, D. and Kawashima, R.; IAA SG4.23; April 2019; “A 

Handbook for Post-Mission Disposal of Satellites Less Than 100 

kg”;  International Academy of Astronautics (IAA) . 

> 605

McKnight, D. and Kawashima, R.; IAA SG4.23; April 2019; “A 

Handbook for Post-Mission Disposal of Satellites Less Than 100 

kg”;  International Academy of Astronautics (IAA) .

69 C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E 606  Federal Communications Commission; November 2019; 

U.S. Government Orbital Debris Mitigation Standard Practices; 

https://orbitaldebris.jsc.nasa.gov/library/usg_orbital_debris_mit -

igation_standard_practices_november_2019.pdf. Accessed 3 

August 2021.  

> 607

European Space Operations Centre (ESOC); GEN-DB-LOG-

00288-OPS-SD, Version 4.0; 27 May 2021;  ESA’s Annual Space 

Environment Report,  pp. 68-71; https://www.sdo.esoc.esa.int/en -

vironment_report/Space_Environment_Report_latest.pdf. Accessed 

3 August 2021.  

> 608

Manis, A., Matney, M., Anz-Meador, P., Gates, D., Kennedy, T., 

Seago, J., Vavrin, A. and Y.-L. Xu; April 2020; “The New NASA Or -

bital Debris Engineering Model 3.1”;  NASA Orbital Debris Quarterly 

News, Vol. 24, No. 2,  p. 2.  

> 609

Aerospace Corporation; September 2020;  Commercial Multi-

INT Cheat Sheet.  

> 610

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 13 February 2018; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community,  p. 13.  

> 611

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 13 February 2018; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community,  p. 13.  

> 612

Beyer, Bill and Nelson, Nicholas; 28 June 2018; “Space Con -

gestion Threatens to ‘Darken Skies’”;  National Defense Magazine ;

http://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles/2018/6/28/ 

viewpoint-space-congestion-threatens-to-darken-skies. Accessed 

4 August 2020.  

> 613

Office of the Director of National Intelligence; 13 February 2018; 

Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 

Intelligence Community,  p. 13.  

> 614

Secure World Foundation; January 2017;  The United 

States, China, and Space Security: Issues for the Trump Ad -

ministration;  https://swfound.org/media/205709/jw_uschi -

naspacesec_17012017.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 615

Secure World Foundation; January 2017;  The United 

States, China, and Space Security: Issues for the Trump Ad -

ministration;  https://swfound.org/media/205709/jw_uschi -

naspacesec_17012017.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 616

Matytsin, Valery; 27 January 2017; “Russian specialists pro -

posed creation of satellites to service spacecraft”;  TASS;  https:// 

tass.ru/kosmos/3976581. Accessed 20 July 2021.  

> 617

Sellers, Jerry Jon;  Understanding Space: An Introduction to 

Astronautics, 4th Edition,  pp. 614-617, 623-624; CEI: United 

States; 2015.  

> 618

Sellers, Jerry Jon;  Understanding Space: An Introduction to 

Astronautics, 4th Edition,  pp. 61-62; CEI: United States; 2015.  

> 619

Joint Chiefs of Staff; 26 October 2020;  Joint Publication 3-14: 

Space Operations  (10 April 2018, Incorporating Change 1), p. II-4.  

> 620

Sellers, Jerry Jon;  Understanding Space: An Introduction to 

Astronautics, 4th Edition,  pp. 6, 59-60; CEI: United States; 2015.  

> 621

Xinhua; 20 July 2018; “China developing in-orbit satellite trans -

port vehicle”.  

> 622

Jones, Andrew; 21 April 2021; “China is developing plans for a 

13,000-satellite megaconstellation”;  Space News ; https://space -

news.com/china-is-developing-plans-for-a-13000-satellite-commu -

ni- cations-megaconstellation/. Accessed 2 August 2021.  

> 623

Joint Chiefs of Staff; 26 October 2020; Joint Publication 3-14: 

Space Operations (10 April 2018, Incorporating Change 1), p. x.  

> 624

GPS.GOV; 5 November 2019; “Timing”; http://www.gps.gov/ 

applications/timing/. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 625

Hoehn, John R. and Ryder, Samuel D.; R45996; 26 June 2020; 

“Precision Guided Munitions: Background and Issues for Con -

gress”;  Congressional Research Service.  

> 626

Gray, Brandon J., Major, USAF; August 2017; “The Post 

GPS-Only Era: Positioning, Navigation, and Timing (PNT) in 21st 

Century Warfare”;  Air Command and Staff College ; https://apps. 

dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/ad1054619.pdf. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 627

Quasi-Zenith Satellite System; 2021; “Overview of the Qua -

si-Zenith Satellite System”; https://qzss.go.jp/en/overview/services/ 

sv01_what.html. Accessed 20 July 2021.  

> 628

Indian Space Research Organization; 2021; “Indian Regional 

Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS): NavIC”; https://www.isro.gov. 

in/irnss-programme. Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 629

European Global Navigation Satellite Systems Agency; 17 

February 2021; “Galileo is the European global satellite-based 

navigation system”; https://www.gsa.europa.eu/european-gnss/ 

galileo/galileo-european-global-satellite-based-navigation-system. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 630

Xinhua; 26 May 2021; “China’s Beidou-related industry esti -

mated to top 1t yuan by 2025”; http://www.xinhuanet.com/en -

glish/2021-05/26/c_139971521.htm. Accessed 20 July 2021.  

> 631

Interfax; 4 May 2021; “Twenty-two GLONASS satellites cur -

rently in operation”.  

> 632

Foust, Jeff; 8 April 2021; “OneWeb continues to study offering 

navigation services”;  Space News ; https://spacenews.com/one -

web-continues-to-study-offering-navigation-services/. Accessed 17 

December 2021.  

> 633

Joint Chiefs of Staff; 26 October 2020; Joint Publication 3-14: 

Space Operations (10 April 2018, Incorporating Change 1), p. II-8.  

> 634

Erwin, Sandra; 14 November 2019; “Air Force: SSA is no more; 

it’s ‘Space Domain Awareness’”;  Space News ; https://spacenews. 

com/air-force-ssa-is-no-more-its-space-domain-awareness/. 

Accessed 3 August 2021.  

> 635

Joint Chiefs of Staff; 26 October 2020; Joint Publication 3-14: 

Space Operations (10 April 2018, Incorporating Change 1), p. I-3, 

II-16.  

> 636

Joint Chiefs of Staff; November 2021;  DoD Dictionary of Military 

and Associated Terms , p. 71.  

> 637

Joint Chiefs of Staff: November 2021;  DoD Dictionary of Military 

and Associated Terms , p. 64. D E F E N S E I N T E L L I G E N C E A G E N C Y

70 INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK C H A L L E N G E S T O S E C U R I T Y I N S PAC E INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
