Title: Height profile of some air quality markers in the urban atmosphere surrounding a 100 m tower building

URL Source: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1352231098000740

Markdown Content:
Abstract
--------

Air quality inside buildings, whether naturally or mechanically ventilated, is strongly dependent on that of ambient external air in the surrounding atmosphere. This paper describes results obtained in the assessment of urban air quality influence in the neighbouring of a tall, multistorey building with mechanical ventilation on its indoor air quality. Within the study, which lasted for more than 30 d of continuous monitoring, the concentrations of carbon monoxide (CO), of total and grossly speciated classes of airborne organic vapours and of PM 10 airborne particulate were measured both outdoors, at ground and at various heights between street level and the top of the tower building (approximately 100

m) and inside the building. The daily variation of airborne pollutants in the urban atmosphere in the neighbouring of the tower building was traced as the contribution of both time-dependent pollutant production from urban outdoor sources (mainly vehicular traffic) and of the variation of meteoclimatic conditions influencing pollutant diffusion from street level upwards. In particular, a steady concentration decrease with increasing height of the concentration of automotive-related pollutants, such as of PM 10 airborne particulate, of a mixture of volatile aromatic compounds (TAAC) and of CO could be measured in the immediate neghbouring of the tower building (values of 40

_μ_ g

m-3 of PM 10 airborne particulate decreasing to 32

_μ_ g

m-3 at 80

m; of 5

mg of benzene equivalents m-3 at ground level with a 30% decrease at 100

m height; of 3

mg

m-3 of CO decreasing to 2.2

mg

m-3 at 100

m). The acquired information was employed to advice the building management on the improvement of indoor air quality attainable by moving the air feed grid of the HVAC system to a higher level from ground. An example is reported, which shows the improvement of the indoor air quality in a three-storey peripheral building of the same complex subject to scheduled refurbishing, obtained by moving the HVAC air feed point, originally at +4

m in an internal courtyard, to the building roof, at about +11

m.

Introduction
------------

Air quality study in indoor spaces (IAQ) is a fundamental and applied research topic of ever-growing interest, since the population of developed countries spends an increasing proportion of lifetime within confined spaces (homes, work, commercial and leisure places, vehicles) and is thus exposed to a largely artificial environment, the air supply to which may be mediated by mechanical devices, such as the ventilation system (HVAC) of buildings (Awbi, 1991). The final quality of air inside buildings is determined by the effect of three main occurring phenomena: (i) pollution of the outdoor air in the neighbourhood of the building with respect to both continuous and intermittent sources, such as domestic heating or vehicular traffic (e.g.: Hayward et al., 1993; Weschler et al., 1993; Teijonsalo and Seppanen, 1994; Ekberg, 1994; Ekberg, 1995; Ando et al., 1996); (ii) pollution generated by indoor activities (presence of occupants; Olcerts, 1994; release of chemicals from building materials, use of chemical auxiliaries in clerical activities; Wolkoff, 1993) and finally (iii) by the smoothing effect which the mechanical ventilation system exerts on both (e.g. Shair and Heitner, 1974).

The evaluation of the quality of outdoor air in the proximity of a building is a key step in the assessment of global IAQ in mechanically ventilated buildings, since the outdoor concentration of airborne pollutants at the air supply point to the HVAC system is the main parameter determining the quality of the air supplied to the occupants inside the building (Sparks, 1992). To this regard, the choice of an adequate position for air supply, optimized with reference to its distance from urban traffic streams and to its height above street level, is the most efficient strategy to achieve as low as possible influence of airborne chemical contamination from traffic inside the building.

While the vertical distribution of some airborne pollutants over the height scale of the general troposphere has been previously measured (e.g. SO _x_: Berkowitz, 1991; HCHO: Kelly and Fortune, 1994; CO: Klemm et al., 1996), on the contrary the low-height scale pertinent to the urban heat island has been, to our knowledge, much less investigated. For example, measurements of the night concentrations of nitrogen oxides (NO _x_) in the ground-to-400

m height layer of a Japanese town (Sahashi et al., 1996) were obtained by employing point samplers hanging from a tethered balloon. Pfeffer et al., (1995)compared measurements of traffic-related gaseous pollutants (CO and NO _x_) simultaneously obtained at 1.5 and 3.5

m over ground in street canyons of German towns. Literature information on the vertical stratification of airborne pollutants in the lower urban atmosphere is in fact limited and results are necessarily of local validity. As a consequence, it is generally difficult to define rules for height positioning HVAC air feed grids of sealed, mechanically ventilated buildings.

The case study reported in this paper was triggered by the necessity to examine possible strategies able to reduce the influence of transient increases of external pollutants on indoor air quality of a urban office building in Milan, e.g. by considering the opportunity to move the HVAC air supply from ground level to the top of the investigated building, or to optimize the running parameters of its HVAC system. The behaviour of airborne automotive-related pollutants (carbon monoxide, some chemical classes of organic pollutants, PM 10 airborne particulate) was thus studied over the length of several typical Winter days, on the height scale between ground and about 100

m level, to understand the vertical transport of ground produced air pollutants in the immediate proximity of urban buildings and to evaluate their influence on the chemical quality of air supply to mechanically ventilated buildings.

Section snippets
----------------

Study design
------------

Data were acquired within an extensive IAQ monitoring campaign performed on “Grattacielo Pirelli”, a large office building block, which is located in an open square with a high density of urban traffic, within the city center of Milan. The main building of the block is a tall (30-storey, 130

m) tower with fully mechanical ventilation, surrounded by a partially independent three-storey building. The HVAC air feed grid is located near ground, on a highly trafficked square. Some preliminary study

(a)Time profile of carbon monoxide (CO) and organic vapour pollutants
---------------------------------------------------------------------

The time profile of CO concentration, was continuously measured in the proximity of Grattacielo Pirelli, for 36 days between 12 January and 21 February, 1995 and with an interruption between February 9 and 14 (Fig. 1). CO concentration ranged between 0.8 and 14

mg

m-3; (log-normal mean concentration 2.3±2.1

mg

m-3; _n_=3242) and showed a variable time profile, characterized by inter- and intra-daily fluctuations in the absolute minima and maxima, related to daily and weekly variations in the strength

(a)Vertical concentration gradient of automotive pollutants in urban atmosphere
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Measurements taken along a 100

m urban tower building highlighted a decrease with increasing height of the concentration of three markers (PM 10 particulate matter, a mixture of aromatic hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide) of the main different classes of airborne pollutants present in the urban atmosphere as a consequence of vehicular traffic. The phenomenon has been more easily observed for airborne particulate matter and organic vapours, than for a permanent gas pollutant such as CO, for which a

Conclusions
-----------

From a general point of view, our work contributes to emphasize the role covered—within the frame of studies aimed at improving the overall quality of buildings indoor air—by a detailed knowledge of the space and time distribution of environmental airborne pollutants in urban air. Such information may be employed to assist local-scale intervention for minimizing the influence of automotive-produced pollution on the quality of urban air at the feed point of buildings HVAC systems—especially in

Acknowledgements
----------------

This work was performed under Grant No 1246 D.G.R. V/41795/93 from Regione Lombardia (Italy). The authors are grateful to the technical personnel of CEMOC (Drs G. Bernazzani and G. Bocchi) and of Regione Lombardia (Geom. S. D’Ambrosio and Mr L. Martegani) for experimental assistance.

View full text
Copyright © 1998 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
