Title: Estimating the impact of the license plate quota policy for ICEVs on new energy vehicle adoption by using synthetic control method

URL Source: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0301421520307333

Markdown Content:
Introduction
------------

Since the 21st century, energy security, environmental pollution, and climate change have become the three most important challenges that threaten the sustainable development of the global economy. Using energy in a safe, clean, and low-carbon manner has become the common pursuit of all national governments. Additionally, internal combustion engine vehicle (ICEV) ownership in China has continued to increase. By the end of 2019, car ownership in China reached 260 million (MPS, 2020), causing problems such as energy security, environmental pollution, and traffic congestion. New energy vehicles (NEVs) are favored over ICEVs for their low emissions and low energy consumption. Compared with ICEVs, NEVs have advantages in reducing greenhouse gas emissions, pollutant emissions, and fossil fuel consumption (IEDC, 2013; Ahmadi, 2019; Qiao et al., 2019; Jin et al., 2019; Ke et al., 2017). NEVs have become an important option for countries to respond to energy and environmental threats. In China, since 2009, because of new policies, NEV ownership has continued to increase. By the end of 2019, NEV ownership reached 3.81 million (MPS, 2020), accounting for 53% of total global NEVs (EV-volumes, 2020). License plate quota policies for ICEVs are one of the most important and representative policies in China. By restricting the total amount of ICEV passenger car purchases in major Chinese cities, the market demand for NEVs has indirectly increased. Stimulated by preferential policies for NEVs and the construction of charging piles, the sales of NEVs in cities adopting a license plate quota policy are growing rapidly. From 2015 to 2018, the annual sales of NEVs in these cities accounted for an average of 48% of the total national sales.

License plate quota policies for ICEVs are government measures to regulate the number of ICEVs to alleviate traffic congestion, air pollution, energy security, and climate change. The regulations are formulated and implemented by administrative agencies to be general rules or special behaviors that directly interfere with market allocation mechanisms or indirectly change the supply and demand decisions of enterprises and consumers (Spulber, 1999). Due to the negative externalities of ICEVs, which caused the failure of market regulation, administrative management agencies must implement corresponding regulatory measures. The purpose of a license plate quota policy is to use consumers as the demand side and restrict the development of ICEVs from the total amount through quantitative regulation (Ma, 2016).

China is the only country implementing a license plate quota policy for ICEVs (Ma, 2017). Another similar policy is Singapore's “Certificate of Entitlement (COE)” policy, implemented in May 1990 (Zhang et al., 2018), where the Singapore government determines the number of new COEs issued per year on the basis of the number of existing vehicles, the number of vehicles to be deregistered at the end of the previous year, and road capacity. On the basis of the annual quota, a certain number of COEs are bid on each month. All the individuals who want to buy a new car must participate in the COE bidding process. COE public bidding is conducted twice per month. The winning bidders must register a new car within 6 months, and the COE is valid for 10 years from the registration date (Han, 2010). The vehicle quota system has effectively controlled the number of cars in Singapore. Before 2009, the vehicle population growth rate in Singapore was approximately 3% (Han, 2010). From 2010 to 2012, the average annual vehicle population growth rate was approximately 1.5%, from 2013 to 2019, this rate was further reduced to 0.5% (LTA, 2020).

Shanghai was the first city in China to implement a license plate quota policy for ICEVs. To alleviate traffic congestion, Shanghai has implemented its license plate quota policy since January 1994, and new ICEV license plates are obtained through auctions. As of July 2019, eight cities (Shanghai, Beijing, Guiyang, Guangzhou, Shijiazhuang, Tianjin, Hangzhou, Shenzhen) and one province (Hainan) had implemented a license plate quota policy for ICEVs, and except for Shijiazhuang, which restricts families from buying a third passenger car, all have adopted annual total control and mandate that ICEV license plates be obtained by lottery or auction (Table 1).

With the development of the practice of regulatory economics, the theory of incentive regulation has been developed. This theory has shifted the research focus of regulatory economics from why governments regulate to how governments should regulate and improve their regulatory efficiency (Yan, 2008). Table 1 indicates that each region that implements license plate quota policy for ICEVs, while adopting quantitative regulations on ICEVs, has adopted incentive regulations on NEVs that the government vigorously promotes. Because the license plate quota policy for ICEVs can rapidly reduce consumers' purchases of ICEVs and the purchasers of NEVs are entitled to various incentives, some consumers in urgent need of vehicles will switch to buying NEVs. Therefore, the quantitative regulation of ICEVs may indirectly promote the development of NEVs.

China's incentive policies for NEVs are divided into three major categories. The first category is financial subsidy policies, for example, purchase subsidies, tax reductions, and charging infrastructure construction subsidies. Most scholars have posited that purchase subsidies and tax relief policies can effectively promote the diffusion of NEVs, particularly in the early stage of NEV promotion, which can quickly increase the market share of NEVs (Wang et al., 2017a, 2019; Ma et al., 2017; Li et al., 2015, 2019; Jenn et al., 2013; Lutsey et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019). The second category is administration management policies, which primarily include free license plates and unlimited roads. These two policies mainly refer to the license plate quotas for ICEVs adopted by some major cities in China, and traffic restriction policies implemented for a specific time or specific license plate tail numbers issued for ICEVs. Scholars have generally agreed that in regions where a license plate quota policy and traffic restriction policy are implemented, free license plates and unlimited traffic are strong positive incentives for the adoption of NEVs (Ma et al., 2017; Li et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2017a, 2017b; Zhang et al., 2018; Qian et al., 2019). In addition, Wang et al. (2017b), Zhang et al. (2018), and Qian et al. (2019) have maintained that in regions where a license plate quota policy is adopted, the impact of free license plates on the promotion of NEVs is stronger than the impact of a purchase subsidy. The third category is convenience policies, which typically refer to, for example, reducing or exempting of parking fees for NEVs, access to special roads for buses or priority road use, constructing charging infrastructures, and discounting charging costs. Most scholars have posited that free parking (Wolbertusa et al., 2018), access to special roads for buses or priority road use (Wang et al., 2019), charging pile density (Wang et al., 2017a, 2019; Lutsey et al., 2015), discounts on charging costs (Qiu et al., 2019), and construction of home charging facilities (Qian et al., 2019) have a positive impact on consumers' purchases of NEVs and are important factors in increasing the share of NEVs. On the basis of this analysis, the license plate quota policy promotes the development of NEVs. Even in a limited sense, the promotion effect of the license plate quota policy on NEVs is stronger than that of the financial subsidy policies. However, few researchers have quantified the impact of license plate quota policy for ICEVs on the sales of NEVs. This paper uses the synthetic control method (SCM) for the first time to quantify the impact of a license plate quota policy on NEVs from the perspective of quantitative analysis.

This paper attempts to quantitatively assess the impact of a license plate quota policy for ICEVs on NEV adoption. All provinces and most cities in China have adopted financial subsidy policies and convenience policies to promote the adoption of NEVs. If a license plate quota policy does not play a role in the adoption of NEVs, the sales of NEVs in these cities will be similar to that in other cities. It is important to quantitatively analyze the impact of license plate quota policy on the sales of NEVs. First, this research will help policymakers more accurately assess license plate quota policy from political, economic, and social perspectives, then, help policymakers adopt new policies or renewal existing policies and promoting the development of the NEV industry. Second, by analyzing the impact of license plate quota policy on the sales of NEVs, we deepen the understanding of the effectiveness and implementation obstacles of license plate quota policy and provide help in assessing whether the license plate quota policy can be used as a normalized policy to limit the number of ICEVs and promote NEVs.

Based on the monthly sales of NEVs in 32 provincial capital cities and Shenzhen, this paper uses SCMs to quantify the impact of license plate quota policy on the sales of NEVs. The novelty of this paper is as follows: First, with the latest monthly sales data of NEVs and SCMs, the impact of license plate quota policy on NEVs is quantified for the first time (the literature has mostly used qualitative analysis), and the robustness of the results is checked with the difference-in-differences (DID) method. Second, this paper analyzes the social impact of license plate quota policy from the perspective of consumer public opinion by using the text analysis method and examines the positive effects and limitations of license plate quota policy. Finally, this paper investigates the diversity of the impact of license plate quota policy on types of NEVs and the impact on the regional ICEV industry and therefore provides policy implications for formulating targeted NEV promotion policies and ICEV compensation policies.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 contains the research method and data used in this study, Section 3 contains the results of empirical analysis and robustness tests, Section 4 contains the discussion, and Section 5 contains the conclusions and policy implications.

Section snippets
----------------

Synthetic control method
------------------------

To compensate for the subjective aspect of comparison group selection in traditional regression methods in comparative case studies, Abadie et al. (2003; 2010) proposed the SCM. A comparative case study is an analytical method that scholars often use to analyze the effects of events or policy interventions (e.g., license plate quota policy for ICEVs) that occur at an aggregate level and affect aggregate entities (e.g., NEV sales). The idea behind the SCM is that “for the unit exposed to the

Results
-------

We construct the synthetic treated units as the combination of cities in the control group that most closely resembled the treated units before the implementation of a license plate quota policy. The results are shown in Table 4, Table 5, Table 6, Table 7, which compare the prediction factors of the actual treated units with their synthetic controls, and the average of the 21 control units. The prediction factors of the synthetic treated units obtained by the weighted average of the control

Impact mechanism of a license plate quota policy on NEVs
--------------------------------------------------------

Our analysis found that a license plate quota policy for ICEVs can significantly positively increase the sales of NEVs. What type of NEV sales does license plate quota policy promote? This paper further analyzes the sales structure of NEVs in Tianjin, Hangzhou, Shenzhen, and Haikou from 2012 to 2018 (Fig. 6). For individual consumers, license plate quota policy mainly promotes the sales of compact and smaller cars. Among BEVs, the highest sales volume is that of mini-cars, which accounts for

Conclusions
-----------

To promote the rapid development of NEVs, the Chinese government has adopted various incentive policies. This paper uses the SCM to quantitatively estimate the effect of license plate quota policy on NEV adoption, using DID method for robustness test, and obtains some findings and policy implications as follows.

A license plate quota policy for ICEVs can significantly increase the sales of NEVs. The results indicated that after Tianjin, Hangzhou, Shenzhen, and Haikou implemented a license plate

Declaration of competing interest
---------------------------------

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgement
---------------

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.

71673266

,

71690245

) and the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No.

2017YFE0101800

. In addition, this work is partly supported by the National Social Science Foundation of China (No.

19ZDA081

). All remaining errors are the authors' own.

© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
