Title: Tax Committee Debates Trump's Tax Cuts : CSPAN2 : May 14, 2025 3:31am-8:09am EDT : Free Borrow & Streaming : Internet Archive

URL Source: https://archive.org/details/CSPAN2_20250514_073100_Tax_Committee_Debates_Trumps_Tax_Cuts

Markdown Content:
3:31 am

$11 million which is just egregious versus someone who is a real small business a hundred thousand dollars of agi would only get $1,997. and, in fact, i have a letter here, mr. chairman, and i'm hoping that you will allow me to enter into the record without objection. >> without objection. .. .. pages with two columns of small businesses that say this 199 a provision does not represent small businesses. there's been a whole lot of talk here tonight that union hall, we are legislating like we are in the country club.

3:32 am

this bill would provide $25,000 to small businesses with qualifying business in, and we would be able to serve so many small businesses, the other argument is these are job creators, you heard the discussion i had with mr. barchtul80% of them had no employees and i would yield back. >> further discussion on the amendment? miss shoe? >> i support this amendment very strongly because it actually would help small businesses.

3:33 am

i know about the scam of the one hundred 99 a.m. because i served on the house small business committee for many years and so many years republicans corrode about how it was the measures that was helping small business but it was totally untrue. that's because the 199 pass-through deductions not even targeted at small businesses, it skewed toward the wealthiest, truly shocking but by design. a 20% deduction for millionaires is worth a lot more than a 20% deduction for small business owner earning $50,000 or even $100,000 a year and in fact i heard from witnesses that many of the small businesses simply don't have the resources to navigate the complex rules and therefore

3:34 am

don't claim tax deduction at all. you don't have to take my word for it, the joint committee on taxation found half of the richest 10% of households claim the pass-through deduction while fewer than one in ten households in the bottom half of income claim it. in 2022 the pass-through deduction for the wealthiest 10% of taxpayers was 3000 times larger than for the taxpayers in the bottom 20%. that is not an exaggeration. there is no incentive for hiring employees at all or passing that benefit to lower wage workers. in 2017, republicans slashed the corporate tax rate by 40% but did not want millionaires to feel left out so they

3:35 am

created a 20% deduction for the ultra-wealthy and then told the public it was about fairness to small businesses. i don't believe people earning millions of dollars a year needed 20% tax cuts when wage earners get no benefit and the smallest businesses who truly need our support are left out. miss more's amendment changes of that. the smallest businesses would get the deduction that they need in order to survive and thrive. i yield. >> thank you for your time. i want to correct something that i said when i had my time, in my rush i misspoke and said

3:36 am

they had $11 million deduction. it was actually $115 million deduction. why aren't we talking about the progenitors are buchannan and mister kelly talked about, something i would be interested in talking about, talking about a $20,000 deduction for small businesses. that is more in line with what we think of when we say we are going to do something to help small businesses. not $150 million for a corporation that has no employees whatsoever and i really don't want to hear the argument that this is some sort of parity with see courts. the only parity, the only things this office parity to are the wealthiest, those in the highest tax bracket. republicans say they care about waist, this is a big waste to. this . this $818 billion i would be

3:37 am

happy to have that extend the child tax credit so that we can take care of the poorest children and we can raise the gdp of our families. with that i would yield back to miss chu. >> mr. smucker. >> thank you, mr. chairman. the tax cuts and jobs act delivered on creating an environment that benefited all americans, benefited through more money in their pockets, less taxes paid but also benefited in creating an economy that generated more investment and more jobs that

3:38 am

created more opportunity for all americans, the one hundred 99 a portion of the tax cuts and jobs act is one of the most important parts of that bill because of the impact on communities all across the country. we held roundtables specifically in the district i represent and other districts about this deduction to small businesses. these are main street businesses, not large corporations, they are american entrepreneurs, craftspeople. we talked to one individual who owned a hair salon, photographers, mechanics, small businesses that are the lifeblood of their communities. i would say the health of the community is dependent on the

3:39 am

success of the main street businesses and these business owners talked about how this deduction provided more opportunity for them not only to invest in their businesses but also in their employees and in their community so again this is not large corporations, this is small businesses, 26 million of them all across the country, individuals building their dream, investing in their future. investing in their organization. they are self-starters and there are some that do not yet have employed, might be styling here to fixing a truck about this bill gives them a fair shot to compete with the c corporations and to grow. why would you disqualify a business because they haven't hired someone yet. that would be punishing the smallest businesses just for

3:40 am

the size that they are so the one hundred 99 a provision in the tax cuts and jobs act was one of the reasons tax cuts and jobs act was so successful. in this bill today we increase the benefit by deducting 23% of the k-1 income as opposed to 20%. this is a really important provision, i would say one of the most important provisions of the bill we are considering today so i rise in opposition to this amendment and encourage my colleagues to vote no. >> further discussion on the amendment. >> will you yield just a second? >> he has already yielded his time. >> that he? that i will have to get some more time. >> further discussion? mr. neil.

3:41 am

>> thank you for yielding. i just want to redirect mr. smucker to the comments that i made, don't know if he didn't hear me. my hairdresser, i spent a lot of time at the hairdresser and they don't get $115 million out of their one hundred 99. if they are making one hundred thousand dollars a year and that's a good hairdresser, they are getting $1997. if it is a damned good hairdresser, $200,000 a year they get $6,500 a year, not $115 million. we have, like i said, i want to remind you what i said, 84% of these folks have no employees whatsoever. i'm not punishing the

3:42 am

hairdresser who is the only person working. i'm talking about those corporations who are getting this benefit, like dick and liz eline who are supporters of the republican party, they saved over $40 million in taxes by claiming this 199 a deduction and they saved income tax liability and they had over one hundred $15 million so i just wanted to remind people about what i said. i, like everyone else love small businesses. want to do things to support them and i'm very interested in the bill mister buchanan and mister kelly half because i think that is more in line with helpless help small businesses than this, you could drive a

3:43 am

mack truck through the loopholes in this 199 a deduction. guide to think you talk about waste fraud and abuse, the 199 a deduction is just that. i have a bill, hr 3049, i didn't just pull this out of my head to have a gotcha amendment. i thought it through. i'm trying to find savings for you. you want to reduce the deficit and here's a great opportunity to reduce the deficit by $818 billion. i would yield back. >> mr. buchanan. >> i've been in business for 30 years, 40 years, long time. you all start out as corporations, 5 employees are 10 employees.

3:44 am

then llc, subchapter s is significant. hundreds of thousands, don't know where you got the data from but i would like to look at it. 84% where they have a single employee, most people have 10, 15, 20, many have 50, 75, a hundred employees, that makes up 9% of the businesses in your state. i was chairman of the chamber of commerce. most of them were pass-through entities. it might be 10,000. it might have been a corporation. >> i got the numbers from jcp. i didn't make the numbers up. i also got the number where 84% of the businesses had no employees.

3:45 am

i didn't make them up. i yield back to you. >> anyway. in terms of businesses that operate kind of late at night, bottom line is in my experience of what i have seen, these businesses are very effective, 100 employees, 98, 95% pass-through entities, i yield back to you. >> further discussion on the amendment. seeing none, the question, the amendment offered by miss more. you've already accepted that for the record. the clerk will call the roll. [roll call vote] [roll call

3:46 am

vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

3:47 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

3:48 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] >> the clerk will record the vote. >> yess are 19, the knows are 26. >> there being 19 yess, 26 nos,

3:49 am

the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? mr. davis. >> i reserve a court — point of order. >> mister davis, will you suspend while the amendment is distributed? mr. davis, you can speak. >> thank you, mr. chairman. as americans struggle with rising childcare costs plus higher costs for mr. trump's erratic tariffs and illegal cutting of federal spending i offer an amendment to reimburse working parents up to $8000 in child care costs.

3:50 am

almost half of all children live in families with low income. even though 2 thirds of these families have at least one adult who works. the income from paid work is not enough to beat their basic needs so my amendment helps these hard-working families with the childcare they need to work. my amendment is in stark contrast to this republican bill that does not improve child and dependent care tax credit and leaves the poorest children out of the child tax credit and gives the wealthy trillions. parents, childcare is the work related expense. as aei scholar alan gillett

3:51 am

explained, child and dependent care tax credit for the cdc t was created in 1976 as a work incentive by offsetting work-related expenses for parents. the cdc complements other work related tax benefits like the use of one's car, or home, or teachers expenses but congress has failed to update this essential credit for working parents with the current rate last session at the turn-of-the-century in 2001. indeed the current cbtc fails working families. there are a few families who receive meaningful benefit from the credit do to the extremely

3:52 am

low phaseout level of $15,000. very low expense limits and nonrefundable nature. the tax policy center estimates that only 13% of families with children claimed it in 2022. in 2021, democrats successfully enhanced both the cdc tc and the child tax credit because both credits are essential to support parents ability to provide for their families. to file 100% reimburses parents for actual childcare cost to work, parents mostly use the child tax credit to defray other significant costs such as food, rent, and clothing.

3:53 am

families need both tax credits. my amendment would restore the 2021 modernization to give working parents up to $8000 back in their pockets with childcare costs and we all know that $8000 is much better than the current 600, or 1200 that families get now. my amendment would also make the maximum credit available to most working families with income up to one hundred $25,000 much higher than the current level of 15,000. the national conference of state legislatures sent letters to our offices requesting the key elements of this amendment including refund ability and increased credit. childcare places a major

3:54 am

financial burden on american families. cost of care can range from 5000 to just over $17,000 a year. democrats know that families with enhanced child tax credit that help all families to improve shelter and basic necessities for a child as well, up to 8000 dials -- $8,000 in child care tax credit to meet the needs of working families. as i close, i ask unanimous consent to add a letter into the record and i yield back. >> without objection so ordered. mr. moore. >> thank you, chairman. appreciate, similar to the gentlewoman from washington the amendment earlier related to the child tax credit, the gentleman from illinois's

3:55 am

attention to this matter as well. i want to highlight some of the things that we are doing in this bill as it relates to a piece of legislation i introduced earlier this year, how we are focusing in this piece of legislation on providing maximum benefit not only to families with children but also to the children themselves. in my family first act we looked at abroad range of opportunities to enhance the child tax credit. the child and dependent care tax credit, was something that as we dug into it, one of the big concerns we see is when we pigeonhole, we are just not seeing what you see happen as a

3:56 am

negative externality is the price is often times increase, we see this in a lot of areas, the more money you provide often times there's an increase cost to that particular service and this is what happens with this is a significant increase and this will be a very high score. we are late in the evening, early in the morning, i won't make you run any numbers but this is a significant score that would be a big deficit increase but to highlight, we look closely at this. we want to give maximum flexibility's to family so by enhancing the child tax credit and not telling them at not telling a family how they have to use that money gives them, helps the market be able to shape where the needs are best and if they are forced to use

3:57 am

it in a certain way they may not needed for that particular reason and it may not benefit their families so in the spirit of providing maximum flex ability to families who support that effort, we want to make it so we are not pigeonholing how they have to use the money but in addition to that, when we talk about investing in the child, what we are putting in this bill, in a bipartisan approach, heard about it several times, and the money accounts for growth and advancement, the accounts that are going to go to a direct resource to newborn babies over the next several years, for them to have an account that will grow with them over time and similar to 529, it will be something that could benefit them further into their adult

3:58 am

years, a unique approach to support that individual, not exactly targeting ctcdc in mr. davis's amendment but the way we are going about the next particular piece of legislation is real investment that can be unique and grow how we are going to support younger families and individual children and with that i wanted an opportunity to highlight the unique things we are doing in your back. >> the chair recognizes miss sanchez. >> the child and dependent care tax credit is the only tax credit that directly helps working parents offset the cost of childcare. parents need the child and dependent care tax credit and the child tax credit to help afford the cost of parenting in this country.

3:59 am

when this committee temporarily updated the ctcdc it nearly quadrupled that credit for working families. mister davis's amendment would bring the child and dependent care tax credit back to those 2020 one levels. that means up to $8000 in the pockets of working parents specifically to afford childcare. the cost of childcare has risen so much in this country that $8,000 won't cover a year of childcare for one child in most states. the average price for an infant in a childcare center in california is a whopping $20,000 a year. and many stated costs more to send a child to childcare than it does to send that child to college and yet our republican colleagues have not included update to this tax credit in

4:00 am

their so-called big beautiful bill. they will tell you time and together they are on the side of families but they orange. mr. davis and my democratic colleagues are. i introduced this bill along with ms. davis to give working families a hand up in their biggest work related expense. while we are working to protect childcare and put money back into the pockets of american families, republicans are here today to cut economic assistance in order to pay for tax breaks again for the wealthiest americans. when parents don't have childcare they cut down their hours or they turn jobs down. this amendment would give parents the freedom to go to work knowing that their children are cared for. childcare is a win/when. it's good for businesses and families alike and that should just be common sense. i hope my colleagues will vote with their conscience and the

4:01 am

families they represent and vote yes on this amendment. it doesn't do families any good to not update the assistance they need for childcare and claim that you are helping them when in reality the measly help you're giving them is not even going to cover the cost of childcare for a year. with that i yield back the balance of my time. >> the chair recognizes miss delbebe. >> this would lower the cost of childcare for families. i thank my colleague representative davis and sanchez for their leadership on this effort. the amendment would permanently expand the child and dependent care tax credit, ctcdc, and raise the maximum credit of $4000 for one child and $8000 for two or more children. in my home state of washington the average cost of childcare

4:02 am

is nearly $16,000 a year. to put that in perspective that is more than in-state tuition at the university of washington for an entire year. every day working parents have to make tough decisions to make ends meet and things are only getting more difficult as costs continue to rise but they are not the only ones paying the price. in washington, the lack affordable infant and toddler childcare results in $3.5 billion of lost productivity, wages and revenue a year. in the chairman's state of missouri they are losing $1.9 billion a year and nationwide, we lose one hundred $22 billion annually. republicans claim to be a pro family party and this amendment is an opportunity to vote like you are. families are counting on us to make life more affordable for

4:03 am

the man this amendment will help address one of the biggest costs of raising kids. i urge my colleagues to support this amendment and i yield back. >> the chair recognizes miss more. >> thank you, mr. chairman and i enthusiastically support mr. davis's amendment and associate myself with all of the comments of democrats on this side that have spoken in favor of the challenge of the tax credit as well as expanding the child tax credit. i appreciate mr. moore's concern about increasing the cost of services because we are providing subsidies. i appreciate his observation.

4:04 am

families don't have any choice but to purchase childcare and often, at least in low-wage communities, low income communities, the only way they can get any childcare is by exploiting some other woman, getting their mother who is going to dialysis three days a week to babysit for them. putting their kids in vulnerable situations because they can't afford it. as a member of the joint economic committee. i know you can recall testimony where women say they are not having as many children as they want because they don't, they can't afford childcare. we are having a problem in this

4:05 am

country with our future workforce because we don't have an adequate replacement rate and we heard our president say that he wants to pay women to have children and i think $5000 would not go very far because we know the cost of childcare is very expensive. i did a back of the envelope cancellation on mr. davis's $8000 proposal and you take some woman who is somebody's administered of assistant somewhere making $50,000 a year, but if she had to pay that $8,000, my calculation came up with $8500 and 17% of her wages going to childcare, that would reduce her just gross income to only $41,500.

4:06 am

women cannot afford to pay 18% of their income before childcare. we complain about the lack of workforce participation particularly among low income women, penalizing them, not providing them with benefits because they don't go to work, but when you think about the struggles and the expense of childcare we realize the women no matter what their income are not going to leave their children alone just to meet some work requirement. many women find themselves, i know one case in particular that inspired some legislation that i sponsored the other day where a woman was trying to go to work and meet her work

4:07 am

requirements and left her 5-year-old at home at night, worked third shift, instructions, don't answer the door, make yourself a sandwich and this worked out just fine and finally when the woman got busted leaving her 5-year-old child at home so she could go to work the child found herself in and out of home placement for over a year and it caused a lot of psychological damage to that child all because the woman didn't have childcare. i don't want to hear too many more complaints about women not working, women not having kids, the replacement rate being low, when we won't support women in the one area that they say is causing them to not have as many children as they want and with that i would yield back. >> gentlelady yields back. mr. gomez.

4:08 am

>> thank you, mister chairman. how expensive childcare is is something that is hurting so many families throughout the country. i am a dad whose daughter is 21/2 and we pay $2100 a month. i am fortunate because i have a good job that helps me pay that but that cost of paying for childcare has only increased. so when you add the fact that the average american family spring 26% toward childcare plus the average family paying 30% of their income towards housing it is almost we do things taking up 60% of a family, 60%, these figures are based on pretax numbers so if you take it as a percentage of their net it is probably even

4:09 am

higher. what is going on right now, it is not only hurting these families but economists said the cost of these two items are literally pulling down the growth of our gdp itself, the growth of our economy itself. that is something that is astonishing. if we want to help our economy grow we help families deal with these two issues, this amendment will do that when it comes to helping make childcare a little bit more affordable, helps parents to afford it but here's the thing, this doesn't apply to all taxpayers, the credit is nonrefundable meeting low income families can't take advantage of the credit and the amendment before us would put more money in the pockets of families by more than tripling the credit most families can receive from one thousand 50,

4:10 am

to $4,000 per child, $8,000 for 2 or more children. furthermore this amendment would make the credit refundable to ensure those with the greatest needs benefit. this is an amendment the will unpack so many people, this is not just a blue-collar issue. i've been talking to ibew. i've been talking to people who are in the building trades and they can't get to their worksites to help rebuild our country, because they don't have anywhere to drop off their child and then there are struggles. they are making the calculus, more beneficial economically and financially for our families if somebody stays home, more beneficial because

4:11 am

it is cheaper to stay at home, cheaper to stay at home. we know that people are struggling and here's the thing. who does it disproportionately impact? for a variety of reasons? women make less money doing the same job in this country. what ends up happening, they are not paying into a 400 one k or retirement or social security and if something happens, those parents separate, the woman is worse off. as all my colleagues on the other side of the aisle understand, when you're saving for retirement you want to be paying in every single year as long as possible before you retire. that is how you build compound interest, that is how you build up a little bit of wealth so

4:12 am

this amendment is going to help working people so i'm asking you all to support this amendment and if you can't, then work with us on finding a solution to the childcare crisis in our country, with that i yield back. >> i recognize mr. thompson, miss chu, i'm sorry. >> i urge support for this important amendment which, much needed financial support to working families with children. most families with young children have all available parents in the workforce meaning childcare is so essential but the country is experiencing a childcare crisis, right now the average cost of full-time childcare for just one child can exceed $19,000 a year and in los angeles now people are spending

4:13 am

more money on childcare than even nonhousing. most families can't afford these high costs. this bill does nothing for them. consider jessica from my home state of california who says she and her husband of three kids both have good paying jobs yet childcare costs for their 2-year-old keeps them living paycheck to paycheck and buying a house is not even a financial possibility, childcare prevents them from getting ahead. democrats are thinking of families like jessica when we use the american rescue plan to strengthen and expand the child and dependent care tax credit, we gave working families $300 a month to offset the cost of childcare and made it refundable but while corporations get another tax cut in this bill families like jessica's will be left behind and it is incredibly ironic coming from a party that claims

4:14 am

to be so pro family and appears so concerned with incentivizing americans to have more children. if republican colleagues really were pro family they would use their majority now to enact policy solutions that would actually support families and children and that includes making childcare more affordable. that's why i strongly support this amendment and urge my colleagues to vote yes. and i yield back. >> gentle lady yields back, i recognize mister thompson. >> i would like to yield my time to mister davis. >> thank you, mister chairman. i want to thank all of those who have spoken favorably towards this proposal especially mister moore. chairman, i understand there might be an appetite that we might be able to increase ctc to $10,000.

4:15 am

>> is that a question from your mister moore mr. moore? >> actually, you are the chairman now. you are the chairman. happy to entertain that, mr. davis. >> i think that would be a great way to end this discussion. >> the gentleman yields back. anybody else need time? the question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by mister davis. all those in favor signify by saying yes? those opposed no. the share, the knows have it. the clerk will call the roll. >> [roll call vote]

4:16 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

4:17 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

4:18 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

4:19 am

>> clerk will report the vote? >> the yess are 19, the knows are 25. >> there being 19 yeses and 25 knows the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? >> mr. chairman i reserve a point of order. >> you are recognized. >> thank you, mister chair. >> if you will suspend for a moment while we pass out the amendment. >> thank you. >> if you could proceed please with your amendment. >> thank you.

4:20 am

mr. chair, this amendment would provide increased round cover of rates of 13 $25 retroactively until 2032 to the virgin islands of the united states and puerto rico. this bill is about rum. but this bill, this amendment is really not just about run. it is about a great producer of revenue for the people of the virgin islands. of the rum cover over is the amount of money that is transferred to the virgin islands of the united states and puerto rico from the rebate of federal excise taxes on distilled spirits produced in or imported into the rest of the united states from those two us territories and serves as one of the primary funding sources to promote economic

4:21 am

development and create jobs in puerto rico and the virgin islands. the cover over has been a fundamental part of the tax relationship between the united states and its territories going back over a century. these funds which represent nearly 25% of the virgin islands government annual budget are critical for stabilizing the government employees tension programs, supporting infrastructure projects and attracting investments to diversifying the economy beyond tourism. i am thankful to my colleagues, congressman ron estes of kansas, for code leading legislation in the 119th congress to support the virgin islands economy and our constituents. presently under current law excise tax collections on imported rum are transferred to puerto rico and the virgin islands at a rate of $13.25 per gallon.

4:22 am

$10.50 for proof gallon is a permanent loss and the remaining $2.75 for proof gallon requires periodic reauthorization of congress. this legislation would amend section 7652 of the internal revenue code of 1986 making $13.25 the amount covered over by law until 10-32. enhancing long-term sustainable economic growth in the two us territories. this seems like a light thing for a lot of us and we've had instances in the past over many many years where the rum cover overs was extended over and over and over again. you will see from the chart i have here that this has happened periodically over and over again from 1999 extended

4:23 am

in 2001, 2001 it was temporary extended to 2003, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2011. unfortunately what has happened is the extension has expired for a couple years and we've not been able to recruit this money. i know that the chairman, mr. smith and others have agreed to work with us because the economy, 25% of our revenues are dependent on that 1325 particularly because in order to stabilize our retirement system the government of the virgin islands used the 1325 to securitize funding to keep the employment system, the retirement system for

4:24 am

government employees moving. i am asking my colleagues continue to work with us to ensure that this money can be recouped by both puerto rico and the virgin islands so that our economies can continue to move forward and we can gain that financial independence we so desperately are looking forward to. i yield back at this time. >> thank you. mr. estes, recognized for five minutes. >> i appreciate this amendment being brought forth, we are working together on this. this is something that has a big impact on the virgin islands and puerto rico. it has good support for a pension system in the virgin islands, for operating costs as

4:25 am

well as conservation program within the island there. one of the things that has been problematic with this process and where we want to be sure it gets renewed before reimbursement is the variable nature of it and it is difficult to plan and move forward on this. i know we didn't get this, as we pull together the one big beautiful bill, the provisions for that but this is an ideal scenario where we can work together and have a bipartisan solution. with that i yield back. >> does anybody else seek recognition? ms. sanchez. >> i support the amendment and i want to thank her for this important amendment. i know how important the rum carryover is to the people of puerto rico.

4:26 am

this amendment is about providing stability and certainty, for a long-term planning growth. the rum carryover rate made it difficult for the us virgin islands to confidently budget and invest in their communities. the rum carryover has been part of the tax system for over a century helping puerto rico and the virgin islands make critical investments in infrastructure, education and public services. it accounts for one third of the general revenue. this territory faced financial strain, it leads to unpredictable funding which affects not only day-to-day operations but also the territory bond payment and retirement system. by locking in the $13.20 rate

4:27 am

in 2032, the amendment provided much needed financial certainty enabling better budgeting, planning and long-term growth for territories. the continued development of puerto rico and the us virgin islands and another proposal missing from the republican bill, the supply chain security and growth act which was brought to the attention by resident commissioner hernandez and ensure supply-chain in puerto rico and island territory. i urge my colleagues to help our territories to get the certainty and ability to plan for their future. and i yield back the balance of my time.

4:28 am

>> i recognize miss malliotakis. >> i appreciate you bringing this amendment. it is something we need to work together to resolve. this is so critical for their economy, the rum industry is so important to the economy in puerto rico. we need to make sure they have this income, not just for stability in the government but further ecosystem, this is one where we can help puerto rico and the virgin islands and we need to work together in a bipartisan fashion and make sure this gets done by the end of the year and i thank you for putting this issue forward and my colleagues who have spoken in favor of supporting a solution to get this done. >> thank you.

4:29 am

i now recognize miss more of wisconsin. >> i will be brief. i did not know about this problem in puerto rico and the virgin islands and i appreciate the fact that miss plaskett seems to have bipartisan support with regard to increasing rum cover over rate but i think that had you brought us something with this, we bite have been more inclined to pass this this morning. i yield back. i yield the rest of my time to miss plaskett but i was just wondering. you know. >> miss more, yesterday, yesterday was my birthday. in my office, i not only had food, but you can be assured on

4:30 am

any given day that the products of my home, rum will be available to any and all members of the ways and means committee how and should they needed it. whether that is dark, white, flavored, however you want it, rum and coke is available but on a serious note, i really am, if you understand that, though territories are in a very different position because we rely on congress to determine so much of what we do, we don't have the independence that the states have. congress decides so much of our existence and this is one example where our economy which we've moved rum to be something that is a benefit to us.

4:31 am

my ancestors four five generations ago, rum and the creation of sugar, was the thing that was the oppressor of the. we moved this to be something that benefits our economy but we rely on congress to do the right thing, to give us the amount so we can stabilize our government at that additional rate so we have bipartisan support in this. i am thankful to my colleague from new york, miss malliotakis who has a large number of puerto rican constituents as well as people from other caribbean islands and mr. estes, thank you for being the champion in this congress. i know our former colleague, former congresswoman gonzalez who is the governor of puerto

4:32 am

rico, i hope she's not watching at this moment, and is getting some rest but this is something we are very keen on and looking forward to so i am asking if the chair would commit that there could be some work done on this matter so that our government of the virgin islands and puerto rico can have certainty in how we work on ensuring our economies move forward and are not as dependent on the federal government, that we propose we are right now. we want to be independent and mature and that requires us to have the full funding we need to stabilize our economy and i'm asking your support as we continue to work on this. >> may i have that support? >> we look forward to working with you in a collaborative way. >> we have acknowledgment from the chair understanding that as

4:33 am

well as the bipartisan support of my colleagues. i would withdraw the amendment. not the rum, just the amendment. >> the gentle lady withdraws her amendment. are there any other amendments? mister evans, you are recognized. >> i reserve a point of order. >> mister chairman. i have an amendment. >> pause for a second and we will distribute that. you may proceed, mister evans. >> i ask that you consider my amendment that would restrict the treatment of millionaires,

4:34 am

make sure millionaires faced the same paperwork requirements that republicans are forcing on to poor americans, specifically, in order for the rich to of to receive republican tax penalties they must provide monthly verifications, complete eligibility checks every six months to provide that they are working 8 hours in a month. republicans will pay work requirements, not workers requirements. most people who are already working multiple jobs will struggle to navigate republican red tape. won't seek the benefits they earn. one paperwork earn includes unsure for a lifetime, puts the same requirement on paper cuts for the rich, it is only fair.

4:35 am

i yield back, mr. chairman. >> anybody else? you are recognized. >> mr. evans, your amendment is spot on. we have verification for $200, $500 benefits for people who are poor and yet these people who benefit from the one hundred 99 aa, we don't know what they are doing. they could be rock stars or something that have one show every three months and claim the benefit and do nothing for three months, lay on the beach and drink rum and coke and so i

4:36 am

do think that it is spot on to create some parity between people who work hard and have to report and prove that they are working, gargantuan amounts of money, to get $115 million. and what value they are creating. we require this accountability from welfare recipients, many of the recipients are in fact welfare recipients. i would yield back. >> recognize mr. smucker?

4:37 am

>> 199 aa, one of the most progrowth, considering small business that is a pass-through. we don't need work requirements, individuals running business working very hard so this is an important bill as i mentioned earlier, provision i mentioned earlier allows businesses to reinvest more into wages for their employees, reinvested equipment, expansion and their communities. i ask my colleagues to vote no on this.

4:38 am

>> i stand in support of the amendments for reporting requirements for those 199 a recipients. these are citizens making $10 million and the reality is the tax code is not fair when it comes to reporting requirements. i represent in my district, $29,000, audited for ei tc, it is easy to audit, a $10 million folks who get away with murder, it is complicated and whatever. parody and fairness, mr.

4:39 am

evans is spot on increasing reporting requirements. this is something that won't be onerous because they have a team of auditors and staff. at the end of the day, make our tax code a little more fair so i do support this and ask my colleagues do the same. >> anybody else seek recognition? if not the question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by mr. evans, clerk will call the roll. >> [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

4:40 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

4:41 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

4:42 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] >> clerk will report the vote. >> though yeses are 19. the knows are 25. >> there being 19 yearses and

4:43 am

25 nos the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? >> i have an amendment at the desk. >> i reserve a point of order. >> you are recognized for your amendment if you will allow us two minutes to pass out. you can proceed, miss chu. >> it would strike three sections designed to rip healthcare away from the very people who need it most. these are the sections that use red tape to sabotage the affordable care act. let's call this bill what it is. a deliberate attempt to got the affordable care act. this bill attacks one of the most basic protections of the aca, automatic reenrollment. for years, that provision has kept working families cover even if they missed a deadline

4:44 am

or had trouble navigating complex paperwork but now republicans want to kill it. under this bill every family would have to manually verify their income every year or lose access to their advanced premium tax credits. if they can't perfectly predict their income 12 months in advance they would be forced to pay the full premium out-of-pocket with no assistance. that isn't how any other health coverage works. employer plans, medicare, medicaid, none of them force you to reapply every single year under threat of losing your care. this disastrous bill also got to the special enrollment period for people under one hundred% of the poverty line meaning people making roughly $23,000 a year or less will no longer have the chance to

4:45 am

enroll in an aca plan year round, this deliberately shutout workers who face unstable hours, part-time jobs or are only offered junk employer coverage. if that wasn't cruel enough, the bill also removes the on how much the federal government can clawback from people who underestimate their income. think about that. good workers, uber drivers, freelancers, small business owners and hourly workers often have no idea how much they will earn in a year. they do their best to estimate the accurate amounts but under this bill if they misjudge their income even slightly the government will clawback every single dollar of their advanced premium tax credit. this provision alone will impose a $19 billion increase on consumers and it will

4:46 am

bankrupt people who did nothing wrong. what is it for? not to lower cost, not to improve care, it is to push 13.7 million people off healthcare to free up trillions for republican tax giveaways to billionaires. in my district, that includes people like stephanie, at 64 years old lost her job and now relies on the aca for coverage until she transitions to medicare. she tells me if subsidies are cut she will have no choice but to go uninsured because premiums would exceed her entire monthly budget. the last thing she needs is a new set of administrative traps designed to take her coverage away. so i asked my republican colleagues how many of your constituents are you prepared to push off their health insurance just to give one more

4:47 am

tax break to billionaires? if the answer is none, i encourage you to vote yes on my amendment. otherwise, to my constituents and americans watching this debate, when you see your premiums go up or you miss estimate your income are year and are half after your coverage, you will know this is because this bill puts billionaires first and working families last. i yield back. >> anybody else seek time? if not the question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by miss moore, you are recognized. >> i will be very brief. miss chu, this is an extremely important amendment, peppered throughout this bill we have

4:48 am

seen our colleagues, i am trying to think of the word for it, something where they almost like the actuarial tables apply to people's failure and human foibles, people forgetting their appointments or forgetting to open their mail, things that are really common among sick people or disabled people, monetize scoring that failure first savings, it is real enough areas i think. all peppered throughout this bill, we see this is our major strategy in the energy commerce committee they are doing it over their too, if you are late for an appointment or you miss an appointment you lose your medicaid, here you lose under our jurisdiction the aca and to

4:49 am

actually sort of rely on this first savings, to score it, i have experienced this in my own lifetime. in the community developing credit union, i had a washer and dryer that i needed desperately, i had three kids, from a finance company, when i was a month or two from paying it off and was late for a payment, my kids, they repossessed my washer and dryer, where they had calculated, they had scored their belief that somehow, they were right that i would fail, that i would be late and that they were able to take my washer and dryer and give it to some other poor mother, that motivated me.

4:50 am

i don't know what the word is but i appreciate your offering this and shining a light on how cynical and nefarious we have become so that human foibles become our way to clawback money as opposed to making people who are billionaires pay their fair share. i want to thank you for offering this amendment and i support it. >> mr. schweiger. >> i want to get my head around this. just the basic concept of program integrity. we have someone, i don't tell the truth about my income so i get my subsidy, that society

4:51 am

shouldn't one and the excess moneys that were provided because you didn't tell the truth, so we want an amendment that basically says it is okay to commit fraud and it is wrong for society to ask back the dollars that were fraudulently taken. this is how you end up getting the public despising these programs that you say help because the cascade of incentives, it is okay to cheat. i know that is not what you mean here. if the goal is saying within the margin of error or these sorts of things, we know we

4:52 am

have a problem of my income is here and it is not and getting access to subsidies to recapture them. it is not to be cruel, if you want programs to continue, we can't basically tell everyone we have lots of fraud. if there's a better mechanism, happy to take it. do you want me to yield? >> just following your same train of thought what's the difference between that and a big corporation or billionaire evading taxes? both of them require, evading taxes, they are subject to criminal penalties.

4:53 am

>> you underfunded the agency -- >> you are doing -- >> asking -- >> conflating things. if you have a mechanism. i am a huge fan of using technology at the irs because it is more effective than people. we've seen that. you cheat you should get caught whether you are a big corporation or individuals as we've had talk for years under tax credit. and we had troubles on that, the data map, the speed to work to do this.

4:54 am

>> miss delbene. >> i yield my time to miss chu. >> you are accusing google workers, uber drivers, freelancers, hourly workers of committing fraud. think about deliberately doing that and how many shifts, a district, creative workers and television and film industry and they don't know if they will or will not get a job and they predict at the beginning of the year that they are going

4:55 am

to have so much in income but ultimately may not get a job or they may get a big job in some production. they cannot know exactly how much they will make in that year and what this will do is punish them for that and force them to give back every single dollar of advanced premium tax credit and bankrupt people who did nothing wrong and so cynical that this is how you are making money, this is how you are giving money to the billionaires by imposing a $19 billion tax increase on these consumers, making $19 billion off of this. and i yield back. >> the gentle lady yields back. i recognize mr. kelly of pennsylvania. >> it is fascinating, you now

4:56 am

admit you give the number, $19 billion, you now admit there is a scale that is very large, a very creative population too, the number of them that live in my community is so much more tax effective. the fact of the matter is if you have been overpaid, you pay back. does anyone else see the absurdity, you see the world differently that you take something you shouldn't maybe you should have to give it back back to mr. kelly. >> mister kelly yields. any other member seeking recognition? if not the question, not agreeing to the amendment offered by miss chu, clerk will

4:57 am

call the roll. [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

4:58 am

[roll call vote] [laughter] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

4:59 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

5:00 am

[roll call vote] ..

5:01 am

rising, farmers are losing access, many small businesses are on the verge of closing their doors forever and jobs are being lost. it's time to put an end to the economic damage, a tax bill that creates massive deficits and gives handouts to billionaires will not do that. we must use this opportunity to restore stability in our trade and economic policies, before the damage is too far to reverse. that's why i'm offering an amendment to renew trade adjustment assistance and modernize the program. including by streamlining the

5:02 am

eligibility criteria for farmers, workers and businesses. this language comes from the competes act which congress passed on a bipartisan basis in 2022. under my amendment, displaced workers would be eligible to apply for adjustment assistance through 20311. 2031. it would ensure they would be eligible to apply for taa if they lost their jobs due to tariffs imposed by president trump. since its inception, taa has helped millions of trade displaced workers obtain the necessary skills, credentials, resources and support they need in order to return to work. 17,249 new applicants since president trump took office in

5:03 am

march. a nearly 10% increase in less than two months. despite the fact this data was updated monthly, no new data has been available since march 3rd. just after trump began to wreak havoc on our economy with the canada and mexico tariffs and the april 2nd global tariffs. wow, i wonder why. could it be that the trump administration is scared of americans finding out the real cost of his chaotic trade policies? not only are prices going up, but americans working in trade related industries literally have their jobs on the line including the thousands of port workers from los angeles and palm beach that live in my district. every one container that arrives in the port supports four jobs in the los angeles economy. yet imports at the port of los angeles are currently down by 35% from the same time last year. if this trend continues, empty shelves and layoffs will follow.

5:04 am

we cannot forget truck drivers who helped transport essential goods across the country. these truck drivers will lose from declining trade volumes and higher operational costs. we cannot abandon our workers. they need relief now. over 8,000 workers with pending taa applications are in my republican ways and means' colleagues districts. chairman smith currently has 1,272 workers with pending taa applications. representative adrian smith, 295 workers in his district, representative mike kelly, 60 workers, representative wikert, 250 workers, representative la hood, 1,097 workers, rep sense representative estes, 528 workers, representative murphy, 120 workers, representative van dine, 1,382 workers, rep

5:05 am

beanstra, 197 workers, rep miller, 125 workers and rep yakum, 2,442 workers, all with pending trade adjustment assistance claims. they cannot be afforded -- cannot afford to be left in limbo any longer waiting for congress to renew trade adjustment assistance. i call on my republican colleagues to support my amend amendment to renew taa and help those who unfairly lost their jobs due to the administration's stupid and irresponsible trade policies. with that i yield back the balance of my time. >> mr. smith. >> thank you, mr. chairman. i think it's important to note that given the job market right now, with employers underwriting the cost of training their employees, that's pro worker. it's pro taxpayer.

5:06 am

and certainly eliminates the need for what used to be a bipartisan program but i think a lot of reasonable folks would describe it as overly partisan now and as i pointed out, largely unnecessary. when you look at the tax bill and how pro worker that is, we need to go back to the negotiation of usmca, a trump priority during a pelosi speakership that got done. if that can get done, pretty much anything can be done. i would think around here. if we lean into what our objectives are. it's enlightening i guess when during his first term president trump proposes tariffs and certainly the anti-trump crowd opposed those and then once the

5:07 am

anti-trump crowd had control to get rid of those tariffs, they did nothing about those. in fact, we saw four years of absence on the world stage as relates to a trade agenda and i think the world was watching certainly and the world expected more out of us and for us to be more aggressive in advocating for ourselves on the world stage as relates to commerce and international trade. so certainly we have a more aggressive negotiator now in the white house who is moving forward, i think in a pro worker way. and that's why i think that ultimately at taa certainly as it's been fashioned in the past, it's no longer necessary because employers are actually picking up the tab and more efficiently training their employees. that is pro worker, pro employee and pro taxpayer. thank you. i yield back.

5:08 am

>> further discussion on the amendment? ms. chu. >> i strongly support this amendment which would extend protection for workers, who are completely left behind by this bill. that's because this legislation does nothing to shield consumers or workers from the devastation unleashed by president trump's senseless trade war. he's unilaterally imposed tariffs on nearly every product for material imported into the u.s. from almost every single country in the entire world. fortunately, he caved yesterday and caused the 145% tariffs on -- paused the 145% tariffs on china for 90 days. there's no reason to believe those tariffs won't come back. that's why the international long shoreman's warehouse union which represents dock wokers ats called the tariffs a direct

5:09 am

attack on the working class. their jobs are under threat as cargo stops moving through the ports and because republicans have refused to work with democrats to reauthorize the trade adjustments assistance to help workers who lose their jobs due to trade related impacts, they will be left behind if their jobs are lost. this amendment is a small step that republicans can take towards addressing the whatting havocwreaked by the trump trade. if they were serious about helping families, they would join the legislation, helping thousands of small businesses stay open and keep their employees on the ray roll and pe that families don't face any further tariff costs this year. president trump has turned the global economy upside down through this trade war, dock workers will be amongst the first to feel the worst impacts but they certainly will not be the last. i urge my colleagues to support

5:10 am

the amendment and i yield back. >> mr. forster. >> thank you, mr. chairman. i would like to support the amendment by representative sanchez and as the co-chair of the congressional labor caucus, i strongly endorse the reauthorization of the trade adjustment assistance program. i'm actually a little shocked to hear my republican colleagues on the other side abandon our constituents who have relied on this program through republican and democratic majority. the trade adjustment assistance program provides support and jobs retraining for workers who lost their jobs due to trade including due to other countries' unfair trade practices and it helps them get back on their feet and we know that the trade adjustment

5:11 am

assistance program works, according to a study by the u.s. census bureau, taa recipients earned an average of $50,000 more in income over a 10 year period compared to workers who did not participate in the program. workers can't access this program because unfortunately my republican colleagues refuse to reauthorize it. there are currently over 190,000 workers across the country who have submitted taa petitions to the department of labor but they're not receiving the assistance they're entitled to because republicans refuse to reauthorize this important program. let me say that again. there are over 190,000 workers who lost their jobs due to no fault of their own because of other countries undermining american businesses and can't

5:12 am

receive the support those workers deserve. this administration claims to want to provide a level playing field for american workers. we have a program that specifically exists to support workers who are negatively impacted by trade. yet congressional republicans are cutting medicaid and extending tax cuts for the rich. meanwhile, the taa is a program that has been championed by democrats and that republicans refuse to reauthorize. sadly, they are showing the american people exactly what they -- what their priorities are. tax cuts for billionaires, permanent tax cuts and no help for workers who have been displaced due to no fault of their own. i commend my colleague, the ranking member of the trade subcommittee, representative

5:13 am

sanchez. this is a common sense amendment and i urge my colleagues to support it. i yield back. >> mr. neily. >> i want to commend ms. sanchez as well. the merit of the argument is clear. part of the frustration that the american family has felt over the last 30 years has been because of dislocations in the workforce. much more complicated than just unfair trade practices relates to issues of technology, skill set, you name it. geography. but there's also i think some responsibility that congress had along the way, done a better job of updating, upgrading and monitoring the trade adjustment assistance act, an ideal opportunity i think for the community college system in america to become immersed and involved in, if not to administer. i think it's a really good amendment. if done properly this would be of great assistance to the american people. >> i just want to make one last

5:14 am

point. trade adjustment assistance is to help workers that have been displaced and the crux of it is to provide them with skills, training, so they can move perhaps into other industries when those industries they've been working in have died out in their area and to just make the blanket assertion that all employers are providing training to workers is patently false. not true. not all companies are willing to invest and train up their workers. and that's certainly true in areas where there are few employers and where whole industries may shutter because of unfair labor practices or because of trade -- the trade impact from our trade agreement. so i just want to make the point that you can't make blanket

5:15 am

statements like oh, there's no need for trade adjustment assistance because the employers are providing the training. that's just simply not true in many, many, many cases, i would say the majority of cases. with that i would yield back. >> additional discussion on the amendment. seeing none, the question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by ms. sanchez. the clerk will call the roll. [roll call vote]

5:16 am

5:17 am

[roll call vote]

5:18 am

>> the clerk will record the vote. >> the yeses are 19, the nos are 24. >> there being 19 yeses and 24 nos, the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? mr. gomez. >> there's a point of order that's been reserved. will the gentlemen descend as the amendment is distributed.

5:19 am

mr. gomez, you can proceed. >> all right. thank you so much. so i want to give my colleagues on the other side of the aisle another opportunity to show that they're pro family and not pro billionaire. i have an amendment that would adjust the paid leave tax credit in the bill found in section 45s to ensure it actually helps working families. republicans created the 45x tax credit in 2017 but it has been ineffective in getting most americans to be covered boy paid leave program through their work. i would love for my colleagues to join me in supporting the amendment to expand the credit and help us get one step closer to ensuring every american has access to paid leave. my amendment would increase the credit from 25% to 75% for small businesses and 50% for large businesses where the majority of

5:20 am

workers make under $100,000. it would also put in place important protections for employees who employers claim to credit by guaranteeing job protection, requiring employers to continue health insurance and prohibiting employers from charging extra fees or discriminating against workers for taking leave. it would also support and strengthen the existing state paid leave program by offering a federal reimbursement to help more states create the successful program. i've been hearing a great deal about president trump and republicans wanting to do more to boost the birth rate. as a father of a young son i can tell you exactly what is making it hard for americans to start and grow a family right now. families want help with groceries, with rent, with affordable high quality child care and they want to know when they have a child they can take time off of work to care for their newborn son or daughter and still be supported

5:21 am

financially, they want to know they can go back to their job after their 12 weeks with their new family member and we know this isn't just good policy for families, it's good for the economy too. paid leave helps small businesses keep and retain workers and remain competitive. again, i ask my friends on the other side of the aisle, you want to pass this bill to give billions away to the wealthiest americans, why not work together to do some good for working families for a change. by passing this amendment we'll make paid leave a reality for more americans and show them a policy that is made to help working families. here's the thing. i expanded paid family leave in california. one of the things we saw was when we passed it, we were the first in the union to pass paid family leave, we started seeing more people spend time with their loved ones, to be there to help with the newborn child and

5:22 am

to support their spouse and what we learned is when a spouse spends time with their wife, they're less likely to have post postpartum depression, the health outcomes increase and improve and it also means that there's just a stronger family bond. so if you want to be pro family, pro family values, and not just for the billionaires, i ask you to support my amendment. with that i yield back. >> mr. fenstra. >> thank you, mr. chair. i would like to thank the gentleman for this amendment. we have done a tremendous job in this bill on the family medical leave act. we worked very hard. many of you know that was a pilot program established in 2017 they the tax cuts and jobs act and we're extending it and making it permanent which is very significant.

5:23 am

what it does, it strengthens the family medical leave credit from the trump tax cut, quadruples the maximum employer provided child tax credit and adds additional relief to small businesses for providing child care. these are very important things for families. i'm very proud of what we're doing in this bill and i'm proud we're going down the path to make sure we extend family medical leave to small businesses so they can use their insurance, their disability insurance to make all these -- make this family medical leave work up to 12 weeks. so thank you for noting this but the bill does a great job already in this area. i yield it back. >> are there additional discussions on the amendment? ms. sanchez. >> thank you, mr. chairman. according to the national partnership of women and families, only 27% of our workforce has access to paid family leave through their

5:24 am

employers. in fact, the united states is one of only six countries in the world that does not guarantee any paid leave to our workers. i now have difficulty coming back to work so quickly after having a baby can be. when my son was born 16 years ago i was going to say today but it was actually yesterday, i was back in this hearing room three days later to markup the affordable care act. paid family leave is essential to any parent. we need it in every line of work from the halls of congress to office jobs to fast food restaurants. this amendment will vastly improve the paid family leave allowing more workers to benefit from more time. it incentivizes states to allow all of their residents to have comprehensive leave policy. paid leave isn't just good for families. it's also good for businesses. small businesses are at a disadvantage if they can't provide paid leave to their

5:25 am

workers while big businesses can afford to do so. and paid leave keeps people in the workforce by allowing them to hold jobs and care for children at the same time. this bill makes it clear that my republican colleagues don't care about the benefits that paid leave would bring to their constituents. they found ways to make big corporations richer without the expense of family -- but at the expense of family. they made it clear they don't care about their own constituents who are struggling to make ends meet and they made it very clear that they just don't care about working parents. i urge everyone to vote yes on this amendment to make paid leave applicable to all workers, protect american jobs, and help families afford to care for their children. and with that i yield back the balance of my time. >> ms. moore. >> thank you. i want to thank mr. gomez for

5:26 am

offering this amendment. again, this is an extension of some remarks i made earlier about the family supports people actually need in order to stay in the workforce. not a single one of us sitting here this morning will lose money if for some reason we have a medical emergency or a problem, a funeral we need to go to or sickness of a child, not a single one of us will lose one dime and this is a privilege that we have that other americans don't have and i do think that it's important to realize as our colleague, ms. sanchez has said, it's embarrassing to call yourselves a civilized, first world country and be one of six in the world that doesn't recognize the value of children and keeping people's

5:27 am

connections to the workforce by providing paid at least parental leave and i do agree that we need to expand this beyond just parents and have paid medical leave for our employees as well. i have been an employer for many years in one capacity or another and i have some of the most wonderful, talented, intelligent and loyal employees because i put their families first. nobody ever has to miss a parent teacher conference on behalf of coming to my job. no one ever has to come to work ill because of my job. nobody has to come and bring a doctor's excuse. i respect them and take their word. in return for that, i have people right here at 5:00 in the morning, here staying with me. and that's the investment that i

5:28 am

think we need to make in our employees, in our economy, and of course in our families. and i will yield back. >> further discussion on the amendment? seeing none -- oh, -- >> thank you. you know, i, like so many women here who had children before this became a thing, you know, i have my oldest son is 37 now and i can recall having him my senior year at georgetown and not having any way of just having the support of friends to be able to watch him while i went to class and then having my second son in between law school, my third son, my second year of law school while i worked a job during the day,

5:29 am

went to law school at night, graduated with three of them under the age of five, and there was no leave. i wanted to start a family, wanted to get it out of the way, have my children have each other and the country was not in a place where it was offering support to families for paid leave. and now the united states is one of only six countries in the world that does not guarantee any paid leave to our workers. now, the ways and means democrats have the first ever bill to guarantee 12 weeks of comprehensive universal paid family leave without a single republican vote. we did that. you want to talk about what we could have done when we had everything, that's something we did. and we found ways to pay for it

5:30 am

when we were in charge. and now instead of expanding paid leave, this bill continues a failed policy from 2017. we know that during that time only 1,230 businesses used the credits that they were offering and 89% of the spending went to pay 180 claims from firms with over $1 billion in revenue. only 16% of small business owners support extending the credits. this is not going to get to the families and to the individuals and to the young growing families that we need to, to support them while they're growing their family. we talked about being pro life, right? remember that discussion? how many hours ago was that? we talked about supporting women giving birth.

5:31 am

and as ms. moore said, we support until the baby comes out and then it's done. the support leaves completely. and you're on your own. so this bill, this amendment is being offered to support the range of families, the range of individuals to be there in a manner so they don't have to be like ms. sanchez had to do, three days after giving birth, being back in this dreadfully cold room for a markup and it will allow families to be able to have what they need to be able to go back to work because oftentimes what happens is as we said, decisions have to be made and women leave the workforce. we lose that intellect. we lose that knowledge with women having to leave the workforce because they are forced to make a decision which they don't want to make.

5:32 am

so i support this amendment and i ask my colleagues to support it and i yield the balance of my time to mr. gomez. >> one of the things i kind of want to stress about paid family leave, it also could be there for people who are dealing with a sick family member, somebody that gets diagnosed with cancer or a terminal illness. you can actually be there to take care of them. you can be there during the most vulnerable and most emotional time for that person in your life. most of us will one day, we will all -- not most, we will all die one day and don't we want our loved ones to be able to take off time to be there so that when we go gently into the dark night that we have some comfort? that's what we want. that's what we want when it comes to paid family leave.

5:33 am

that's what it's about. that's why when i say if you want to be pro family, support this amendment, show people that you're thinking about them. with that, i yield back to the gentle lady from the virgin islands. >> thank you, mr. gomez. and i yield back my time. >> further discussion on the amendment? seeing none, the question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by mr. gomez. the clerk will call the roll [roll call vote]

5:34 am

5:35 am

5:36 am

>> the clerk will report the vote. >> the yeses are 19, the nos are 25. >> there being 19 yeses and 25 nos, the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? mr. horseberg. >> i reserve a point of order. >> a point of order has been reserved. will the gentlemen suspend while the amendment is distributed.

5:37 am

the gentleman may proceed. >> thank you, mr. chairman. before we begin, i know we've been coming up on over 15 and-a-half hours, i want to thank my staff and the entire ways and means staff for their hard work and effort and professionalism working so hard on these amendments that are incredibly important to our constituents. they didn't ask for all of this but on behalf of our constituents, i just want to extend my gratitude. but mr. chair, i have an amendment at the desk to rectify the damage that the trump administration has caused to the tourist economy. this tax credit would incentivize domestic travel within the united states, ensuring that we can reboot america's tourism dominance that is being decimated by president trump.

5:38 am

trump's blanket tariffs are already causing harm. tourist industry is collateral damage. while trump flip-flops on trade. the facts are in the numbers. canada and mexico make up the largest percentage of visitors to the united states annually, making up a total of 53% of visitors combined in 2023. but the damage has already been done. in march alone, the number of visitors in our country shrank by nearly 12% and nevada saw nearly an 8% decrease. why? because of trump's repeated threats to our neighboring countries. it's being reported that canada's major airlines have announced reductions in flights to las vegas due to the severe drop in airline bookings. so let's be serious here. trump's harmful rhetoric and

5:39 am

mismanagement of the economy is projected to cost the american tourism industry $64 billion this year, due to both a decrease in domestic and international travel. while that number won't cause elon musk to blink, those are nevadan small businesses and jobs that are on the line. in fact, oscar shabira, owner of a mexican restaurant in las vegas cannot keep prices down in his establishment because of these trump tariffs. most of the meat that buys for the restaurant comes from canada or mexico. and he said that these tariffs will directly reflect in his prices which he fears will cut back on people choosing to dine in his restaurant. now, las vegas isn't the only place that's impacted by decreased visitors since the beginning of 2025.

5:40 am

the fallout from strained relationships with canada due to this administration can be seen in arizona, for example. canadians account for roughly $775 million in spending during the snow season but because of this administration and their actions, they are reconsidering travel not only to arizona, but also to nevada. and to places all around our country as a whole. so i would just really encourage my colleagues on the other side of the aisle to see the light. this is happening in all of our districts. if this bill is serious about helping working class people and main street america, then we need this amendment so that american people have a solution to the economic crisis that's being caused right now. while republicans in this committee continue clinging to

5:41 am

their seats, desperately trying to win trump's favor and prove their loyalty, i am here to advocate on behalf of my constituents and i will not sit here and let our tourist industry crash because of trump's mess. i'm asking my colleagues to support this amendment on behalf of not just the entertainment capital of the world in las vegas, but international travel to the united states which is incredibly important. we have the world cup coming up. we have the olympics coming up. we have the 250th anniversary of our nation's birth, all of this is being affected because of donald trump and his flip-flop on trade. with that, i yield back. >> further discussion on the amendment? seeing none, the question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by mr. horseberg. the clerk will call the roll.

5:42 am

[roll call vote]

5:43 am

5:44 am

5:45 am

>> the clerk will report the vote. >> the yeses are 18, the nos are 25. >> there being 18 yeses and 25 nos, the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? mr. chairman, i reserve a point of order. >> mr. docket, would you descend while your amendment is distributed and there has been a point of order reserved. proceed. >> thank you, mr. chairman. this amendment is one line. it deletes the voucher provisions in this bill.

5:46 am

these voucher provisions are designed to really undermine our public schools. they come as a supplement to voucher plans that have been implemented in some states, most recently in the state of texas. i believe that our public schools are essential to our democracy and that measures to undermine those schools which serve about 90% of the students in our country are measures that not only hurt public education, but hurt the entire concept of democracy. now, president trump has of course already proposed eliminating the department of education and his forces have done significant damage to the work of that department. undermining one aspect of federal aid to be public education after another. president trump had hardly moved into the white house before he issued an executive order, calling on all federal agencies

5:47 am

to shift as many federal dollars to private schools, away from public schools as possible. this is all part of that plan to undermine our public schools. it's very interesting on the development of this particular measure in that it did come before our committee last year and was voted on in this committee. i opposed it then. democrats opposed it. it got out of committee but republicans never brought to it the floor for consideration. instead of having this bill, this voucher proposal considered on its merits separately, it's being buried into this huge reconciliation bill in hopes that it can take a ride along the way and get passed what might not be able to pass the house on its own merits. that's true of voucher measures generally. when they have gone to the public, again and again they have been voted down. we have also considerable experience from the states in

5:48 am

these voucher systems. take florida, where in 2023 the state removed income eligibility limits for its voucher program. with these changes, 69% of new voucher recipients were already enrolled in private schools. while only 30% of them came from families earning less than $55,000 a year. in arkansas, the state's own department of education reported that 95% of voucher recipients had never set foot in a public school before receiving public dollars. and in arizona, over half of 2024 voucher spending is going to students who are already in private schools or not yet in school. even within this bill, families who qualify include those making 300% of the area median income. in other words, in texas, families making as much as $228,000 would be eligible for these credits. credits to do what?

5:49 am

to go to schools that don't have to accept everyone, schools that don't have to have certified teachers, schools that don't meet the needs of individuals with disabilities, of children with disabilities. that's why i'm very pleased to work with colleague congresswoman soule in offering this amendment because we believe in our public schools, believe in all they have to offer for america, and recognize that parents applying to send their children to private school that don't use taxpayer dollars to do i this is using taxpayer resources, it's just using it in a more obscure way through a tax credit system, so i urge the adoption of this amendment and rejection of vouchers as a long -- as a wrong way to go for education and wrong way to go for democracy answered i yield back. >> mr. smith. >> thank you, mr. chairman. thank you to my colleagues for their patience and willingness

5:50 am

to have the discussions that we need to have, certainly happy to do that, happy to defend the provision that is currently in the bill relating to school of choice. this is about families, it's about empowering parents and children to pursue a brighter future with quality education. i think it should concern all of us that parents have been pushed away from the curriculum of schools, they have been pushed away from various decisions impacting their own children and that's why we need to empower families rather than push them away. it should concern all of us that so much bureaucracy, whether it's education, whether it's healthcare, the bureaucracy is actually standing in the way of the quality and efficient delivery of services that are vitally needed, needed across america, especially in

5:51 am

vulnerable populations where education in this case means so much. i certainly appreciate the very positive feedback that i get from families, especially students themselves who have found greater opportunity through a scholarship program such as this, where scholarship granting organizations form basically around the needs of students and the scholarship granting organizations i want to have the freedom and the flexibility to meet the needs of the students and various communities so that a brighter future can be pursued. so certainly urge the rejection of this amendment and urge the adoption of the full bill so that we can see the positive impacts across america as soon as possible. thank you. i yield back. >> further discussion on the amendment?

5:52 am

ms. soule. >> thank you, mr. chairman. i want to thank mr. docket for his partnership on this amendment. this amendment strikes the private school voucher steam that's in this bill. under the republican plan, donors who contribute money or stocks to these voucher schemes will receive 100% of the contributions back in the form of a discount on their tax bill. this is a preposterous tax benefit that is not given to other charitable donations like those to churches. i know this issue well. my home state of alabama has adopted a dollar for dollar tax shelter for donations to these voucher schemes in alabama and alabama's public school children and teachers are paying the price, right along with taxpayers footing the bill. mr. docket's state has poured $1 billion into a similar

5:53 am

program. this is unprecedented to satisfy $5 billion of taxpayer money into private school voucher schemes while starving our public school of their funding. we should not stand for this and i know i for one will be very vocal about it. this proposal would advance president donald trump's agenda on establishing universal school of choice by providing families nationwide the option to give their children education different from the one offered in local public schools. as my questioning of mr. volto unveiled, there are no household income requirements for students to receive these scholarships. therefore, parents can give as a donation to these organizations as much money as they want, dollar for dollar, getting that donation as a deduction and at

5:54 am

the same time their children of wealthy folks can actually use this to go to school. it's unfair. and what it does is it limits the ability -- it's using taxpayer money in order to help private schools flourish. and i think to add insult to injury, in states like alabama and the deep south, the same type of scheme of choice in the name of choice caused so many of these segregated private schools to prop up. in my hometown of selma, alabama, i went to a public school. i'm a proud public school graduate. having said that, in selma there were also two private academy. one private academy came about in 1965, came out for the purpose of making sure that the public schools were not integrated and i have to tell you, the public school back in

5:55 am

alabama when i was there in selma, we had a debate team. we were the ones who had winning basketball teams and the like. and it was our kids that went on to ivy league schools and to top universities whereas morgan academy, named after a confederate klan'sman, morgan academy students, all white schools, 40 years ago and today it's still an all white private school and many of the parents utilized this, these schools sponsoring organizations to actually funnel money through to their own children and to children similarly situated in terms of their ability to pay and it's simply unfair so i think that not only will it give it dollar for dollar, in states that also offer the same kind of schemes, those same donors get to get a one for one on the

5:56 am

federal side and they get a deduction on the state side and it's simply unfair so their one dollar gets them -- for every one dollar, it gets them $1.50 worth of benefits and that's not the same benefit that we have in public schools. the program would be funded by donors who could contribute money or stocks and it allows stockholders to avoid paying taxes that would be levied if they donated or transferred the stock. this private voucher scheme is just bad. it is one that will allow wealthier americans to be able to provide private school education for their children at the expense of public schools and i don't think that any of us would want that to occur. i know as a proud public school girl, i will be fighting to make sure that every dollar that can go to public schools will go to public schools.

5:57 am

i am not adverse to private schools. i just prefer public schools and i definitely don't want private schools that are segregated to flourish like they have. there is no choice in selma. one public school, one private school. one is all black and one is all white. it's simply unacceptable in 2025 and we should not be in the business of promulgating it. >> mr. yakum. >> thank you, mr. chairman. i rise in opposition to this amendment. i was a proud co-sponsor of mr. smith's bill. this bill was originally introduced by my predecessor, our friend and my dear friend and our mutual friend, jackie volarski. time and time again, we see democrat politicians send their kids to private school while railing against vouchers. educational choice should not be

5:58 am

just for the rich. educational choice should be for everyone. no matter what your income level is. this provision is to -- from my estimation, is a pro middle class provision, this is something that allows anyone whether you're poor, whether you're middle class, no matter who you are to be able to send your child to the school of your choice. mr. chairman, i urge my colleagues to vote no on this amendment and i yield back. >> mr. davis. >> i strongly oppose. i yield back. >> thank you. further discussion? ms. chu. >> i strongly support this amendment. as if the bill were marking up today doesn't do enough to cater to the wealthiest individuals in this country, republicans have included this educational choice for children act which would take federal funding away from

5:59 am

public schools in order to subsidize private schools and some of the wealthiest families that attend them. if enacted into law this proposal would take $10 billion per year, federal taxpayer dollars away from public students, and give it to private students. every single dollar we direct to private schools will come at the expense of the overwhelming majority of our country of students, 90% who attend public schools. to make matters worse, these scholarships wouldn't even be limited to low and middle income families. under the bill, any student whose family makes up to 300% of the median gross income in their area would be eligible, meaning this bill would force taxpayers to pay for high income families to send their children to private schools eve even when they can already afford it. in fact in schools that already have school voucher programs, 70% of students receiving vouchers were already attending

6:00 am

private school to begin with. furthermore, private schools unlike public schools are not required to provide a free and fair education to all children and are allowed to turn away prospective students and ignore civil rights protections such as protections for students with disabilities. we must not use public tax dollars to subsidize the wealthiest families who send their children to private expensive and often religious schools that are not accountable to the public and are not required to serve every student. for that reason, i urge a no vote on this bill. >> further discussion on the amendment? seeing none, the question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by mr. docket. the clerk will call the roll. [roll call vote]

6:01 am

6:02 am

6:03 am

6:04 am

the clerk will report the vote. >> the yeses are 18, the nos are 24. >> there being 18 yeses and 24 nos, the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? ms. soule. >> you reserve a point of order. >> there has been a point of order reserved. will the lady please descend while we distribute the amendment. ms. soule, you can proceed. >> thank you, mr. chairman.

6:05 am

my amendment seeks to strike the provision in this bill that targets the endowment of america's leading colleges and universities for the sake of paying for corporate tax and tax cuts for the wealthy. in 2017, for the first time the tax cuts and jobs act imposed a tax on the endowment of not for profit colleges and universities with more than 500 students and endowments larger than 5,000 per student. it was a 1.4% tax. now, this bill provides an even greater tax and expands the number of institutions that must pay it. under this bill, it is a four tiered tax proposal that ranges from 1.4% to as much as 21% tax. this is truly punitive. imposing this punitive taxis ans

6:06 am

an attack on american values, america's leading colleges and universities are nonprofit entities that benefit all allamericans. they seek cures for diseases, make discoveries that are critical to america's security and prosperity, they spin out businesses and develop talent and entrepreneurs. they empower regional economies and educate diverse regional workforces and they truly change lives as well. it is an attack on college affordability. more than half of annual endowment spending goes directly to student financial aid. tens of billions a year. by reducing reliance on federal loans, endowments reduce burdens on american taxpayers and enable graduates more flexibility to pursue public sector or non---

6:07 am

not for profit jobs. i can personally attest to the college affordability. you see, i would never have had an opportunity to go to college, to my alma mater, had it not been the fact that myal ma almar used it's endowment for a needs blind admission. i didn't know how my family could afford school. not only did they admit me on a needs blind basis but they provided me with every financial help that i needed in order to graduate. princeton is one of the leading institutions when it comes to student aid. i can personally attest to that. even after 35 years, their commitment to college affordability and being able to use endowments to help make sure that america's children that get in actually can get out of

6:08 am

college debt free. in fact, most families with incomes of under $100,000 pay nothing for their undergraduate students to attend college at princeton and i know that many of the other elite colleges have similar programs. half of all princeton students receive aid that covers the full cost of tuition including most families with incomes up to $200,000. i think that the punitive nature of this tax is based on a fallacy that somehow these institutions breed liberalism. i can tell you that this one institution that i went to, my alma mater, produced terry stool, a democrat, as well as ted cruz, a republican. i think it's a fallacy that somehow going to these institutions create liberalism. it's an attack on higher education. these university endowments are

6:09 am

essential to america's preeminence in higher education, attack on america's competitiveness by continuing to have this punitive tax. our country needs to win the global competition in industries that will dominate the 21st century such as a.i. and quantum science and biotechnology and endowments support essential american leadership in these areas. i also think it's really unfair that similarly situated taxpayers should be treated similarly, nonprofit colleges and universities are no different than libraries, museums and philanthropic foundations and each of our districts, they are significant organizations impacting overall well-being of the local economy. i think that it is a shame that we are utilizing endowments, tax endowments up to 21% to pay for

6:10 am

the wealthiest to get a tax break and for big corporations to have permanent tax breaks. i yield back the balance of my time and i urge my colleagues to think about the universities and institutions in their own districts that provide opportunities that would not exist for vulnerable children and children in need. thank you. i yield. >> further discussion on the amendment? ms. chu. >> this bill is so outrageous and ill logical that it would likely result in some universities paying a higher tax than many corporations do despite the fact that these institutions of higher education are driven not by profit but by the mission to educate the public and support research. and let's consider that university endowments enable many institutions to provide more generous financial aid for

6:11 am

their students and to help fund ground breaking research. in fact, u.s. colleges and universities spend more on student financial aid from their endowments than on anything else. institutions like the california institute of technology or cal tech which is in my district, 100% of students demonstrate financial needs so they can focus on making discoveries of tomorrow without having to worry about costs or graduating with a mountain of debt. the tax increase will undermine the teaching and research missions of institutions, harm students in need of financial aid and curtail critical research without doing anything to lower the cost of college or enhance access to higher education and for that reason i urge a yes vote and i yield back. >> further discussion on the amendment? seeing none, the question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by ms. soule.

6:12 am

the clerk will call the roll. [roll call vote]

6:13 am

6:14 am

6:15 am

>> the clerk will report the vote. >> the yeses are 19, the nos are 24. >> there being 19 yeses and 24 nos, the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? >> mr. chairman, i have an amendment on the desk. >> mr. chairman, i reserve a point of order. >> point of order has been reserved. will the gentle lady suspend while the amendment is distributed. you can proceed. >> thank you, mr. chairman. mr. chairman, my amendment would provide a refundable tax credit for fertility treatment expenses. starting or growing a family looks different for everyone and

6:16 am

some parents need a little extra help. everyone knows someone who has only been able to start a family because of fertility treatments. in 2023, over 95,000 babies were born via in vitro fertilization. unfortunately, fertility treatments can be incredibly expensive and out of reach for many. with costs ranging from 15,000 to $30,000, ibf is cost prohibitive for so many couples looking to expand their families. we can and we should do more to help these families. earlier this year president trump signed an executive order expanding access to in vitro fertilization. the executive order recognized the importance of family formation and mentioned that as a nation our public policy must make it easier. this amendment does just that.

6:17 am

the underlying bill already includes changes to the adoption tax credit. why doesn't it address other ways that people start and grow families? democrats are here standing up for families and unfortunately republicans are working to provide tax breaks for the wealthy. this amendment is an opportunity to support families and the many ways that they are created. i urge all of my colleagues to ensure their constituents can build families however is best for them by voting in favor of this amendment. i yield back. >> further discussion on the amendment? seeing none, the question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by ms. delviny. the clerk will call the roll. [roll call vote]

6:18 am

6:19 am

6:20 am

6:21 am

>> the clerk will report the vote. >> the yeses are 19, the nos are 24. >> there being 19 yeses and 24 nos, the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? mr. buyer. >> mr. chairman, i reserve a point of order.

6:22 am

>> a point of order has been reserved. >> i have an amendment on the desk. >> gentleman can proceed. >> mr. chairman, as we all know, president trump regularly makes promises he can't or won't keep. for example, i remember a day not too long ago when he said he would bring pricing down on day one. we can all see how well that's going, prices are higher today than they were when trump took office, the price of eggs are the highest price on record. coffee prices are up over 5% since trump took office, are expected to climb even higher when trump's tariffs take effect given we cannot grow coffee domestically and the price of used cars experienced the highest price increase in a long time. these rising prices are hurting american families that are struggling to make ends meet and the uncertainty about the health of the economy. working americans need to carefully consider how these increases impact the family

6:23 am

budgets. for the wealthiests it represents nothing more than pocket change. it's not surprising we see the same kind of attitude apply to taxes as far as the president is concerned. regardless of what donald trump promise, at the end of the day he's helping rich pals over working people. during the first run for president a decading ago, trump promised to eliminate the carried interest loophole that allows the richest executives on wall street to pay a lower tax rate than their secretaries. the president was emphatic, saying we could close did loophole because the hedge fund guys didn't build the country. the hedge fund guys are get you awaywith murder, end quote. the carried interest loophole that hedge fund guys use is indefensible. carried interest is the percentage of investment gains usually around 20% that hedge fund managers, private equity

6:24 am

executives take as profit on top of management fees they charge their client. the current law is written, the rich executives don't need to put any money in the state to take advantage of the loophole and claim the profit as investment. what does this mean? it means these profits are subject to low capital gains tax rates, rather than the ordinary income tax rates that most people see on their w2s. i'd like to say i'm surprised my republican colleagues are prioritizing tax cuts for the wealthy, but we've seen this before. back in 2017 when my republican friends passed the first tax cuts for billionaires bill, it failed to prioritize common sense reforms like closing the carried interest loophole and unsurprisingly trump failed to push them on it. 45 billionaires hold money up

6:25 am

275% since the first term. this needs to be changed. by closing the loophole, my amendment would raise billions of dollars and help bring down our national debt that my republican friends seem intent on blowing up even more with this bill. it's long past time to ask the richest people in america to start paying their fair share. my amendment would do just that. let's help donald trump keep a promise of his for once. unlike so many of the other ideas, closing the carried interest loophole would be a promise worth keeping. i urge my colleagues to support this long overdue amendment. i yield back. >> mr. yakum. >> i have a copy of the inflation reduction act and american rescue plan. i guess my question is for the amendment's author, when you have the majority and you put through two reconciliation plans, can you show me what page the carried interest loophole

6:26 am

closing is on? will the representative yield? sure. >> that was in the bill that passed out of this house and it went to the senate. it was taken out by senator kyrsten sinema. that did not make the american rescue plan or the inflation reduction act? >> it did not. because we have one recalcitrant democratic senator that would not go along with it. >> when you had the house, the senate, and the presidency, you were not able to get that through. >> are you trying to foreshadow what's going to happen with the bill in the senate. >> i'm just making sure. >> thank you so much. i yield back. >> further discussion? >> when president trump was first running for office, he said on the campaign trail, quote, the hedge fund guys are getting away with murder. they're paying nothing and it's ridiculous. the hedge fund guys didn't build this country. these are the guys that shift paper around. he was right then. but as with his promises to

6:27 am

bring prices drastically down, and to do so many other things, he abandoned his claims once he got into office. he did absolutely nothing to close this egregious loophole. as president, shutting down the tax break is exactly what he said he would do and what he did not do. trump has since proclaimed against as mr. byer pointed out as recently as last week that he objected to this carried interest loophole but it's all talk and no action. and the result and outcome that should not have surprised anyone, the trump tax scam of 2017 did not close the loophole and there's nothing in this bill to close the loophole. a new report shows how wide open this loophole remains and why this amendment is important to adopt and close the loophole. the report highlights that just

6:28 am

eight top executives, two of the biggest private equity firms saved a collective $335 billion in taxes over a recent five-year span. all thanks to the carried interest loophole. one individual at one of these private equity firms who is himself worth over $40 billion saved over $93 million on taxes over the same period solely because of the carried interest tax break. if trump were truly on the side of working americans, if these republicans were truly on the side of working americans, they would join us to take action to fix a broken tax system replete with loopholes that allow billionaires to escape paying their fair share. a yes vote for this amendment will be a vote to trim hedges, be a vote to ensure that those trimmed hedge -- those that trim hedges for a living are not paying a higher rate than those

6:29 am

who manage hedge funds. a no vote means the work of nurses, teachers, firefighters and police officers is not valued as much as those who manage other people's billions for a living. i urge approval of the amendment. >> further discussion on the amendment? seeing none, the question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by mr. byer. the clerk will call the roll. [roll call vote]

6:30 am

6:31 am

6:32 am

>> the clerk will report the vote. >> the yeses are 18, the nos are 25. >> there being 18 yeses and 25 nos, the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? >> thank you, mr. chairman, i've got an amendment at the desk.

6:33 am

>> a point order has been reserved. mr. panetta. proceed. >> my amendment would increase medicare payments at the rate of inflation. an amendment to ensure doctors and other providers are able to stay in practice and serve our constituents. mode care payments have not -- medicare payments have not reflected economic realities of the rising cost of healthcare. 2001, adjusting for inflation, medicare doctor payments have been cut by one-third. as a result, more and more providers are closing their doors and leaving seniors and disabled americans without access to vital medical care. medicare is a promise we make to our constituents that if you pay into the system, it will be there for you. but unfortunately today it's not about medicare coverage. it's about doctors accepting

6:34 am

medicare patients because they can't afford to accept medicare payments. for now, until you cut medicaid programs, -- for now, until you cut the medicaid programs, it's the number one health issue i hear about from my constituents who can't find a doctor who will take medicare. i hear from seen years all the time -- seniors all the time who have to drive out of the district or wait months for an appointment. this is a bipartisan problem that does have a bipartisan solution. the amendment i'm introducing mirrors representative ruiz's act which last congress had 172 co-sponsors, 47 of them were republicans. the nonpartisan act recommended that congress tie payments to inflation. majority offered a bill today that would give a modest one time increase to doctors just

6:35 am

for next year, followed by annual increases at just a tenth of a percent or less than even the current law. this means in the long run, doctors are going to be worse off than if we did nothing at all today. i'm proud to have partnered in the past with my republican colleagues who i know, i know are committed to getting this right and preventing further medicare cuts. i urge all my colleagues to pass this amendment to finally link medicare payments to the true cost of care and ensure that we keep our promise so that our constituents can always rely on medicare. thank you, mr. chairman. i yield back. >> further discussion on the amendment? dr. murphy. >> i see the sun is shining today. i see a light coming they from e east. my good friend from the west, i think it's going to be a disney day. i am happy that finally my democratic colleagues are seeing

6:36 am

the light and that know that physician payment is a terrible, terrible disaster that we are all facing. i appreciate the interest in this. i really, really do. and my only problem is, mr. panetta, can i ask a quick question. how much is this? >> you know the answer,. >> it's a lot of money. >> yeah. we understand that. we also know it's needed though. >> we absolutely do. >> if i may, i've got to give you a lot of credit because you've been a leader on this and you understand that although it's expensive, it's also needed, not just for doctors, but for our patients. >> absolutely. our colleagues in energy and commerce believe -- who knows, they may be going. i believe they're trying to break a record over there. i don't think we need to do it over here by the way. [laughter] >> will the gentleman yield? >> that's under doctor's orders,

6:37 am

please. you all just don't look too good over there. i'm just saying. we don't look too good over here. just ask blaine. [laughter] >> but our colleagues over in energy and commerce have pulled out 8.9 billion. i think that's a good start. i don't think it's enough. personally, i don't think it's enough. i think we can squeeze another 4 billion out to make our physicians and all the other people who do benefit from medicare payments n i'm not voting for the bill unless they do that, not voting for the final bill. this is $200 billion. and that's the reason i didn't sign on this bill. i want us to be fiscally responsible but i also want our doctors to actually be able to survive in private practice. hell, i knew this when i was up at 2:00 a.m. looking for the paper clips at my private practice. when i left, all my younger doctors went we're going to have to go work for a hospital. that's the only reason i won't

6:38 am

support this. i do support it but i can't support it just because there's not a pay for. that's all. thank you for the initiative. and i pray this is the last amendment we have. >> further discussion on the amendment? seeing none, the question is on agreeing the amendment offered by mr. panetta. the clerk will call the roll. [roll call vote]

6:39 am

6:40 am

6:41 am

>> the clerk will report the vote. >> the yeses are 19, the nos are 25. >> there being 19 yeses and 25 nos, the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? >> mr. chairman, i reserve a point of order. >> a point of order has been reserved. proceed. >> yes. good morning, mr. chairman. my amendment seeks to remedy some of the entirely unfair tax treatment reflected in this republican tax bill. the bill serves 2%. the billionaires and the ceo class. not hard working americans who actually need tax relief. independent estimates suggest that this bill could have

6:42 am

extended all of the 2017 cuts except for those ultra rich making over 400,000 per year for 1.8 trillion over 10 years. for $1.8 trillion, we would have been able to extend the 2017 tax cuts to everyone under $400,000. that's a lot of money. but 98% of americans do need tax relief. instead, republicans are looting the american people to the tune of over $5 trillion. cutting vital programs that everyday americans rely on and skyrocketing their costs. all to deliver a massive handout to the wealthiest 2%. republicans are giving an $800 billion gift to billionaires by permanently

6:43 am

increasing 199 aid for pass through business owners. republicans are permanently increasing the state tax exemption so that hard working heirs of the rich and famous can build their trust funds tax free. republicans are extending the need to the investor class at every turn, renewing the failed opportunity zone program, giving the wealthiest americans another chance to shelter capital gains and already gentrifying areas of major cities, republicans offer the world to wealthy and expect the 98 to be happy with the crumbs. the tiny boost of the child tax credit, poorly designed tax breaks for overtime and meager contributions to children's saving accounts that this bill does, and give away to the wealthy are made permanent.

6:44 am

those little crumbs are to keep the 98% quiet, give you something to believe that you're getting something, while they give themselves permanent meals. the republicans are transparently targeting political enemies to pay for tax cuts for the rich. this bill exploits the deficit, driving up interest, explodes the deficit, driving up interest rates. this bill replaces targeted and strategic tax incentives with inefficient and complex give aways that won't grow the american economy or help raise take home wages of american workers. simply, this bill redistributes from for rich. my amendment is for the 98% of americans who this bill takes from. this amendment will ensure that the bill will not take effect until the congressional budget office ashowers that -- assures

6:45 am

that the benefits of the bills are distributed among taxpayers making under 400,000 in an equitable manner. oppose the billionaire boondoggle, support this amendment. i yield back at this time. >> further discussion on the amendment? seeing none, the question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by ms. plaskis. the clerk will call the roll. [roll call vote]

6:46 am

6:47 am

6:48 am

>> the clerk will report the vote. >> the yeses are 19, the nos are 25. >> there being 19 yeses and 25 nos, the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? ms. moore. >> mr. chairman, i reserve a point of order. >> a point of order has been reserved. ms. moore, proceed. >> good morning, mr. chairman. i'm hoping that with the rising

6:49 am

of the sun we could just sort of pull back from the brink for a moment. earlier this morning, we considered an amendment offered by ms. soule to strike the excise tax on universities endowments. and i understand that this endowment as she indicated went from 1.2% excise tax all the way up depending on the size of the endowment up to 21% which is a huge increase. this was -- i don't know if this was instituted. this was aggravated, i think, by the sort of conflict that our

6:50 am

president had with harvard university and of course harvard university was established in 1636 so they may in fact have a big enough endowment to do what they did, to fight back in court and so on. and ms. soule, i hope i won't embarrass her. she invoked the name of her alma mater of princeton as an example, but she's also an alum alumna of harvard law school as well and i hope that we don't destroy higher education. i mean, the thing that provides american exceptionalism, you know, we invented the internet. we invented, you know, google

6:51 am

and all the other things. i fear -- we do research around, you know, healthcare. i'm looking at my grandmother for whom i'm named, i'm looking at her death certificate. she died of a type of leukemia. that would have been managed very handily by today's drugs that are out there to fight the type of leukemia that she had and so i know we're looking for pay fors and i don't want us to use the excuse that institutions reportedly were anti-semetic, created a hostile environment, throw the baby out with the bath water and destroy our truly -- what's truly exceptional about us and that we at this point don't have any competitors, i think, with regard to our excellent post secondary

6:52 am

education. this amendment is really, really simple. i'm running out of time. but it would simply strike, provide an exception to section 4968 excise tax for graduate schools only programs. my amendment only affects four institutions in the entire country. schools with a very important mission, related to the health of our nation. this modification is crucial for ensuring that the medical college of wisconsin in my district will continue to supply a robust healthcare workforce pipeline across wisconsin and beyond. 1530 students are enrolled at medical college of wisconsin school of medicine, school of pharmacy and graduate school of biomedical sciences and their teachers will be affected by the decisions that this committee is making today. annually, mcw faculty directors

6:53 am

collaborate on more than 3,225 research studies including clinical trials and i don't have time to tell you about all of the ground breaking research that they have done on traumatic brain injury, including on our veterans, and having one of the nation's leading researchers in that area so it's not just mcw. it's three other medical schools, behr in texas, mayo in minnesota and sinai in new york. and they'll suffer cuts to their programs directed at the national, regional and local health needs and that's why on a bipartisan basis every single member of the wisconsin delegation, six republicans and two democrats sent a letter to the committee asking for a fix for these medical schools. we have a lot of disagreements

6:54 am

about healthcare but i hope that we agree that we need health professionals to provide that care. i mean, the endowment tax, even at 1.2%, it's already inhibiting medical schools ability to advance the healthcare workforce, invest in patient care and deliver research discoveries. if this republican proposal is enacted without a fix for medical graduate schools, we should expect some combination of reducing our student class sizes or reductions of our workforce. you know, every day 10,000 people turn 65. we need more doctors, not fewer doctors. my time is expired but i beg you, i beg you to consider this amendment. mr. chairman, mr. chairman, don't go to sleep on me. i'm begging you to work with me

6:55 am

on this. >> how could i ever go to sleep with your lovely voice. >> i know. i'm begging you. this is a bipartisan issue. i don't want to get caught up in the sort of pissing match and to diminish our opportunities to produce quality doctors in this country and i'm asking this committee to work with me on this amendment. >> everyone is telling me to say yes, i will work with you. >> just say you'll work with me. >> i will always work with you. we passed legislation together. >> with that, i will give people an early breakfast gift and i will withdraw the amendment. >> who else wants to work with

6:56 am

me. [laughter] >> all right. are there any more amendments? mr. horseberg. >> mr. chairman, i reserve. >> a point of order has been reserved. would the gentleman suspend while the amendment is distributed. >>

6:57 am

the bills that we have considered have significantly stronger safeguards are van when this came to life. i'm disappointed that the larger bill does nothing to give service employee industries a raise. my tips act would ensure we are laminate the abysmal $2.13 in our sub minimum wage, there are workers in america that get paid as little as $2.13 an hour but while i'm glad you are all including a no tax on tips recognize you can't have one without the other, not enough to impact tips but also ending

6:58 am

the sub minimum wage and giving people, workers, the power to keep more of their hard-earned money. if i could for a moment, thank you to you and your staff are working with me and my staff on the no tax on tips legislation but there is one last thing i would like to ask you to consider and i understand was part of what your team was looking at but whatever reason it may have fallen through in the final version. i believe we need to close a loophole that would allow a wealthy business owner to pass down inheritance to their children under the guise of tips. right now this bill would allow the rich to give their fortune to their kids and call that a tipper. we know that is not the intent but unless you put these safeguards in place, that's the

6:59 am

type of abuse that could happen so my ask simply is that if this bill moves forward, that you, through the chairman, continue to work with me to ensure this bill works for workers. my amendment asks related parties cannot give a tip that your boss that you call your wage and your brother can't give you a tip, a gift and call it a tip. this is something i believe should be included within the safeguard and based on other provisions that have already been added, i want to ask mister buchanan if you would like me to continue to work on that should this measure move forward out of the committee.

7:00 am

>> i know it is big but also for florida tourism. got a couple pages and make sure we tighten it up. i look forward to working with you. >> with that is the understanding, thank you, congressman buchanan, to you and your chairman, i will withdraw my amendment. >> are there additional amendments? mr. gomez? >> all right, mister chairman, second day, let's get this done as my ii and a half year said, let's do this. >> reserve point of order. >> point of order has been reserved. >> i'm offering an amendment to extend premium tax credits for women and kids including all those who are about to lose medicaid coverage because of the devastating republican cuts. let's remember as my colleagues

7:01 am

have pointed out, this bill does nothing to extend the tax credits for middle-class and working-class families to afford health insurance, that means millions of americans are going to see their health insurance skyrocket. in the chairman at the district a family or four earning $64,000 a year is going to see their premiums double. that family will have to pay 2000570 one dollars more than a year ago. i don't know where they are going to go to find that money, mr. chairman because of republican in action, 4 million more people will be uninsured and that is on top of the 8.6 million that will lose medicaid coverage because of $715 billion cut republicans want to make to medicaid, the biggest in the program's history. in my district over 400,000 people rely on medicaid as a vertical lifeline and the chairman's district, that's 200,000 people, kids, seniors,

7:02 am

vulnerable to being kicked off of their health insurance because of republican cuts. i will ask again, where are people in your district and everybody's district going to get healthcare when the republican tax code has kicked them off their insurance? i asked my republican colleagues are you going to be with the families? the babies? the seniors? are the billionaires which i will give you another chance to vote with your constituents. i hope you have a good answer when you go home and your constituents ask that question. instead of giving massive tax cuts. >> further discussion on the amendment? the question is agreeing to the amendment with mr. gomez. clerk will call the roll.

7:03 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] mr. estes, no. [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:04 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:05 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:06 am

>> the clerk will report the vote. >> yeses are 19, nos are 24. >> there being 19 yearses and 24 nos the amendment is not agreed to. i there additional amendments? >> i reserve a point of order. >> point of order has been reserved. >> i have an amendment at the desk to ensure that the tax code honors our national commitment to veterans in a fiscally responsible manner. if you can't tell, i am passionate and i am passionate about housing because my district is facing a housing affordability crisis. people need affordable homes and need them now. i am glad there is one thing in this bill for housing my disappointment comes from what is not here. what is not here is something to address the millions of renters. what is not here is something

7:07 am

to address trump's blanket tariffs that will raise the cost of housing. my amendment would create a veterans housing fund that creates a modest one% sarah tax on corporate stock buybacks limited to firms with $10 billion in assets, the finance stable housing and essential mental health services for homeless and at risk of veterans. last year the s&p 500 companies reported nearly $1 trillion in buybacks while over 30,000 veterans experienced homelessness. if my colleagues are committed to helping veterans they can support this amendment to help balance that equation. this is not a blue city amendment, half of veterans experiencing homelessness are in suburban or rural communities and around 75% of

7:08 am

these patriots reside in the states represented in this committee. there is nothing in this bill that addresses shelter, mental health, substance abuse, job training or other assistance specifically for veterans, meanwhile stock buybacks set an annual record of $943 billion last year alone. which increased nearly 20% from 2023. in the fourth quarter, hundreds of companies reported buybacks of at least $5 million, increasing dividends nearly 7% to a record $168 billion. it was the top 20 s&p 500 companies that accounted for all stock buybacks. stock buybacks inflate share prices and reward shareholders. they do nothing to create jobs, serve the broader economy or

7:09 am

reward national service. if you profit from america's market you should help the people who protected them. this 1% tax on wall street access is 100% investment in our veterans and their success. i will say it again again, if you profit from america's market you should help the people who protected them. i urge my colleagues to support this amendment daniel back. >> further discussion on the amendment? it is plastic. >> thank you very much. i had more a question for my colleague regarding this patriot act you had, pre-deployed amendment, what will this take away from and who are the individuals that would have to be putting into the fund to be able to pay for these veterans? >> thank you to my colleague from the virgin islands.

7:10 am

it would apply to corporate s&p 500 companies specifically, with assets of $10 billion or greater, to finance housing, what i'm calling a veterans housing fund and would be assessed 1% tax on any of those stock buybacks. >> in essence we are giving them these corporations a tax break and so they are already getting a lot of money in their pockets, from their shareholders to put back into the company and we are only asking that one% only the companies in the fortune 500, and there are millions of companies in this country, that those fortune 500 companies need to put into a pool of funds, almost a trust to be

7:11 am

able to support our veterans. those individuals who have committed their lives to protect us and to protect america. is that what you're asking? >> that is simply what i'm asking and specifically to fund the needs around housing, mental health services, substance abuse which we know many of our veterans suffer from, job training and other assistance including prevention of suicide. i believe these are common sense approaches to address a critical need that all of us have across all of our districts, there were 30,000 veterans that experienced homelessness. at the same time, s&p 500 companies reported nearly $1 trillion in buybacks. this would set that towards a more balanced approach. >> once again, i'm always looking at the end. what is the long-term fiscal

7:12 am

responsibility that we have? by providing a housing, mental health, job training to those individuals who come out of active service and become our veterans, that in turn creates productivity in the american economy, that creates the productivity and allows our veterans to continue to be part of this country while at the same time contributing him if they have a job job training and jobs they will be paying taxes, income taxes, we know we have a substantial number of veterans who are receiving medicaid, receiving social services, by creating this fund, this then allows us to be able to set up programs outside of federal funding to be able to support these veterans. i think there's an amazing opportunity for us to show how

7:13 am

we feel about veterans in this country and to show that we are willing to keep accountability to those corporations who are extracting the most, making the most money to be able to give back to our country in a manner that supports those who made the ultimate sacrifice for us and i would ask my colleagues to support this amendment and thank you to my colleagues for not thinking that because it is 6:00 or 7:00 in the morning, we need to do what we need to do, what we said we need to do and that is enough, that you are steady in these amendments. i appreciate that. i commend you for it and i support this amendment. >> thank you. further discussion on the amendment?

7:14 am

seeing on the question is on agreeing to the amendment by mister horseberg, clerk will call the roll. [rollcall vote] [rollcall vote] [rollcall vote] [rollcall vote] [rollcall vote] [rollcall vote] [rollcall vote]

7:15 am

[rollcall vote] [rollcall vote] [] rollcall vote] [rollcall vote] [rollcall vote] [rollcall vote] [rollcall vote]

7:16 am

[rollcall vote] [rollcall vote] [rollcall vote] [rollcall vote] >> clerk will report the vote. >> yeses are 19, nos are 24.

7:17 am

>> there being 19 yeses and 24 knows the amendment is not agreed to. either additional amendments? mister gomez. >> i reserve a deck of order. >> point of order has been reserved. mr. gomez. >> thank you, mister chairman but i believe this markup should be focused on the needs of the working class and the middle class and one of the biggest issues facing not only them but the entire country is the housing affordability crisis which americans voted for serious change and relief from high prices. not giving tax breaks to billionaires and fortune 500 companies paid for by cutting essential programs for workers and families like medicaid and snap. americans are concerned about affordability and how rising prices are making it increasingly difficult to achieve the american dream. a survey indicated 67% of americans now believe

7:18 am

homeownership is an unrealistic milestone for young people and here is the thing. there is a high correlation of people believe they can buy a house and believe in the american dream and the system actually works for them. home prices are skyrocketing and rising prices on everything from childcare to groceries making it harder for young americans to save for a down payment. the median home price is now $416,900. that's a 30% jump over the last five years, median household income in the united states in 2023 was about $80,610. that means more than 50% of american households need more than entire year of income before taxes for 20% down payment. in california the median listing price is $760,000. in los angeles that is one million dollars. .

7:19 am

the price of housing is outstripping wage growth or inflation. this is clearly a crisis. trump ran on a plank of amazing how to morph our -- making housing more for blend republicans almost nothing in this massive tax giveaway that would help americans to purchase a home. create a one thousand dollars tax-free investment for young children that could be used for a down payment is too little and too late. especially for millennials andgen z americans trying to purchase a house right now. i'm proposing an amendment that will use our tax code to boost homeownership but helping first-time homeowners to afford a down payment and helping stimulate building of starter homes first-time buyers could afford. my amendment will allow eligible first-time homebuyers, $65,000 towards down payment and closing costs. this credit would be

7:20 am

advancedable at time of closing. additionally my amendment would establish a credit to incentivize construction of starter homes that are affordable. allowing states to allocate credits to developers equivalent to 50% qualified construction costs toward eligible starter home which boosted to 30% if a developer certifies the starter home was sold to a first-time homebuyer. this is a substantial investment government and young americans and the american dream. for too long republicans lack the courage to seriously invest in housing for working and middle-class americans. if we find money to give tax crates to billionaires and massive corporations we should be able to find the money to help average americans to own a home and here is the thing, i recognize there is a lot more to do. we've got to cut the red tape at the local level that helps

7:21 am

spur the creation of new units, make sure we protect renters who are on the verge of missing a rent payment and may end up on the streets and make sure that this is not a boondoggle. if we want to create, deal with the housing affordability crisis it has to be bigger than the 200,000 units over the low income housing tax credit provision that was in this bill, we are short about 4 million units. if we want to be serious about this crisis, we've got to create a housing boom we haven't seen since the end of world war ii when the troops were coming home. we have to tackle it like we would construction of the interstate highway system, make sure we can do this, a million new units of housing a year for the next ten years. i'm working with my colleagues on the other side of the aisle

7:22 am

that will help convert real estate through housing. here's the thing. is not able state or blue city issue. working on this bill with mr. carey from ohio on that bill. a good bill. that's a red state, or read the city and i had conversations with somebody. i know that we can tackle this problem if we work together. i ask for a yes vote. >> further discussion on the amendment? miss plaskim. >> thank you for offering this amendment. we know in this legislation while the republicans have touched the surface of housing there is so much more to be done particularly in light of tariffs which are raising the cost of building homes which

7:23 am

will cause skyrocketing and materials, imported building materials for residential construction, 22% of which comes from china. we know that our young people, i see you addressed first-time homebuyers and starter homes, construction credits, those are the two areas that need it most. there is an urgent need to invest in low income housing tax credit because it is our nation's most successful tool for encouraging private investment in the development and presentation of affordable housing. democrats focus not only on housing supply but also on affordability. through initiatives like first-time homebuyer credits and renters credit when we were able to get this work done. this bill, the bill in front of us right now has got the cash for people making over $1 million but does our bare minimum, $14 million investment in our housing crisis.

7:24 am

the fact is with the cost of building materials with the lower percentage of disposable income, individuals who are going to have and rising cost of inflation still going up talked about during the time of biden, during the biden administration inflation was going down. we see that it is rising now and the cost of buying a home is going to increase so we has members of congress need to invest in the american people and one of the greatest ways that we can do that that leads to wealth is through home ownership. that the primary gap particularly with black americans. we know after world war ii when the rest of america was able to increase their wealth through homeownership and the g.i. bill, black americans, black g.i. s were denied that through redlining and not being able to

7:25 am

use the g.i. bill, that is when we saw start disparity in wealth between black americans and white americans that has not been able to be closed and a lot of this has to do with home ownership. that is how people are able to leverage themselves, leverage their wealth, to be able to grow and provide something for their children and an inheritance for their children's children. the bible says a wise man will raise up well for himself but his children's children and the best way they can do that is through homeownership. i would urge my colleagues to support this amendment and yields back the balance of my time. >> further discussion on the amendment? the question is on agreeing to the amendment offered by mister gomez. the clerk will call her all. [roll call vote]

7:26 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:27 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:28 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] >> the clerk will report the vote. >> the yeses are 19, the knows are 25. >> there being 19 yeses and 25 knows the amendment is not

7:29 am

agreed to. are there additional amendments? mister horseberg. >> point of order. >> point of order has been reserved. proceed. >> thank you, mister chairman. i have an amendment at the desk to rectify another grave mistake this administration has made. i believe in government efficiency but recklessly firing our federal workforce is a mistake. these arbitrary firings throughout the federal workforce aren't efficient and is lazy policy has put our veterans at risk as they make up 30% of the federal workforce. thousands of brave patriots have left the military and continue serving the american people listing and services that safeguard the nation's security to support veterans services like running the veterans crisis line.

7:30 am

brave patriots like mark flagstaff who served the nation for ten years in the marine corps. after a decade of loyal atari service, mark moved to north las vegas where he continued his public service at the va. despite receiving stellar evaluations mark was let go as part of doge's industry minute cuts. market mark, along with thousands of other veterans have had their careers and lives dismantled by a president, and oligarchs, who have no clue what it means to serve this country. these terminations not only violate our commitment to those who served but they actively undermine the strength and quality of the federal workforce. i want to repeat a question that was asked by former marine corps sergeant mark flagstaff. he said, quote, as an american i signed up to defend my

7:31 am

country, dedicated to public service. i stood for my country. now who will stand for me? if you are hearing this i want you to know that i am standing with you and asking my colleagues who are here today to stand with you as well. my amendment will make sure that the recently laid off veterans from federal service are included in the work opportunity tax credit. specifically, veterans subject to reduction by federal government would be an additional category to make sure we are doing our veterans justice. these service members have fought for our country and i am not going to stand idly by why donald trump and anyone else fires the with no due cause.

7:32 am

this is yet another reasonable approach, if we say we care about our veterans and their contributions to our communities and the fact that they represent the federal workforce, though best we can do is guarantee they are included in the workers opportunity tax credit and have the ability to get back into the workforce. i urge my colleagues to support this amendment and i yield back my time. >> mr. buchanan is recognized. >> mister chairman. i make a point of order against the amendment. mister chairman. the amendment is not germane to the underlying resolution under clause 7 rule 16, the amendment is not germane if the subject

7:33 am

matter is different from that underlying resolution, the subject matter underlying resolution is generally related to the matter in the committee's jurisdiction. the jurisdiction of the committee on appropriations, therefore the amendment is not germane. i urge the chair to sustain point of order. >> point of information. >> does the gentleman wish to be heard on the point of order? >> appreciate it, mr. chairman. my reading of house rule 16 plus 7 is my amendment must not raise subject matter outside the scope of the measure or have a fundamental purpose not in keeping with the fundamental package. this package is such a massive jumble of provisions that i

7:34 am

struggle to see the line this thing wishing my amendment as non-germane to this far reaching anf if the anf was considered germane. i just note i don't know how many amendments we went through but this is the only amendment in the entire 16 hours that has been challenged. 17. and it is for veterans. let's be real. i would challenge the ruling about the germane issue and call upon the chair to make, to overrule. >> i will rule that is not germane because it contains provisions outside the ways and means committee jurisdiction. it tells appropriations which is not in our jurisdiction, it was 50 years ago but not now. >> mr.

7:35 am

chairman, i move to appeal the decision of the chair. >> mr. buchanan is recognized. the clerk will call the roll. [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:36 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:37 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:38 am

>> how is mister evans recorded? >> mr. evans is recorded as yes. [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] >> the clerk will report the vote. >> yeses are 26, nos are 18. >> there being 26 yeses and 18 nos, the bill is tabled and the

7:39 am

point of order is sustained. are there additional amendments? mr. horseforward. >> i reserve a deck of order. >> point of order has been reserved and the gentleman will suspend while the amendment is distributed. the gentleman may proceed. >> and amendment at the desk to unleash american entrepreneurship by increasing the startup tax deductions from $5000-$50,000. if this reconciliation package is about helping americans you will stand with me to remove a major financial barrier for those ready to build and innovate our e economy. starting a new business is one

7:40 am

of the most effective ways to build wealth and create jobs. too many small business owners know that the cost of starting a small business are daunting. unlike the president most americans can't get a small loan of $1 million but the current tax code only allows a startup of a $5,000 deduction. this barely scratches the surface of what it takes to open the doors, having kept pace with inflation or the real cost of launching a business in today's economy. the average startup cost for a business, now $40,000. many small businesses in rural areas in red states face the same or even higher startup costs as urban businesses but often with fewer financial tools or investor access. this policy would benefit our veterans, farmers and

7:41 am

family-run businesses starting up on tight margins, starting a business requires personal risk and responsibility which are the values we should be re-warding. by raising the deduction we give a break to the job creators. the real job and innovators who are the backbone of the american economy. small businesses are responsible for two thirds of the net new jobs in the us economy. by raising the deduction this amendment aligns tax relief with the actual opportunities entrepreneurs face and helps more americans turn ideas into companies. let me make this clear, this amendment would boost local economies helping small businesses survive their first year face federal dollars by reducing bankruptcies, unemployment and lost growth.

7:42 am

i urge my colleagues to support america, american small businesses and entrepreneurs, the engines of our economy and with that i yield back my time. >> further discussion on the amendment? seeing none the question is on agreeing to the amendment by mr. horseford, the clerk will call the roll. [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:43 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:44 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:45 am

[roll call vote] >> clerk will report the vote. >> yeses are 19. nos are 25. >> there being 19 yeses and 25 nos the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? >> i have an amendment at the desk. >> mister snyder. >> i reserve point of order. >> point of order has been reserved. >> proceed, mister snyder. >> it has been a long night. the hearing started more than 17 hours ago, it is easy to

7:46 am

forget the whole proceeding has gone forth with a question hanging over it of whether the aim was even germane. we start with a 28 page bill, was nothing more than a faint. on monday exactly 24 hours before we started this markup republicans released 400 page amendment in the original bill including salt, irate credits, endowment tax into many things. you have to ask why did my republican colleagues insist on having this markup in the dark of night. why did they hide the ball? maybe it was the fact that 14 million people will lose their healthcare because of this bill or that the bill will add $5

7:47 am

trillion, a 5 of 12-0s to our debt by 2044 and $45 trillion by 2055 or maybe it was the unwillingness to consider any improvements whether done with housing or salt or tariff relief, ideas for lowering the cost of the bill without raising taxes on 98% of taxpayers. in fact, my colleagues on the other side of the aisle even refused to raise rates for people making $1 million or $10 million or $100 million, even $1 billion, no willingness to bring reason to this bill. the senate republican this are signaling they are going to ignore what house republicans are doing in the energy and commerce committee and agriculture, they are just going to rewrite this bill. my amendment would simply make it easier for the senate by

7:48 am

replacing the amendment with a blank slate. with the blank slate, democrats are willing to work together with our colleagues in the house and the senate to craft responsible legislation that helps american families not only make ends me to but get ahead. doesn't take healthcare away from 14 million people and doesn't leave children and grandchildren with mountains of debt. >> further discussion on the amendment? seeing none the question is on agreeing to the amendment. >> mr. buchanan. [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:49 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:50 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:51 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] >> doctor murphy is reported as no. >> the clerk will report the vote? >> yeses are 19, nos are 25. >> repeat those numbers.

7:52 am

>> yeses are 19, nos are 25. >> there being 19 yeses and 25 nos the amendment is not agreed to. are there additional amendments? if there are no further amendments, i recognize mr. neil. >> i think the staff for their great work as usual. [applause] >> our members were extremely well prepared. i think members for their diligence. i thought the invoice of conversation based on the history of this committee were not only well intended but based on fact as well and i would say that in the future i make this request in front of all this should be done in the morning, which start at 9:00 in the morning, we are prepared to do this 9:00 to 8:00, 9:00 to 10:00, whatever but i think it loses some of its meaning as

7:53 am

the night wears on, members begin to lose some interest in the immediate discussion. i hope that is something we can do, we tried in the majority to do precisely that. quitting at 8:00 at night, go back the next morning. the majority felt they had time obligation but in the future, this is the longest in 33 years i have ever been in this room at any one time. i hope in the future we accommodate the parties by doing this in the morning starting in the morning. >> i want to reiterate how appreciative i am of the ways and means staff, no one worked harder than this group. and for every one of you to deliver this product to the american people, both

7:54 am

republican and democrat, going through this process. if there are no further amendments on the nature of the amendment and the substitute all those in favor signify by saying i. those opposed say no. the opinion of the chair the eyes have it and the nature of a substitute is agreed to. i will now recognize mr. buchanan for the purpose of offering a motion. >> i move the committee adapt the committee print as amended. >> question is on the motion to adopt committee print as amended. the clerk will call the roll. [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:55 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] >> one more vote. >> doctor murphy. yes. [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] >> if i could interrupt i want

7:56 am

to remind everyone there's another vote. [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

7:57 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] >> clerk will report the vote. >> yeses are 26. nos are 19. >> there being 26 yeses and 19 nos the motion is agreed to and the committee print as amended is adopted. i will recognize mr. buchanan for the purpose of

7:58 am

offering a second motion. >> i move the committee, mr. chairman i move the committee transmit the recommendations of this committee and all the appropriate accompanying materials including supplements or dissenting views to the house committee on budget in order to comply with the reconciliation directive included in section 201 of the resolution of the budget for fiscal year 2025, consistent with section 310 of the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974. >> the question is on the motion to transmit the recommendations of this committee and all appropriate accompanying material including minority additional

7:59 am

supplemental or dissenting views to the house committee on the budget in order to comply with the reconciliation directives included in section 2001 of the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2025, consistent with section 310 of the congressional budget and impoundment control act of 1974. the clerk will call the roll. [roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote]

8:00 am

[roll call vote] [roll call vote] [roll call vote] .. [roll call] [roll call] [roll call]

8:01 am

[roll call] [roll call] [roll call] [roll call] [roll call] >> the clerk report the vote. >> mr. chairman, the yeses are

8:02 am

26, the no's are 19. >> there being 26 yeses in 19 nose, the motion is agree to the recommendation of this committee and all appropriate accompanying material were order transmitted to the house committee on the budget. without objection ask the staff be authorized to make technical and conforming changes to the measure and that members have two additional days to file with the committee clerk supplemental additional dissenting or minority views. i also want for all of us to recognize mr. tom for staying through this entire hearing -- [cheers and applause]

8:03 am

>> there being no further business before the committee, the committee stands adjourned. [applause] [inaudible conversations] [inaudible conversations] [inaudible conversations] [inaudible conversations]

8:04 am

[inaudible conversations] [inaudible conversations] [inaudible conversations] [inaudible conversations]

8:05 am

[inaudible conversations] >> the house ways and means committee has wrapped up passing a republican tax cut package as part of the reconciliation bill. the measure extends key provisions of president trump's 2017 cats from his first term. the legislation temporarily exempt tips and overtime wages from income tax, and changes the state and local tax deduction cap. it now has -- it heads to full house for full coverage. you have been watching live coverage on c-span2. >> nonfiction book lovers, she's been has a number of podcast for you. listen to best-selling nonfiction authors and influential interviewers on the "after words" podcast. on q&a here wide-ranging conversation with nonfiction authors and others who were

8:06 am

making things happen here booknotes+ episodes are weekly hour-long conversations that feature fascinating authors of nonfiction books on a wide variety of topics. find all of our podcast by downloading the free c-span now app or wherever you get your podcasts, and onurebsite c-span.org/podcasts. >> get c-span wherever you are with c-span now, our free free mobile video app that puts you at the center of democracy live and on-demand picky but with today's biggest events with live stream to the floor proceedings and hearings from the u.s. congress, white house events, the courts, campaigns and more from the world of politics all at your fingertips. catch the latest episodes "washington journal", find schedule information for c-span's tv and radio network plus a variety of compelling podcasts. the c-span now app is available at the apple store and google

8:07 am

play. download it for free today. c-span, democracy unfiltered. >> c-spanshop.org you can c-span's online store. browse through our latest collection of, apparel, books, home decor and accessories. there is something for every c-span fan and every purchase helps support our nonprofit operations. shop now or anytime at c-spanshop.org. >> c-span, democracy unfiltered. we are funded by this television companies and more including buckeye broadband. ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ >> buckeye broadband supports

8:08 am

c-span is a public service along with these other television providers giving you a front-row seat to democracy. >> coming up a conversation on how the russia-ukraine war could impact future global conflicts including the evolution of military technology and the use of drones by ukraine and the defense supply chain challenges.

23 Views

info Stream Only

Uploaded by TV Archive on May 14, 2025
