Title: 

URL Source: https://www.congress.gov/119/crec/2025/02/13/171/30/CREC-2025-02-13.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 07 Oct 2025 21:57:43 GMT

Markdown Content:
# Congressional Record 

> UNUMEPLURIBUS

United States 

of America PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE 119 th CONGRESS, FIRST SESSION 

b This symbol represents the time of day during the House proceedings, e.g., b 1407 is 2:07 p.m. Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor. 

# .

H681 

# Vol. 171 WASHINGTON, THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 2025 No. 30 House of Representatives 

The House met at 9 a.m. and was called to order by the Speaker pro tem-pore (Mr. B OST ). 

f

DESIGNATION OF THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE The SPEAKER pro tempore laid be-fore the House the following commu-nication from the Speaker: W ASHINGTON , DC, 

February 13, 2025. 

I hereby appoint the Honorable M IKE B OST to act as Speaker pro tempore on this day. M IKE J OHNSON ,

Speaker of the House of Representatives. 

f

PRAYER The Chaplain, the Reverend Margaret Grun Kibben, offered the following prayer: Blessed are those who fear You, OLord, and walk in Your ways. We pray Your blessings on this day, but it is too often not You we fear but the mul-titude of challenges that confront us. Whether our anxiety is for things po-litical or personal, changes environ-mental or emotional, upheaval supposi-tional or spiritual, we too often find the uncertainty of our days has eclipsed our ability to acknowledge or appreciate Your power and authority over every aspect of our lives. Teach us then to walk in Your ways, to affirm Your majesty over every as-pect of our lives. Would that we allow, within our own spirits, Your Holiness to transform the hostility, Your kind-ness every cruelty, Your love every malevolence. Blessed are those who fear the Lord. May this day and all the days of our lives receive Your blessing that the work of our hands may prosper. In Your merciful name, we pray. Amen. 

f

THE JOURNAL The SPEAKER pro tempore. The Chair has examined the Journal of the last day’s proceedings and announces to the House the approval thereof. Pursuant to clause 13 of rule I, the Journal stands approved. 

f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE The SPEAKER pro tempore. Will the gentleman from California (Mr. K HANNA) come forward and lead the House in the Pledge of Allegiance. Mr. KHANNA led the Pledge of Alle-giance as follows: I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the United States of America, and to the Repub-lic for which it stands, one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. 

f

ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE SPEAKER PRO TEMPORE The SPEAKER pro tempore. The Chair will entertain up to five requests for 1-minute speeches on each side of the aisle. 

f

HONORING THE LIFE OF RICK DUNLAP (Mr. HURD of Colorado asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. HURD of Colorado. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor the life and leg-acy of a great Coloradan and a true American patriot, Rick Dunlap. Rick’s story is one of resilience, courage, and service. Born into poverty in Tennessee, he answered the call of duty at just 18, serving two tours in Vietnam as a door gunner with the 101st Airborne Division. His heroism earned him the Bronze Star for valor and the Vietnam Cross of Gallantry, in recognition of his extraordinary brav-ery in combat. Rick’s service didn’t stop when he left the battlefield. He dedicated nearly three decades to law enforcement in Montrose County, rising to sheriff and leading with integrity, earning the trust of his community. Even in retirement, he continued giv-ing back, volunteering, mentoring, and, most recently, serving as county commissioner. Rick was a man who never stopped serving. He never stopped caring, and he never stopped fighting for people around him. Colorado’s Third District lost a lead-er, a friend, and a hero. To his beloved wife, Karen; his sons, Greg, Chad, and Josh; and all who knew and loved him, Rick’s impact will not be forgotten. May he rest in peace. 

f

SUPPORTING USAID (Mr. QUIGLEY asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his re-marks.) Mr. QUIGLEY. Mr. Speaker, Presi-dent Trump’s first Defense Secretary, Jim Mattis, once said: If we don’t fully fund the State Department and diplo-macy abroad, I need to buy more am-munition. Apparently, Elon Musk, a newly minted oligarch with $20 billion in gov-ernment contracts and subsidies, never heard this warning. Musk’s decision to shutter USAID, supported by the cur-rent administration, will make us less safe. USAID tracks and prevents global diseases such as Ebola and malaria from reaching the U.S. No more. USAID programs lift people out of poverty and promote access to justice, which alleviates the root causes of ter-rorism. No more. USAID counters Chinese and Russian influence by fighting against misin-formation and offering funds to build. No more. For one penny out of every dollar we pay in taxes, I cannot think of a better investment to advance America’s secu-rity. Not long ago, Secretary of State Rubio said: ‘‘Foreign aid is not charity. 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE7.000 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE 

# ®Pdnted  on  recycled  papfil CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H682 February 13, 2025 

. . . it is critical to our national secu-rity.’’ Mr. Speaker, he should take his own advice. 

> f

APPLAUDING PRESIDENT TRUMP’S DECISIVE ACTION (Mr. STUTZMAN asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. STUTZMAN. Mr. Speaker, I ap-plaud President Trump’s decisive eco-nomic actions that have leveled the playing field between Hoosier busi-nesses and the Chinese Communist Party. The CCP has taken advantage of hardworking Hoosiers by engaging in currency manipulation, undermining our manufacturing sector, and buying American farmland in an attempt to control our agricultural future. For too long the CCP has used the ex-change rate of their currency as a dag-ger to be hidden under the cloak of what they describe as fair trade prac-tices. They bought great American companies like Smithfield and masqueraded as a friendly neighbor-hood face, while silently gutting the al-ready hemorrhaging mom-and-pop pork operations that are important to America’s future and food supply. To top it all off, they tried to deal a lethal blow to the third largest indus-try in my State by attempting to pur-chase Indiana steel mills. Enough is enough. Trump has sent a clear message that America is finished with allowing the CCP to evade U.S. tariffs. Hoosiers don’t want the CCP to control our farmland or our markets. It is time to change the unacceptable status quo that has taken hold and put America, not China, first. 

> f

SUPPORTING THE FARMERS OF EASTERN NORTH CAROLINA (Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina. Mr. Speaker, I rise to voice my unwavering support for the hardworking farmers of eastern North Carolina who are facing enormous challenges. Inflation continues to cast a shadow over our agriculture community with input costs such as seeds, fertilizer, and equipment. In our State, many farmers have experienced crop losses resulting from drought conditions and Hurricane Helene. It is hard to catch a break as labor costs continue rising, making it in-creasingly difficult for farmers to maintain operations and livelihoods. We cannot overlook the well-known ef-fects that tariffs have on our agri-culture communities. They hurt farm-ers’ bottom lines and limit market ac-cess. Congress must pass a farm bill that meets the needs of farmers, consumers, and rural communities. We must re-spond not just with our words but with deeds. 

> f

PROTECTING THE CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU (Ms. GARCIA of Texas asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend her remarks.) Ms. GARCIA of Texas. Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear about why we have the Consumer Financial Protection Bu-reau. It is not some fancy agency. They just simply defend hardworking people. They are the consumers’ watchdog. Think about it. We have $21 billion back in people’s pockets who were cheated by big banks and corporations and $360 million recovered for veterans who were the victims of fraud. Starting this year, Americans will save $11 bil-lion a year without bank overdraft fees. Republicans are letting the President and Elon Musk burn it down. For what? For the banks? For large corporations? For their billionaire buddies? They don’t get to pander to working people while doing the banks’ dirty work. We must protect the Consumer Fi-nancial Protection Bureau. We must protect the consumer’s watchdog. We must put people’s pocketbooks over billionaires and their buddies. 

> f

CONGRATULATING SANTIAGO CAN-YON COLLEGE ON 25 YEARS OF SERVICE (Mrs. KIM asked and was given per-mission to address the House for 1minute and to revise and extend her re-marks.) Mrs. KIM. Mr. Speaker, I rise to con-gratulate Santiago Canyon College for 25 years of providing quality, afford-able educational opportunities to stu-dents across southern California. Santiago Canyon College in Orange, in my district, offers one of the largest community college adult education programs in California with over 60 ca-reer training certificates. From nurses and teachers to accountants and med-ical assistants, the top-notch appren-ticeship programs at Santiago Canyon are helping students of all backgrounds learn the skills to get jobs and con-tribute to our communities. I congratulate Santiago Canyon Col-lege President Jeannie Kim, faculty, staff, and students on this outstanding achievement. I can’t wait to see what is ahead for the next 25 years. Go Hawks. 

> f

SUPPORTING COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS (Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend her remarks.) Ms. DEAN of Pennsylvania. Mr. Speaker, for the uninsured, the work-ing poor, Medicaid recipients, and rural communities, healthcare is hard to find. Yet, for 60 years, community health centers, or CHCs, have cared for people who would go otherwise unseen and un-treated. In Pennsylvania, that is more than 1 million people, including 280,000 chil-dren, nearly 140,000 seniors, almost 15,000 veterans, and about 14,000 agri-cultural workers, receiving affordable and comprehensive care. In my dis-trict, the community health centers and dental centers serve four sites in Barto, Boyertown, Norristown, and Pottstown. Some of our most vulnerable, those with no health insurance, struggling with addiction or homelessness, have no hope. Importantly, CHC offers not just primary care but preventive care, a critical aspect of our healthcare sys-tem. Not only is it cost effective, it is compassionate in giving that hope. In Pennsylvania, thousands of doc-tors, nurses, behavioral specialists, and more show up every day for those most in need. They are not in it for the money. They are in it for the love of neighbor. 

> f

PROTECTING CIVIL SERVANTS (Mr. KHANNA asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his re-marks.) Mr. KHANNA. Mr. Speaker, not since Abraham Lincoln suspended habeas corpus at the height of the Civil War has a President defied the United States Supreme Court. Yet, Vice Presi-dent VANCE has called for President Trump to fire every civil servant in the administrative State. When the courts stop you, Vice President V ANCE said, go like Andrew Jackson did and say the Court has made its ruling, now try to enforce it. Perhaps the Vice President doesn’t know the history that Andrew Jack-son’s defiance of the Supreme Court led to the forcible removal of Native Americans and the Trail of Tears and shame for the country. It is black let-ter law. Vice President V ANCE should go back to Yale Law School where both of us studied. Article II has the President administering the law. Article III has the Courts saying what the law is. That has been the bipartisan consensus that even Richard Nixon understood. It is dangerous for him to call on the Presi-dent to defy the Supreme Court. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Mem-bers are reminded to direct their re-marks to the Chair and refrain from engaging in personalities toward the Vice President. 

> f

AGENT RAUL GONZALEZ OFFICER SAFETY ACT Mr. M C CLINTOCK. Mr. Speaker, pur-suant to House Resolution 5, I call up the bill (H.R. 35) to impose criminal         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.003 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H683 February 13, 2025 

and immigration penalties for inten-tionally fleeing a pursuing Federal offi-cer while operating a motor vehicle, and ask for its immediate consider-ation in the House. The Clerk read the title of the bill. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursu-ant to House Resolution 5, the bill is considered read. The text of the bill is as follows: H.R. 35 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Rep-resentatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, 

> SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as ‘‘Agent Raul Gon-zalez Officer Safety Act’’. 

> SEC. 2. CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR EVADING AR-REST OR DETENTION.

(a) I N G ENERAL .—Chapter 2 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: 

‘‘§ 40B. Evading arrest or detention while op-erating a motor vehicle 

‘‘(a) O FFENSE .—A person commits an of-fense under this section by operating amotor vehicle within 100 miles of the United States border while intentionally fleeing from— ‘‘(1) a pursuing U.S. Border Patrol agent acting pursuant to lawful authority; or ‘‘(2) any pursuing Federal, State, or local law enforcement officer who is actively as-sisting, or under the command of, U.S. Bor-der Patrol. ‘‘(b) P ENALTIES .— ‘‘(1) I N GENERAL .—Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), any person who com-mits an offense described in subsection (a) shall be— ‘‘(A) imprisoned for a term of not more than 2 years; ‘‘(B) fined under this title; or ‘‘(C) subject to the penalties described in subparagraphs (A) and (B). ‘‘(2) S ERIOUS BODILY INJURY .—If serious bodily injury results from the commission of an offense described in subsection (a), the person committing such offense shall be— ‘‘(A) imprisoned for a term of not less than 5 years and not more than 20 years; ‘‘(B) fined under this title; or ‘‘(C) subject to the penalties described in subparagraphs (A) and (B). ‘‘(3) D EATH .—If the death of any person re-sults from the commission of an offense de-scribed in subsection (a), the person commit-ting such offense shall be— ‘‘(A) imprisoned for a term of not less than 10 years and up to life; ‘‘(B) fined under this title; or ‘‘(C) subject to the penalties described in subparagraphs (A) and (B).’’. (b) C LERICAL A MENDMENT .—The analysis for chapter 2 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the fol-lowing: ‘‘40B. Evading arrest or detention while oper-ating a motor vehicle.’’.        

> SEC. 3. INADMISSIBILITY, DEPORTABILITY, AND INELIGIBILITY RELATED TO EVAD-ING ARREST OR DETENTION WHILE OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE.

(a) I NADMISSIBILITY .—Section 212(a)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1182(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ‘‘(J) E VADING ARREST OR DETENTION WHILE OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE .—Any alien who has been convicted of, who admits having committed, or who admits committing acts which constitute the essential elements of a violation of section 40B(a) of title 18, United States Code, is inadmissible.’’. (b) D EPORTABILITY .—Section 237(a)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1227(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ‘‘(G) E VADING ARREST OR DETENTION WHILE OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE .—Any alien who has been convicted of, who admits having committed, or who admits committing acts which constitute the essential elements of a violation of section 40B(a) of title 18, United States Code, is deportable.’’. (c) I NELIGIBILITY FOR R ELIEF .—Chapter 2 of title II of the Immigration and Nationality Act is amended by inserting after section 208 the following:         

> ‘‘SEC. 208A. INELIGIBILITY FOR RELIEF RELATED TO EVADING ARREST OR DETEN-TION WHILE OPERATING AMOTOR VEHICLE.

‘‘Any alien who has been convicted of, who admits having committed, or who admits committing acts which constitute the essen-tial elements of a violation of section 40B(a) of title 18, United States Code, shall be ineli-gible for relief under the immigration laws, including asylum under section 208.’’. 

> SEC. 4. ANNUAL REPORT.

The Attorney General, in conjunction with the Secretary of Homeland Security, shall submit an annual report to the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate and the Com-mittee on the Judiciary of the House of Rep-resentatives that— (1) identifies the number of people who committed a violation of section 40B(a) of title 18, United States Code, as added by sec-tion 2(a); and (2) summarizes— (A) the number of individuals who were charged with the violation referred to in paragraph (1); (B) the number of individuals who were ap-prehended but not charged with such viola-tion; (C) the number of individuals who com-mitted such violation but were not appre-hended; (D) the penalties sought in the charging documents pertaining to such violation; and (E) the penalties imposed for such viola-tion. The SPEAKER pro tempore. The bill shall be debatable for 1 hour, equally divided and controlled by the majority leader and minority leader, or their re-spective designees. The gentleman from California (Mr. MCCLINTOCK ) and the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. R ASKIN ) each will con-trol 30 minutes. The Chair now recognizes the gen-tleman from California (Mr. MCC LIN -TOCK ). 

b 0915 GENERAL LEAVE Mr. MCCLINTOCK. Mr. Speaker, Iask unanimous consent that all Mem-bers may have 5 legislative days in which to revise and extend their re-marks and insert extraneous material on H.R. 35. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there objection to the request of the gen-tleman from California? There was no objection. Mr. MCCLINTOCK. Mr. Speaker, Iyield myself such time as I may con-sume. Mr. Speaker, one of the great trage-dies that came of the Democrats’ 4years of open-border policies was the number of fatalities of American citi-zens and law enforcement officers that were caused by high-speed chases of human and drug smugglers and illegal aliens who poured across our southern border. The Democrats’ open-border policies incentivized and encouraged these tragedies by creating the conditions that made these deadly high-speed chases commonplace. Just last year, Border Patrol agents in Eagle Pass told us that in the Del Rio sector alone, the cartels were mak-ing $32 million every week from human smuggling. That is just one sector of the southwest border. These policies created an enormous incentive that emboldened criminals and cartels and human smugglers and illegal aliens alike. High-speed chases with smugglers occurred almost daily in these border communities, placing both law enforcement officials and in-nocent Americans in grave danger. For example, last year, criminals led the Texas Department of Public Safety officers on a high-speed chase outside of Del Rio as they attempted to smug-gle half a dozen illegal aliens into the interior of our country. At least one of the smugglers himself was a foreign na-tional from Nicaragua. Amazingly, the Biden-Harris administration rewarded this criminal alien with a work author-ization. These criminals also smuggle deadly drugs, like fentanyl, which has poisoned thousands of Americans. Roughly 1 month ago, in California, a high-speed chase ensued after two men had their car referred for secondary in-spection at a port of entry. Border Pa-trol officers ultimately stopped the men and recovered nearly 5 pounds of fentanyl. That is enough to kill more than 100,000 Americans. At the beginning of the last Con-gress, Cochise County, Arizona, Sheriff Mark Dannels, a 38-year veteran of law enforcement, testified before the House Judiciary Committee. Sheriff Dannels told us about a woman named ‘‘Wanda’’ from his county who was killed while driving to her own 65th birthday party by an individual who was evading law enforcement while smuggling illegal aliens. She had hoped to enjoy some time at the party with her son, who was receiving treatment for stage IV cancer. According to Sheriff Dannels, the criminal who caused the crash was smuggling illegal aliens when he fled from law enforcement officers, blew through a red light, and crashed into Wanda’s car, cutting it in half and in-stantly killing her. These dangerous car crashes kill our law enforcement heroes, as well. On December 7, 2022, Border Patrol Officer Raul Humberto Gonzalez got up, got dressed, and he left for work. His fam-ily would never see him again. He was killed later that day in Mission, Texas, doing his job trying to protect our country. A group of illegal aliens led him on a high-speed chase that ended in a fatal wreck that took his life. Authorities do not have the tools to fully prosecute and punish these crimi-nals. Currently the failure to yield to a         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.005 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H684 February 13, 2025 

Border Patrol agent or any other law enforcement officer assisting Border Patrol is not explicitly criminalized under Federal law. At the same time, there are no spe-cific immigration consequences for for-eign nationals, including illegal aliens, who intentionally evade the Border Pa-trol. In other words, criminals and for-eign nationals have little incentive not to evade them. On November 5, the American people sent a strong message to the world: There is only one pathway into the United States, and that is to obey our laws. This bill sends a message that we will no longer tolerate those who evade our law enforcement officers who are up-holding those laws. H.R. 35 is named in honor and in memory of Agent Gonzalez. It ensures that those who endanger border com-munities and law enforcement officers by failing to yield to Border Patrol agents will face meaningful con-sequences, ensuring these illegal aliens can be prosecuted and will be ineligible for immigration relief under our laws. This legislation also provides esca-lating criminal penalties if the evasion results in serious bodily injury or death to another person. Last session, this bill passed on a bi-partisan basis, although 154 of our Democratic colleagues opposed this commonsense measure. Taking their cue, Senate Democrats refused to take it up last year. That is inexplicable to me. I don’t understand that. I hope that today, after Democrats have had time to reflect on the matter, especially in light of the decisive ver-dict of the American people last No-vember, that more of our Democratic colleagues will have seen the light and will join us in protecting the American people from these dangerous criminals and cartels and human smugglers. Mr. Speaker, I thank Arizona Rep-resentative JUAN CISCOMANI for his leadership on this bill, and I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. RASKIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume. Mr. Speaker, I begin with an urgent constitutional public service announce-ment based on millions of calls and messages that have been flooding Con-gress. There is a serial constitutional viola-tor at large right now in the District of Columbia whose overall project to dis-mantle our Constitution and rule of law is now the target or subject of at least a dozen different Federal court temporary restraining orders and pre-liminary injunctions across the land and also faces emergency civil actions in dozens of other courts and jurisdic-tions. The suspect has been described as a very evil individual by Steve Bannon and has been operating in a clandestine fashion with a night crew of computer-hacking juvenile associates, one of whom goes by the alias of ‘‘Big Balls’’ and another one they call ‘‘the kid,’’ who has been known to post racist and anti-Semitic provocations online. The accelerating spree of constitu-tional offenses alarming the Nation in-volves dozens of episodes of computer fraud and data theft affecting poten-tially 300 million Americans and esca-lating threats against congressionally created Federal agencies serving the people from the NIH to the National Weather Service to NOAA to the De-partment of Justice; public workers; teachers and students; prosecutors of cop-assaulting criminals and seditious conspirators against our government; FBI agents; and anyone who depends on Social Security, Medicare, Med-icaid, or any other computerized public payment system. The apparent ringleader of all the constitutional mayhem is a reported father of 12, a formerly deportable un-documented immigrant who worked il-legally in the country and is appar-ently part of a loose network of Silicon Valley billionaires who oppose Amer-ican constitutional democracy and openly favor creation of a monarchical techno-state under their control. The suspect was seen yesterday in the vicinity of 1600 Pennsylvania Ave-nue NW and is known to have been con-sorting as recently as a few days ago with a convicted felon from New York. Described as the richest person in the world, the suspect is both a govern-ment contractor with billions of dol-lars in defense contracts—and we learned yesterday $400 million slated from the State Department for some of his armored Tesla vehicles—and also he is a part-time government worker whose many taxpayer-supported busi-nesses are being investigated, fined, or sued by numerous Federal agencies, in-cluding the Department of Transpor-tation, the National Labor Relations Board, the Department of Justice, the Consumer Financial Protection Bu-reau, and the Securities and Exchange Commission. The suspect has allegedly been work-ing to seize control over several of these same agencies to shut them down, which would presumably termi-nate all of the relevant threatening in-vestigations. The public has never received from the suspect any ethics disclosure forms required of all Federal workers nor any conflict of interest waiver to resolve his glaring conflicts of interest. The suspect spent his formative years in apartheid South Africa and has been known to post racist and anti-Semitic material and to engage in aNazi salute in public. Steve Bannon calls him a truly evil individual. The ringleader and his asso-ciates, sometimes called the Muskovites, have been seen by numer-ous Federal workers violating the sepa-ration of powers and the Spending Clause, usurping the powers of this body, trampling the civil service laws, and violating the rights of both his Federal and corporate workers. The suspect, his sponsors, and accom-plices should be considered dangerous to the constitutional rights, freedoms, and institutions of the people as well as their property, their jobs, and their livelihoods. If you know anything about the situ-ation and you are a Republican Mem-ber, please get in touch immediately with the Democrats so we can form a majority to stop this unprecedented at-tack on the Constitution and American law and order before we end up like apartheid South Africa or Orban’s Hun-gary or Putin’s Russia. Now, back to our regularly scheduled program where we avoid the constitu-tional crisis overtaking the first and greatest multiracial, multiethnic con-stitutional democracy on Earth and in-stead pass completely redundant, un-necessary, and sloppily drafted laws that allow us to vote against immi-grants, whether documented or un-documented, as Elon Musk was, with-out either engaging in comprehensive immigration reform or fixing the bor-der. Now, with this bill, House Repub-licans are once again seeking to take political advantage of a horrific crime by seizing on the death of Agent Gon-zalez in the performance of his duties, while doing nothing to make our bor-der more secure or to repair our broken immigration system. Everyone knows, of course, that they blew up the bipartisan border security deal that we had at the end of the last Congress. H.R. 35 seeks to establish new crimi-nal and immigration penalties on any-one—citizens, permanent residents, documented immigrants, or undocu-mented immigrants—for this offense: fleeing a Border Patrol agent or a law enforcement officer who is working with the Border Patrol. Fleeing Border Patrol at the border already carries substantial criminal and legal penalties under current law. That is already a crime. Under 18 U.S. Code 758, whoever flees or evades acheckpoint operated by the Customs and Border Protection, or any other law enforcement agency, in a motor ve-hicle and flees from Federal, State, or local law enforcement in excess of the legal speed limit can be charged with and convicted of high-speed flight from an immigration checkpoint. Furthermore, many decades of pros-ecution and case law make it perfectly clear that fleeing law enforcement is a crime involving moral turpitude for which a conviction will render a non-citizen, whether documented or un-documented, immediately deportable and inadmissible to the country. In other words, what they are drag-ging us through again is already against the law. If all of it is already a crime, why do we need another version of it, except for plainly opportunistic political purposes. I know those are the only bills they have been bringing forward. They have got no other agenda for the country. They have handed over the legislative authority of the Congress of the United         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.007 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H685 February 13, 2025 

States to Elon Musk, the fourth branch of government. In any event, they want us to pass again something that is already against the law. We don’t need it. In fact, this characteristically poorly drafted, pile-on bill is so poorly drafted this time that it could subject not just undocumented people, not just perma-nent residents, but American citizens to prison sentences for conduct that the vast majority of Americans would not even recognize as a crime at all and would not see as a crime. Now, unlike existing Federal law or similar State statutes, the bill does not define what it means to ‘‘flee.’’ In their haste to get this to the floor, they just rushed over that element of the crime, which is of extraordinary interest to every other jurisdiction and even Con-gress before when dealing with it. Leave that aside, it does not even re-quire evidence of criminal intent, aguilty mind, what lawyers call mens rea, the intention to do the evil thing. 

b 0930 In other words, this bill does not re-quire a person to know that they are fleeing Border Patrol in order to be charged with that crime. Think about it, Mr. Speaker. It ap-plies to citizens, not just noncitizens, and you can be prosecuted and jailed for fleeing from a Border Patrol that you didn’t know was Border Patrol. This is a radical departure from the prevailing rule in American jurisdic-tions. For example, in Maryland—I looked up my State—the offense of fleeing or eluding law enforcement requires that a uniformed officer gives a person avisual or audible signal to stop and prominently displays their official badge or other insignia. If an officer is not in uniform, Maryland requires that an officer give a visual or audible sig-nal to stop while in an officially marked police vehicle to establish the necessary mens rea before we put somebody in prison. Under either cir-cumstance, a visual or audible signal can be by hand, voice, emergency light, or siren. It is not only blue States like mine that require evidence that the accused knew what they were doing was wrong before convicting them of purposefully fleeing from law enforcement. That is the rule almost everywhere. I am sure the Crime and Federal Gov-ernment Surveillance Subcommittee chairman, Mr. B IGGS , and the sponsor of this bill, Mr. C ISCOMANI , are aware that, in Arizona, the offense of unlaw-ful flight from pursuing law enforce-ment requires proof that the officer’s vehicle had markings indicative of an official police vehicle, evidence that the driver knew that the vehicle was an official law enforcement vehicle, or the defendant must admit knowing that the vehicle was an official police vehicle. In other words, their own State takes the exact painstaking precautions that they just run roughshod over in order to get this bill, which has not had ahearing, to the floor of the United States House of Representatives. Should a defendant choose to exer-cise their right to trial by jury, the trial judge in Arizona would instruct the jury that they may consider wheth-er the officer operated their emergency lights or siren to determine whether the defendant is guilty of unlawful flight from an actual pursuing vehicle. As was stated in the collaborative re-ports ‘‘Without Intent’’ and ‘‘Without Intent Revisited,’’ published by The Heritage Foundation, which is ada-mant about mens rea, and the National Association of Criminal Defense Law-yers, ‘‘Ensuring that an adequate mens rea provision is included in statutes and regulations that create criminal offenses is critical.’’ The Heritage Foundation says that it is critical to specify that there must be a culpable or guilty state of mind be-fore we put people behind bars. It ap-pears that nearly every State recog-nized this fact when drafting their statutes carefully to address the fears and consequences associated with peo-ple fleeing law enforcement. We don’t want people going to jail be-cause they were simply moving away from a person they thought was acriminal who turns out to be, for exam-ple, an undercover police officer. As a matter of fact, of the States rep-resented by the 32 cosponsors of this legislation, all but two of them specifi-cally require, at minimum, an audible or visual signal to stop the vehicle to prove that there was intentional flight from a pursuing officer. Looking at statutes that address similar conduct in all 50 States, there are only 6 that do not explicitly re-quire an order, direction, request, or signal to stop the vehicle. Despite this widely accepted ap-proach to legislative construction, H.R. 35 would allow Donald Trump’s Depart-ment of Justice to not only convict noncitizens but citizens of a violation of this so-called offense and to deport noncitizens without allowing them their day in court and without requir-ing any evidence of any knowledge that they were actually fleeing a govern-ment agent. Without any limiting characteristics, under this bill, a citizen could be sent to prison because they did not imme-diately pull over when hailed by some-one—for example, a local undercover officer assisting Border Patrol. Similarly, in the immigration con-text, admitting to acts that constitute this nebulous and vague conduct would render a green card holder deportable. The bill applies its criminal immi-gration penalties even if the law en-forcement officer is in plain clothes and is driving an unmarked undercover vehicle. There are a lot of good reasons why a law-abiding citizen or permanent resi-dent might be wary of pulling over for an unmarked vehicle. Just last week, reports emerged of an alarming trend across the country of rapists, crimi-nals, or vigilantes pretending to be im-migration enforcement personnel tar-geting people whom they thought might be undocumented in order to rape them, assault them, harass them, or what have you. I saw on TV a case last night of a sex-ual assailant who accosted a woman and forcibly assaulted her while pre-tending to be an ICE agent. I saw that last night. Another man, Sean-Michael Johnson, was arrested for impersonating a law enforcement officer, along with felony kidnapping, larceny, and assault and battery, after he impersonated an ICE agent and stopped a group of men in their car because he told them they were not lawfully present in the coun-try. In this environment, Mr. Speaker, it would be neither unreasonable nor sur-prising for law-abiding citizens to be wary of pulling over for an unmarked car that claims to be working with Border Patrol. Further, given that the Trump administration is deputizing anyone they can to get to aid immigra-tion enforcement efforts, the number of officers, both in police clothing and in unmarked clothing, to whom this law would apply is staggering. In backing this bill, our colleagues want to impose extraordinary criminal and immigration consequences for not immediately pulling over when an un-marked car driven by a total stranger hails you at a time when criminals, in-cluding a pardoned January 6 felon, by the way, are going around imper-sonating immigration enforcement of-ficers. That is a real trend happening now, and I would love to be convinced it is not if the gentleman has reason to think that all of these reports and ar-rests of people impersonating officers are wrong. This is a trend in the country. All of this is simply to give more power to target immigrants, which already ex-ists, just for the purposes of a legisla-tive show. This is outrageous. Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to oppose the legislation, and I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. M CCLINTOCK. Mr. Speaker, Iyield myself such time as I may con-sume. Mr. Speaker, my friend argues that this bill is unnecessary because aliens who are convicted of fleeing an immi-gration checkpoint are already remov-able. That part is correct, but there are no corresponding grounds for inadmis-sibility. This bill fixes that omission. It also expands the law to someone who is de-liberately fleeing the Border Patrol not only from a checkpoint but from any-where within 100 miles of the border. This begs the larger question: If, as the Democrats say, this bill simply re-states the existing law, then why are they opposing it? They say you should prove that the alien knows that they are evading the         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.009 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H686 February 13, 2025 

Border Patrol when they initiate ahigh-speed chase through a crowded neighborhood. He forgets that there are many, many acts that are themselves deadly and dangerous that we sanction. Drunk driving is such an offense. It doesn’t matter if you intended to kill somebody when you got behind that wheel drunk. The behavior itself is deadly and dangerous and punishable under law. Leading a high-speed chase through a crowded highway is also such an inher-ently dangerous act, which my friends on the other side of the aisle, for some inexplicable reason, want to excuse. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. C LINE). Mr. CLINE. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding. Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the ranking member of the committee has his talking points today when he wants to complain about a businessman help-ing the administration to save tax-payer dollars, and he is raising histrionics to a new level by talking about a constitutional crisis. Mr. Speaker, we do have the power of the purse under Article I, but Article II, when given that money, has a re-sponsibility for administering it in aresponsible manner. If this administra-tion is going to grant taxpayer funds for irresponsible purposes, or if the last administration granted money to irre-sponsible recipients, then this adminis-tration should be able to reconsider those grants or stop those grants from occurring and direct the money into a more appropriate place. It doesn’t surprise me that the gen-tleman from suburban Washington, who has so many Federal employees in his district, is now worried that we are going to have a number of Federal em-ployees who are going to be put out of work. Do you know what, Mr. Speaker? We have too many Federal employees in this country. It is about time that we shrink the size and scope of the Federal Government, and I think that even though it results in people in suburban Washington unfortunately having to seek employment elsewhere, it will save the taxpayers money and improve government efficiency for the long term. Mr. Speaker, I rise to support this bill, the Agent Raul Gonzalez Officer Safety Act, because, in recent years, cartels and human smugglers have re-cruited drivers to transport illegal aliens from the southwest border fur-ther into the United States and many of our communities. Unsurprisingly, when encountered by law enforcement and Customs and Bor-der Protection officials, these drivers routinely flee, often at high speeds. Raul Gonzalez was a Border Patrol agent who was killed in 2022 in a high-speed chase while pursuing a car filled with illegal immigrants in Texas. That same year, there were six Border Pa-trol agents who died on the job. A high-speed chase puts agents, first responders, and innocent bystanders in danger. Because these chases happen as often as daily to multiple times a day, they take up the bulk of the U.S. mar-shals’ responses to calls. This bill provides a Federal criminal penalty for individuals who inten-tionally evade Border Patrol agents or law enforcement officers assisting Bor-der Patrol and provides for escalating penalties when evading law enforce-ment results in serious bodily injury or death. The consequences of the Biden-Harris administration’s open-borders policies are clear. Now, House Republicans, along with President Trump, can en-sure the safety of our communities and the security of our borders. Mr. Speaker, I support this bill, and I encourage my colleagues to do so, as well. Mr. RASKIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume. Mr. Speaker, yes, we have hundreds of thousands of Federal employees who live in Maryland, and we are very proud of them. I assume the distin-guished gentleman from Virginia is proud of the hundreds of thousands of Federal employees who live and work in Virginia, including in Roanoke. They have constitutional rights just like other American citizens have. None of our rights, whether they are constitutional or in the civil service, should be trashed by an unelected bil-lionaire bureaucrat who doesn’t under-stand our system of government. As to the merits, the distinguished gentleman talks about high-speed chases, which is what most statutes talk about in the country. This bill—I don’t know if the gentleman read the language—doesn’t mention high-speed chases or any speed at all. It just says ‘‘fleeing.’’ It is the only statute I could find in the country that doesn’t define what ‘‘fleeing’’ means. It is a very sloppy bill that has not had a hearing and that was brought to the floor for political entertainment purposes. Mr. Speaker, I yield 6 minutes to the distinguished gentlewoman from Wash-ington (Ms. J AYAPAL ), who is the rank-ing member on the Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity, Security, and Enforcement. Ms. JAYAPAL. Mr. Speaker, do you remember when candidate Trump said that, on day one, he would end infla-tion and bring prices down for Amer-ican citizens? That is, in fact, the num-ber one reason he got elected. Guess what, Mr. Speaker? He has done nothing on this. Republicans have spent no time on the floor trying to bring down prices for average Ameri-cans. In fact, the data that was just re-leased yesterday says that prices have shot up because of many of the pro-posals that Donald Trump has put for-ward and the chaos he is inflicting on the economy. Are we spending time on that here on the floor? No. We are wasting time on yet another attack on all immigrants, including U.S. citizens. Once again, the majority is moving a bill to expand the Trump administra-tion’s mass deportation machine and trample on the core American principle of due process. All of these bills that are being put forward utilize a very simple formula: first, take laws that are already on the books about deporting and making in-admissible to the United States people who are convicted of committing cer-tain crimes and fool the American peo-ple into thinking somehow that is not already the law; and, second, dan-gerously expand those laws so that simply being accused of something or admitting to something that no one would reasonably consider being acrime makes it sufficient to now deport someone or make him inadmissible without any due process and without a fair day in court. This is terrorizing communities across the country, and Donald Trump’s obsession with using every lever of government to target immi-grants has undermined our national se-curity and our safety by forcing Fed-eral law enforcement officials to aban-don fighting drug trafficking or human smuggling and instead focus on arrest-ing, detaining, and deporting immi-grants who pose no threat to public safety. Many of them have lived and worked in this country for decades. Already, we have seen the effects on U.S. citizens, with the unlawful deten-tion of U.S. citizens, the targeting of Native Americans, and the arrest of countless people with no criminal records. ICE agents are treating the act of speaking Spanish as probable cause for interrogation, and they are revoking all the crucial and successful legal pathways put in place by the Biden ad-ministration, like parole and tem-porary protected status, including, by the way, for Venezuelans and Cubans, who feel Trump’s betrayal deeply. 

b 0945 This bill follows the same divisive, deceptive formula. H.R. 35 amends the Immigration and Nationality Act to create a new ground of deportability and inadmissibility for any noncitizen who admits fleeing from Border Patrol while operating a motor vehicle, whether or not they knew it was Bor-der Patrol that they were fleeing from. Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear. Just as I said with the formula, being convicted of fleeing from Border Patrol or any law enforcement already makes a per-son deportable and inadmissible. That is current law. The key word here is ‘‘convicted.’’ Remember that when we talk about deportability, we are also talking about people who are in the United States lawfully. Many are green card holders and have lived in the United States for decades. If we are going to deport them, I hope that we would all agree that they should have basic due process rights and a day in court, just like any American would want for themselves.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.011 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H687 February 13, 2025 

That is why conviction is required for deportation. Convictions also mean that law enforcement can focus on the most serious criminals, not those who are simply accused and may well be in-nocent. Let me also debunk the Republican argument that admitting to fleeing is the same as a conviction. That is sim-ply not true. People may admit to flee-ing without even knowing that the per-son chasing them is Border Patrol. Let me give an example. Let’s say that a woman is driving alone on a de-serted road at night. She hears a siren. She sees an unmarked car behind her signaling that she should pull over. She had heard many stories about the men who prey on solo female drivers by pre-tending to be law enforcement, so she slows down and puts on her hazards. She even calls 911 to confirm that they have an officer in the area. They confirm that one of their offi-cers, who is deputized by CBP, is in the area, so she pulls over. When the offi-cer comes up to her window, she says: I am sorry, Officer. I needed to keep driving while I confirmed that you were with law enforcement since you were in an unmarked car. That constitutes an admission that she was intentionally fleeing from law enforcement. Under this bill, even if she is a lawful permanent resident who has been in this country for 10 years or 20 years, she has just rendered herself deportable. A conviction requirement importantly ensures that people have due process and that that essential context isn’t missed. Just last week, The Washington Post reported an uptick in people who are impersonating immigration enforce-ment officers to harass and attack peo-ple they suspect of being undocu-mented. One North Carolina man showed a woman a fake badge and told her that he would deport her if she didn’t come to a motel and have sex with him. He ended up being arrested and charged with impersonating law en-forcement, kidnapping, second-degree forcible rape, and assault. In this envi-ronment, it is not surprising that peo-ple keep driving away when unmarked cars tell them to pull over, claiming to work with Border Patrol. U.S. citizens should also be aware of the fact that the new criminal pen-alties in this bill would subject U.S. citizens to draconian mandatory mini-mums for something as minor as fail-ing to immediately stop when hailed by an unmarked police car. The SPEAKER pro tempore. The time of the gentlewoman has expired. Mr. RASKIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield an additional 20 seconds to the gentle-woman from Washington. Ms. JAYAPAL. Mr. Speaker, this bill applies to anyone within 100 miles of the border. That is two-thirds of the population of the United States, cities like Jacksonville; Charleston; Green Bay, Wisconsin; Grand Forks, North Dakota; and Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. Fear is already pervasive. People are afraid to go to work and school. Busi-nesses are hurting. Local economies and communities and States, from Ne-braska to Ohio to Texas, are hurting. Mr. Speaker, this bill plays on fear. It is cruel. It is unnecessary. It is dan-gerous for all Americans’ due process rights. I urge my colleagues to vote ‘‘no.’’ Mr. MCCLINTOCK. Mr. Speaker, Iwonder if the Democrats even listen to themselves. The gentlewoman just told us that this bill is simply duplicative of existing law and, therefore, a farce. A moment later, the gentlewoman told us that it is a dangerous expansion of existing law. I ask them to pick at least one side or the other and stick to it. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Mississippi (Mr. G UEST ). Mr. GUEST. Mr. Speaker, I rise today in support of H.R. 35, legislation named after Agent Raul Gonzalez, a 38-year-old father of two, who lost his life in an ATV accident on December 7, 2022, as he was attempting to appre-hend a group of immigrants who had entered the country illegally. This legislation not only honors the sacrifice of Agent Gonzalez, but it rein-forces Republican support to secure our border. This legislation helps fulfill the promise that President Trump made to the American people to protect those who protect each of us. This legislation will protect American communities by imposing criminal penalties on people who evade U.S. Border Patrol agents or other law enforcement agents at our border. This legislation will also help protect the brave men and women who enforce our border, those who risk their lives for the mission of keeping us safe and providing a secure border for all Amer-icans. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to work alongside President Trump to make our country safe for all American citi-zens. I am proud to support this legis-lation, and I urge my colleagues to please vote ‘‘yes’’ on H.R. 35. Mr. RASKIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume. Mr. Speaker, just in answer to a cou-ple of the recent comments that the good gentleman, the floor manager, says: How could it be possible that this bill is both duplicative and wildly ex-pansive? Mr. Speaker, it is duplicative of the actual criminal offense. That already exists. It is already a crime for some-body at the border to flee in a high-speed chase away from an officer. That is already a crime. What is expansive is this applies to citizens. It goes way beyond the border. It goes all over the country. It doesn’t define what it means to flee. It doesn’t require a high-speed chase. As the gentlewoman from Wash-ington (Ms. JAYAPAL ) was saying, it can apply to a woman who hears on the news, the way I heard last night, that there is a maniac out there claiming to be an ICE agent who is attacking women. She hears about it, and then a plainclothes officer in an unmarked car begins to chase her. If she moves away and stops three or four blocks later, she is guilty of violating their sloppily drafted bill. If Republicans are serious about it, we should go back and have a real hearing, and the majority should look at what States across the country are doing. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from Oregon (Ms. B YNUM ). Ms. BYNUM. Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to oppose H.R. 35. Let’s call this bill what it is: fear-mongering dressed up as officer safety. This bill echoes one of the darkest chapters in our Nation’s history, the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850. Just like that shameful law, H.R. 35 forces local authorities and encourages the depu-tizing of randos to do the Federal Gov-ernment’s work, punishing them if they refuse. Back then, it was hunting down peo-ple who dared to seek freedom. Today, it is forcing local police to become Fed-eral enforcers, which is a violation of States’ rights. This bill is duplicative of existing law. It threatens members of our com-munity who are here legally and lacks the surgical precision needed for solid immigration policy. We need to start focusing on real solutions for the bor-der. I support law enforcement. I support public safety, but I oppose the Federal Government overreach that erodes local control and threatens civil rights. Mr. Speaker, I urge my colleagues to continue seeking comprehensive immi-gration policy reform and to vote ‘‘no’’ on H.R. 35. Mr. MCCLINTOCK. Mr. Speaker, Iyield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from Texas (Ms. D E LA CRUZ ). Ms. De La CRUZ. Mr. Speaker, Ithank the gentleman for yielding. Mr. Speaker, I rise today in support of H.R. 35, the Agent Raul Gonzalez Of-ficer Safety Act, which I am proud to have co-led with Congressman CISCOMANI .Agent Raul Gonzalez was stationed in my community of McAllen, Texas, and was dedicated to protecting the Rio Grande Valley and, quite frankly, all of the Nation. In 2022, he tragically lost his life while pursuing a car full of illegal immigrants. By passing this legislation, we can take critical steps to protect the safety of law enforcement officers and prevent this tragedy from ever happening again. This bill will make failing to yield to Border Patrol agents or law enforce-ment a Federal crime. Further, if any-one is killed during the apprehension, it could result in life in prison. Criminals will think twice before en-gaging in dangerous and reckless be-havior like a high-speed chase from Border Patrol agents.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.013 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H688 February 13, 2025 

Law enforcement officers put their lives on the line every day to protect our communities. I am committed to protecting those who protect us, and I urge my colleagues to support this bill in honor of the life and service of aTexas hero, Agent Raul Gonzalez. Mr. RASKIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the gentlewoman from Michigan (Ms. T LAIB). Ms. TLAIB. Mr. Speaker, here we go again. We are voting on yet another bill that just promotes racial profiling. That is exactly what is happening be-cause Americans right now who are Brown or Black or have an accent and who are American citizens are carrying passports with them. Why? It is be-cause we are going to allow the tar-geting of communities that look like my district, to police them and to mili-tarize them. This bill strips away the right to due process. We already know that. I think that many of my colleagues who are supporting this know that. This is going to target even legal per-manent residents. The majority is going to separate families instantly without ever allowing anyone to be able to go to trial or even have a con-viction. It is absolutely and clearly un-constitutional. Everyone in our country has rights, and I want my residents to hear me say this again: Everyone has rights, no matter their status, in the United States of America. This is what Republicans want. My colleagues on the other side of the aisle want to make racial profiling the law of the land and make discrimination the law of the land. That is what my Republican colleagues want. Repub-lican Members want to go back to that kind of militarization and policing of targeting people who look like my mother and who look like my neigh-bors in the 12th Congressional District. Mr. Speaker, I will be very clear, though. What my colleagues don’t get, and I want my residents to hear me when I say this, is that no President— none—has the power to end constitu-tional rights, the right to due process; not one. Mr. Speaker, this is not about fixing our immigration system. The dollars and the people who support measures like this and the fear-mongering want a broken immigration system because, as the ranking member probably knows, they make money off of our broken immigration system. If my colleagues really wanted to ad-dress it, let’s get to the core issues of the fact of who is benefiting the most from not allowing our families and our loved ones who have been here for dec-ades and years to be able to have apathway to citizenship. It is because someone benefits from it, and it is un-fortunate. Mr. Speaker, Democrats will have the backs of our immigrant neighbors and even our American citizens who feel like they are being targeted by this law. Mr. M CCLINTOCK. Mr. Speaker, I as-sure the gentlewoman that the inno-cent victims of these high-speed chases come from all races and all back-grounds. Mr. Speaker, I yield 3 minutes to the gentleman from Missouri (Mr. O NDER ). Mr. ONDER. Mr. Speaker, I rise today in strong support of H.R. 35, the Agent Raul Gonzalez Officer Safety Act. This important legislation would make it a crime to evade arrest or de-tention while operating a motor vehi-cle within 100 miles of the U.S. border. For aliens, the bill would go a step fur-ther, making it a deportable offense to flee from a pursuing Border Patrol agent. Our southern border is under attack, and our Border Patrol agents are on the front lines. The former administra-tion depleted Border Patrol resources, leaving them with an impossible task that routinely puts them in harm’s way. The Border Patrol experienced over 5,700 encounters every day in December 2022, the month that Agent Raul Gon-zalez was killed while pursuing an ille-gal alien who was evading arrest. The following year, the Biden admin-istration doubled down on its open-bor-der policies, surging these encounters to 2.5 million in 2023. Under President Biden’s so-called leadership, border wall materials were sold off, and razor wire was removed. Under President Trump’s leadership, we are taking full advantage of our re-sources to secure the border, and Mex-ico and Canada have already agreed to bolster enforcement. The Trump policies are already work-ing. Yesterday, The Washington Times reported what they called a reverse flow of illegal immigrants streaming back home after being blocked at Trump’s border. 

b 1000 When migrants learn of the new, en-hanced security measures at the south-ern border, they are giving up and going home. Border Patrol agents who previously encountered as many as 10,000 illegal immigrants in a day are seeing fewer than 500. By passing this legislation, we are showing Border Patrol agents that we have their backs and that we prioritize their safety. This bill provides addi-tional protections for Border Patrol agents by imposing harsher penalties for illegal aliens evading arrest at our border. Mr. RASKIN. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. MCCLINTOCK. Mr. Speaker, Iyield 3 minutes to the gentleman from Ohio (Mr. JORDAN ), chairman of the House Judiciary Committee. Mr. JORDAN. Mr. Speaker, Demo-crats have been saying for 2 weeks now, instead of stopping the stupid spend-ing, they attack the guy who is expos-ing the stupid spending. I think we should maybe get rid of the stupid spending. Trans comic opera in Ireland, Sesame Street on Iraqi television, I think maybe we should focus on that. No. No. No. We can’t do that. I think this just underscores the fun-damental difference between the left and those of us in the Republican Party, those of us who are conserv-atives. The left thinks the bureaucrats are smarter than we the people. You have to trust the bureaucracy. You have to trust the experts in the government. I would rather trust the people, the 77 million people who elected President Trump who told us he was systemati-cally going to go through these agen-cies and identify dumb things where taxpayer money is going to. He told us he was going to do it. The American people understood it. He got elected, and now he is carrying out that mis-sion. Now they are attacking the guy who President Trump has put in charge of this effort. The bureaucrats who decided Big Bird and Bert and Ernie on Baghdad TV was a good use of taxpayer money, can’t question them. We can’t do that. We can’t question the people in the bu-reaucracy. We can’t question the 108,000 people who work at the Depart-ment of the Treasury. No. No. No. They are smarter than the folks President Trump has asked to come in and look at where our tax money is going. Think about this, the smartest bu-reaucrat in the history of the world, Dr. Fauci, the things he told us. We weren’t allowed to question him for 2 years, and he ran our lives. Here is the irony: Everything he told us turned out to be false. He told us the virus didn’t come from a lab. Yes, it did. We have agencies now that tell us that and confirm that. He told us the vaccinated couldn’t get it. He told us the vaccinated couldn’t transmit it. He was wrong on both those counts. He told us that masks work. He told us 6 feet social distancing was based on science, but they just made it up. Here is the kicker: He told us this is the first virus in history where there was no such thing as natural immu-nity. We can’t question him. We have to trust the bureaucracy. I prefer to trust the people. By the way, remember when they tried to set up a bureaucracy in the government that was going to tell us what we were allowed to say? They ac-tually tried to set up the Disinformation Governance Board as if a bunch of Federal bureaucrats can tell us what we can say, what we can’t say, what is information, and what is disinformation. You have to be kidding me. I will trust the guy who was elected by 77 million Americans. I will trust the Constitution that says: The execu-tive power shall be vested in a Presi-dent of the United States. Do you know why they did that in the Constitution? Because that is the guy who puts his name on a ballot and has to get votes, not the bureaucracy.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.014 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H689 February 13, 2025 

It is not the thousands and thousands of people who think they are so much smarter than us regular folks who just get to vote. I trust the guy who was elected and the people he has put in charge of this effort. He told us he was going to do it. The American people elected him to do it. Maybe we should focus on stopping the stupid spending. After all, we have a $36 trillion debt. The SPEAKER pro tempore. The time of the gentleman has expired. Mr. MC CLINTOCK. Mr. Speaker, Iyield an additional 1 minute to the gentleman from Ohio. Mr. JORDAN. Finally, I will just say this: It is a good bill by a good Member of our Congress, Mr. CISCOMANI . We passed it last year. We should pass it again. Mr. RASKIN. Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time. Mr. MC CLINTOCK. Mr. Speaker, Iyield 5 minutes to the gentleman from Arizona (Mr. C ISCOMANI), the author of this measure. Mr. CISCOMANI. Mr. Speaker, Ithank Mr. M C CLINTOCK for yielding me time here to talk about this bill. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to rise in support of my legislation, H.R. 35, the Agent Raul Gonzalez Officer Safety Act. We have heard talk on both sides of the aisle on the floor on this bill on the merits of it, and I am very proud to be supporting this and to actually share a little bit of the story of how we came about this bill. One of my first official meetings that I had after being elected in ’22 was to go back to one of my border counties in Cochise. This meeting happened in early ’23. I asked them, if there is one bill that I could start on immediately, what would it be? This meeting included law enforcement, local law enforcement from the State, from the county, Bor-der Patrol, and stakeholders. The unanimous vote and feedback was to make sure that something like what happened to Agent Raul Gonzalez never happened again. The issue we homed in on dealt with the issue of high-speed chases and the inability of law enforce-ment to be able to pull over and punish those that are fleeing law enforcement and their failure to yield not being a Federal crime. This was it. To all those on the other side of the aisle here who criticize this bill as say-ing that it is anti-fill in the blank, this came from the same people that my friends on the other side claim that this is against. This is a bill that came from the feedback of those that are highly impacted by this in our border communities. It is not only law enforcement that is suffering and actually being risked in this kind of activity, it is innocent by-standers that are hurt by these high-speed chases that are literally dying in border communities and being killed by these pursuits. The bill is simple: It makes evading law enforcement within 100 miles of the border a Federal crime. To me, it is simply common sense that this should be a Federal crime. Far too many lives have been jeopardized and even trag-ically taken, like I said, at the hands of bad actors who engage in these high-speed chases. If you evade CBP or local law en-forcement, you clearly don’t have good intentions. That is obvious. Unfortu-nately, the current law does not make this a crime in and of itself. It leaves the burden of prosecuting these indi-viduals to our local border commu-nities, as if they don’t have enough challenges already with what the pre-vious administration caused at the bor-der. Not only is this bill common sense, it is crucial and in some cases, even life-saving. To quote one of my constituents, he said: At least once a week there is a high-speed chase through town that in-cludes a 15-mile-an-hour school zone. Do residents need to die to get the at-tention needed to correct the border problem? The sad truth is that some have died, both law enforcement and innocent ci-vilians. Law enforcement wants this bill, Mr. Speaker. Mayors in my border districts want this bill. My constitu-ents want this bill, but every opposi-tion that I have heard from my friends on the other side is coming from the same people that stood by as the pre-vious administration and the White House caused this border crisis. For-give me if I am not moved by those ar-guments. I am moved by the feedback from those that are on the front lines of this border crisis. I consistently hear about the detri-mental impact that high-speed chases have in southeastern Arizona and across the southern border, specifically in the county that I mentioned earlier, Cochise County. This criminal activity is not just re-served to drug cartels or illegal immi-grants or smugglers themselves. These cartels are targeting American citizens to be those drivers. In most cases, those drivers happen to be American citizens, as well. Yes, this legislation goes beyond just the illegal immigrants that are driv-ing. It goes to punish also U.S. citizens that are engaging in this activity. Any-one endangering American lives should be held to account. This bill is about supporting our law enforcement communities who deal with this crisis on a daily basis to stop the smuggling and trafficking. In calendar year 2022 and 2023, Cochise County reports booking 2,884 individuals for border-related crimes, costing over $9.4 million to that local community. This is in one county, in one State. I have seen the toll it takes firsthand in our communities. We should be asking ourselves why these people are fleeing law enforce-ment. The answer is: These are bad ac-tors who the cartels want to evade law enforcement. Finally, I will highlight the hero that this bill is named after. The SPEAKER pro tempore. The time of the gentleman has expired. Mr. MCCLINTOCK. Mr. Speaker, Iyield an additional 1 minute to the gentleman from Arizona. Mr. CISCOMANI. Agent Raul Gon-zalez was killed in 2022 while pursuing illegal immigrants in Texas. His death underscores the tragic truth that our Customs and Border Protection agents and officers risk their lives every day to protect our community. By passing this legislation, we are showing them that we have their backs. That is why this bill is sup-ported by law enforcement groups like the National Border Patrol Council and the National Sheriffs’ Association and many local law enforcement groups in Arizona, as well. This bill passed last Congress with bipartisan support. I hope and encour-age my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to support this bill, prioritize bor-der security, and make our border com-munities safer. Mr. RASKIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield myself the balance of my time. Mr. Speaker, the distinguished chair-man of the Judiciary Committee (Mr. J ORDAN ) invites us to believe that we should just suspend our own interests in legislative power. We should no longer defend the laws we have passed, the programs we have adopted, the money we have appropriated but that we should turn it over to the new fourth branch of government, Elon Musk, who can do whatever he wants. Then he wants to also delegate to Mr. Musk our oversight power. We have an entire committee chaired by Mr. C OMER. We have our own subcommittee on Oversight in the Judiciary Com-mittee, but do they want to have hear-ings on Big Bird and Ernie and all of the alleged waste, fraud, and abuse that Mr. Musk is finding with his untu-tored, unvetted, juvenile computer hacker crew? Come on. Let’s show some institu-tional self-respect. This is the Congress of the United States. We are not dele-gating our power to Elon Musk or any-body else. Mr. Speaker, many of our great he-roes have understood that sloppy legis-lation undertaken as part of an at-tempt to whip up anti-immigration hysteria comes to haunt not just the immigrant community, of course, but citizens, too. This bill is a great example of that because I don’t know if they meant to write it this way, but it applies to citi-zens. It doesn’t require mens rea, so call the Heritage Foundation about that. They are opposed to bills like this that don’t require you prove that peo-ple have a specific intent to violate the law and commit a criminal offense. It doesn’t define what fleeing even means. It doesn’t require a high-speed chase, which is what they keep talking about. That is already against the law in lots of places.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.016 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H690 February 13, 2025 

It is a sloppy bill that is going to come back and haunt us if it were ever to become law, which it won’t. Thomas Jefferson said during the 1798 Alien and Sedition Acts where peo-ple were trying to whip up hysteria— The SPEAKER pro tempore. The time of the gentleman has expired. Mr. RASKIN. Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time. Mr. MC CLINTOCK. Mr. Speaker, Iyield myself the balance of my time. Mr. Speaker, I first am tempted to address my friend’s obsession with Elon Musk. The situation is pretty simple: A new boss takes over and he brings in an auditor. The auditor calls in the Democrats and says, I would like to see your expense account receipts, and the Democrats go absolutely ber-serk. Now, what does that tell you about what has been going on with our money all this time? My experience has been that the most closely guarded secrets of govern-ment are not those that are marked ‘‘top secret,’’ they are the secrets that are embarrassing. Elon Musk is embarrassing the Democrats, which is why they have un-leashed this torrent of invective, vit-riol, and character assassination upon him, and why they have spent so much time today obsessing on Elon Musk rather than the bill before us to pro-tect the victims of illegal immigration that they themselves unleashed upon our country. Mr. Speaker, Scott Jennings of CNN recently wondered aloud: What pos-sesses the Democrats to constantly take the 20 percent side of every major issue, whether it is waste in govern-ment, men competing in girls’ sports, crime and homelessness, or, in this case, border security? They seem in-stinctively to reject a commonsense position expressed by 80 percent or more of the electorate and double down on the 20 percent or less position taken only by the lunatic fringe of the rad-ical left, and they are doing that again today. 

b 1015 High-speed chases due to human and drug smuggling at the border have claimed the lives of far too many Americans, including a Border Patrol agent who was simply trying to protect his local community. This bill, named in his memory, makes it a Federal crime to evade the Border Patrol or local law enforcement acting in sup-port of the Border Patrol within 100 miles of the international border. If you are a foreign national, it makes a conviction or admission of such a crime grounds for inadmis-sibility and removability. If you endan-ger our local law enforcement officers or innocent bystanders by initiating a high-speed chase, we will throw you in prison for a long time. Then, we will send you packing when you get out. I suspect this bill has the support of well over 80 percent of the American people, yet once again, the Democrats oppose it. I suspect most will vote against it, as they did last year. The American people have seen this unfold in this Chamber time and time again. They clearly understand what is at stake, and they well understand the implications to the sovereignty of our country and to the safety of our com-munities. Last November, they gave us the votes to pass this legislation, and they gave us a President who will sign it. Let’s get on with it. Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time. 

Ms. M CCOLLUM. Mr. Speaker, I rise in op-position H.R. 35. This bill is a solution that has already been addressed in law. Right now, the House of Representatives has important work to do. The deadline to fund the government is only one month away, and the price of eggs is skyrocketing under President Trump. But in-stead of addressing these problems, Repub-licans put forward the same messaging bill we voted on last Congress. To be clear, fleeing the border patrol al-ready carries criminal and legal penalties under current law, and a conviction for fleeing border patrol already makes a person deport-able. This bill is poorly written and politicizes a tragedy. It does nothing to make our border more secure or fix our broken immigration sys-tem. Republicans continue to demonstrate they are not willing to work toward real solu-tions to bring order to the border and fix our immigration system. This is another bill in a series of Republican slippery-slope immigration bills that erodes the rights of everyone present in the United States, including green card holders, students, temporary workers, DACA recipients, and even citizens. It attacks due process under the United States Constitution and targets immi-grants who are lawfully in the United States. In H.R. 35, there is no requirement that a noncit-izen actually be charged by law enforcement, making a person deportable without even being convicted of a crime. Our Constitution holds that in the United States, you are inno-cent until you are proven guilty. This bill un-dermines that basic principle. 

The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr. S IMPSON ). All time for debate has ex-pired. Pursuant to House Resolution 5, the previous question is ordered on the bill. The question is on the engrossment and third reading of the bill. The bill was ordered to be engrossed and read a third time, and was read the third time. The SPEAKER pro tempore. The question is on passage of the bill. The question was taken; and the Speaker pro tempore announced that the ayes appeared to have it. Mr. RASKIN. Mr. Speaker, on that I demand the yeas and nays. The yeas and nays were ordered. The vote was taken by electronic de-vice, and there were—yeas 264, nays 155, not voting 14, as follows: [Roll No. 42] YEAS—264 Aderholt Alford Allen Amodei (NV) Arrington Babin Bacon Baird Balderson Barr Barrett Baumgartner Bean (FL) Begich Bentz Bergman Bice Biggs (AZ) Biggs (SC) Bilirakis Bishop Boebert Bost Brecheen Bresnahan Buchanan Budzinski Burchett Burlison Calvert Cammack Carey Carter (GA) Carter (TX) Case Ciscomani Cline Cloud Clyde Cole Collins Comer Costa Courtney Craig Crane Crank Crawford Crenshaw Cuellar Davids (KS) Davidson Davis (NC) De La Cruz DeLauro Deluzio DesJarlais Diaz-Balart Downing Dunn (FL) Edwards Ellzey Emmer Estes Evans (CO) Ezell Fallon Fedorchak Feenstra Finstad Fischbach Fitzgerald Fitzpatrick Fleischmann Flood Fong Foxx Franklin, Scott Fry Fulcher Garbarino Gill (TX) Gillen Gimenez Golden (ME) Goldman (TX) Gonzales, Tony Gooden Goodlander Gosar Gottheimer Graves Gray Green (TN) Greene (GA) Griffith Grothman Guest Guthrie Hageman Hamadeh (AZ) Harder (CA) Haridopolos Harrigan Harris (MD) Harris (NC) Harshbarger Hern (OK) Higgins (LA) Hill (AR) Hinson Houchin Houlahan Hoyle (OR) Hudson Huizenga Hurd (CO) Issa Jack Jackson (TX) James Johnson (LA) Johnson (SD) Jordan Joyce (OH) Joyce (PA) Kaptur Kean Keating Kelly (MS) Kennedy (NY) Kennedy (UT) Kiggans (VA) Kiley (CA) Kim Knott Kustoff LaHood LaLota LaMalfa Landsman Langworthy Latta Lawler Lee (FL) Lee (NV) Letlow Loudermilk Lucas Luna Luttrell Lynch Mace Mackenzie Magaziner Malliotakis Maloy Mann Mannion Massie Mast McCaul McClain McClain Delaney McClintock McCormick McDonald Rivet McDowell McGuire Messmer Meuser Miller (IL) Miller (OH) Miller (WV) Miller-Meeks Min Moolenaar Moore (AL) Moore (NC) Moore (UT) Moore (WV) Moran Morelle Moskowitz Mrvan Murphy Nehls Newhouse Norman Nunn (IA) Obernolte Ogles Onder Owens Palmer Panetta Pappas Perez Perry Pfluger Reschenthaler Riley (NY) Rogers (AL) Rogers (KY) Rose Rouzer Roy Rulli Rutherford Ryan Salazar Salinas Scalise Schmidt Scholten Schrier Schweikert Scott, Austin Self Sessions Shreve Simpson Smith (MO) Smith (NE) Smith (NJ) Smucker Sorensen Spartz Stanton Stauber Stefanik Steil Steube Strong Stutzman Suozzi Sykes Taylor Tenney Thompson (PA) Tiffany Timmons Titus Turner (OH) Valadao Van Drew Van Duyne Van Orden Vasquez Veasey Vindman Wagner Walberg Weber (TX) Webster (FL) Westerman Whitesides Wied Williams (TX) Wilson (SC) Wittman Womack Yakym Zinke NAYS—155 Adams Aguilar Amo Ansari Auchincloss Balint Barraga ´ n Beatty Bell Bera Beyer Bonamici Boyle (PA) Brown Brownley Bynum Carbajal Carson Carter (LA) Casar Casten Castor (FL) Castro (TX) Cherfilus-McCormick Chu Cisneros Clark (MA) Clarke (NY) Cleaver Clyburn Cohen Conaway Connolly Correa 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.018 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H691 February 13, 2025 

> Crockett Crow Davis (IL) Dean (PA) DeGette DelBene DeSaulnier Dexter Dingell Doggett Elfreth Escobar Espaillat Evans (PA) Fields Figures Fletcher Foster Foushee Frankel, Lois Friedman Frost Garamendi Garcia (CA) Garcı ´a (IL) Garcia (TX) Goldman (NY) Gonzalez, V. Green, Al (TX) Hayes Horsford Hoyer Huffman Ivey Jackson (IL) Jacobs Jayapal Jeffries Johnson (GA) Johnson (TX) Kamlager-Dove Kelly (IL) Khanna Krishnamoorthi Larsen (WA) Larson (CT) Latimer Lee (PA) Levin Liccardo Lieu Lofgren Matsui McBath McBride McClellan McCollum McGarvey McGovern McIver Meeks Menendez Meng Mfume Moore (WI) Morrison Moulton Nadler Neal Neguse Norcross Ocasio-Cortez Olszewski Omar Pallone Peters Pingree Pocan Pou Pressley Quigley Ramirez Randall Raskin Rivas Ross Ruiz Sa ´ nchez Scanlon Schakowsky Schneider Scott (VA) Sewell Sherman Simon Smith (WA) Soto Stansbury Stevens Strickland Subramanyam Swalwell Takano Thanedar Thompson (CA) Thompson (MS) Tlaib Tokuda Tonko Torres (CA) Torres (NY) Trahan Tran Turner (TX) Underwood Vargas Vela ´ zquez Wasserman Schultz Waters Watson Coleman Williams (GA)

NOT VOTING—14 Donalds Gomez Grijalva Himes Hunt Kelly (PA) Leger Fernandez Mills Mullin Pelosi Pettersen Scott, David Sherrill Wilson (FL) 

b 1045 Mses. M CCLELLAN and JOHNSON of Texas changed their vote from ‘‘yea’’ to ‘‘nay.’’ Mr. VEASEY changed his vote from ‘‘nay’’ to ‘‘yea.’’ So the bill was passed. The result of the vote was announced as above recorded. A motion to reconsider was laid on the table. Stated against: 

Ms. PETTERSEN. Mr. Speaker, I recently gave birth and am unable to travel to D.C. to vote. Had I been present, I would have voted NAY on Roll Call No. 42. 

f

MESSAGE FROM THE SENATE A message from the Senate by Ms. Lasky, one of its clerks, announced that the Senate has passed a bill of the following title in which the concur-rence of the House is requested: S. 32. An act to clarify where court may be held for certain district courts in Texas and California. 

f

SUPPORTING ORPHAN WELL GRANT FLEXIBILITY (Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania asked and was given permission to ad-dress the House for 1 minute and to re-vise and extend his remarks.) Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania. Mr. Speaker, I rise today in support of my bipartisan bill, the Orphan Well Grant Flexibility Act. We all know that orphaned wells, either unplugged or improperly plugged, can pose serious environmental health risks to sur-rounding communities. In Pennsylvania alone, there are more than 27,000 documented aban-doned and orphan oil gas wells across the State. This is not just a Pennsyl-vania issue, however, as abandoned wells are found across the country. The Orphan Well Grant Flexibility Act, which I introduced alongside my colleague, Congressman DELUZIO from Pennsylvania, will empower States to maximize their flexibility when plug-ging abandoned oil wells and cut red tape to accelerate environmental reha-bilitation. We have many of the resources we need to plug these wells. It is our job to ensure they are able to be used for their intended purpose. I thank Con-gressman DELUZIO for joining me in leading this critical effort. I encourage all my colleagues to support this legis-lation. 

f

UNHOUSED TRAGEDY (Ms. TLAIB asked and was given per-mission to address the House for 1minute and to revise and extend her re-marks.) Ms. TLAIB. Mr. Speaker, I want to share the words of a mother in Detroit who today said she was sorry but she tried. She is talking about the fact that she was evicted. A mother of five, she had no choice but to park her minivan in the parking lot of down-town Detroit on one of our coldest nights. She lost two of her children, a 2-year-old and a 9-year-old. They froze to death in the car. We know that last year we saw arecord 18 percent rise in homelessness in our country. Nearly 150,000 children are unhoused every night. We know, again, that our country spends trillions of dollars, though, on weapons and war, while children freeze to death in our country. It is estimated that ending homeless-ness in our country could cost as little as $11 billion. The Pentagon spends $12 billion a year on F–35 jets that can’t even fly in the rain. Our priorities are fundamentally broken. I want to tell Ms. Williams we failed her. She should not be apologizing be-cause she tried. We are not trying hard enough here in this institution to pro-tect her and her children. 

f

HONORING THELMA BAKER (Mr. DOWNING asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his re-marks.) Mr. DOWNING. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor the extraordinary life of Thelma Baker. Thelma is what one might call a local legend, both in Mis-soula County where she made her home and across the Treasure State. To some, she was known as the owner and proprietor of the Thunderbird and Canyon Motels, to others a great-great-grandmother. Those are two greats for the folks keeping track at home. The Thelma I knew was a tireless ad-vocate for conservative causes, who lived a life of dedicated service to her community, to her State, and to her country. She was a voting member of the Montana electoral college since 2000 and was actively involved with local organizations like the University of Montana Grizzly Athletic Associa-tion, Copper Connections, and the Mis-soula Chamber of Commerce. Thelma lived the life of a model cit-izen, and generations of Montanans will be better off for her devotion to civic engagement and community in-volvement. May her memory be a blessing. 

f

GEORGIA’S UNION CITY NAMED CITY OF CIVILITY (Mrs. M CBATH asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend her re-marks.) Mrs. MCBATH. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Union City, Geor-gia, for being named a City of Civility by the Georgia Municipal Association. Union City has adopted a civility res-olution and a pledge built on active lis-tening, empathy, and respect for dif-fering opinions, efforts which, to quote from their materials: Encourage ‘‘re-spectful and constructive dialogue’’ in public spaces. We, this body, must work harder than ever before to improve our civic and political discourse. Recalling the words of President Abraham Lincoln in his first inaugural address: May we not let passion break our bonds of affec-tion, that we be touched by the better angels of our nature. I am proud that leaders in my dis-trict in Georgia are setting this exam-ple for the entire Nation. I congratu-late Mayor Williams and the Union City Council for earning this distin-guished recognition. 

f

GIVING POWER TO PARENTS (Mrs. MILLER of Illinois asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend her remarks.) Mrs. MILLER of Illinois. Mr. Speak-er, I commend President Trump for his steps to close down the Department of Education and to return power back to the parents. For too long the Depart-ment of Education has overstepped its bounds, imposing top-down policies that have done more harm than good. Since its creation, this bureaucracy has grown into a bloated, unaccount-able institution that prioritizes Fed-eral control over the actual needs of our children. It has drained billions of taxpayer dollars, while delivering little in the way of education. Sadly, we have declining test scores, a one-size-fits-all curriculum, and policies that have often placed ideology over learning.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE7.004 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H692 February 13, 2025 

It is time to recognize that the Fed-eral Government does not know what is best for our sons and daughters. De-cisions about education should be made at the State and local level by those who are closest to the students, not by bureaucrats in Washington. Elimi-nating the Department of Education isn’t radical. It is common sense. I thank President Trump for stand-ing up for all the parents and students across this Nation. 

> f

RECOGNIZING THE INSPIRATIONAL WORK OF LEAP YOUTH ALLIANCE (Ms. SALINAS asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend her re-marks.) Ms. SALINAS. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize the inspirational work of the LEAP Youth Alliance in my district. LEAP stands for leadership, edu-cation, advocacy, and prevention. This coalition of teens works to educate their friends and peers about how to lead healthy, happy, and substance-free lives. Today’s teens confront higher rates of anxiety, depression, and other mental health challenges than previous generations, leading some to use e-cigarettes, alcohol, and other harmful substances in order to cope. It is a disturbing trend, and we must work together, using every tool in our toolbox to reverse it. As a leader in the Congressional Mental Health Caucus, I am working to find solutions and pass legislation that will break the stigma and make healthcare more affordable and accessible for our youth, but I can-not do it alone. That is why I was honored to meet with members of LEAP in my D.C. of-fice where I learned more about how they lead by example and encourage their peers to take control of their lives and health. I am so proud of these young changemakers who truly make a difference in our community. They will keep up the good work, and I look forward to partnering with them to raise awareness and connect teens with the mental health care and re-sources they need to thrive. 

> f

HOLDING ILLEGAL ALIENS ACCOUNTABLE (Mr. WILSON of South Carolina asked and was given permission to ad-dress the House for 1 minute and to re-vise and extend his remarks.) Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Mr. Speaker, sadly, too many Americans have lost their lives due to illegal aliens engaging in high-speed chases. This week highlights the Agent Raul Gonzalez Officer Safety Act led by Con-gressman JUAN CISCOMANI . This bill creates criminal offenses when driving a vehicle within 100 miles of the south-ern border, while fleeing from Border Patrol. Consequences include severe jail time with prohibition from receiv-ing legal status. Under the leadership of President Trump, Republicans are sending a clear message. When Americans are at risk, they will be protected. In conclusion, God bless our troops as the global war on terrorism continues. Open borders for dictators puts all Americans at risk of more 9/11 attacks imminent, as warned by the FBI. Trump is reinstituting laws to protect American families with peace through strength. The world is inspired by the patriots demonstrating in Tbilisi, Republic of Georgia for fair and free elections. Le-gitimate President Salome Zourabichvili is tireless for the people of Georgia opposing the rigged elec-tions for President in Georgia. 

> f

b 1100 HARMFUL ACTIONS BY ELON MUSK (Mr. GARCI ´A of Illinois asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. GARCI ´A of Illinois. Mr. Speaker, I rise today because a billionaire with unchecked power is calling the shots in our government. I am outraged that President Trump is enabling this unelected billionaire donor Musk to wreak havoc on our Federal workers, dismantle critical Federal agencies, and even gain access to the personal data of millions of Americans without any vetting, secu-rity clearance, or congressional ap-proval. The richest man in the world should not have access to our payment sys-tems for him to decide whether you should or should not receive payments such as Social Security benefits or Medicaid. For the past few weeks, my office has been flooded with messages from con-cerned constituents wondering about the impact that Trump and Musk’s ac-tions will have on their lives. While Republicans and Trump look with a blind eye, Musk exploits the system for his own benefit. I refuse to stay silent. Billionaires like him may think they can buy our democracy, but, we, the people, will fight back. 

> f

PUSH FOR TRANSPARENCY (Mr. HARIDOPOLOS asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. HARIDOPOLOS. Mr. Speaker, Icome from the great State of Florida, and we believe in government and spending in the sunshine. As a leader in the Florida Senate, we created a website that allowed for every dollar to be seen how it is spent, how every contract is spent, not just for government officials. Every Flo-ridian, every American, can look at how their dollars are being spent. They deserve to know. They are the ones who earn the money to pay those taxes. It is an American issue, especially considering the fact that our prices have gone up over the last 4 years by 20 and 30 percent, and they are hearing about these nefarious acts in which, let’s just say, money is spent on ques-tionable items, to be generous. We must continue to fight for trans-parency to make sure every tax dollar is spent in a wise fashion. More impor-tantly, Americans deserve to know with a website that shows everyone where those dollars are spent. 

> f

SECURING ARTICLE I AUTHORITY (Mrs. HAYES asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend her re-marks.) Mrs. HAYES. Mr. Speaker, on Feb-ruary 7, Members of the United States House of Representatives were denied access to the Department of Education. In recent weeks, Members have also been denied access to other Federal agencies, including USAID, the Depart-ment of the Treasury, and the EPA. Members of Congress are a branch of the Federal Government and should be allowed to legally access Federal build-ings. Through Article I of the Constitu-tion, we are a co-equal partner and have the same authority to check and balance the other branches. I introduced the All Access Act, with 44 of my colleagues, to ensure Members of Congress have access to Federal buildings upon showing a valid Member ID. Even Republicans should agree that this separation of power should be pro-tected. I ask my colleagues to join me in se-curing our Article I authority and pro-tecting the ability to do our jobs that we were elected to do. 

> f

HONORING GREG PARKER (Mr. CARTER of Georgia asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. CARTER of Georgia. Mr. Speak-er, I rise today to honor Greg Parker, a visionary leader and dedicated philan-thropist, as he celebrates 50 years as CEO of Parker’s Kitchen. Mr. Parker went from operating asingle store in Midway, Georgia, to running a thriving business with near-ly 100 locations, embodying the spirit of hard work, innovation, and commu-nity service. In 1975, he opened his first store, working every role from pumping gas to cooking food. He built Parker’s Kitchen into a household name across Georgia and South Carolina. Even today, he remains hands on, stocking shelves and engaging with customers. Mr. Parker pioneered a customer loy-alty program that has saved customers millions in credit card fees. He also in-troduced an AI-powered smart kitchen to improve efficiency and reduce waste. The Parker’s Community Fund fo-cuses on four key pillars: healthcare,         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.023 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H693 February 13, 2025 

hunger, supporting heroes, and edu-cation. This foundation has donated $30 million in the last 8 years to support these pillars. As Greg Parker steps down as CEO, his focus shifts toward philanthropy. His aim is to grow the Parker’s Com-munity Fund to $100 million and con-tinue prioritizing giving back, strengthening communities, and spend-ing time with loved ones. Greg Parker’s success is not meas-ured by stores built or revenue earned, but by the lives he has touched and the communities he has strengthened. 

> f

SUPPORTING MILITARY FAMILIES (Mr. VINDMAN asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his re-marks.) Mr. VINDMAN. Mr. Speaker, today, we celebrate a victory for military families. After introducing my bipar-tisan Support Military Families Act, the administration has heeded our call and granted an exemption to the re-turn to in-person work order. This is a massive win for patriotic military families who all serve to-gether, ensuring that they have flexi-bility, stability, and the support they deserve. When we strengthen military families, we strengthen our national security. I am grateful to the bipartisan group of legislators who stood with me, and I will give a special shout-out to my col-leagues from the Commonwealth, Con-gressman R OB WITTMAN and Congress-woman JENNIFER KIGGANS, for their support in getting this across the fin-ish line. When we work together, we deliver results. Today, we did just that for our military families. 

> f

FIGHTING TO SECURE OUR BORDER (Mr. MEUSER asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his re-marks.) Mr. MEUSER. Mr. Speaker, before President Trump was elected, there were an average of 3,430 illegal immi-grant crossings per day. Today, under President Trump, that number has dropped 126 per day. Despite this decrease, the threat from illegal immigration has not evap-orated. H.R. 35, the Agent Raul Gon-zalez Officer Safety Act, passed just a few minutes ago, gives law enforce-ment authorities the necessary tools to fully penalize criminals who inten-tionally evade border security agents. Penalties include jail time and a per-manent ban on obtaining legal status. This legislation does send a clear mes-sage to cartels and traffickers: If you endanger Americans lives, we will hold you accountable. The American people have had enough. We will no longer tolerate law-lessness and policies that put criminals ahead of citizens. We won’t stop fight-ing to secure our border, stop illegal drugs and human trafficking, and pro-tecting our communities. 

> f

PROTECTING EDUCATION IN AMERICA (Ms. BYNUM asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his re-marks.) Ms. BYNUM. Mr. Speaker, I rise today because Oregon’s children don’t have access to all the tools they need to succeed, and that is unacceptable. Now, Elon Musk is threatening to eliminate the Department of Edu-cation. That would leave millions of students without resources they rely on; end financial aid programs, making higher education more expensive; and leave rural schools behind. As the mom of a kid with disabilities, I know they aren’t getting all the funding that they need in their classrooms to thrive. I would like anybody to tell me how this is helping our kids and how it is going to make us competitive in aglobal economy. How is this going to make life better for anyone? I know they can’t. If Musk and the Department of Gov-ernment Efficiency are trying to make the government more efficient by giv-ing tax breaks to the rich at the ex-pense of our schools and our children, to that we say: No thanks. 

> f

RECOGNIZING VINCENT TAYLOR (Mr. BEAN of Florida asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. BEAN of Florida. Mr. Speaker, if I were to ask you what you had for lunch last Wednesday, chances are you would struggle to remember. If I were to ask you who your favorite teacher was from 40 years ago, you would know instantly. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to celebrate one of those unforgettable teachers, Mr. Vincent Taylor from Cedar Hills Elementary School in Jacksonville, Florida, on being named the 2025 Duval County Teacher of the Year. For 27 years, Mr. Taylor has been a guiding force in Duval County Public Schools, inspiring students as a teach-er and math coach. His impact extends beyond the class-room. Through his mentorship, profes-sional development work and—how about this—10 professional books pub-lished, including ‘‘If Instruction Isn’t Engaging, I Quit!’’ Though he once envisioned a dif-ferent career, Mr. Speaker, his path to teaching is a gift to our students and our community. Today, we celebrate Mr. Taylor’s un-forgettable dedication and thank him for shaping the future one student at a time. GREAT BILLIONAIRE TAKEOVER (Mr. LEVIN asked and was given per-mission to address the House for 1minute and to revise and extend his re-marks.) Mr. LEVIN. Mr. Speaker, it has been another week of the attempted great billionaire takeover of our Federal Government, being led by DOGE, which actually stands for destruction of gov-ernment by Elon. They have shut down the agency pro-tecting Americans from fraud and pred-atory lending. They are gutting fund-ing for medical research. They are tar-geting at-risk and special education programs, all without a single vote from Congress. Where do we go from here? I know some Republicans support these objectives. I get it, but this is not the way. Congress must act. The Con-stitution requires it. Our Founders were clear, but too many in this body are looking the other way, fearing political backlash. Our system of government only works if we all do our jobs. This isn’t about left or right. To my friends across the aisle, I ask: Would they want a future Democratic President to act without guardrails, to act without any checks or balances? The situation they are allowing is dan-gerous. The choices we make now will shape our Nation for generations. They should do better. 

> f

HONORING BOBBY TYNER (Mr. FRY asked and was given per-mission to address the House for 1minute and to revise and extend his re-marks.) Mr. FRY. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor the life of Bobby Tyner, who passed away peacefully at his home in Surfside Beach, South Carolina, this week. Bobby was a faithful steward of the Palmetto State and dutifully served our country as an engineer in the U.S. Army. Following his service, Bobby became an advocate for those impacted by Agent Orange chemical exposure dur-ing the Vietnam war, helping to share the stories of veterans and their loved ones and advocate for good public pol-icy. Our country would not be where it is today without the sacrifices of Bobby and men and women like him serving on the front lines to ensure our Na-tion’s freedom. South Carolina’s Seventh District will certainly miss Bobby. We will miss his grit. We will miss his passion. We will miss his humor. We will forever cherish the lives he touched as a hus-band, a father, and a veteran. 

> f

CONTRIBUTIONS OF DREAMERS (Mr. CORREA asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute.)         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.024 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H694 February 13, 2025 

Mr. CORREA. Mr. Speaker, today, I rise to remind my colleagues who Dreamers are. Dreamers and DACA re-cipients came to this country as young children by no fault of their own. They follow the law and pay taxes. They are nurses, teachers, police officers, and police chiefs. There are Dreamers like Dr. Oliver Lopez, a professor of mathematics at Chapman University in my district. What America needs are more STEM degrees. What America needs are more STEM instructors. We need more peo-ple like Dr. Oliver Lopez. Dreamers are also people like Officer Mitchell Soto-Rodriguez, a police offi-cer in Blue Island, Illinois. She dreamed of being a police officer all her life. She achieved her dream because of DACA. Officer Soto-Rodriguez and Dr. Lopez are essential pillars of our community. They are Dreamers, and they deserve an opportunity to earn the American Dream. 

> f

b 1115 STOP FEDERAL OVERREACH (Mr. L A MALFA asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his re-marks.) Mr. L AMALFA. Mr. Speaker, in one of the many eleventh-hour actions by the Biden administration, the EPA handed California unprecedented power to enforce extreme vehicle regulations, giving them the green light to ban new gas-powered cars by 2035 and impose crushing new emissions standards on heavy-duty trucks, and also using the ever-increasing price of fuel to price people out of being able to drive or into these vehicles they don’t want to be in. This wasn’t about cooperative fed-eralism. It was about one State backed by Washington, D.C. bureaucrats forc-ing its agenda on the rest of the coun-try. The EPA’s waivers let California dic-tate the future of the auto and truck-ing industries, driving up costs for reg-ular consumers, squeezing small busi-nesses, and putting even more strain on an already struggling supply chain, at the same time that they are now trying to put in a high-speed rail sys-tem whose costs quadrupled what they told the taxpayers just 15 years ago. Instead of letting Congress weigh in, the Biden EPA let California call the shots for everyone across the country, bypassing the legislative process we hear so much complaining about here, and pushing policies that could force everyday Americans to pay more and get less for their hard-earned money. That is not how this country is sup-posed to work. We are about having choice, choice of automobiles, choice of trucks, and what have you. This Federal overreach needs to be stopped. HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY OF JOSEPH BERNAL (Mr. CASTRO of Texas asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. CASTRO of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I rise to honor the life and legacy of Dr. Joseph Bernal, a veteran, educator, and pillar of San Antonio and Texas poli-tics who passed away on January 25. Born on San Antonio’s westside dur-ing the Great Depression, Dr. Bernal graduated from Lanier High School be-fore enlisting in the U.S. Army where he supported postwar reconstruction efforts in Japan. Upon his return to San Antonio, he earned a bachelor’s degree through the GI Bill, which was soon followed by a master’s degree and a Ph.D. As a young teacher, he witnessed the grave inequities facing Hispanic stu-dents, an experience that would lead him to elected office in the Texas Leg-islature and the State Board of Edu-cation, where he fought to repeal laws that banned speaking Spanish in public schools, championed the State’s first bilingual education law, and led efforts to create the University of Texas at San Antonio and the UT Health Science Center. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to celebrate the life and service of a trailblazer who will be long remembered in my home-town and across the State of Texas. 

> f

THE DESTRUCTION OF THE AMERICAN FAMILY (Mr. GROTHMAN asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. GROTHMAN. Mr. Speaker, I have already spoken on the very significant hearing we had in the subcommittee regarding what is normally called wel-fare on Tuesday. There is another point I would like to make. In that hearing, it came out that, while it varies from couple to couple, there are about 90 programs which largely make up the welfare safety net, which if somebody were to get married, a single parent would get married to someone with an income, they would lose the benefits of those programs. We heard testimony from Robert Rector that you could easily come up with hypotheticals in which someone would lose $28,000 if getting married. In the 1950s in this country, the rate of children born without a mother and father at home was only 4 percent. We are now at 42 percent. This didn’t hap-pen by mistake. It is something that the radical feminists and the Marxists have always wanted: the destruction of the American family, particularly not having a man in the American family. As we work our way through the budget process and reconciliation proc-ess, I hope we all remember that it is not anticipated that America would be a country without families and get rid of these perverse incentives. DREAMERS (Mr. VARGAS asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his re-marks.) Mr. VARGAS. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak about an urgent issue facing our Nation, and that is a path-way to citizenship for Dreamers. These were children who were brought to our country oftentimes as infants. Mr. Speaker, you have already heard about them. It has been almost 13 years since President Obama announced DACA. Since then the program has provided needed relief for Dreamers, including work authorization and temporary re-lief from deportation. However, more than a decade later, Dreamers still do not have permanent protections. As the program continues to be challenged in the courts, Dream-ers are left stuck in limbo. For so many Dreamers, again, this is the only country they have ever known. They came as children and in-fants. They grew up here. They studied here. They worked hard here. As you heard, Mr. Speaker, they are nurses, teachers, businessowners, and they are beloved members of our com-munities. This is their home. Congress must finally come together to make a real difference for our Dreamers and our families, our busi-nesses, and our communities. We have to get this done. It is the right thing to do. I also believe in the family. Why are we not allowing these fami-lies to stay, Mr. Speaker? It is the right thing to do. We are good-hearted people as Americans. Let’s get this done. 

> f

THE DESTRUCTION OF USAID (Mr. GARAMENDI asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Speaker, so we now know what a $280 million-in-vestment in a Presidential campaign will give you: the opportunity to to-tally destroy one of America’s most important soft power, and that is the United States Agency for International Development. Mr. Musk and Mr. President, before you set about destroying USAID and the work that it does to provide nec-essary support for people, refugees and starving children around the world, Iwant you to hold in your hand a starv-ing child. Look at their extended belly, look at their eyes, and understand what you are doing to hundreds, indeed millions, of people around the world when you take USAID and put it in the wood chipper. Reverse it. Have you any sense of humanity? Do you have any compassion? If you do, you will reverse the policy of destroying USAID.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.026 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H695 February 13, 2025 

The SPEAKER pro tempore. Mem-bers are reminded to address their re-marks to the Chair. 

> f

STRENGTHEN CONGRESS’ OVER-SIGHT OF THE FINANCIAL OVER-SIGHT AND MANAGEMENT BOARD FOR PUERTO RICO (Mr. HERNA ´ NDEZ asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. HERNA ´ NDEZ. Mr. Speaker, yes-terday I introduced an amendment dur-ing the House Natural Resources Com-mittee markup to strengthen Congress’ oversight of the Financial Oversight and Management Board for Puerto Rico, specifically addressing net meter-ing policies and the PREPA bank-ruptcy. Though the amendment didn’t pass, it received bipartisan support from Representatives TOM MCC LINTOCK, NYDIA VELA ´ ZQUEZ , DARREN SOTO, and others. It is critical that Congress en-sures transparency and accountability in Puerto Rico’s financial and energy decisions. The FOMB’s stance on net metering harms our people, and the PREPA bankruptcy remains unresolved. After 7 or 8 years of questionable Federal oversight, it is time to hold the over-seers accountable. I will continue to fight for fairness and transparency for Puerto Rico, and I urge my colleagues to join me. 

> f

FEDERAL WORKERS SAVE TAXPAYERS MONEY (Mr. SUBRAMANYAM asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. SUBRAMANYAM. Mr. Speaker, I rise because many people want to paint Federal workers and contractors as un-skilled bureaucrats who waste tax-payer dollars. However, the reality is the opposite. I know this because Vir-ginia is home to hundreds of thousands of our country’s Federal workers and contractors, and I have heard from many of them. These Federal workers actually save taxpayers money, and they keep all Americans safe and healthy, despite all the regulations imposed on them by Congress. That is the bureaucracy. In almost all cases, they bring critical skills or expertise that are hard to re-place. One GSA employees says firings in her department, which is focused on threats to America’s crops, could cost us hundreds of millions of dollars down the road. One contractor who supports anti-terrorism efforts overseas was fired de-spite his track record of success coun-tering extremism. These firings even threaten border security. A contractor who vets refu-gees has to lay off 100 security experts because of the cuts. No one will want to serve our govern-ment if Federal workers and contrac-tors are treated this way. The attacks on Federal civil servants will cost tax-payers money and make all Americans less safe and less healthy. 

> f

RISING UTILITY BILLS (Mr. RILEY of New York asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his remarks.) Mr. RILEY of New York. Mr. Speak-er, working families are getting screwed. Last year, I met a young fam-ily in Sullivan County who was strug-gling to make ends meet. Mr. Speaker, do you cut back on the groceries to pay the rent? Do you maybe pick up a couple of extra shifts at work? However, then you have to pay for more childcare. They are the tough conversations families are having at kitchen tables across Upstate New York. Then, as if that is not enough, they get a letter in the mail from the utility company saying they are going to jack up rates again. These corporations are raking in billions of dollars, bragging to their investors about it, and now they want to take even more money from families struggling to get by. Hell no. Today I am fighting back. I am intro-ducing a bipartisan bill to create good union jobs making homes more effi-cient. My bill will save families up to $400 per year on their utility bills. Mr. Speaker, $400 is a lot of money for daycare, groceries, and rent because that young family in Sullivan County needs that money a hell of a lot more than the utility monopolies do. 

> f

PAYING TRIBUTE TO TIM TOOTEN (Mr. MFUME asked and was given permission to address the House for 1 minute and to revise and extend his re-marks.) Mr. MFUME. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to a friend, agreat journalist, a humanitarian, and a man of faith, Rev. Dr. Tim Tooten. Tim was an admired journalist hav-ing spent more than 35 years reporting at Baltimore’s WBAL-TV. He was a dis-tinguished pastor at Harvest Christian Ministries and an accomplished writer. Tim was also an award-winning filmmaker, a documentary person who believed in reporting and sharing facts, as well as a cherished teacher to so many. He confronted life with the courage of his convictions and confronted death with the conviction of his faith. Our condolences across the Baltimore area go out to his wife, Charlene; his loving children; and his grandchildren during this time. We will miss you, my friend, but we will never ever forget you. COMMUNICATION FROM THE SPEAKER The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr. CRANK ) laid before the House the fol-lowing communication from the Speaker of the House of Representa-tives: W ASHINGTON , DC,          

> February 13, 2025.
> I hereby designate the period from Thurs-day, February 13, 2025, through Sunday, Feb-ruary 23, 2025, as a‘‘district work period’’ under clause 13 of Rule 1. MIKE JOHNSON ,
> Speaker of the House of Representatives.
> f

TRUMP ADMINISTRATION’S DIS-MANTLING OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT The SPEAKER pro tempore. Under the Speaker’s announced policy of Jan-uary 3, 2025, the gentleman from Cali-fornia (Mr. GARAMENDI ) is recognized for 60 minutes as the designee of the minority leader. Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Speaker, I am a stand-in. This is actually MARCY K APTUR ’s Special Order hour. She is tied up in a hearing, so I will try to do my best to lay it out. She was going to speak for 7 minutes on the issues of the Trump administra-tion’s dismantling of the Federal Gov-ernment and the hiring of, or I guess the acquiescence of, Elon Musk as the principle agent of destruction. What has happened over the last 17 days is an extraordinary display of con-tempt for the American Government. If you think about this, Mr. Speaker, in its totality, right off the start, all funding stopped. What does that mean to the pro-grams that Americans depends upon? Healthcare, education, research, in-frastructure programs, for what pur-pose was that done? Perhaps it was in order to set up the next step which is the dismantling of extraordinary important programs for me and for my wife. More than almost 58 years ago, we participated in aUSAID program which at that time was just 4 years old set up by Kennedy. It was a vaccination program, an ef-fort of the United Nations, funded by the American Government through USAID, to eradicate smallpox. We spent 1 month in rural Ethiopia doing vaccinations. As our life worked on, we continued working to provide the necessary serv-ices so that people could survive, the Food for Peace program. Patti actually ran that when she was at the USDA as an assistant administrator. The famine camps, we were there. We saw the children who were dying of starvation. We saw the American grain arrive. I remember clearly one evening at the famine camp in Ethiopia in the mid-eighties, a woman literally in rags, was picking up individual grains of wheat that had spilled from the bags trying to fill a cup so that there would be enough food that she could take back to her children.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.028 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H696 February 13, 2025 

They died that night of starvation. The richest man in the world in-vested over $250 million in a Presi-dential campaign, and he was given the keys to the American Government and the opportunity to destroy things that he didn’t like. 

b 1130 USAID not only providing the nec-essary food to allow people to continue to live, but also to thrive through agri-cultural programs and economic devel-opment programs around the world. People who didn’t have the opportunity were given the opportunity through the generosity of the American people. Mr. Speaker, when someone has the greatest wealth of any individual and seems to think they have the right to destroy lives, before our President gives someone the power to do that, I would ask the individual to get on their private jet or to get on Air Force One and go to one of the famine camps in southern Sudan and hold a starving child in their arms. The individual should look at the extended belly, the vacant stare, the fact that they are not even able to hold up their head and know that the American people have developed an emergency supplemental food program that can revive that child. After that, come back and decide whether to put USAID into the wood chipper. If anyone has just a modicum of humanity and a sense of compassion, they would never, never ever take USAID and destroy it. There are other programs out there, and we will be talking about these other programs as my colleagues join us here on the floor. There is the De-partment of Education and the Labor Department. Giving the richest man in the world the keys to the U.S. Treasury? What is going on here? What information has been gathered? Where did that information go? What will it be used for? Who owns that information now: the U.S. Government, or Elon Musk? These are serious questions. My col-leagues and I will raise these questions. Mr. Speaker, I yield to Mr. C ASTEN. Mr. CASTEN. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding. Mr. Speaker, last week, my col-league, HALEY STEVENS , and I intro-duced the Taxpayer Data Protection Act. I am going to get to that in aminute. I woke up this morning to find that apparently this bill had gotten Mr. Musk’s attention. I will read the tweet from that great statesman and special government employee, Elon Musk: ‘‘Any given law will do the opposite of its name. ‘‘The one this guy wants to pass is called ‘Taxpayer Protection,’ which means its real goal is giving taxpayers the shaft! ‘‘What he really cares about is hiding the biggest scam in human history.’’ Those are his words, the great states-man, Elon Musk. I would point out that we attack what we fear. As Teddy Roosevelt said: It is the man in the ring who matters. I would like to give Mr. Musk a little view from inside this ring. A couple of weeks ago, Elon Musk and his goons hacked into the Treasury payment sys-tem. That is the system that controls $5 trillion a year of payments. They came in with unsecured software, unse-cured hardware, and unvetted individ-uals. They claimed they only had read-only access. It now turns out that they actually had write access, as well. We don’t know what information they extracted from that system, but it may make them targets of our foreign adversaries. They could have stolen data that affects the privacy of every single American taxpayer. They also potentially accessed data on the pay-ment systems and identities of intel-ligence assets that we have embedded overseas in hostile foreign govern-ments who are risking their lives to keep America safe. What this bill does is exactly what it says it does, notwithstanding this childish tweet. It is the Taxpayer Data Protection Act. I point out that the only reason Mr. Musk got into the system is because, when he asked Treasury Secretary Bessent to let him into the system, the civil servant and patriot, David Lebryk, who was running the system, said: No, you cannot do this. At that point, Secretary Bessent fired Mr. Lebryk, and the theft of data occurred. What we did in this bill is said that, going forward, the Treasury Secretary cannot allow anybody to access the Treasury payment system unless: num-ber one, they have a top secret clear-ance; number two, they have no eco-nomic conflicts of interest; number three, they are not a special govern-ment employee; and, number four, they have been employed by the Federal Government for at least 1 year. That is a problem if one is a Nazi-sa-luting, economically conflicted, special government employee who is so des-perately in need of validation that they bought a social media company and tweaked its algorithm to amplify their own tweets and fill their own sense of self-worth, who is currently cosplaying as a public servant. It is not a problem for taxpayers. It is not a problem for data integrity. I understand protecting personal data has never been Elon Musk’s jam, but it is necessary. This bill does ex-actly what it says, which is why he fears it and why he attacks it. Let me say what I fear. I fear what happens to our country if his conflicts of interest are allowed to run rough-shod and trample over Americans’ right to privacy and all that has ever truly made America great. We are attacking what we fear, as well, and I hope that we can find three Republicans who are committed to the idea that that is something worth de-fending. Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Speaker, Ithank Mr. C ASTEN for his comments. Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentle-woman from Florida (Ms. W ASSERMAN S CHULTZ ). Ms. WASSERMAN SCHULTZ. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentleman for yielding and I thank my fellow appro-priator and friend, M ARCY KAPTUR , for initiating and hosting this Special Order hour. I thank my friend, the gentleman from California (Mr. GARAMENDI), for standing in for the gentlewoman be-cause it is incredibly disturbing that we must come together to condemn what should be inherently obvious. Elon Musk was elected by no one, confirmed by no one, and is account-able to no one. Yet, President Trump allows this conflict-riddled billionaire to rifle through Americans’ highly sen-sitive records and attack the public servants who look out for all of us. I have never witnessed such utter con-tempt for the Constitution and the rule of law. It is clear who is running this White House. It is Elon Musk, whose nonstop lies would leave human rights groups in Cuba and Venezuela out to dry and victims of famine and natural disasters left to starve or die. Donald Trump is allowing Musk to il-legally slash our efforts to counter dic-tators and protect democracy, the man with billions on the line in China. Trump and Musk are gutting agen-cies that are investigating Musk’s com-panies. Is that coincidence? All the while, Donald Trump ignores what he committed to prioritizing throughout his campaign: making ev-eryday life more affordable for every-one. Mr. Speaker, this chaos crew in the White House is rocking the faith of Americans. It is alienating allies and destabilizing our businesses. It is trashing our ability to honor our com-mitments and fulfill the basic func-tions of government. My constituents are angry and afraid, and they should be. It is under-standable. Musk and his minions will gut any program that doesn’t line their own pockets. These cruel, reckless cuts built on lies and illegal funding freezes will dev-astate the children, veterans, and sen-iors that we Democrats fight for every day, and worse. All that this chaotic Republican rip-off will do is raise gro-cery prices and healthcare costs for our families. While Musk steals children’s Social Security numbers, Trump is busy enacting policies that will raise prices on everything from prescription drugs to affordable housing. As Musk digs through mom and dad’s tax returns, he and Trump are gutting consumer protections that keep scammers from ripping Americans off. All of this is designed for one thing: to pay for more millionaire and billion-aire tax breaks and open the door to gut Medicaid, Medicare, and Social Se-curity. In fact, the Budget Committee is meeting right now, as we speak, to do         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.030 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H697 February 13, 2025 

just that. They all get wealthier, and the lives of working families become even more unaffordable. Mr. Speaker, we are not going to roll over and let this madness continue. Every dollar illegally stolen from our Federal agencies must be restored. We must continue to hold Trump and his billionaire friends accountable. We are going to continue to protect victims of scams and natural disasters, regardless of what Trump or his billionaire pup-peteer proposes. The Musk-Trump unchecked raid of taxpayer dollars must end. We must commit together to reduce people’s ev-eryday kitchen-table costs, and Demo-crats will stand up every single day to fight to put lowering people’s costs at the top of the agenda. Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Speaker, Ithank the gentlewoman from Florida (Ms. W ASSERMAN SCHULTZ ) for her com-ments. Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from Ohio (Mr. L ANDSMAN). Mr. LANDSMAN. Mr. Speaker, Ithank the gentleman for yielding. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to also talk about Elon Musk and to ask the Speak-er and my colleagues to follow the money. Elon owns six companies, two of which are Tesla and SpaceX. SpaceX alone has received something like $20 billion in Federal contracts. That is Federal taxpayer dollars. Tesla, when it was struggling to get off of the ground, got a half-a-billion-dollar loan from the Department of Energy. This is in addition to the billions that they have received in tax credits and other supplements from the Fed-eral Government. He is not just the world’s richest man, but Elon Musk is trying to become the first trillionaire in the history of the world. Mr. Speaker, during the 2024 election, Musk gave over $200 million to Trump and Republicans. That is a lot of money. Trump wins, and Elon, just weeks—not months—after the election, generates several hundred billion dol-lars in new wealth, making his way to that trillion-dollar number. He generated all of that new wealth because the markets knew that, with Trump, he was going to have access to even more of our money. They knew he was going to get billions more in con-tracts, billions more in Federal sub-sidies, and he is well on his way. To expedite these efforts, Trump em-powers Musk, moments after he is in-augurated—Musk, an unelected tech billionaire. He empowers him to take access of our personal data, all of it. He gives him access to the Federal pay-ment system. He gives him power to purge as many Federal workers as he possibly can, all in the name of waste, fraud, and abuse, which, in the end turns out to be somewhat accurate. By the way, what happened with the data breach and the fact that he now has access to all of our data is arguably the greatest data breach in the history of the United States of America. Mr. Musk has defunded Federal pro-grams, purged public servants, and stripped resources away from govern-ment oversight, all while getting richer and richer at the expense of the rest of us. Today, the State Department said they plan to spend $400 million of our tax dollars to purchase Tesla Cybertrucks. Why in the world would the Federal Government buy one Tesla Cybertruck, let alone $400 million of Tesla Cybertrucks: waste, fraud, and abuse. 

b 1145 Every day, Elon Musk makes $8 mil-lion from government contracts. That number just went up. In comparison, seniors on Social Security get $65 aday. The question that so many are ask-ing is: How do you fight back against this waste, fraud, and abuse? There is a playbook, Mr. Speaker. It is the Constitution of the United States. Article I does not lay out the powers of the Presidency or the Su-preme Court, the Judiciary, Article Ilays out the powers of the Congress of the United States. This Congress is responsible for ap-propriating funds and oversight of the Federal Government and holding the President accountable. The Founders envisioned this moment. They didn’t know that it would come with a bil-lionaire tech donor, but they envi-sioned this moment. With Republicans in control of both the House and the Senate, they have to step up and deal with this waste, fraud, and abuse. Mr. GARAMENDI. Mr. Speaker, crit-ical important issues have been raised in the last 20 minutes or so about the issues of conflicts of interest, of cor-ruption, and of policy mistakes that the current administration has put in motion over the last 15, 16 days. I will draw the attention of the House to this diagram, and this is just a display of some of the contracts that Elon Musk has with the government. In total, it is more than $15 billion, but in each of these there are some very subtle and ominous opportunities for corruption. I will point out just one. In the Infla-tion Reduction Act and in the Infra-structure Investment and Jobs Act, there is money for electric vehicle charging stations. In fact, there is asubstantial amount of money. It turns out that Tesla has some 20,000 charging stations around the United States and has become the principal charging sta-tion connection to all electric vehicles. If Elon Musk were to shut down the money for other companies to build charging stations, he would then have a monopoly. It is subtle but obvious to those of us who watch. My colleague spoke to the issue of the State Department putting out on its website a very specific $400 million purchase order of just one vehicle, aTesla cybertruck. Corruption, yes. Waste, probably. Yet, here we are with an unelected in-dividual who has extraordinary power, in fact, the power of the Presidency, and the Presidency is misusing the power to shut down organizations around this country. I will suggest that the Democrats have a different view of government and a different view of purpose. Franklin Roosevelt once said: ‘‘The test of our progress is not whether we add more to the abundance of those who have much; it is whether we pro-vide enough for those who have too lit-tle.’’ That test is now before the Con-gress of the United States. Hardworking families are struggling, dealing with inflation. Yet, it appears as though the Trump administration is going to focus on making the wealthier even more wealthy. We need to think about this. In the days ahead, I am certain that our Democratic colleagues will put forth a rigorous defense of the pro-grams that Americans and indeed peo-ple around the world depend upon. We will do that together with the men and women around this Nation who have seen the effect, in many cases, the tragic effect of the shutdown of govern-ment and the shutdown of agencies upon which we all rely. Simultaneously, we will put forth a positive agenda about what we stand for and how we see America growing in the future. Mr. Speaker, I notice the arrival of the esteemed gentlewoman from Ohio (Ms. K APTUR ) who had actually put to-gether this 1 hour. It has been a privi-lege for me to stand as a substitute. She has now arrived, and I turn my at-tention back to M ARCY KAPTUR and her 1 hour. I thank her for the opportunity to sub for a bit while she was tied up in committee. I know she had good work to do there. Ms. K APTUR , the floor is yours. Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time. 

> f

ELON MUSK-DOGE THREATS TO GOVERNMENT The SPEAKER pro tempore. Under the Speaker’s announced policy of Jan-uary 3, 2025, the gentlewoman from Ohio (Ms. K APTUR ) is recognized for the remainder of the hour as the designee of the minority leader. Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, may I in-quire as to the time remaining. The SPEAKER pro tempore. The gen-tlewoman from Ohio has 35 minutes re-maining. Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I thank Congressman G ARAMENDI , who is such a distinguished Member, for substituting for me while I was in our Budget Com-mittee. I know what a phenomenal job he does and how deeply he loves our country and how hard he fights for her and for all the people that he rep-resents and those include my constitu-ents, too. His work is just phenomenal. I thank him for being here today. Mr. Speaker, I will focus a little on Elon Musk and put some materials in         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.032 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H698 February 13, 2025 

the R ECORD . He is an unelected billion-aire with no Federal clearance, stand-ing or sitting right next to the Presi-dent of the United States, almost on a daily basis. Mr. Musk is so rich he could buy my entire congressional district and have lots left over. He spent millions upon millions, more than I and all of our relatives are worth, to defeat House Democrats for Congress, myself included. I couldn’t come near to match his money. He did the same to many of my colleagues in this House, including some with us today. Can you imagine having enough money to put millions and millions of dollars up against Members of Congress to control Congress? That is what is going on. Political victories to billionaires equate to the fall of our Republic. Presidents Washington and Lincoln could never have imagined this selling off of our Republic. Musk has endless money. He uses it fiercely. Some of us won despite the tidal wave of his money. Politics shouldn’t be about raising oodles of money. It should be about serving our people and strengthening our Nation for all, not just the superrich. You know what? They have enough. The America we have known is at risk of becoming owned by a billionaire class. If and when that happens, our precious freedoms will vanish. Now, our family and I have been citi-zens of this country for our entire lives, three generations, totaling over a century and a half: grandparents, par-ents, and us. Every generation worked very hard here. It wasn’t easy. They fought fiercely for our Nation as vet-erans in every major war to defeat dic-tators, to preserve liberty for our Na-tion and others, and then they be-queathed that precious gift to us. We all worked hard to become more edu-cated. Our family, community, and Na-tion are my treasures. By contrast, Elon Musk holds citi-zenship in three countries: South Afri-ca, Canada, and then for the last 22 years, the USA. I keep asking myself: To which one is he most loyal? He was born and raised in apartheid South Africa in very well-to-do circumstances. With the fall of that apartheid regime not so many years ago, after a great human rights struggle inside South Africa, his father knew that economic circumstance would change in South Africa, so he took Elon, then a teenager, to visit over a dozen countries, including Can-ada, where Elon’s mother still resides. Elon took a second citizenship in Canada. He obtained a visa then to at-tend college in the United States as a foreign student, graduating in econom-ics and physics. He then moved to Sil-icon Valley for graduate school, but dropped out after 2 days. There is still remaining some ques-tions as to whether he illegally over-stayed in our country on a student visa. Records show he has only been a citizen of our country for 22 years, hav-ing become a citizen in the year of 2002. Bottom line: Why has President Don-ald Trump just given a naturalized cit-izen with two other citizenships and with no Federal clearance and only 22 years of residency in our Nation the keys to the U.S. Department of the Treasury’s electronic payment sys-tems. That data records every citizens’ private financial information and every businesses’ private information across our country. Musk got the position completely without the normal ethic investiga-tions required of every political ap-pointee to any President. When I served President Carter, the FBI checked our records, people all the way back to grade school. That was not done for this man. The American people need to know more about exactly how Elon, now an unelected billionaire, built his fortune off Federal Government contracts. In our Budget Committee, a number was just stated that he holds up to $18 bil-lion of contracts with the Government of the United States. That began with a huge $465 million loan from the U.S. Department of Energy to launch Tesla in California. Who exactly lobbied in that department for that loan, and who and why was it accepted? We are told it was paid back. Frankly, I have never known anyone who has gotten a loan that large from the Government of the United States with his background. For the record, Elon Musk paid that loan back over time, but began increas-ing the amounts of his gigantic loan and grant applications to the Federal Government with the largest thus far, we think, being with NASA. Wouldn’t we call this a conflict of in-terest, Mr. Speaker? Would we allow the head of GM or any other large cor-poration in our country to sit next to the President and go into the U.S. De-partment of the Treasury and not say it was a conflict of interest? Are we all fools? In using his financial leverage to re-elect Donald Trump, Musk should have been vetted by the FBI as is anyone who works close to the Presidency or critical government records. It appears Musk simply has been leveraging his vast fortune off government contracts. Is he rummaging through Treasury files to gain an advantage over com-petitors or to seek vengeance in busi-ness dealings? Just this year, he ordered the State Department to buy $400 million worth of his own cybertrucks, but when scru-tiny came, the purchase order mysteri-ously disappeared the word ‘‘Tesla’’ from their procurement orders. How about that? Over the past 5 years alone, he has received over $13 billion in government awards to his company. I ask every Member of Congress here and listening, do you know any other human being who has ever been allowed this kind of access with such private-sector inter-est in dipping into the U.S. Depart-ment of the Treasury time and again across all these agencies? It is unbe-lievable. Conflict of interest equals Elon Musk. He should not be able to invade the private records of the American people at the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Yet, he has done just that. Every person hearing my words, he has invaded your records, your tax records, your business reports. Think about that. Think about the investments that the Department of the Treasury makes in order to roll over our debt. 

b 1200 No one listening to this today, nor any elected official here in Congress, could ever have gained access to the records of the American people held in confidence in the U.S. Treasury. I can tell you how difficult it is even for a Member of Congress to get an appoint-ment to see the Secretary of the Treas-ury. We have been trying over the last several weeks. We haven’t gotten it yet. With Musk, what a breach of privacy for every American citizen. One must ask, how did he finagle this heist for the princely sum of $250 million spent on Presidential campaigns and congres-sional campaigns? I am sure that num-ber doubles. It literally is more and more like a quid pro quo. Elon Musk bankrolled President Trump’s reelection, and for this, he is given the keys to America’s financial kingdom. Wow. This is new in American history. Musk is now using unsecured, private servers to snoop on the millions of pri-vate accounts of the American people and businesses with which he is in com-petition. Where is the business community? Are they afraid of him? Will they speak up? Wall Street is speaking up in a very interesting way. The markets have been really rickety these last few days. They are not too comfortable. They are not dumb. Pay attention. Musk must be identi-fying individuals he would like to upend. Are they afraid, too, like Mem-bers of Congress who are afraid to speak out because they are afraid Musk will put more money up against them in the next campaign? Guess what? He is going to do it anyway, so speak out. Whatever he is concocting with his inverted merry band of minions, aged 19–26? They have no security clearances and no experience to work at the U.S. Treasury Department. Every person in America must have a concern about this. Their Social Secu-rity records, their health benefits, the profits of their corporations, and who they do business with is all there. His sole mission is to collect private, con-fidential information for more self-dealing and maybe threats and tax cuts for the billionaire class.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.033 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H699 February 13, 2025 

Does Elon Musk have to file a finan-cial disclosure statement like all of us? Where is it? We have to have them. Where is his? It seems his will be kept private. Musk is ruthless and a self-enabler. Surely, he seeks to wipe out his com-petitors or spy at will on the privileged information of the American people. I might ask anyone listening today, why does he have access to your mom’s So-cial Security records and your grandpa’s Medicare? What does he now know about you and your family? Mr. Speaker, I appreciate my col-leagues joining me today, and I yield to the gentleman from Georgia, Congress-man HANK JOHNSON . I thank him so very much for participating. I also thank Congresswoman DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ for substituting when I was not able to be on the floor. Mr. JOHNSON of Georgia. Mr. Speak-er, I thank the gentlewoman for con-vening us for this Special Order today and for her very thoughtful comments. Today, I rise to voice my alarm about the rapid descent of our democ-racy into a dictatorship. While co-President Donald Trump fo-cuses on expanding his business oppor-tunities globally while ignoring his campaign promise to lower the cost of living for ordinary Americans, co-president Elon Musk has taken awrecking ball to the Federal Govern-ment one agency at a time. Congress established the agencies that Musk is trying to delete, and it is only Congress, under our Constitution, not an unelected co-president, that has the constitutional authority to abolish a Federal agency. We still live in a democracy, which is government of, by, and for the people who have the right, the precious right, to vote for their leaders. We tell our constituents to vote. We tell them their votes and voices mat-ter, that their choices shape the future of this country, but what does that mean when an unelected billionaire can waltz into our agencies and slash and burn the whole thing to the ground like a Taliban terrorist, threatening 2 million Federal employees to resign under false pretenses, putting other folks out of work, and stopping pay-ments to small businesses and non-profits while illegally putting in pur-chase orders for the State Department to spend $400 million in taxpayer money for Tesla pickup trucks? This level of corruption is shocking. Co-President Trump and the Repub-licans in Congress, all of whom have abrogated their legislative power to the king, have handed the keys to the Nation’s Treasury to unelected co-president Elon Musk. Their actions are taking what we know as corruption to a whole new level. This is banana re-public-style corruption at its ugliest. While the powerful play their games, Donald Trump, Elon Musk, and their billionaire buddies get richer while the cost of living goes up for everybody else. Every day, my constituents call me, worried and scared, asking how an unelected billionaire they never voted for is gutting the very resources they rely on to put food on the table and a roof over their heads. They see a man who wants billion-aires like himself to pay nothing while hardworking Americans foot the bill. They see him kneecapping the Con-sumer Financial Protection Bureau, an agency created to shield the people from scams, fraud, and corporate greed. They ask why someone with a long history of union-busting, worker abuse, and blatant disregard for labor laws is being allowed to scuttle the Depart-ment of Labor. They want to know why a billionaire businessman from South Africa, who holds no elective office, has been given unchecked access and influence over their most sensitive personal and fi-nancial information, their rights, and their future. Let me be clear: I am committed to ensuring that president Musk stops this attack on the American people. House and Senate Democrats will not stand by, like my Republican col-leagues are doing, while Elon Musk hi-jacks our government. We will fight to protect the institutions that serve the people, not the privileged. That is what we must do to protect democracy and freedom. We will stand, and we will fight. With the American people roused in peace-ful, nonviolent protests across the country, Mr. Speaker, we will win. This country belongs to the people, not to the billionaires. Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I thank Congressman JOHNSON for his com-ments. I yield to the gentleman from New York, Congressman T IM KENNEDY ,a phenomenal new Member from Buf-falo. Mr. KENNEDY of New York. Mr. Speaker, let me begin by thanking Congresswoman M ARCY KAPTUR for her leadership on this important issue. Mr. Speaker, the U.S. Government exists to protect the rights and well-being of all Americans. People in my district want a government that works and works to improve the lives of west-ern New Yorkers and all Americans. People in my district and others across the country do not want an unelected billionaire dismantling our government for parts and raking in profits in the process. That is what is happening. President Trump has allowed Elon Musk to oper-ate with unchecked authority, unilat-erally and illegally gutting the agen-cies that protect everything we hold dear, all without necessary congres-sional approval. In my district alone, there are 8,500-plus Federal employees, including those at the Buffalo VA Medical Cen-ter, the Social Security Administra-tion, the Niagara Falls Air Reserve Station, and many, many other agen-cies that help our communities each and every day. We can’t protect the privacy of mil-lions of Americans if Elon Musk has access to private taxpayer data, includ-ing that of Social Security recipients, Medicare beneficiaries, and taxpayers. We can’t advance lifesaving, scientific, and cancer research breakthroughs if Elon Musk hollows out the National Institutes of Health. We cannot provide the benefits and services to our mili-tary heroes, who have earned and de-serve it, if Elon Musk drives away Fed-eral employees who serve our veterans. This is to say nothing of Elon Musk’s dizzying list of conflicts of interest. This is an unelected billionaire who has made those billions in large part from taxpayer-funded government con-tracts. This President has handed him unprecedented power to wring out hardworking families for every penny that they have. We can’t allow an individual who prioritizes profits above all and cozies up to adversaries like China and Russia to make decisions for the American people. We must continue to fight for the rights and well-being of hard-working families and put people over billionaire profit. Our constituents de-serve nothing less. Ms. KAPTUR. Mr. Speaker, I believe an additional speaker is coming. While we are waiting, Mr. Speaker, I want to point to this. If there are citi-zens who are listening, if we look at some of the government contracts that Mr. Musk is engaged in, we are trying to make this as complete as we can. For example, NASA is one of the largest contracts that he personally has. Look at this number, $11.8 billion with NASA. Can you imagine how many subcontractors there are on that job? That is just one connection. Then, we look over to the U.S. De-partment of Defense, and that is $3.6 billion. These are enormous contracts. I have companies in my district that do con-tract with the government. They don’t have contracts that size. We look at the Department of Com-merce, $1.9 million. Mr. Musk has acontract there. The Department of Veterans Affairs is an interesting one, $463,000. I am not sure what that is for. The Department of State is $440,000. You can do a lot with $440,000. There is a lot of information at the State De-partment. What is that contract for? Then, we have a whole series at other agencies. We know it is well over a mil-lion dollars. We can’t even track how much it is. This is an enormous amount of money. Even General Dy-namics and some of our large corpora-tions, I don’t think, have this kind of reach. Mr. Speaker, apparently, we don’t have any final speakers. I thank the Speaker and all those who are listening for their indulgence. This is a time for the American people to be intrepid and on the watch and providing informa-tion to their Members of Congress about information they may have         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.035 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H700 February 13, 2025 

about what Mr. Musk and all of his al-liances are doing across this country— to benefit the Republic. Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Mem-bers are reminded to refrain from en-gaging in personalities toward the President. 

> f

GRID RELIABILITY The SPEAKER pro tempore. Under the Speaker’s announced policy of Jan-uary 3, 2025, the gentlewoman from North Dakota (Mrs. F EDORCHAK ) is rec-ognized for 60 minutes as the designee of the majority leader. GENERAL LEAVE Mrs. FEDORCHAK. Mr. Speaker, Iask unanimous consent that all Mem-bers may have 5 legislative days in which to revise and extend their re-marks. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Is there objection to the request of the gentle-woman from North Dakota? There was no objection. Mrs. FEDORCHAK. Mr. Speaker, Iyield myself such time as I may con-sume. Mr. Speaker, I wanted to start this speech with a real-time exercise. Iwanted to suddenly have all the lights go out in here. Imagine what would happen if we did that. It would be pitch black in this room. Everything would come to a halt. The microphones would stop. We wouldn’t be able to see each other. People watching online would certainly be confused. We would all wonder what was going on. 

b 1215 Would we be able to see to walk around, to get out? Would anyone panic? Then, let’s imagine if the outage wasn’t just in this room or this build-ing, but all across Washington, D.C. At first, there would be silence, but it wouldn’t take long before confusion and, perhaps, chaos ensued. Now, let’s imagine this happening in my State of North Dakota where just this week, temperatures dropped to minus 22 degrees for many days in arow. In fact, this morning was the first day it rose above zero. What would that mean to lose power when it is 22 below? People’s liveli-hoods be at risk. Children couldn’t go to school. Hospitals would be unable to care for people. Businesses would come to a standstill. Energy production would halt. Livestock would be threat-ened. Homes and properties would freeze up. It wouldn’t take very long in that kind of weather for the economy of North Dakota to grind to a halt and for people to die if we had no power. This isn’t some farfetched scenario. This is a real threat in America today. The North American Electric Reli-ability Corporation warns that two-thirds of the United States is at an ele-vated risk of blackouts, of not having enough reliable power to meet demand when we need it the most. This map clearly illustrates the problem. Every area of America in red and yel-low on this map has an elevated risk of not having enough power to meet de-mand; not tomorrow, not in 5 years or 10 years, today. This is the scenario today in America. That is why I am on the House floor today to sound the alarm about our grid reliability crisis and to highlight five practical solutions to keep the lights on. First, let’s talk about why this happening. What is driving this problem? It really comes down to one thing: We are retiring power plants faster than we are replacing them. Seriously, it is that simple. In States throughout our Nation, power providers are shut-ting down massive amounts of tradi-tional power generation from power plants that can be turned on, up or down, as needed to follow demand. They are retiring these generators faster than they are able to bring on new generators that can provide the same kind of always-available power. Grid operators measure this avail-ability in terms of capacity, and there are two kinds. First, there is installed capacity. That is the maximum amount of power a generator can churn out in the best conditions. For example, most wind farms in North Dakota have a name-plate capacity of 300 megawatts. Our largest coal fire facility is 1,100 megawatts. Over on this chart, the blue line on top represents nameplate capacity. The second capacity term, is called accredited capacity. That is the amount of power that can be counted on, regardless of conditions. Grid oper-ators determine the value of accredited capacity. They look at performance of a generator over time, how it works in different conditions, and they deter-mine how much of that power they can rely on when they need it the most in any weather condition. That same wind farm would likely have an accredited capacity that is 30 percent of its nameplate capacity or in a 300-megawatt wind farm, a fraction of that would be accredited capacity. The coal facility probably comes in at about 80 to 90 percent of nameplate ca-pacity, so about 950 megawatts of ac-credited capacity. In the MISO market, this region here in red, that serves 15 States. Roughly, 42 million Americans get their power in the MISO region. The operators in that region warn that the accredited capac-ity, the line on the bottom here, the red, is shrinking dramatically even though we are spending a lot of money installing more and more generation on a nameplate capacity. You can see this clearly in these two lines. The top line, the blue, is name-plate capacity. Americans are paying for that to be installed. The red line below is accredited capacity. Ameri-cans are already paying for that, too. The red line is what you can count on when times are tough, when it is 22 below. The blue line is questionable. That is dependent on the weather. If you ever wonder why your utility prices are rising, but you face more risk for blackouts or brownouts, this gap is why. That is why NERC keeps warning us with reports, forecasts, and maps like this. MISO is in the red zone on this map. All the yellow zones also have elevated risk. In a nation as blessed with natural resources and brilliant people like the United States, there is no reason to ever run short of power. Our whole country should be blue. We should never run short of power ever. We will have storms that knock the power off for a time, but to not have enough power to meet demand, that is just bad planning and terrible leader-ship. That is the bad news today. The good news is this: We can fix this. We have the resources. We have the tech-nology, and now we just need to act. Here are the five key steps—the five solutions to this problem. First, we need regulatory relief. Right now, Fed-eral regulations are strangling our en-ergy producers, making it nearly im-possible for them to meet our power de-mand. We must repeal the EPA’s green-house gas rule. We must eliminate the methane fee rule and roll back the BLM resource management plan for North Dakota and other States. We must reform the new source perform-ance standards that prevent power pro-viders from making efficiency improve-ments to their existing fleets, the ones that are already connected to the grid, to improve them, to help them produce more power in a cleaner and more effi-cient way. That new source performance stand-ard is just bad policy. It makes no sense at all. These are just a few exam-ples of Biden administration policies that have imposed crushing costs and regulatory burdens on the power sec-tor. They are jeopardizing the stability of our grid and the livelihoods of hard-working Americans. Second, we must reevaluate Federal incentives for energy production. Our government has distorted the energy market with subsidies that favor cer-tain resources while neglecting others. This has resulted in a grid that is too dependent on the weather. Think back to the map from NERC, two-thirds of the country at an elevated risk of not having enough power to meet demand. It is time to realign these incentives. Today, our grid operators are calling for more dispatchable generation, more capacity. They want to fill that gap in those two lines that I showed earlier. Think of the MISO zone in red on my first map. MISO is desperate for more power resources that can be turned on when needed, but here is the stack of resources that are in line to connect with the MISO grid. You see this over time, it goes back to the year 2000, and shows back then there was a decent amount of gas—the blue lines are gas, and then you start seeing wind coming online.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.036 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H701 February 13, 2025 

If you go all the way over to the far side of this map, you see this stack of resources currently in line in MISO, 171 gigawatts of resources, actually more resources than the entire nameplate or the entire peak demand in MISO is cur-rently in line. Today, in that column, you see it is almost filled with solar and wind re-sources. Fortunately, some battery too, but those are not the dispatchable resources MISO is calling for and clam-oring for. Only a sliver of gas on the bottom is in line to connect to MISO, even though they are desperate for more gas to help make it a more stable grid. We must ensure that our Federal pol-icy doesn’t exacerbate this problem and current vulnerabilities that have been created by a flood of wind and solar, which are weather-dependent generation. Instead, we must support fair markets that better encourage the investments needed to meet growing demand and long-term grid reliability and stability. Third, we need to speed up the per-mitting process. Right now, it can take years, sometimes decades, to get ap-proval for new energy projects. This is unacceptable, especially when we have transformative technologies ready to go, like small modular reactors. These advanced nuclear systems are safe, re-liable, clean, and capable of powering entire communities. I look forward to working with my colleagues in the House and leaders, like Energy Secretary Chris Wright, to cut through the bureaucratic red tape and accelerate deployment of these new technologies. Fourth, we must implement rules that protect grid reliability. As I men-tioned earlier, it was well below freez-ing throughout North Dakota this week. My State and region weathered those temperatures largely because of coal, natural gas, and nuclear power. This chart here is straight from MISO data. It illustrates the energy that was used this week in the MISO region to meet demand. As you can see, fully 80 percent of those resources were coal, natural gas, and nuclear. That is what came online when the tempera-tures were 22 below to keep the power on for all the people living in those cold areas. Yet, despite this reality, States are racing to shut down these reliable baseload power generators that are re-sponsible for powering our commu-nities, replacing it with intermittent resources—that huge stack that was in the queue in the line in MISO, that huge stake of wind and solar—the intermittent resources that cannot re-liably meet all the demands of our grid or the people who depend on it. I have nothing against wind and solar. North Dakota has tons of wind generation online, but it is simply not capable today to meet the demands of the grid. The people who are respon-sible for making sure our grids are reli-able are the ones saying that over and over. This is reckless. We need Federal safeguards to ensure before a power plant is retired, there is a reliable re-placement ready to go online. We can-not afford to gamble with our Nation’s energy security. Energy security is na-tional security. Finally, we need to better understand the growing demands of the AI indus-try. AI and other data-intensive tech-nologies are driving massive increases in energy consumption. As Vice President VANCE acknowl-edged in Paris this week, if we are to remain competitive in the global econ-omy, we need to remove the barriers to development and unleash the full po-tential of American energy resources. This means embracing an all-of-the-above strategy that includes battery technology to back up renewables, but also oil, gas, nuclear, and hydropower, whatever it takes to power our future. Mr. Speaker, grid reliability is not a partisan issue. It is an American issue. Our security, our economy, and our way of life depend on it. We cannot be a beacon for the world, or even safe in our own homes, if we are sitting in the dark without power. We have the re-sources. We have the technology. Now, we must act. America can and must re-main the most powerful, prosperous, and innovative Nation on Earth. I look forward to working with my colleagues to do just that. Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentle-woman from California (Mrs. K IM ). Mrs. KIM. Mr. Speaker, I appreciate Congresswoman F EDORCHAK for hosting this Special Order to raise awareness of the critical need the United States is facing to become energy independent. Protecting our environment is not controversial. I represent a district in southern California. Unfortunately, Californians know too well the con-sequences of rushing to implement en-ergy policies. 

b 1230 Mr. Speaker, as Governor Newsom pushed to ban gas-powered cars, he then said people couldn’t charge elec-tric cars as our community saw rolling blackouts. It doesn’t need to be one or the other—environment or economy, natural gas or renewables. We need an all-of-the-above energy strategy. Through American innova-tion, we create jobs, expand our energy supply, protect our environment, lower costs, and strengthen our national se-curity. Energy fuels everything from our cars to our homes, and we must ensure we have energy resources here at home that we can rely on. I will keep fight-ing to bring commonsense energy poli-cies to Congress. Again, I thank Con-gresswoman F EDORCHAK for her leader-ship on this issue. Mrs. FEDORCHAK. Mr. Speaker, Ithank Congresswoman KIM. She has lived this in her State of California, and I appreciate her bringing attention to the false choice of one or the other. We can and must do it all. Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from Florida (Mr. H ARIDOPOLOS). Mr. HARIDOPOLOS. Mr. Speaker, this is an important issue which has af-fected us all. We have seen prices rise by 20 to 30 percent over the last 4years. Unfortunately, because of the policies of the previous administration, we have seen these challenges become more and more difficult as we take the reins of power once again in Wash-ington, D.C. There is no other way to put it other than energy dominance is essential. It is the best way to ensure we have American prosperity, national secu-rity, innovation, excellence in energy, and a reliable grid, as the Congress-woman has talked about today. Fortunately, we have persons who are experts right here in the United States Congress, a new Member of Con-gress, Mrs. F EDORCHAK , on the Energy and Commerce Committee. She under-stands firsthand the essential nature of energy and why it is so important to all Americans as they face challenges here and abroad. If we can meet all of those criteria— prosperity, national security, innova-tion, and reliable energy—we will once again have lower prices at the grocery store, lower prices for the gas tank, and make sure we stay warm in the winter and cool in places like Florida in the summer. Mr. Speaker, I applaud this effort. If we have an all-in energy solution and energy dominance, once again, as the Congresswoman has talked about, America can move forward and meet the challenges of tomorrow. I appreciate the opportunity to speak this afternoon on this Special Order and make sure that we are moving for-ward with the leadership of Donald Trump and leaders like Congress-woman F EDORCHAK on the Energy and Commerce Committee. Mrs. FEDORCHAK. Mr. Speaker, Ithank Mr. H ARIDOPOLOS . We certainly need a lot of power to get out in space. His dreams and his leadership in that area are certainly noted. We need power to fuel those, too, and I thank him for being here today. Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from Texas (Mr. W EBER ). Mr. WEBER of Texas. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentlewoman from North Dakota. Like my preceding colleague just said, she is great on the Com-mittee on energy. She is an energy busybody. She is moving and shaking for being brand new. I thank her for the opportunity to speak today. Mr. Speaker, I will tell everyone that being on the Energy and Commerce Committee has been the delight of my life. It means a lot to America. When I speak to groups, Mr. Speaker, whether they are school-aged kids or whether they are college or whether they are industry or whatever it might be, I tell people that the things that make America great are the things that America makes. How do we do that? We do that with a reliable, affordable, dependable         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.038 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H702 February 13, 2025 

source of energy, Mr. Speaker. We do that with grid reliability, a critical issue that affects every single Amer-ican. Our Nation’s economy, our secu-rity, and our very way of life depend on energy that is stable, affordable, and, yes, resilient. Today, our system is under threat. When we talk about grid reliability, we have to start with the facts. Right now fossil fuels, natural gas, coal, and even petroleum supply 60 percent of our electricity. Natural gas alone provides 40 percent and up. It keeps the lights on in homes. It keeps the lights on in businesses and factories all across America. Did I mention, Mr. Speaker, that the things that make America great are the things that America makes? Add in nuclear power at nearly 19 percent, and it is clear that these are the backbone of our energy system eco-nomically, politically, and militarily. Yet, despite this reliability, these prov-en sources are under attack by radical policies that push unreliable energy at the expense of energy that actually works. Mr. Speaker, that is changing now. The Trump administration has made it clear. We are going to put American energy first. We are increasing domes-tic production, cutting unnecessary regulations, and ensuring that our power grids remain strong and resil-ient. That means expanding natural gas. That means investing in nuclear energy. That means making sure we have the very infrastructure to keep energy flowing to American homes and businesses. Did I mention, Mr. Speaker, that the things that make America great are the things that America makes? Yet, here is what is happening. The premature shutdown of our most reli-able energy sources—coal, natural gas, and nuclear—put our entire grid at risk. The Nation’s largest grid oper-ator, PJM, which serves much of the eastern U.S., warns that up to 30 per-cent of its power generation could re-tire by 2030. Meanwhile, demand is expected to rise 40 percent by 2039. I am not good at math, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think that adds up. We cannot take away reliable generation and then just simply pre-tend we don’t face an energy crisis. That is pie in the sky. Thankfully, President Trump under-stands this and is working to ensure we do not face a future of rolling black-outs and energy shortages. He probably understands, Mr. Speaker, that the things that make America great are the things that America makes. If the United States is serious about remaining a leader in energy and tech-nology, we must embrace energy ex-pansion. That means building more pipelines. Pipelines are the safest and most efficient way to transport energy. Yet they are being blocked by over-regulations and bad policy, and that is why the Trump administration is com-mitted to cutting the red tape, getting pipelines built, and making sure Amer-ican energy can move freely to where it is needed so that the things that make America great can continue to be made. Let me be clear, Mr. Speaker. Mod-ernizing our grid does not mean push-ing expensive and unreliable energy mandates on taxpayers. Americans should not be forced to foot the bill for an agenda that actually weakens our power supply. What we need is a bal-anced, commonsense approach that prioritizes affordability, reliability, stability, and security. With the Trump administration back in office, Mr. Speaker, we now have leadership that values energy inde-pendence, as well as economic growth. This Congress, on the Energy and Com-merce Committee, I look forward to advancing real solutions to hardening our energy grid, to protect it from cyberattacks, to protect it from supply chain disruptions, and to protect it from natural disasters. Mr. Speaker, America needs a grid that works when we need it. That means standing up for natural gas. That means investing in nuclear. That means protecting our pipelines. That means rejecting reckless policies that put politics ahead of not only reli-ability but reality. The things that make America great are the things that America makes. President Trump, thanks to his lead-ership, is on the right path to securing a future based on that premise, and I thank the gentlewoman from North Dakota for holding this Special Order. Mrs. FEDORCHAK. Mr. Speaker, Ithank Representative W EBER for being here and leaving us with that really great phrase. The things that make America great are the things that America makes. I love that. Mr. Speaker, we can and we must meet the challenge of a reliable, afford-able, sustainable power grid. As President Trump said: ‘‘In Amer-ica, the impossible is what we do best.’’ We can do this, and we will lead the world in this venture. Mr. Speaker, we have talked a lot about the challenges that face Amer-ican energy. I want to talk about the opportunities we have, too. With an en-ergy supply that is affordable, reliable, and dependable, the United States can lead the way on emissions reductions and artificial intelligence. Today, I want to talk about AI. To be AI dominant, we must first be energy dominant. That is why today I am an-nouncing my plans to create an AI and Energy Working Group. While my colleagues are thankfully working hard on regulations, speech, and other components of AI, this work-ing group will focus exclusively on AI and the energy this growing tech-nology demands. This work will be complementary to and not duplicative of other efforts by my colleagues, including the Speaker’s Task Force on AI, which completed its work last December. My goal is to bring in experts and stakeholders, leg-islators, and other interested parties to fully explore these power needs, the current barriers to meeting them, and Federal policy solutions to help reli-ably, affordably, and sustainably power the future of AI. I plan to follow four main pillars. My first pillar is: Meeting AI energy demands requires American energy dominance. Today, AI searches consume nearly 10 times the electricity of standard internet searches. In 2024, data centers accounted for 4.3 percent of total U.S. power demand. Analysts predict this could climb to as much as 12 percent by 2030. To put that into perspective, that would be more electricity than the en-tire State of Texas uses today. Yet, the U.S. isn’t scaling up reliable baseload power quickly enough to support this rapid growth. In fact, the Biden admin-istration’s policies are forcing this baseload power offline. If we don’t act, we risk energy short-ages, higher costs, and a slowdown in technological advancement. To secure their energy needs, major tech compa-nies are locking in exclusive long-term power contracts. For example, in September, Micro-soft entered an agreement to reopen the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant to reliably power its AI data cen-ter. While I support these types of agreements, we must also ensure that smaller companies and new players in the AI industry have access to the power they need to innovate and com-pete. Meeting the energy demands of AI isn’t just about powering technology. It is about powering America’s future. Now that brings us to pillar number two: A strong, secure electronic grid. The rapid, forced transition to inter-mittent power sources, paired with the retirement of reliable baseload genera-tors, has left our electric grid increas-ingly vulnerable to outages. Today, the North American Electric Reliability Corporation warns that two-thirds of the United States faces an elevated risk of not having enough power to meet the demand of having blackouts. As we have become more reliant on power-dependent digital infrastructure, the stakes are even higher. Having enough power isn’t our only concern. Cyberattacks targeting U.S. grid operations and infrastructure are a growing threat that could disrupt ev-erything from everyday conveniences to our national security. If AI is to flourish, we must prioritize grid reli-ability and security. This leads me to pillar number three: This requires the right energy regula-tions. According to the report from the bi-partisan House Task Force on Artifi-cial Intelligence, new AI models are de-veloped roughly every 6 months, and data centers are built within 1 to 2years.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.039 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H703 February 13, 2025 

b 1245 Meanwhile, new power plants and transmission infrastructure can take at least 5 to 10 years to build. This cre-ates, obviously, a significant gap be-tween the rapid growth of AI and the slow growth of the power supply needed to support it. Our current energy regulatory envi-ronment is not equipped to bridge this gap. I know this environment well. Iserved 12 years as a State energy regu-lator. We need forward-thinking regula-tions that empower both small innovators, who depend on the bulk power system, and larger firms that se-cure power through long-term agree-ments. By ensuring a level energy playing field, we can position America as the global leader in AI development, and we can outpace China. This leads me to pillar number four: America, not China, must be the global leader of AI innovation. On January 20 of this year, China un-veiled DeepSeek–R1. It is the most ad-vanced large language model report-edly developed with less advanced proc-essors at a fraction of the cost of U.S. models. This proves that China is rap-idly closing the gap, and we can’t af-ford to fall behind. The Trump administration recog-nizes this urgency. That is why, just 3 days after the new Chinese revelation, on January 23, President Trump signed Executive Order No. 14179: Removing Barriers to American Leadership in Ar-tificial Intelligence. This order overturned President Biden’s mandates that had stifled American investment and innovation in AI. With this decisive action, we are reclaiming our competitive edge. It is time to take the handcuffs off our AI industry and unleash the full potential of American ingenuity. Winning the future of AI requires bold action, smart energy policy, and a commitment to American innovation. That is why I will engage with a broad range of voices and stakeholders, big and small, to craft a legislative frame-work that secures our energy domi-nance, strengthens our electric grid, and positions America as the global leader in AI. For those with ideas on how we can achieve these goals, my door is always open. Together, we can power the fu-ture of AI and assure that America, not China, leads the way back. Mr. Speaker, I yield to the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. C LINE). Mr. CLINE. Mr. Speaker, I thank the gentlewoman for holding this Special Order and for her leadership on energy issues. The House is truly fortunate to have her as a Member. Mrs. F EDORCHAK is exactly right. We have, as our top priority, the need to restore energy independence for this country and energy dominance, espe-cially in regard to our relationship with nations like China that are push-ing to lead in AI and other tech-nologies. We are dependent on China for rare earth minerals that are so important to powering our grid, powering the technologies that support AI. That is why it is great that the Trump admin-istration is leading on ways in which we can explore not only in the conti-nental United States for rare earth minerals but also talking to other countries, talking to countries like Greenland and Ukraine, quite frankly, making comments about the need to ensure that the U.S. has the rare earth mineral supply that it needs to support the AI initiatives that are happening in this country. We need to be the leader in AI globally. If not, we cede it to China. We just had a hearing yesterday in the Judiciary Committee about what would happen with the censorship-in-dustrial complex if other nations, whether it is Europe and their privacy directive or China through their efforts in AI, to dictate what can and cannot be said on the internet. When it comes to energy, what is most important is the American con-sumer, the American citizen. What we have seen over the last several years is that American citizens are suffering under the Green New Deal agenda, the increasing dependence on other coun-tries for our energy needs, and the need to restore that energy independence in order to target costs, bring down infla-tion, and actually allow Americans to be able to afford the important tech-nologies and appliances and other things that are critical to daily living. According to the U.S. Energy Infor-mation Administration, since 2021, en-ergy prices under the Biden adminis-tration outpaced inflation, with con-sumers seeing an average rise of 10 per-cent. This is all despite the massive glut of subsidies that the Biden admin-istration pushed to prop up Green New Deal technologies that otherwise wouldn’t exist without government handouts. Thankfully, we have a new President, a new sheriff in town, one who will bring online more energy production and ensure that the days of $5 gas prices are left behind along with Biden’s failed legacy. Moreover, this administration will prioritize affordability and consumer choice in appliances, focusing on cut-ting burdensome red tape, not on regu-lating your gas stoves or water heaters at home, which we saw the Biden ad-ministration seek to regulate in the waning days of the administration, the outgoing days of that administration. Just this week, Energy Secretary Chris Wright signed his first secre-tarial order meant to unleash a golden era of American energy dominance. Ilook forward to working with them and the administration to lend whatever support and authority is needed from Congress to achieve tangible results for the American people. At the end of the day, that is what it is all about, is making sure that we de-liver for the American people and en-sure that this great Nation continues its energy dominance that we had under the first Trump administration, that we lost under the failed Biden ad-ministration, and that we are seeking to regain under the current Trump ad-ministration. I thank the gentlewoman for her leadership, and I look forward to work-ing with her on these issues. Mrs. FEDORCHAK. Mr. Speaker, Ithank Mr. C LINE for taking the time to participate in the Special Order this afternoon, especially on a fly-out day when everyone is heading back to their districts to be with the citizens they represent. Energy dominance and energy inde-pendence is the foundation for the mas-sive new agenda that we must move forward with in America today. It is the foundation for driving down infla-tion, for lowering costs of everything from housing to utilities to rent to gro-ceries and gas. The cost of power is baked into everything we buy. It is the foundation for powering economic growth. It is the foundation for becom-ing AI dominant, and it is clearly the foundation for national security. I thank everyone who participated in this Special Order this afternoon, and I yield back the balance of my time. 

> f

GREATEST LIVING THREAT TO OUR REPUBLIC The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mr. BRESNAHAN ). Under the Speaker’s an-nounced policy of January 3, 2025, the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas (Mr. G REEN ) for 30 minutes. Mr. GREEN of Texas. Mr. Speaker, and still I rise, a proud, liberated Dem-ocrat, unbought, unbossed, and unafraid. I rise, Mr. Speaker, today, in the name of liberty and justice for all, in the name of government of the peo-ple, by the people, for the people. I rise to remind us of the words of Ben Franklin. He reminded us that we have a republic if we can keep it. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to warn all of the greatest living threat to our Re-public. I rise to explain how we must deter this threat or we must remove it. I rise to explain how the consequences of doing nothing can be harmful to all that we hold dear. Mr. Speaker, our greatest living threat is a President who defies court orders. Our greatest living threat is a President who defies court orders. One can but only imagine what America would be like today if President Eisen-hower had defied the order of the court in Brown v. Board of Education. It was Brown v. Board of Education that desegregated society to the extent that it is, that integrated it to the ex-tent that it is, that probably has given me a means by which I can stand here in the House of Representatives. Brown v. Board of Education was a seminal moment in time. It was a mo-ment in time which has changed time from the point of its announcements to         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.041 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H704 February 13, 2025 

this very day. Brown v. Board of Edu-cation has made a difference in my life and in the lives of many others. I am so grateful that President Ei-senhower—who was reluctant, who was not a fan of Brown v. Board of Edu-cation, who didn’t really want to deal with the great racial issues of his time. I am glad that he did not defy the court. There are things that he could have done to prevent Brown from being fully realized. Quite frankly, it has not been fully realized to this day. A President who defies court orders is the greatest threat to American de-mocracy because that President has the ability to not only defy court or-ders but in so doing to become the final arbiter of what the law is. That Presi-dent assumes an inordinate amount of power. That President will destroy what we know as the three branches of govern-ment, because that President will no longer recognize the judiciary and what the judiciary has been allowed to do since Marbury v. Madison. That President, Mr. Speaker, will become a person who is not only above the law, but that President will become the law, if we allow a President to defy court orders. What we must do to prevent this? We can prevent a President from defying court orders with impeachment, im-peachment in two senses of the word. One, it can act as a deterrent. The other is it can act as a means of re-moval. If a President defies a court order, we can remove him, but let’s not go there just now. Let’s talk about de-terrence. I learned from the last time I en-gaged in this impeachment process of the value of deterrence, impeachment as a deterrent. Here is how it works. If a President believes that he will be impeached for defying a court order, because he will in effect become the law of the land, we will no longer be a land where laws govern but a land where a man governs or a woman governs, a person governs. We are a land of laws, and we want to remain such. If a President defies acourt order and if he knows this, that we can deter him or we can impeach him, he can opt to take advantage of the warning of deterrence. This is what I learned. This President or any President can be deterred if the President believes that impeachment is a remedy. If the President does not believe that im-peachment is a remedy, then he can go on and defy the court’s orders. If he believes that impeachment is there as a possible remedy, then he will not. 

b 1300 I say it can be a deterrence. I say it can be a deterrence if the President be-lieves that we will impeach. I believe that if a President knows that we will impeach, then he may back off, and he may back down. I believe that this President knows that I will bring Articles of Impeach-ment against him. He knows that Ihave no fear of him as many others do. I believe he understands that those who fear him will cower. They are pu-sillanimous. I am not a pusillanimous politician. I will not kneel; I will not bend; and I will not break. I will stand for liberty and justice for all. Mr. President, you know that if you cross the line and if you defy court or-ders, then there is one Member of Con-gress who has pledged to bring Articles of Impeachment against you. Let that deter you, Mr. President. Don’t go forward, Mr. President. Don’t believe what the Vice President is tell-ing you about defiance of court orders. Don’t believe those around you who are trying to convince you that you can do this with impunity. Mr. President, you have been made immune to some laws, but you are not immune to impeachment. Impeach-ment is the final straw that can break the back of the camel who happens to decide that he is going to continue with his ruthless, reckless orders and defy even the courts of this country. No President—no President—should ever defy court orders because, at that point, that President becomes a dic-tator. We in this country have decided that we have a republic, and we want to keep it. If we are going to keep this Republic, then we must use impeach-ment as a deterrence, which means that this President has to know that it is there for him and that we will use it against him, impeachment as a deter-rence. Now, let’s move to impeachment as a form of removal. If a President defies a court order or court orders, then that President has committed an impeach-able act. It is an impeachable act to defy your oath of office to execute the laws, to honor the laws of the United States, and to protect the Constitu-tion. You are charged with the respon-sibility of defending the Constitution. If you do this, Mr. President, then you will now have committed an im-peachable act. The question is not whether you will be impeached by way of a resolution being presented and not whether a resolution will be presented because you know that I am going to present that resolution. I am telling you now that I will present the resolu-tion. If you defy court orders, then I will present resolutions to impeach you. I will present the resolution. Now, the question is: Will the Con-gress act? What will the Congress do? I believe that even some of the most con-servative Members of Congress will recognize that we don’t want a dicta-torship and that if we don’t act, then we will have a dictatorship. The con-sequences of our inaction and the con-sequences of our failure to impeach and convict would be a dictatorship. I don’t believe that the Congress of the United States of America and Idon’t believe that the Senate of the United States of America will stand by and watch a dictatorship develop while they are in office. This is our watch. I don’t believe that, on our watch, we have such per-sons who are going to simply stand by. There may be some, but I believe there will be enough to impeach, and I be-lieve there will be enough to convict. That is because no one in this country, I believe, wants a dictatorship. If there are some who want it, then you don’t know what you are asking for. Mr. Speaker, this is an alarm. I am warning our country. I want you to know that we are this close to a dicta-torship because we have a President who is seriously considering, it seems, disobeying court orders. That is the line. That is the line in the dirt. That is the Rubicon. If you cross this line in the dirt, you will have moved into the area of impeachment, and I assure you, Articles of Impeach-ment will be brought against you. Mr. President, you are a Goliath. You have been made to be above the law in certain cases. You are a Goliath. There is nothing on the planet like you, it seems, because you happen to be armed with the nuclear weapons that are ca-pable of changing life on Earth as we know it or obliterating all life on Earth. You are armed with the mighti-est Army. You are armed, Mr. President, and you are dangerous if you decide you are going to move forward and deny court orders. You are a Goliath, but I will let you know now, Mr. President, that there are Davids among us. There are Davids, Mr. President. There are 435 Davids. The question is, will these Davids use their slings to bring you down with im-peachment? That is the only question. I believe the Davids among us will do this. I be-lieve that there is a majority on agiven day when impeachment is brought who will vote to impeach. These are the Davids that will save this country. They will preserve the Republic. They will continue to have the justice that we understand we should have through the courts. They are the persons who are on watch, and they understand that this is their watch, Mr. Speaker. I would pray that the President would not move forward. I would pray that he will back down from his notion of defying court orders. I also know that if he does, the Davids of the Con-gress of the United States of America will bring him down. Mr. Speaker, I am one of those Da-vids. Mr. Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time. The SPEAKER pro tempore. Mem-bers are reminded to refrain from en-gaging in personalities toward the President and to direct their remarks to the Chair and not to a perceived viewing audience. 

> f

ADJOURNMENT The SPEAKER pro tempore. Pursu-ant to clause 13 of rule I, the House         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.043 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H705 February 13, 2025 

stands adjourned until 1:30 p.m. tomor-row. Thereupon (at 1 o’clock and 6 min-utes p.m.), under its previous order, the House adjourned until tomorrow, Fri-day, February 14, 2025, at 1:30 p.m. 

f

EXECUTIVE COMMUNICATIONS, ETC. Under clause 2 of rule XIV, executive communications were taken from the Speaker’s table and referred as follows: EC–430. A letter from the Chairman, Coun-cil of the District of Columbia, transmitting DC Act 25-717, ‘‘Harmonious Living Amend-ment Act of 2024’’, pursuant to Public Law 93-198, Sec. 602(c)(1); (87 Stat. 813); to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. EC–431. A letter from the Chairman, Coun-cil of the District of Columbia, transmitting DC Act 25-718, ‘‘Downtown Arena Revitaliza-tion Act of 2024’’, pursuant to Public Law 93-198, Sec. 602(c)(1); (87 Stat. 813); to the Com-mittee on Oversight and Government Re-form. EC–432. A letter from the Chairman, Coun-cil of the District of Columbia, transmitting DC Act 25-719, ‘‘Restoration of Covenanted Roads and Alleys by the District Govern-ment Act of 2024’’, pursuant to Public Law 93-198, Sec. 602(c)(1); (87 Stat. 813); to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. EC–433. A letter from the Chairman, Coun-cil of the District of Columbia, transmitting DC Act 25-720, ‘‘Recidivism Reduction at DYRS Act of 2024’’, pursuant to Public Law 93-198, Sec. 602(c)(1); (87 Stat. 813); to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. 

f

PUBLIC BILLS AND RESOLUTIONS Under clause 2 of rule XII, public bills and resolutions of the following titles were introduced and severally re-ferred, as follows: By Mr. COMER: H.R. 1276. A bill to remove restrictions from a parcel of land in Paducah, Kentucky; to the Committee on Natural Resources. By Mr. AMO (for himself, Mr. M AG -AZINER , Mr. B ISHOP , Mr. C ARTER of Louisiana, Ms. C LARKE of New York, Mr. C LYBURN , Mr. C OHEN , Mr. C OSTA ,Mr. D AVIS of North Carolina, Mr. F IG -URES , Mr. G REEN of Texas, Mr. J ACK -SON of Illinois, Mr. J OHNSON of Geor-gia, Ms. K ELLY of Illinois, Mrs. M CB ATH , Ms. MCCOLLUM , Mrs. MC IVER , Mr. M FUME , Ms. M OORE of Wisconsin, Mr. M OULTON , Ms. N OR -TON , Ms. P LASKETT , Ms. S CHAKOWSKY ,Ms. S EWELL , Ms. S TRICKLAND , Mr. TURNER of Texas, Ms. U NDERWOOD ,Mr. V EASEY , Mrs. W ATSON C OLEMAN ,and Ms. W ILLIAMS of Georgia): H.R. 1277. A bill to award a Congressional Gold Medal, collectively, to the First Rhode Island Regiment, in recognition of their dedicated service during the Revolutionary War; to the Committee on Financial Serv-ices. By Mr. AMODEI of Nevada (for himself, Mr. GOTTHEIMER , and Mr. M CC OR -MICK ): H.R. 1278. A bill to amend title 31, United States Code, to save Federal funds by au-thorizing changes to the composition of cir-culating coins, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Financial Services, and in ad-dition to the Committees on the Budget, and Rules, for a period to be subsequently deter-mined by the Speaker, in each case for con-sideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. BEAN of Florida (for himself, Mr. W EBER of Texas, Mr. K ENNEDY of Utah, and Mr. S COTT F RANKLIN of Florida): H.R. 1279. A bill to amend title XIX of the Social Security Act to establish a commu-nity engagement requirement for certain in-dividuals under the Medicaid program; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce. By Mr. BEAN of Florida: H.R. 1280. A bill to require the head of each Executive agency to relocate 30 percent of the employees assigned to the headquarters of the Executive agency to duty stations outside the Washington metropolitan area, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. By Mrs. BICE: H.R. 1281. A bill to amend the Energy Pol-icy and Conservation Act to modify stand-ards for water heaters, furnaces, boilers, and kitchen cooktops, ranges, and ovens, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce. By Mr. BILIRAKIS (for himself and Mr. BAIRD ): H.R. 1282. A bill to prohibit Federal fund-ing for institutions of higher education that carry out diversity, equity, and inclusion initiatives, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Education and Workforce. By Mr. BILIRAKIS: H.R. 1283. A bill to amend title 18, United States Code, to prohibit child pornography produced using artificial intelligence; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By Mr. BOST (for himself, Ms. S EWELL ,Mr. M ORAN , Ms. TENNEY , Ms. VAN DUYNE , Mr. M URPHY , Mr. M RVAN , Mr. B ALDERSON , Mr. P ALMER , Ms. BUDZINSKI , Mr. P ANETTA , and Mr. C AREY ): H.R. 1284. A bill to amend the Tariff Act of 1930 to increase civil penalties for, and im-prove enforcement with respect to, customs fraud, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on Ways and Means. By Mr. BOST (for himself and Mr. PAPPAS ): H.R. 1285. A bill to amend the Water Infra-structure Finance and Innovation Act of 2014 to establish payment and performance secu-rity requirements for projects, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Transpor-tation and Infrastructure, and in addition to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdic-tion of the committee concerned. By Mr. BRESNAHAN (for himself, Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina, Mr. B OST ,Mr. P ANETTA , Mr. VALADAO , and Mr. H ARDER of California): H.R. 1286. A bill to direct the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to seek to enter into an agreement with a federally funded research and development center for an assessment of forms that the Secretary sends to claimants for benefits under laws administered by the Secretary, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs. By Ms. BROWNLEY (for herself and Ms. N ORTON ): H.R. 1287. A bill to amend title 5, United States Code, to provide that dependent chil-dren under the age of 26 are eligible for cov-erage under the Federal Employees Dental and Vision Insurance Program, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. By Ms. BROWNLEY (for herself, Ms. T LAIB , Mr. CRENSHAW , Mr. VARGAS ,Mr. S HERMAN , Mr. C OHEN , Ms. BUDZINSKI , Ms. S ALINAS , Ms. H OYLE of Oregon, Ms. N ORTON , Mr. O BERNOLTE ,Mrs. C HERFILUS -M CC ORMICK , Mr. LIEU , and Ms. T ITUS ): H.R. 1288. A bill to amend title 38, United States Code, to increase the mileage rate of-fered by the Department of Veterans Affairs through their Beneficiary Travel program for health related travel, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on Veterans’ Af-fairs. By Mr. BUCHANAN (for himself and Ms. M OORE of Wisconsin): H.R. 1289. A bill to direct the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to establish and carry out a pilot program to administer to eligible vet-erans medically-tailored meals and gro-ceries, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on Veterans’ Affairs. By Mr. BUCHANAN (for himself and Mr. M URPHY ): H.R. 1290. A bill to direct the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to carry out a pilot pro-gram under which the Department of Vet-erans Affairs refers veterans experiencing mental health crises to approved non-De-partment mental health care providers, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Vet-erans’ Affairs. By Mr. CALVERT (for himself, Mr. P APPAS , Ms. M ALLIOTAKIS , Ms. S CHOLTEN , Mr. G OLDMAN of New York, and Mr. D AVIS of North Caro-lina): H.R. 1291. A bill to amend the Public Health Service Act to ensure that nonanimal methods are prioritized, where applicable and feasible, in proposals for all research to be conducted or supported by the National Institutes of Health, to provide for the estab-lishment of the National Center for Alter-natives to Animals in Research and Testing, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce. By Mr. CALVERT: H.R. 1292. A bill to amend title 18, United States Code, to increase the maximum pen-alty for mail theft; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By Mr. CASTEN (for himself and Ms. M ATSUI ): H.R. 1293. A bill to amend the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 to provide tax incentives and fees for increasing motor vehicle fuel economy, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Ways and Means, and in addi-tion to the Committee on Energy and Com-merce, for a period to be subsequently deter-mined by the Speaker, in each case for con-sideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. CISCOMANI (for himself and Mr. D AVIS of North Carolina): H.R. 1294. A bill to pilot the use of image technician positions in the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Office of Field Operations; to the Committee on Homeland Security. By Mr. COMER (for himself, Mr. D ONALDS , Mr. B IGGS of Arizona, Ms. GREENE of Georgia, Mr. J ACK , Mr. G ILL of Texas, Mr. G ROTHMAN , Mr. FALLON , Mr. C RANE , Mrs. L UNA , Mr. B URLISON , Mr. L ANGWORTHY , Mr. S ES -SIONS , Mr. H IGGINS of Louisiana, Ms. BOEBERT , and Mr. T IMMONS ): H.R. 1295. A bill to amend chapter 9 of title 5, United States Code, to reauthorize the ex-ecutive reorganization authority of the President and to ensure efficient executive reorganization, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Oversight and Govern-ment Reform, and in addition to the Com-mittee on Rules, for a period to be subse-quently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. CONAWAY (for himself, Mrs. F OUSHEE , Ms. B ARRAGA ´ N, Ms. 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\K13FE7.045 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H706 February 13, 2025 

S A´ NCHEZ , Ms. P RESSLEY , Ms. C HU , Ms. T ITUS , Ms. N ORTON , Ms. R OSS , Ms. B ROWNLEY , Mr. T AKANO , Mr. F ROST ,Mr. C ASTEN , Mrs. W ATSON C OLEMAN ,Mrs. R AMIREZ , Ms. P EREZ , Ms. G ARCIA of Texas, Mr. C ARSON , Mr. C ARBAJAL ,Mr. GARCIA of California, Mrs. H AYES ,Mr. P ETERS , Ms. T OKUDA , Mr. J OHN -SON of Georgia, Ms. B YNUM , Ms. MC D ONALD R IVET , Ms. S ALINAS , Mr. RUIZ , Mrs. M CI VER , and Mrs. C HERFILUS -M CC ORMICK ): H.R. 1296. A bill to amend the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 to establish a refundable credit for qualified child care startup ex-penses; to the Committee on Ways and Means. By Mr. CUELLAR (for himself, Mr. T ONY G ONZALES of Texas, Ms. E SCOBAR , Mr. V ASQUEZ , and Mr. V ICENTE G ONZALEZ of Texas): H.R. 1297. A bill to establish the Land Port of Entry Modernization Trust Fund, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Ways and Means, and in addition to the Commit-tees on Homeland Security, Agriculture, and the Judiciary, for a period to be subse-quently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina (for himself and Mr. N UNN of Iowa): H.R. 1298. A bill to amend the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 to establish a small busi-ness start-up tax credit for veterans creating businesses in underserved communities; to the Committee on Ways and Means. By Mr. DIAZ-BALART (for himself and Mr. M OSKOWITZ ): H.R. 1299. A bill to amend title 18, United States Code, to reauthorize and expand the National Threat Assessment Center of the Department of Homeland Security; to the Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition to the Committee on Education and Work-force, for a period to be subsequently deter-mined by the Speaker, in each case for con-sideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. DUNN of Florida (for himself, Ms. C LARKE of New York, Mr. M UR -PHY , and Mr. C ARTER of Louisiana): H.R. 1300. A bill to amend title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act to require group health plans and health insurance issuers offering group or individual health insurance coverage to provide coverage for prostate cancer screenings without the impo-sition of cost-sharing requirements, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce. By Mr. FEENSTRA (for himself, Mr. BISHOP , Mr. S MITH of Missouri, Mr. E MMER , Mr. B UCHANAN , Mr. R OUZER ,Mr. F INSTAD , Mr. F LEISCHMANN , Mr. AMODEI of Nevada, Ms. T ENNEY , Mr. P ERRY , Mr. M EUSER , Mr. S TRONG , Mr. Z INKE , Mr. F ITZGERALD , Mr. L AH OOD ,Mr. M OOLENAAR , Mr. E LLZEY , Mr. J OYCE of Pennsylvania, Mr. B ILI -RAKIS , Mr. C LYDE , Mr. C OLLINS , Mrs. H ARSHBARGER , Mr. W EBER of Texas, Mr. LATTA , Mr. BOST , Ms. D E L AC RUZ , Mr. M OORE of Utah, Mr. C REN -SHAW , Mr. STAUBER , Mr. CISCOMANI ,Mr. C RANE , Mr. B URLISON , Mrs. M IL -LER of West Virginia, Mr. L AWLER ,Ms. VAN D UYNE , Mr. J ACKSON of Texas, Mr. B ABIN , Mrs. W AGNER , Ms. M ACE , Mr. M OORE of West Virginia, Mrs. C AMMACK , Ms. B OEBERT , Mr. F RY , Mr. C LOUD , Mr. M CC ORMICK , Mr. BACON , Mr. I SSA , Mr. P FLUGER , Mr. R OY , Mr. M ILLER of Ohio, Mr. C ARTER of Georgia, Mr. S MITH of Nebraska, Mr. S CHMIDT , Mr. W ILLIAMS of Texas, Mr. C LINE , Mr. L ANGWORTHY , Mr. SMUCKER , Mr. E ZELL , Mr. R OGERS of Alabama, Mr. D OWNING , Mr. S COTT F RANKLIN of Florida, Mr. B IGGS of Ar-izona, Mr. R UTHERFORD , Mr. Y AKYM ,Mr. E DWARDS , Mr. M CD OWELL , Mrs. B ICE , Mr. K ELLY of Pennsylvania, Mr. B ARRETT , Mr. G ARBARINO , Mr. B AIRD ,Mr. VAN O RDEN , Mr. K USTOFF , Mr. THOMPSON of Pennsylvania, Mr. NEWHOUSE , Mr. S ELF , Mr. G RAVES ,Mr. G ILL of Texas, Mr. N UNN of Iowa, Mr. V ALADAO , Ms. L ETLOW , Mr. C AL -VERT , Mr. H ERN of Oklahoma, Mr. F ALLON , Mr. F ULCHER , Ms. F OXX , Mr. P ALMER , Mr. G REEN of Tennessee, Mr. T IFFANY , Mr. O GLES , Mr. M ORAN , Mr. M CC AUL , Mr. ALFORD , Mr. GUTHRIE ,Mr. G UEST , Mr. H IGGINS of Louisiana, Mr. E VANS of Colorado, Mrs. M ILLER -MEEKS , Mrs. H INSON , Mr. G RIFFITH ,Mr. W OMACK , Mr. K ELLY of Mis-sissippi, Mr. M OORE of North Caro-lina, Mr. M CC LINTOCK , Mr. H ARRIS of North Carolina, Mr. B ALDERSON , Mrs. H OUCHIN , Mr. M ANN , Mr. R ULLI , Mr. W IED , Mr. F ONG , Mr. S IMPSON , Mr. S TEUBE , Mr. S ESSIONS , Mr. B EAN of Florida, Mr. M URPHY , Mr. T AYLOR ,Mr. C RANK , Mrs. B IGGS of South Caro-lina, Ms. M ALOY , Mr. B RESNAHAN , Mr. COMER , Mrs. F ISCHBACH , Mr. D AVID -SON , Mr. VAN D REW , Mr. TURNER of Ohio, Mr. C AREY , Mr. H URD of Colo-rado, Mr. M ILLS , Mr. R OSE , Mr. W IL -SON of South Carolina, Mr. N ORMAN ,Mr. W ESTERMAN , Mr. G OODEN , Mr. STUTZMAN , Mr. A USTIN S COTT of Georgia, Mr. K ILEY of California, Mr. H ARIDOPOLOS , Mr. D AVIS of North Carolina, Ms. G REENE of Georgia, Mrs. M ILLER of Illinois, Mr. M OORE of Alabama, Mr. A LLEN , Mr. B ERGMAN ,Mr. D ES J ARLAIS , Mr. F LOOD , Mr. H AR -RIS of Maryland, Mr. B ARR , Mr. J OR -DAN , Mr. M ESSMER , Mr. D IAZ -B ALART ,Mr. G OSAR , Mr. W ALBERG , Mr. H ILL of Arkansas, Mr. M CG UIRE , Mr. ARRINGTON , Mr. TONY G ONZALES of Texas, Mr. A DERHOLT , Mr. N EHLS , Ms. F EDORCHAK , Mr. BEGICH , Mr. B URCHETT , Mr. D ONALDS , Mr. BAUMGARTNER , Ms. M ALLIOTAKIS , Mr. C RAWFORD , Mr. L UTTRELL , Mr. D UNN of Florida, Mr. M ASSIE , Mr. M AST ,Mr. R OGERS of Kentucky, Mr. C ARTER of Texas, Mr. H UDSON , Mr. G OLDMAN of New York, and Mr. J OYCE of Ohio): H.R. 1301. A bill to amend the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 to repeal the estate and generation-skipping transfer taxes; to the Committee on Ways and Means. By Mr. FINSTAD (for himself and Mr. C OSTA ): H.R. 1302. A bill to amend the Food, Con-servation, and Energy Act of 2008 to clarify propane storage as an eligible use for funds provided under the storage facility loan pro-gram, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on Agriculture. By Mrs. FISCHBACH (for herself, Mr. CARTER of Georgia, Mrs. H OUCHIN ,Mr. M ORAN , Mr. E STES , Mr. C AREY ,Ms. V AN D UYNE , Mr. J OHNSON of South Dakota, Mr. T HOMPSON of Pennsylvania, Mr. T IMMONS , Mr. F INSTAD , Mr. T IFFANY , Mr. K ELLY of Pennsylvania, Mr. M OOLENAAR , Mr. PFLUGER , Mr. M URPHY , Mrs. M ILLER of West Virginia, Mr. R OSE , and Mr. N ORMAN ): H.R. 1303. A bill to prohibit the Secretary of Health and Human Services from imple-menting, administering, or enforcing provi-sions relating to minimum staffing stand-ards for long-term care facilities and Med-icaid institutional payment transparency re-porting; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, and in addition to the Committee on Ways and Means, for a period to be subse-quently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. FITZPATRICK (for himself, Mr. E VANS of Pennsylvania, Ms. S HERRILL , Mr. BOYLE of Pennsyl-vania, Ms. D EAN of Pennsylvania, Mr. GOTTHEIMER , Ms. H OULAHAN , Mr. K EAN , Ms. MCB RIDE , Mr. N ORCROSS ,Mr. R ILEY of New York, Ms. S CANLON ,Mr. V AN D REW , Mrs. W ATSON C OLE -MAN , and Mr. C ONAWAY ): H.R. 1304. A bill to amend the Water Infra-structure Improvements for the Nation Act to reauthorize Delaware River Basin con-servation programs, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Natural Resources, and in addition to the Committee on Transpor-tation and Infrastructure, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provi-sions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. FLOOD (for himself and Mr. BERA ): H.R. 1305. A bill to direct the Secretary of Health and Human Services to establish aworking group to formulate recommenda-tions for standardizing the measurements of loneliness and isolation, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on Energy and Com-merce. By Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida (for herself and Ms. T ENNEY ): H.R. 1306. A bill to amend the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 to exclude from gross in-come any judgments, awards, and settle-ments with respect to sexual assault or sex-ual harassment claims, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on Ways and Means. By Mr. FROST (for himself, Mr. S MITH of Washington, Mr. E SPAILLAT , Mr. G REEN of Texas, Ms. S ALINAS , Ms. B ALINT , Mr. T HOMPSON of Mississippi, Ms. P INGREE , Mr. DELUZIO , Mr. G ARCI ´ A of Illinois, Mr. F IELDS , Mr. GOLDMAN of New York, Mr. D AVIS of Illinois, Mr. M IN , Mrs. D INGELL , Ms. W ASSERMAN S CHULTZ , Ms. R OSS , Mrs. R AMIREZ , Ms. D EG ETTE , Ms. T ITUS ,Mr. B EYER , Ms. M ATSUI , Mr. E VANS of Pennsylvania, Mr. C ASE , Ms. NORTON ,Mr. C LEAVER , Mrs. S YKES , Mr. S WALWELL , Mr. M RVAN , Mr. P ALLONE ,Ms. W ILSON of Florida, Mr. A MO , Mr. C ISNEROS , Ms. M ENG , Mr. C ASAR , Ms. M OORE of Wisconsin, Ms. S TEVENS ,Mr. J OHNSON of Georgia, Ms. SCHOLTEN , Mrs. H AYES , Mr. R ASKIN ,Ms. S CHAKOWSKY , Mr. M OSKOWITZ ,Ms. C ROCKETT , Ms. M CC LELLAN , Mr. NADLER , Ms. T OKUDA , Mr. C OSTA , Mr. GOMEZ , Mr. CASTRO of Texas, Mr. NEGUSE , Mr. L ARSON of Connecticut, Mr. G ARAMENDI , Mr. O LSZEWSKI , Mrs. B EATTY , Mr. V ARGAS , Ms. B ROWNLEY ,Ms. J OHNSON of Texas, Ms. C ASTOR of Florida, Ms. M ORRISON , Mr. M ULLIN ,Ms. S CHRIER , Mrs. M CIVER , Ms. FRIEDMAN , Ms. U NDERWOOD , Mr. D OG -GETT , Ms. L OIS F RANKEL of Florida, Mrs. T RAHAN , Mrs. M CB ATH , Ms. D EAN of Pennsylvania, Mr. D ES AULNIER , Mr. P OCAN , Mr. T AKANO ,Ms. S CANLON , Ms. DEXTER , Ms. W ATERS , Mr. Q UIGLEY , Mr. MCG ARVEY , Ms. WILLIAMS of Georgia, Mrs. T ORRES of California, Mr. TONKO , Ms. J AYAPAL , Mr. G RIJALVA ,Mr. T ORRES of New York, Mr. G ARCIA of California, Mr. M ENENDEZ , Ms. KELLY of Illinois, Ms. J ACOBS , Ms. M CB RIDE , Mr. M AGAZINER , Mr. M OULTON , Mrs. C HERFILUS -M CC OR -MICK , Ms. B ROWN , Mr. T HANEDAR , Mr. LYNCH , Mr. S UBRAMANYAM , Ms. L EE 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\L13FE7.100 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H707 February 13, 2025 

of Pennsylvania, Ms. D EL B ENE , Ms. B ONAMICI , Ms. K AMLAGER -D OVE , Mr. TURNER of Texas, Ms. G ARCIA of Texas, Mr. L IEU , Mr. K ENNEDY of New York, Mr. C ARTER of Louisiana, Mrs. F OUSHEE , Ms. E SCOBAR , Mr. K EATING ,Ms. A NSARI , Ms. C LARKE of New York, and Mr. L ANDSMAN ): H.R. 1307. A bill to establish the Office of Gun Violence Prevention, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By Mr. GOLDEN of Maine: H.R. 1308. A bill to provide monthly pay-ments for eligible pregnant women and par-ents to improve the ability of families to provide for their children and other family members, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Ways and Means. By Mr. GREEN of Tennessee (for him-self, Ms. H AGEMAN , Mr. B URCHETT ,Mr. O GLES , Mrs. M ILLER of Illinois, Mr. E STES , Mr. N ORMAN , Mr. N EWHOUSE , Mr. M OOLENAAR , Mr. H IG -GINS of Louisiana, Mr. Z INKE , Mr. G UEST , Mr. C RANE , Mr. B ENTZ , Mr. CLINE , Mr. D OWNING , Mr. W EBER of Texas, Ms. M ALOY , Mr. C OLLINS , and Mr. V AN D REW ): H.R. 1309. A bill to amend the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 to prohibit exchanges from effecting transactions in securities issued by natural asset companies, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finan-cial Services. By Ms. HAGEMAN (for herself and Mr. P APPAS ): H.R. 1310. A bill to limit the closure or con-solidation of any United States Postal Serv-ice processing and distribution center in States, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on Oversight and Government Re-form. By Mr. HARDER of California (for him-self, Mr. HUFFMAN , Mr. GARAMENDI ,Mr. THOMPSON of California, and Mr. DES AULNIER ): H.R. 1311. A bill to prohibit the Corps of Engineers from issuing a permit for the Delta Conveyance Project; to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure. By Mr. HARRIS of North Carolina (for himself, Ms. M ACE , Mr. WEBER of Texas, Mr. M OORE of Alabama, Mr. S TUTZMAN , Mr. E DWARDS , Mr. S ELF ,Mr. BIGGS of Arizona, and Mr. O GLES ): H.R. 1312. A bill to amend the Immigration and Nationality Act to provide that an alien who has been convicted of a crime is ineli-gible for asylum, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By Mrs. HARSHBARGER (for herself, Ms. S ALAZAR , Mr. HUNT , Mrs. M ILLER of Illinois, Mr. C RAWFORD , Mr. S CHMIDT , Mr. N EHLS , Mr. W EBSTER of Florida, Mr. W EBER of Texas, Ms. T ENNEY , Mr. M OORE of Alabama, Mr. BAIRD , Mr. J OHNSON of South Dakota, Mr. R UTHERFORD , Mr. VAN O RDEN ,Mr. M ANN , Mr. M URPHY , Ms. L EE of Florida, Mr. H AMADEH of Arizona, Mr. D ONALDS , and Mr. B URLISON ): H.R. 1313. A bill to prohibit the flying, draping, or other display of any flag other than the flag of the United States at public buildings, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Transportation and Infra-structure, and in addition to the Committees on Armed Services, Foreign Affairs, and House Administration, for a period to be sub-sequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provi-sions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. HORSFORD (for himself, Mr. N ORCROSS , Ms. T ITUS , Ms. L EE of Ne-vada, Mr. C LEAVER , Mrs. R AMIREZ ,Mrs. M CIVER , Mr. THOMPSON of Mis-sissippi, Ms. V ELA ´ ZQUEZ , Mr. B OYLE of Pennsylvania, and Mr. C ARTER of Louisiana): H.R. 1314. A bill to amend the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 to eliminate the sepa-rate minimum wage for tipped employees, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Ways and Means, and in addition to the Com-mittee on Education and Workforce, for a pe-riod to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdic-tion of the committee concerned. By Mr. HURD of Colorado: H.R. 1315. A bill to authorize compensation to individuals, organizations, and companies impacted by the Gold King Mine wastewater spill of 2015, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary, and in addition to the Committee on the Budget, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speak-er, in each case for consideration of such pro-visions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. JACKSON of Texas (for himself, Ms. J ACOBS , and Mr. L AWLER ): H.R. 1316. A bill to amend the Export Con-trol Reform Act of 2018 relating to licensing transparency; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. By Mr. JOYCE of Ohio (for himself, Ms. BONAMICI , Mrs. K IGGANS of Virginia, Ms. U NDERWOOD , and Mr. R OGERS of Alabama): H.R. 1317. A bill to amend titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act to increase access to services provided by advanced prac-tice registered nurses under the Medicare and Medicaid programs, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on Energy and Com-merce, and in addition to the Committee on Ways and Means, for a period to be subse-quently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. KENNEDY of Utah (for himself and Ms. S TEVENS ): H.R. 1318. A bill to amend the Research and Development, Competition, and Innovation Act to clarify the definition of foreign coun-try for purposes of malign foreign talent re-cruitment restriction, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. By Mr. KILEY of California (for him-self, Mr. R UTHERFORD , Mr. MOOLENAAR , Mr. M ESSMER , and Mr. O GLES ): H.R. 1319. A bill to amend the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 and the National Labor Relations Act to clarify the standard for de-termining whether an individual is an em-ployee, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on Education and Workforce. By Mr. KILEY of California (for him-self and Mr. M ESSMER ): H.R. 1320. A bill to ensure that the provi-sion of portable benefits to an individual is not considered in determining whether such individual is an employee of a person; to the Committee on Education and Workforce. By Mr. LARSON of Connecticut (for himself, Ms. N ORTON , Ms. B ARRAGA ´ N,Ms. S CHOLTEN , Mr. L ANDSMAN , Mr. C OURTNEY , Mrs. WATSON C OLEMAN ,Mr. J ACKSON of Illinois, Mrs. T ORRES of California, Ms. C HU , Mr. C OHEN ,Mr. G OLDMAN of New York, Ms. S A´ NCHEZ , Mr. N ADLER , Mrs. F OUSHEE ,Mr. C ARSON , Mr. M CG OVERN , Mr. DAVIS of Illinois, Mr. Q UIGLEY , Ms. V ELA ´ ZQUEZ , Ms. T ITUS , Ms. C RAIG ,Mrs. M CC LAIN D ELANEY , Ms. D EL AURO , Ms. T OKUDA , Ms. M OORE of Wisconsin, Mr. M AGAZINER , Mr. P A-NETTA , Ms. S ALINAS , Mr. T ONKO , Mrs. RAMIREZ , Mr. M OULTON , Mr. M ULLIN ,Mr. T HOMPSON of Mississippi, Mr. J OHNSON of Georgia, Ms. S CHA -KOWSKY , Mr. G RIJALVA , Mr. D ELUZIO ,Mr. C ISNEROS , Mr. BEYER , Mr. FIG -URES , Mr. C ASTEN , Ms. P ETTERSEN ,Ms. K APTUR , and Mr. V EASEY ): H.R. 1321. A bill to extend the financial dis-closure requirements of subchapter I of chap-ter 131 of title 5, United States Code, to cer-tain special Government employees, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Over-sight and Government Reform. By Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ (for her-self and Ms. S TANSBURY ): H.R. 1322. A bill to approve the settlement of water rights claims of the Pueblos of Acoma and Laguna in the Rio San Jose ´Stream System and the Pueblos of Jemez and Zia in the Rio Jemez Stream System in the State of New Mexico, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on Natural Re-sources. By Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ (for her-self and Ms. S TANSBURY ): H.R. 1323. A bill to approve the settlement of water rights claims of Ohkay Owingeh in the Rio Chama Stream System, to restore the Bosque on Pueblo Land in the State of New Mexico, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Natural Resources. By Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ (for her-self and Ms. S TANSBURY ): H.R. 1324. A bill to approve the settlement of water rights claims of the Navajo Nation in the Rio San Jose ´ Stream System in the State of New Mexico, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Natural Resources. By Mr. LUCAS (for himself and Ms. L OFGREN ): H.R. 1325. A bill to provide for transparent licensing of commercial remote sensing sys-tems, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on Science, Space, and Technology. By Mr. LUCAS (for himself and Ms. L OFGREN ): H.R. 1326. A bill to provide for Department of Energy and Department of Agriculture joint research and development activities, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, and in addi-tion to the Committee on Agriculture, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdic-tion of the committee concerned. By Mr. LUTTRELL (for himself and Mr. O GLES ): H.R. 1327. A bill to direct the Secretary of Homeland Security to conduct a threat as-sessment of terrorist threats to the United States posed by individuals in Syria with an affiliation with a Foreign Terrorist Organi-zation or a Specially Designated Global Ter-rorist Organization, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Homeland Security. By Ms. MALLIOTAKIS (for herself, Mr. P ANETTA , Mr. B UCHANAN , Ms. V ELA ´ ZQUEZ , Mr. K ELLY of Pennsyl-vania, Mr. H ERNA ´ NDEZ , and Mr. LAWLER ): H.R. 1328. A bill to amend the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 to establish the critical supply chains reshoring investment tax cred-it; to the Committee on Ways and Means. By Ms. MALLIOTAKIS (for herself, Ms. C HU , Ms. D E L A C RUZ , Mrs. D INGELL ,Mr. L AL OTA , Mr. M CG OVERN , Mr. F RY , Ms. D EL B ENE , Mrs. M ILLER of West Virginia, Mrs. C HERFILUS -MCC ORMICK , Mr. G IMENEZ , Ms. S ALI -NAS , Mr. L AWLER , Ms. S CHOLTEN , Mr. I SSA , Mr. D AVIS of Illinois, Mr. STAUBER , Ms. S A´ NCHEZ , Mrs. HOUCHIN , Mr. R UIZ , Mr. B ACON , Ms. BONAMICI , Mr. M OOLENAAR , Ms. BROWNLEY , Mr. T ONY G ONZALES of Texas, Mr. D OGGETT , Mr. M OYLAN ,Mr. E SPAILLAT , Mrs. R ADEWAGEN , Ms. 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\L13FE7.100 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H708 February 13, 2025 

L EGER F ERNANDEZ , Mr. B ARR , Ms. LOIS F RANKEL of Florida, Mr. F LEISCHMANN , Mr. G ARCI ´ A of Illinois, Mr. N EWHOUSE , Ms. B YNUM , Mrs. K IM ,Mr. VAN O RDEN , Mr. L IEU , Ms. J A-COBS , Mrs. S YKES , Mr. R ULLI , Ms. L EE of Nevada, Mr. A MODEI of Nevada, Ms. MC C LELLAN , Mr. L ANGWORTHY , Mrs. R AMIREZ , Ms. T ENNEY , Ms. P INGREE ,Mr. J AMES , Mr. V ICENTE G ONZALEZ of Texas, Mr. R OGERS of Alabama, Mr. VARGAS , Mr. C AREY , Mr. K ELLY of Pennsylvania, Mr. F ITZPATRICK , Mr. VAN D REW , Mr. S CHWEIKERT , Mr. N AD -LER , Ms. S ALAZAR , Mr. O WENS , Mr. LAM ALFA , Mr. B UCHANAN , Mr. MEUSER , Mr. W ILSON of South Caro-lina, Mr. P FLUGER , Mr. M AST , Mr. B ILIRAKIS , Mr. R OUZER , Ms. M ENG ,Mr. C ORREA , Ms. C LARKE of New York, Mr. B ENTZ , Mrs. M CB ATH , Ms. D EG ETTE , Ms. T OKUDA , and Ms. RIVAS ): H.R. 1329. A bill to permit the Smithsonian American Women’s History Museum to be lo-cated within the Reserve of the National Mall, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on House Administration, and in ad-dition to the Committee on Natural Re-sources, for a period to be subsequently de-termined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall with-in the jurisdiction of the committee con-cerned. By Ms. MALLIOTAKIS (for herself, Mr. ESPAILLAT , Ms. D E L A C RUZ , Mrs. D INGELL , Mr. T ONY G ONZALES of Texas, Ms. V ELA ´ ZQUEZ , Mr. SCHWEIKERT , Ms. T ENNEY , Mr. B ENTZ ,Mr. F ITZPATRICK , Mr. LANGWORTHY ,Mr. L AWLER , Mr. B ILIRAKIS , Mr. I SSA ,Mr. C AREY , Mr. B ACON , Mr. N UNN of Iowa, Mrs. M ILLER of West Virginia, Mr. L AL OTA , Ms. S ALAZAR , Mr. B ARR ,Mr. M EUSER , Mr. F LEISCHMANN , Mr. BUCHANAN , Mr. C ORREA , Mrs. K IM ,Mr. RULLI , Mr. F RY , Ms. C HU , Mr. G IMENEZ , Mr. W ILSON of South Caro-lina, Ms. M ENG , Ms. D EL B ENE , Mr. O WENS , Mrs. R ADEWAGEN , Mr. J AMES ,Mr. M AST , Mr. R OGERS of Alabama, Mr. A MODEI of Nevada, Mr. M CG OV -ERN , Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida, Mr. ROUZER , Ms. MCC LELLAN , Mr. V ARGAS , Mr. M OYLAN , Mrs. R AMIREZ ,Ms. P INGREE , Mr. V ICENTE G ONZALEZ of Texas, Ms. L EE of Nevada, and Mr. N EWHOUSE ): H.R. 1330. A bill to permit the Smithsonian National Museum of the American Latino to be located within the Reserve of the Na-tional Mall, and for other purposes; to the Committee on House Administration, and in addition to the Committee on Natural Re-sources, for a period to be subsequently de-termined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall with-in the jurisdiction of the committee con-cerned. By Ms. M CCLELLAN (for herself and Mr. F ITZPATRICK ): H.R. 1331. A bill to amend the Higher Edu-cation Act of 1965 to enhance teacher and school leader quality partnership grants; to the Committee on Education and Workforce. By Mr. MIN (for himself, Ms. BROWNLEY , and Ms. E LFRETH ): H.R. 1332. A bill to direct the Secretary of Commerce to establish and carry out a pro-gram to sequence the genomes of aquatic species; to the Committee on Natural Re-sources. By Mr. MOORE of North Carolina (for himself and Mr. E DWARDS ): H.R. 1333. A bill to amend the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 to designate a portion of United States Route 74 in North Carolina as a future inter-state, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on Transportation and Infrastruc-ture. By Mr. MOSKOWITZ (for himself, Mr. D IAZ -B ALART , Mrs. C HERFILUS -MCC ORMICK , and Mr. T ONY G ONZALES of Texas): H.R. 1334. A bill to permit a single applica-tion to be submitted to the COPS Director or BJA Director for the matching grant pro-gram for school security; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By Mr. MOSKOWITZ (for himself, Mr. FITZPATRICK , and Mrs. C HERFILUS -M CC ORMICK ): H.R. 1335. A bill to enhance the safety of el-ementary and secondary schools by requiring emergency response and parental notifica-tion procedures and improving the security of interior and exterior doors, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Education and Workforce, and in addition to the Com-mittee on Homeland Security, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provi-sions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. MURPHY (for himself, Mr. D AVIS of North Carolina, Mrs. KIGGANS of Virginia, Ms. S TRICKLAND ,Mr. WITTMAN , Ms. MALLIOTAKIS , Ms. ROSS , Mr. V AN O RDEN , and Mrs. B IGGS of South Carolina): H.R. 1336. A bill to direct the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to establish a pilot program to furnish hyperbaric oxygen therapy to aveteran who has a traumatic brain injury or post-traumatic stress disorder; to the Com-mittee on Veterans’ Affairs. By Mr. NEAL (for himself and Mr. KELLY of Pennsylvania): H.R. 1337. A bill to add Ireland to the E3 nonimmigrant visa program; to the Com-mittee on the Judiciary. By Mr. NEGUSE (for himself and Ms. M ALOY ): H.R. 1338. A bill to amend the Disaster Re-covery Reform Act of 2018 to require the President to automatically waive certain critical document fees for individuals and households affected by major disasters for which assistance is provided under the Indi-viduals and Households Program; to the Committee on Transportation and Infra-structure. By Mr. NUNN of Iowa (for himself and Mr. D AVIS of North Carolina): H.R. 1339. A bill to direct the Comptroller General of the United States to carry out a study relating to the resiliency of Social Se-curity and Medicare; to the Committee on Ways and Means, and in addition to the Com-mittee on Energy and Commerce, for a pe-riod to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdic-tion of the committee concerned. By Mr. PANETTA (for himself, Mr. K ELLY of Pennsylvania, Ms. M ALLIOTAKIS , Mr. YAKYM , Mr. CORREA , Ms. D EL B ENE , Ms. S CHOLTEN ,Ms. BROWNLEY , Ms. SALAZAR , Mr. M ULLIN , Mr. I SSA , Mr. H ARDER of California, Mr. B ACON , Ms. M CC OL -LUM , Mr. G OLDMAN of New York, Mr. RUTHERFORD , Mr. COSTA , Ms. B ARRAGA ´ N, Mr. S WALWELL , Mr. LAWLER , Ms. D E LA C RUZ , Ms. P ETTERSEN , Ms. ANSARI , Mr. L ICCARDO , Mr. GOTTHEIMER , Mr. THANEDAR , Mr. CARBAJAL , and Mr. F ITZPATRICK ): H.R. 1340. A bill to amend the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 to increase the exclusion of gain from the sale of a principal residence, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Ways and Means. By Mr. PERRY (for himself, Mr. MEUSER , Mr. T HOMPSON of Pennsyl-vania, Mr. K ELLY of Pennsylvania, Mr. B RESNAHAN , Mr. J OYCE of Penn-sylvania, and Mr. R ESCHENTHALER ): H.R. 1341. A bill to amend the Water Re-sources Development Act of 2007 with respect to certain regulatory actions related to hy-draulic fracturing within the Susquehanna, Delaware, and Potomac River basins, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Trans-portation and Infrastructure. By Mr. PERRY: H.R. 1342. A bill to prohibit discrimination based on political affiliation in granting dis-aster assistance; to the Committee on Trans-portation and Infrastructure. By Mr. PFLUGER (for himself and Mr. S OTO ): H.R. 1343. A bill to require the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Communications and Information to submit to Congress aplan for the Assistant Secretary to track the acceptance, processing, and disposal of cer-tain Form 299s, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce. By Mr. RESCHENTHALER (for him-self, Mr. M EUSER , Mr. T HOMPSON of Pennsylvania, Mr. K ELLY of Pennsyl-vania, Mr. D ELUZIO , and Ms. B ROWNLEY ): H.R. 1344. A bill to amend title 38, United States Code, to expand eligibility for headstones, markers, and burial receptacles under the laws administered by the Sec-retary of Veterans Affairs to certain individ-uals who died before November 11, 1998; to the Committee on Veterans’ Affairs. By Mr. ROY (for himself, Mr. R ULLI ,Mr. P ERRY , and Mr. B IGGS of Ari-zona): H.R. 1345. A bill to repeal the Portable Fuel Container Safety Act of 2020 and the Children’s Gasoline Burn Prevention Act, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce. By Mr. SMITH of Nebraska (for him-self, Ms. C RAIG , Mr. J OHNSON of South Dakota, Ms. B UDZINSKI , Mrs. M ILLER -M EEKS , Ms. D AVIDS of Kansas, Mr. F LOOD , Mr. B OST , Mr. M ILLER of Ohio, Mrs. M ILLER of Illinois, Mr. F INSTAD ,Mr. E STES , Mr. L AH OOD , Mr. M OORE of Utah, Mr. V AN O RDEN , Mr. N UNN of Iowa, Mr. S ORENSEN , Ms. K ELLY of Il-linois, Mr. A LFORD , Mr. T AYLOR , Mr. FEENSTRA , Mr. MANN , Mrs. H INSON ,Mrs. F ISCHBACH , Mr. B ACON , Mr. SCHMIDT , Mr. G UEST , Mr. C LEAVER ,Ms. M CD ONALD R IVET , and Mr. D AVIS of North Carolina): H.R. 1346. A bill to amend the Clean Air Act with respect to the ethanol waiver for Reid Vapor Pressure under that Act, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce. By Mr. SMITH of Nebraska (for him-self, Mr. M ORELLE , Mr. HERN of Okla-homa, Mr. S CHNEIDER , Mr. M ILLER of Ohio, Mr. F EENSTRA , Mr. LAH OOD ,Mr. B UCHANAN , Mr. S MUCKER , Mr. M ORAN , Mr. K USTOFF , Mr. CAREY , Ms. S TRICKLAND , Mr. Y AKYM , Mr. P A-NETTA , Mr. Q UIGLEY , and Ms. T ENNEY ): H.R. 1347. A bill to amend the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 to permanently extend the allowance for depreciation, amortization, or depletion for purposes of determining the in-come limitation on the deduction for busi-ness interest; to the Committee on Ways and Means. By Mr. SOTO (for himself, Ms. S ALA -ZAR , Ms. WASSERMAN S CHULTZ , and Ms. W ILSON of Florida): H.R. 1348. A bill to authorize the Secretary of Homeland Security to adjust the status of certain aliens who are nationals of Ven-ezuela to that of aliens lawfully admitted for permanent residence, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary. 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\L13FE7.100 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H709 February 13, 2025 

By Mr. STEUBE (for himself, Ms. T ENNEY , Mr. HARIDOPOLOS , Mr. M CG UIRE , and Mr. B IGGS of Arizona): H.R. 1349. A bill to amend title XI of the Social Security Act to exclude providers of certain abortion services from participation in the Medicare program; to the Committee on Ways and Means, and in addition to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdic-tion of the committee concerned. By Ms. STEVENS (for herself and Mr. BAIRD ): H.R. 1350. A bill to provide for Department of Energy and National Science Foundation research and development coordination, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. By Mr. STRONG (for himself, Mr. MOORE of Alabama, Mr. R OGERS of Alabama, Mr. A DERHOLT , Mr. P ALM -ER , Mrs. M ILLER of Illinois, Mr. ALFORD , Mr. L AM ALFA , Mr. H ARRIS of Maryland, Mr. W ILSON of South Caro-lina, Mr. B ABIN , Mr. D OWNING , and Mr. R OSE ): H.R. 1351. A bill to amend the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 to re-quire the recitation of the Pledge of Alle-giance and the display of the American Flag in certain federally funded elementary and secondary schools, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Education and Workforce. By Mr. SUBRAMANYAM: H.R. 1352. A bill to designate the General George C. Marshall House, in the Common-wealth of Virginia, as an affiliated area of the National Park System, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Natural Re-sources. By Mr. TIFFANY (for himself and Mrs. MCB ATH ): H.R. 1353. A bill to ensure that homicides can be prosecuted under Federal law without regard to the time elapsed between the act or omission that caused the death of the vic-tim and the death itself; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By Ms. TLAIB (for herself, Mr. CLEAVER , Ms. LEE of Pennsylvania, Mr. J OHNSON of Georgia, Mr. G ARCI ´ Aof Illinois, Ms. N ORTON , Ms. K AMLAGER -D OVE , Mrs. M CIVER , Mr. F ROST , Ms. A DAMS , Ms. P RESSLEY ,Mr. J ACKSON of Illinois, Mrs. R AMI -REZ , and Mr. M FUME ): H.R. 1354. A bill to amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to clarify that disparate impacts on certain populations constitute a suffi-cient basis for rights of action under such Act, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on the Judiciary, and in addition to the Committee on Education and Workforce, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consider-ation of such provisions as fall within the ju-risdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. TONKO (for himself, Ms. K AP -TUR , Mr. R ILEY of New York, Mr. M OYLAN , and Mr. L AWLER ): H.R. 1355. A bill to amend the Energy Con-servation and Production Act to reauthorize the Weatherization Assistance Program, di-rect the Secretary of Energy to establish a weatherization readiness program, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Commerce. By Mrs. TORRES of California: H.R. 1356. A bill to direct the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Homeland Security, acting through the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, to establish a pilot grant program to address damage from mudslides that occur after a wildland fire, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Transportation and In-frastructure, and in addition to the Com-mittee on Natural Resources, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provi-sions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. TURNER of Ohio (for himself, Ms. K APTUR , Ms. T ENNEY , Ms. M OORE of Wisconsin, Mr. W EBSTER of Flor-ida, Mr. S MITH of Washington, Mr. RULLI , Mr. A USTIN S COTT of Georgia, Mr. B AIRD , Mr. B ERGMAN , Mr. THANEDAR , Mr. B ALDERSON , Mr. S TEIL , Mr. P OCAN , Mr. JOYCE of Ohio, Ms. M CD ONALD R IVET , and Mrs. S PARTZ ): H.R. 1357. A bill to increase the benefits guaranteed in connection with certain pen-sion plans, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Education and Workforce, and in addition to the Committee on Ways and Means, for a period to be subsequently deter-mined by the Speaker, in each case for con-sideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. VAN DREW: H.R. 1358. A bill to amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to codify patients rights to hospital visitation, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on Ways and Means, and in addition to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, for a period to be subse-quently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN (for her-self, Mrs. M CI VER , Ms. N ORTON , Mr. J OHNSON of Georgia, Mr. E VANS of Pennsylvania, Mr. N ADLER , Mr. M CG OVERN , Mr. JACKSON of Illinois, Mr. T HOMPSON of Mississippi, Mr. G REEN of Texas, Mr. C ARTER of Lou-isiana, Ms. M OORE of Wisconsin, Mr. CARSON , Mr. C OHEN , Mr. D AVIS of Illi-nois, Ms. T LAIB , Mrs. CHERFILUS -M CC ORMICK , Ms. W ILLIAMS of Geor-gia, Mrs. H AYES , Ms. S CHAKOWSKY ,Ms. W ATERS , Mr. ESPAILLAT , Ms. K ELLY of Illinois, Ms. W ILSON of Flor-ida, Mr. T URNER of Texas, Ms. V ELA ´ ZQUEZ , Ms. B ROWN , Ms. PRESSLEY , Mr. M ENENDEZ , Mrs. R AMI -REZ , Ms. P LASKETT , Mr. T HANEDAR ,Ms. C LARKE of New York, Ms. L EE of Pennsylvania, and Mr. G RIJALVA ): H.R. 1359. A bill to direct the Director of the National Museum of African American History and Culture to conduct a study on Black history education efforts in public ele-mentary and secondary schools, and for other purposes; to the Committee on House Administration. By Mr. WEBER of Texas (for himself, Mr. N EHLS , Mr. C RENSHAW , Mr. BABIN , and Mr. G ILL of Texas): H.R. 1360. A bill to require benefit eligi-bility determinations to be made within acertain period of time; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By Mr. WEBSTER of Florida (for him-self, Mr. D AVIS of North Carolina, Mr. G OODEN , Mr. E SPAILLAT , Mr. F ITZPATRICK , Mr. V EASEY , Mr. S TAUBER , Mr. E DWARDS , Mr. C OLLINS ,Mr. B ACON , Mr. D UNN of Florida, and Mr. M ANN ): H.R. 1361. A bill to clarify certain regula-tions to allow for the installation of pul-sating light systems for high-mounted stop lamps, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on Transportation and Infrastruc-ture, and in addition to the Committee on Energy and Commerce, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provi-sions as fall within the jurisdiction of the committee concerned. By Mr. HILL of Arkansas (for himself, Mr. M EUSER , Mr. O GLES , Mrs. W AG -NER , Mr. H UIZENGA , Mr. T IMMONS , Mr. M OORE of North Carolina, Mr. H ARIDOPOLOS , Mr. B ARR , Mr. W IL -LIAMS of Texas, Mr. D ONALDS , Ms. SALAZAR , Mr. D OWNING , Mr. N ORMAN ,and Mr. G ROTHMAN ): H.J. Res. 59. A joint resolution dis-approving the rule submitted by the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection relating to ‘‘Overdraft Lending: Very Large Financial Institutions’’; to the Committee on Finan-cial Services. By Mr. WOMACK (for himself, Ms. C AS -TOR of Florida, Mrs. H OUCHIN , Mr. BENTZ , Mr. F ITZPATRICK , Mr. L UTTRELL , Mr. L AL OTA , Mr. Z INKE ,Mr. B OST , Mr. C OSTA , Mr. F INSTAD ,Ms. F OXX , Mr. M OYLAN , Ms. M CC OL -LUM , Mr. M RVAN , Mr. C ISCOMANI , Mr. SESSIONS , Ms. SEWELL , Mr. FLOOD ,Mrs. M ILLER of Illinois, Mr. E ZELL ,Mr. M OOLENAAR , Mr. M OULTON , Mr. L UCAS , Mr. G ARBARINO , Ms. S TANSBURY , Mr. L AWLER , Ms. M ALOY ,Mr. K ELLY of Pennsylvania, Mr. C LYDE , Mr. A LFORD , Mr. S COTT FRANKLIN of Florida, Mr. C OLLINS ,Mr. K ENNEDY of New York, Mr. NEWHOUSE , Mr. FEENSTRA , Mr. BILI -RAKIS , Mr. B ALDERSON , Mr. K EATING ,Mr. LANGWORTHY , Ms. DE L A C RUZ ,Mr. G RAVES , Mr. W ITTMAN , Mr. G OLD -EN of Maine, Mr. R OUZER , Mr. R OGERS of Alabama, Mr. D AVIDSON , Mr. MEUSER , Mrs. B EATTY , Mr. BEAN of Florida, Mr. T URNER of Ohio, Mr. R ULLI , Mr. C UELLAR , Mr. V ASQUEZ ,Mr. B ISHOP , Ms. B UDZINSKI , Mr. D AVID S COTT of Georgia, Mr. T HANEDAR , Mr. A MODEI of Nevada, Mrs. M ILLER of West Virginia, Mr. T IFFANY , Mr. D AVIS of North Carolina, Mr. LAM ALFA , Mr. LA H OOD , Mr. S IMPSON ,Mr. H UIZENGA , Mr. CARTER of Lou-isiana, Mr. C OLE , Ms. D AVIDS of Kan-sas, Mr. S MITH of Nebraska, Mrs. SYKES , Mr. WESTERMAN , Mr. TIMMONS , Mr. C OMER , Mr. K EAN , Mr. T HOMPSON of Mississippi, Mr. A USTIN S COTT of Georgia, Mr. M ORAN , Mr. Y AKYM , Mr. V ALADAO , Mr. G ROTHMAN ,Mr. N ORMAN , Mr. C ONNOLLY , Mr. BERGMAN , Mr. V AN O RDEN , Mrs. M CI VER , Mr. PERRY , Mrs. DINGELL ,Mr. C AREY , Mr. E LLZEY , Mr. S CHNEI -DER , Mr. S TAUBER , Mr. H UDSON , Mr. L ATTA , Ms. V AN D UYNE , Mr. G UEST ,Mr. F LEISCHMANN , Mr. M ANN , Mr. WEBER of Texas, Mr. W EBSTER of Florida, Mr. C OURTNEY , Mr. K USTOFF ,Mr. F ALLON , Mr. G OTTHEIMER , Mr. DELUZIO , Ms. H AGEMAN , Mr. V AN DREW , Mr. S ORENSEN , Mr. C RENSHAW ,Mr. D ONALDS , Mr. B AUMGARTNER , Ms. T ENNEY , Mr. B URLISON , and Mr. PFLUGER ): H. Con. Res. 12. Concurrent resolution sup-porting the Local Radio Freedom Act; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By Mr. ALFORD: H. Res. 129. A resolution expressing support for the designation of February 9, 2025, as the first ever ‘‘Gulf of America Day’’ and cele-brating the importance of changing the Gulf of Mexico to the Gulf of America; to the Committee on Natural Resources. By Mr. BERA (for himself and Mr. B ARR ): H. Res. 130. A resolution expressing the sense of the House of Representatives in con-demning the Government of the People’s Re-public of China for its harassment and ef-forts to intimidate American citizens and other individuals on United States soil with the goal of suppressing speech and narratives 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\L13FE7.100 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H710 February 13, 2025 

the People’s Republic of China finds unwel-come; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and in addition to the Committees on the Ju-diciary, and Education and Workforce, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the jurisdic-tion of the committee concerned. By Mr. GUEST (for himself and Mr. D ES AULNIER ): H. Res. 131. A resolution providing amounts for the expenses of the Committee on Ethics in the One Hundred Nineteenth Congress; to the Committee on House Ad-ministration. By Ms. MACE: H. Res. 132. A resolution censuring Rep-resentative Robert Garcia of California for inciting violence against a special govern-ment employee; to the Committee on Ethics. By Mr. MANN (for himself, Mr. P A-NETTA , Mr. T HOMPSON of Pennsyl-vania, Ms. B ONAMICI , Mr. SMITH of Missouri, Mr. C OSTA , Mr. C RAWFORD ,Mr. D AVIS of North Carolina, Mr. R OGERS of Alabama, Ms. D AVIDS of Kansas, Mr. W ESTERMAN , Ms. TOKUDA , Mr. A DERHOLT , Ms. B UDZINSKI , Mr. V ALADAO , Mr. GOTTHEIMER , Mr. G RAVES , Ms. P IN -GREE , Mr. A USTIN S COTT of Georgia, Ms. M CD ONALD R IVET , Mrs. W AGNER ,Ms. C RAIG , Mr. W EBER of Texas, Mr. NEWHOUSE , Mr. S MITH of Nebraska, Mr. B ERGMAN , Mr. W EBSTER of Flor-ida, Mr. B OST , Mr. B ACON , Mr. FITZPATRICK , Mr. M OOLENAAR , Mr. R OUZER , Mr. K ELLY of Mississippi, Mr. CLINE , Mr. ESTES , Mr. M EUSER ,Mr. F EENSTRA , Mr. A LFORD , Mr. L AM ALFA , Mr. J ACKSON of Texas, Mr. K USTOFF , Mr. F INSTAD , Mr. F LOOD ,Mr. E LLZEY , Mr. V AN O RDEN , Ms. D EL A C RUZ , Mr. ROSE , Mr. S COTT FRANKLIN of Florida, Mr. M OORE of North Carolina, Mr. M ESSMER , Mr. S HREVE , Mr. K ELLY of Pennsylvania, Mr. M CD OWELL , Mr. G OODEN , Mr. NUNN of Iowa, Mr. H URD of Colorado, Ms. L EE of Florida, Mrs. M ILLER of Il-linois, Mr. C OMER , Mr. T AYLOR , Mr. G ROTHMAN , Mr. B RESNAHAN , Mr. BALDERSON , Mr. B AIRD , and Mr. L UCAS ): H. Res. 133. A resolution expressing support for the designation of February 15 through February 22, 2025, as ‘‘National FFA Week’’, recognizing the important role of the Na-tional FFA Organization in developing the next generation of leaders who will change the world, and celebrating the 90th anniver-sary of New Farmers of America and the 75th anniversary of the Federal charter to Future Farmers of America; to the Committee on Agriculture. By Mr. M CGOVERN: H. Res. 134. A resolution providing for con-sideration of the bill (H.R. 185) to advance re-sponsible policies; to the Committee on Rules. By Mr. MEEKS (for himself, Mr. K EATING , Mr. CONNOLLY , and Mr. H OYER ): H. Res. 135. A resolution affirming the na-ture and importance of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Article 5 commit-ments under the North Atlantic Treaty; to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. By Ms. TOKUDA (for herself, Mr. C ASE ,Mrs. R ADEWAGEN , and Mr. G RIJALVA ): H. Res. 136. A resolution expressing support for the designation of February 2025 as ‘‘Ha-waiian Language Month’’ or ‘‘ ‘Olelo Hawai’i Month’’; to the Committee on Education and Workforce. CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY STATEMENT Pursuant to clause 7 of rule XII of the Rules of the House of Representa-tives, the following statements are sub-mitted regarding the specific powers granted to Congress in the Constitu-tion to enact the accompanying bill or joint resolution. By Mr. COMER: H.R. 1276. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 4, Section 3, Clause 2 ‘‘The Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make all needful Rules and Regula-tions respecting the Territory or other Prop-erty belonging to the United States; and nothing in this Constitution shall be so con-strued as to Prejudice any Claims of the United States, or of any particular State.’’ By Mr. AMO: H.R. 1277. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I By Mr. AMODEI of Nevada: H.R. 1278. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: The constitutional authority on which this bill rests is the power of Congress to coin money under Article 1, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution. By Mr. BEAN of Florida: H.R. 1279. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: The Necessary and Proper Clause of Article 1 Section 8 The Congress shall have the power to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution . . . By Mr. BEAN of Florida: H.R. 1280. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: The Necessary and Proper Clause of Article 1 Section 8 The Congress shall have the power to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution . . . By Mrs. BICE: H.R. 1281. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1 Section 8 By Mr. BILIRAKIS: H.R. 1282. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Section 8 of Article I By Mr. BILIRAKIS: H.R. 1283. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Section 8 of Article I By Mr. BOST: H.R. 1284. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8, Clause 18 By Mr. BOST: H.R. 1285. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section VIII, Clause XVIII By Mr. BRESNAHAN: H.R. 1286. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Clause 1 of section 8 of article I of the Con-stitution, to ‘‘provide for the common de-fense and general welfare of the United States.’’ By Ms. BROWNLEY: H.R. 1287. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 By Ms. BROWNLEY: H.R. 1288. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitu-tion By Mr. BUCHANAN: H.R. 1289. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, section 8 By Mr. BUCHANAN: H.R. 1290. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, section 8 By Mr. CALVERT: H.R. 1291. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: The constitutional authority of Congress to enact this legislation is provided by Arti-cle I, Section 8 of the United States Con-stitution, specifically clause 1 and clause 18. By Mr. CALVERT: H.R. 1292. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: The constitutional authority of Congress to enact this legislation is provided by Arti-cle I, Section 8 of the United States Con-stitution, specifically clause 1 and clause 18. By Mr. CASTEN: H.R. 1293. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, clause 3 of the Con-stitution By Mr. CISCOMANI: H.R. 1294. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 By Mr. COMER: H.R. 1295. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, Clause 18 of the U.S. Constitution, in that the legislation ‘‘is nec-essary and proper for carrying into Execu-tion the . . . Powers vested by this Constitu-tion in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof.’’ By Mr. CONAWAY: H.R. 1296. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: The General Welfare Clause found in Arti-cle I, Section 8, Clause 1 of the U.S. Con-stitution. By Mr. CUELLAR: H.R. 1297. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 By Mr. DAVIS of North Carolina: H.R. 1298. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, Clause 18. By Mr. DIAZ-BALART: H.R. 1299. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitu-tion By Mr. DUNN of Florida: H.R. 1300. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Clause 3 of Section 8 of Article I of the Constitution By Mr. FEENSTRA: H.R. 1301. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\L13FE7.100 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H711 February 13, 2025 

Article I, Section 8, clause I (Taxing and Spending Clause) By Mr. FINSTAD: H.R. 1302. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, Clause 18 By Mrs. FISCHBACH: H.R. 1303. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Art I, Sec 8 By Mr. FITZPATRICK: H.R. 1304. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section VIII, Clause 18 By Mr. FLOOD: H.R. 1305. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8 By Ms. LOIS FRANKEL of Florida: H.R. 1306. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8 By Mr. FROST: H.R. 1307. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, Clauses 1 and 18 of the U.S. Constitution By Mr. GOLDEN of Maine: H.R. 1308. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8 By Mr. GREEN of Tennessee: H.R. 1309. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 of the Constitution By Ms. HAGEMAN: H.R. 1310. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 By Mr. HARDER of California: H.R. 1311. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 of the Constitution By Mr. HARRIS of North Carolina: H.R. 1312. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, Article 4 Section 4. By Mrs. HARSHBARGER: H.R. 1313. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I; Section 8 of the United States Constitution By Mr. HORSFORD: H.R. 1314. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1 of the U.S. Constitution. By Mr. HURD of Colorado: H.R. 1315. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8, clause 18 (the Nec-essary and Proper Clause) Under this clause, Congress has the power to make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for car-rying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitu-tion in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof. By Mr. JACKSON of Texas: H.R. 1316. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I Section 8 of the United States Constitution. By Mr. JOYCE of Ohio: H.R. 1317. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, Clause 18 By Mr. KENNEDY of Utah: H.R. 1318. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, Clause 18: The Con-gress shall have power to make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for car-rying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitu-tion in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof. By Mr. KILEY of California: H.R. 1319. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I Section 8 By Mr. KILEY of California: H.R. 1320. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I Section 8 By Mr. LARSON of Connecticut: H.R. 1321. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, Clause 18 By Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ: H.R. 1322. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 By Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ: H.R. 1323. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8 By Ms. LEGER FERNANDEZ: H.R. 1324. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8 By Mr. LUCAS: H.R. 1325. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1 Section 8 By Mr. LUCAS: H.R. 1326. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1 Section 8 By Mr. LUTTRELL: H.R. 1327. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8. To make laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this Constitution in the government of the United States, or in any department or officer thereof. By Ms. MALLIOTAKIS: H.R. 1328. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, clause 1 By Ms. MALLIOTAKIS: H.R. 1329. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I Section 8 of the United States Constitution By Ms. MALLIOTAKIS: H.R. 1330. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I Section 8 of the United States Constitution By Ms. M CCLELLAN: H.R. 1331. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8 of the United States Constitution By Mr. MIN: H.R. 1332. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, Clause 18. By Mr. MOORE of North Carolina: H.R. 1333. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Section 8 of Article I By Mr. MOSKOWITZ: H.R. 1334. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Pursuant to clause 3(d) (1) of rule XIII of the Rules of the House of Representatives, the Committee find the authority for this legislation in article I, section 8 of the Con-stitution. By Mr. MOSKOWITZ: H.R. 1335. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Pursuant to clause 3(d)(1) of rule XIII of the Rules of the House of Representatives, the Committee find the authority for this legislation in article I, section 8 of the Con-stitution. By Mr. MURPHY: H.R. 1336. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitu-tion. By Mr. NEAL: H.R. 1337. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 of the United States Constitution. By Mr. NEGUSE: H.R. 1338. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8 By Mr. NUNN of Iowa: H.R. 1339. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 of the United States Constitution To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vest-ed by this Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof. By Mr. PANETTA: H.R. 1340. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1 Section 8 By Mr. PERRY: H.R. 1341. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8 of the US Constitution. By Mr. PERRY: H.R. 1342. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8 of the US Constitution. By Mr. PFLUGER: H.R. 1343. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1 Section 8 By Mr. RESCHENTHALER: H.R. 1344. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 By Mr. ROY: H.R. 1345. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 By Mr. SMITH of Nebraska: H.R. 1346. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following:         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE7.009 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — HOUSE H712 February 13, 2025 

Article 1, Section 8, Clause 18 By Mr. SMITH of Nebraska: H.R. 1347. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8, Clause 1 By Mr. SOTO: H.R. 1348. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, of the U.S. Constitu-tion. By Mr. STEUBE: H.R. 1349. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I Section 8 By Ms. STEVENS: H.R. 1350. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: This bill is enacted pursuant to the power granted to Congress under Article I, Section 8, Clause 18 of the United States Constitu-tion. By Mr. STRONG: H.R. 1351. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8, Clause 1 By Mr. SUBRAMANYAM: H.R. 1352. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8 By Mr. TIFFANY: H.R. 1353. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8, of the United States Constitution By Ms. TLAIB: H.R. 1354. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 1 of the Constitution. By Mr. TONKO: H.R. 1355. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8, Clause 18 By Mrs. TORRES of California: H.R. 1356. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: According to Article 1: Section 8: Clause 18: of the United States Constitution, seen below, this bill falls within the Constitu-tional Authority of the United States Con-gress. Article 1: Section 8: Clause 18: To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Pow-ers and all other Powers vested by this Con-stitution in By Mr. TURNER of Ohio: H.R. 1357. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1, Section 8 By Mr. VAN DREW: H.R. 1358. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article 1 Section 8 By Mrs. WATSON COLEMAN: H.R. 1359. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, Clause 18: [The Con-gress shall have Power . . .] To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Pow-ers, and all other Powers vested by this Con-stitution in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof. By Mr. WEBER of Texas: H.R. 1360. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8, Clause 18 By Mr. WEBSTER of Florida: H.R. 1361. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8 By Mr. HILL of Arkansas: H.J. Res. 59. Congress has the power to enact this legis-lation pursuant to the following: Article I, Section 8 of the United States Constitution 

f

ADDITIONAL SPONSORS Under clause 7 of rule XII, sponsors were added to public bills and resolu-tions, as follows: H.R. 22: Mr. H UIZENGA .H.R. 210: Ms. L OFGREN .H.R. 250: Mr. A DERHOLT , Mr. V EASEY , and Mr. V ALADAO .H.R. 271: Mr. G UTHRIE , Ms. F EDORCHAK , Mr. M CG UIRE , and Mr. Y AKYM .H.R. 272: Mr. G UTHRIE , Ms. F EDORCHAK , and Mr. M CG UIRE .H.R. 307: Mr. STANTON , Mrs. CHERFILUS -MC C ORMICK , Mr. C ARSON , and Ms. C RAIG .H.R. 309: Mrs. R ADEWAGEN and Mr. MCC AUL .H.R. 330: Mr. G RIFFITH and Mr. P FLUGER .H.R. 396: Mr. GARCI ´ A of Illinois. H.R. 412: Ms. T LAIB .H.R. 424: Mr. P FLUGER .H.R. 433: Mr. VARGAS , Mr. COHEN , Mr. G OLDMAN of New York, and Ms. M CC LELLAN .H.R. 451: Mr. M EUSER and Mr. T IMMONS .H.R. 452: Mr. M RVAN .H.R. 465: Mr. B EAN of Florida and Mr. V AN D REW .H.R. 484: Mr. K EATING .H.R. 486: Mr. T HOMPSON of Mississippi. H.R. 498: Mr. W EBER of Texas. H.R. 539: Mr. M ORAN , Ms. M CD ONALD R IVET ,and Mrs. W AGNER .H.R. 645: Mr. N EHLS .H.R. 649: Ms. F OXX , Mr. L AM ALFA , Mr. T HOMPSON of Mississippi, Mr. C RAWFORD , and Mr. O NDER .H.R. 657: Ms. S ALINAS .H.R. 712: Mrs. D INGELL .H.R. 738: Mr. D AVID S COTT of Georgia. H.R. 743: Mr. T HOMPSON of California. H.R. 748: Mr. V AN D REW .H.R. 768: Mrs. H AYES .H.R. 785: Mr. S UOZZI .H.R. 816: Mr. VAN D REW .H.R. 821: Mr. L IEU and Ms. B ROWNLEY .H.R. 846: Mr. F ROST .H.R. 852: Mr. F ROST .H.R. 879: Mr. C OHEN and Mr. O WENS .H.R. 899: Mr. N EHLS .H.R. 909: Mr. M EUSER , Mr. Y AKYM , Mr. S TRONG , Mr. L AL OTA , Mr. P ANETTA , and Mr. A DERHOLT .H.R. 932: Ms. S ALINAS .H.R. 934: Mr. V AN D REW .H.R. 937: Mr. V AN D REW .H.R. 973: Mr. B ACON .H.R. 977: Mr. R OGERS of Alabama. H.R. 989: Ms. M OORE of Wisconsin, Mr. F IG -URES , and Ms. C ROCKETT .H.R. 1004: Ms. T LAIB .H.R. 1008: Mr. L AL OTA , Ms. C LARKE of New York, Mr. S UOZZI , Mr. R ILEY of New York, Ms. V ELA ´ ZQUEZ , Mr. MEEKS , Mr. MANNION ,Ms. G ILLEN , and Mr. E SPAILLAT .H.R. 1009: Mr. L AL OTA , Ms. C LARKE of New York, Mr. S UOZZI , Mr. R ILEY of New York, Ms. V ELA ´ ZQUEZ , Mr. MEEKS , Mr. MANNION ,Ms. G ILLEN , and Mr. E SPAILLAT .H.R. 1024: Ms. K AMLAGER -D OVE .H.R. 1029: Mr. V AN ORDEN .H.R. 1037: Mr. D ONALDS , Mr. Y AKYM , and Mr. R ULLI .H.R. 1039: Mr. C OLLINS , Mr. H ARIDOPOLOS ,and Mr. F ITZGERALD .H.R. 1041: Mr. M ESSMER .H.R. 1052: Mr. V AN DREW .H.R. 1059: Ms. V AN DUYNE .H.R. 1061: Mr. H ERNA ´ NDEZ , Mrs. T RAHAN ,Mr. F ROST , and Ms. M ENG .H.R. 1066: Mr. V AN D REW .H.R. 1076: Ms. M CD ONALD R IVET and Mr. M ANN .H.R. 1084: Mr. L AM ALFA .H.R. 1086: Mr. B ACON and Mr. L AM ALFA .H.R. 1089: Ms. B OEBERT and Mr. W ILSON of South Carolina. H.R. 1099: Mr. M OSKOWITZ .H.R. 1101: Ms. C LARKE of New York, Ms. T OKUDA , Mr. D AVID SCOTT of Georgia, and Ms. S TANSBURY .H.R. 1106: Mr. C ASE .H.R. 1120: Ms. M ACE .H.R. 1121: Mr. B ARR , Mrs. D INGELL , and Mr. D UNN of Florida. H.R. 1127: Mrs. H ARSHBARGER .H.R. 1131: Mr. B ARRETT .H.R. 1150: Mr. S TEIL and Mr. F ITZGERALD .H.R. 1153: Mr. C UELLAR .H.R. 1155: Mr. I SSA .H.R. 1163: Mrs. F ISCHBACH .H.R. 1164: Mr. L IEU .H.R. 1171: Ms. D AVIDS of Kansas, Mr. C AREY , and Ms. V AN D UYNE .H.R. 1172: Mr. V AN DREW .H.R. 1196: Mr. C OSTA and Mr. P ANETTA .H.R. 1198: Mr. B EAN of Florida. H.R. 1224: Mr. V AN DREW .H.R. 1233: Mr. M CC LINTOCK .H.R. 1237: Mr. L ANGWORTHY .H.R. 1248: Mr. M AST .H.R. 1250: Mr. C RENSHAW .H.R. 1251: Ms. K AMLAGER -D OVE and Ms. D EG ETTE .H.R. 1253: Mr. M ANN .H.J. Res. 20: Mr. L ANGWORTHY .H.J. Res. 35: Mr. G RIFFITH .H. Res. 23: Mr. K ENNEDY of New York, Mr. P ANETTA , and Mr. S ORENSEN .H. Res. 70: Ms. M CB RIDE , Mr. LATIMER , and Mrs. M CC LAIN Delaney. H. Res. 71: Mr. L UTTRELL .H. Res. 126: Mr. F ROST .

VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:28 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 7634 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE7.013 H13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with HOUSE Congressional Record 

> UNUMEPLURIBUS

United States 

of America PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE 119 th CONGRESS, FIRST SESSION 

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor. 

# .

S957 

# Vol. 171 WASHINGTON, THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 2025 No. 30 Senate 

The Senate met at 9:30 a.m. and was called to order by the Honorable R OGER MARSHALL , a Senator from the State of Kansas. 

f

PRAYER The Chaplain, Dr. Barry C. Black, of-fered the following prayer: Let us pray. Almighty God, who taught us it is more blessed to give than receive. As we prepare to celebrate Presidents Day, thank You for the great gift of leadership. May this wonderful ability to mobilize people toward a shared ob-jective become the strength of our leg-islative branch. Help our lawmakers find the correct balance that leads to true influence. Lord, give them the wisdom to prefer listening to speaking and learning to teaching, as they seek to make bipar-tisan progress. Infuse them with the se-renity to accept the things they cannot change, the courage to change the things they can, and the wisdom to know the difference. We pray in your wonderful Name. Amen. 

f

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE The Presiding Officer led the Pledge of Allegiance, as follows: I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the United States of America, and to the Repub-lic for which it stands, one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. 

f

APPOINTMENT OF ACTING PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will please read a communication to the Senate from the President pro tempore (Mr. G RASSLEY). The senior assistant executive clerk read the following letter: U.S. S ENATE ,P RESIDENT PRO TEMPORE ,

Washington, DC, February 13, 2025. To the Senate: 

Under the provisions of rule I, paragraph 3, of the Standing Rules of the Senate, I hereby appoint the Honorable R OGER M ARSHALL , a Senator from the State of Kansas, to per-form the duties of the Chair. C HUCK G RASSLEY ,

President pro tempore. 

Mr. MARSHALL thereupon assumed the Chair as Acting President pro tem-pore. 

f

RESERVATION OF LEADER TIME The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tem-pore. Under the previous order, the leadership time is reserved. 

f

CONCLUSION OF MORNING BUSINESS The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tem-pore. Morning business is closed. 

f

EXECUTIVE SESSION EXECUTIVE CALENDAR The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tem-pore. Under the previous order, the Senate will proceed to executive ses-sion to resume consideration of the fol-lowing nomination, which the clerk will report. The senior assistant executive clerk read the nomination of Robert F. Ken-nedy, Jr., of California, to be Secretary of Health and Human Services. RECOGNITION OF THE MINORITY LEADER The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tem-pore. The Democratic leader is recog-nized. NOMINATION OF ROBERT F . KENNEDY , JR .Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, this morning the Senate will vote on the nomination of Robert F. Kennedy to serve as Secretary of Health and Human Services. By now, it is beyond clear that Mr. Kennedy is not remotely qualified to become the next Secretary of HHS. In fact, Mr. Kennedy might be one of the least qualified people that Donald Trump could have chosen for the job. There are so many others that would have been better. I am very proud that every single Democrat will oppose Mr. Kennedy’s nomination, because Democrats know better than to elevate a conspiracy theorist to the top healthcare job in the country. I know some of my colleagues feel the same way privately. In fact, if the Senate held a secret ballot today, Iwould bet Mr. Kennedy would never come close to becoming confirmed and that many, if not most, Republicans would vote against him. I think, most likely, most Republicans would vote against him if there were a secret bal-lot. But, sadly and unfortunately for America, Republicans are being strong-armed by Donald Trump and will end up holding their nose and voting to confirm Mr. Kennedy—what a shame, what a travesty. I urge my Republican colleagues to think very carefully, one last time, be-fore rolling the dice—before rolling the dice—on Mr. Kennedy. A vote to confirm Mr. Kennedy is a vote to make America sicker. Mr. Ken-nedy has made a living not by pro-moting public health but by actively fighting it. Mr. Kennedy is the face of the modern anti-vaccine movement. Mr. Kennedy has spent decades prof-iting off vaccine misinformation. Mr. Kennedy told me to my face that he would ‘‘defer to the President’’ on issues as personal, as deeply held, as important as abortion. How do we know that Mr. Kennedy won’t defer to the President—who is far from an ex-pert on healthcare—on other issues and healthcare issues as well? It is simple: We don’t. But if he can change his view and defer to the President on some-thing as deeply held as abortion, the 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:53 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.000 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE 

# ®Pdnted  on  recycled  papfil CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S958 February 13, 2025 

likelihood is he will change his view on many other healthcare issues, to the detriment of the American people. One thing he won’t change his views on is vaccines. I am sure because he has held that so deeply. My Republican colleagues should think very carefully before voting to elevate a vaccine skeptic and con-spiracy theorist to oversee our healthcare system. If confirmed, I fear greatly that Mr. Kennedy will take steps that severely undermine public health, weaken safe-ty standards, and put the needs of for-profit corporations ahead of the needs of American families. Sooner or later, public backlash is going to build, and Republicans will have wished they hadn’t signed their names for such a troubled nominee. So one final time—one final time—I im-plore my Republican colleagues to re-ject the nomination of Mr. Kennedy to be Secretary of HHS. A vote to confirm Mr. Kennedy is a vote I truly believe many, many Republicans and most Americans will eventually very deeply regret. GOVERNMENT FUNDING Mr. President, now on costs, lowering costs for average families in the budget resolution. Well, my colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, my fellow Americans, welcome to the age of Trumpflation— Trumpflation. If there was one man-date that Donald Trump had after win-ning the election, it was to fight infla-tion. Remember what he said on the campaign trail? He said: When I win, I will immediately bring prices down starting on Day One. Starting on day one, he said he will bring prices down. Well, today is day 25, and inflation is not down but actu-ally up by 3 percent—higher than what economists were expecting. At the gro-cery store, the price of pork and chick-en and beef are all up. Eggs are up 15 percent from last month. Gas prices are up 2 percent from last month. Used cars are up. Auto insurance has become more expensive. And what is Donald Trump doing about all this? He is mak-ing the problem worse by threatening trade wars with our own allies. Here is what the CEO of Ford Motor Company said yesterday. The CEO of Ford Motor Company warned yesterday that ‘‘a 25 percent tariff across the Mexico and Canada borders would blow a hole in the U.S. industry that we’ve never seen.’’ That is the head of Ford Motor. That is not some liberal Demo-cratic economist. The head of Ford Motor says that tariffs will blow ahuge hole—a hole in the U.S. auto in-dustry. What he is doing on tariffs is, again, sort of like everything else. It is sort of a meat-ax approach, a slash-and-burn approach, not looking at each indi-vidual case and seeing what is good and what is bad. Inflation is the No. 1 issue on peo-ple’s minds. It was the biggest issue during the election. And already, Don-ald Trump is breaking his promise to do something about it. The American people are starting to take notice al-ready, even though we are only on day 25 of Trump’s term. A recent CBS poll showed that 66 percent of voters do not think Trump is focused enough on low-ering prices. Sixty-six percent of voters do not think Donald Trump is focused enough on lowering prices. And do you know what? They are absolutely right. In the 3 weeks that Donald Trump has been President, he has been focused on pretty much everything but fighting inflation, which is the No. 1 thing peo-ple care about. We have seen this ma-neuver so many times before from Don-ald Trump. He knows that he has no real answers to fixing inflation, so what does he do? He distracts. He dis-torts. He says ridiculous and wild, strange things hoping to distract the country from the fact he is not doing his job. It is why he talks about things like renaming the Gulf of Mexico. It is why he is talking about hotels in Gaza. It is why he is talking about annexing Canada. None of these things have any-thing to do with the thing that matters most—lowering the cost of living for average American families. Meanwhile, what are the Republicans doing here in Congress? What are my Senate Republican colleagues doing? Are they fighting inflation maybe? No way. No way. Republicans are full steam ahead with cutting taxes for the ultrarich, paid for on the backs of working- and middle-class families. Just look at the gargoyle-like budget proposal that the House Republicans released yesterday. Republicans want to make billionaires even wealthier by raising costs for working people. The Republican budget slashes nutrition programs that help 40 million Ameri-cans put food on the table. The Repub-lican budget proposes massive cuts to Medicaid, threatening healthcare for tens of millions of people. It will make food, healthcare, energy, and housing more expensive—all to cut taxes for the ultrarich, hurting the middle class, raising costs for the middle class to help the ultrawealthy. The Republican budget plan can be described in one word: ‘‘radical.’’ Republicans should remember well what happened the last time they cut taxes for the ultrawealthy. It backfired with the rest of America. If Repub-licans try to cut taxes for the ultrarich again, history is going to repeat itself, and it will cost them dearly at the bal-lot box. I yield the floor. I suggest the absence of a quorum. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll. The senior assistant executive clerk proceeded to call the roll. Mr. BOOZMAN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded. The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. MULLIN ). Without objection, it is so or-dered. NOMINATION OF BROOKE ROLLINS Mr. BOOZMAN. Mr. President, I am honored to speak on the floor of the Senate and support Brooke Rollins to be Secretary of Agriculture. The Sen-ate will vote on her nomination in this Cabinet position today, and I encour-age my colleagues to vote yes. America’s farmers, ranchers, and for-esters need a leader at USDA who will be an advocate for their livelihoods and rural America and be a strong voice to address the pressing needs of our agri-culture community. Brooke Rollins is that person. In her hearing before the Senate Agriculture Committee, she pledged to do everything within her ability to ensure that our farmers, ranchers, and rural communities thrive. And we know she will follow through on that because rural America helped shape her into what she is today. She is leading a life of service that began with membership in her smalltown Texas FFA chapter. She continues to credit her FFA adviser for his support and mentorship in her agri-culture career. She invited him to at-tend the nomination hearing before the Senate Agriculture Committee last month, along with the Texas State FFA officer team she served with in high school. Texas Governor Rick Perry knew Brooke Rollins had a heart for Texas farmers and invited her to join his pol-icy team, where she advocated for agri-culture. She continues that passion today. Her executive leadership during the first Trump administration and her regular collaboration with President Trump make her uniquely qualified to serve in this position and advocate for family farms. She understands the significant re-sponsibility of this role during one of the most economically challenging times for agriculture producers. Hard-working farmers who grow our food are struggling to operate, let alone make a profit in this current economic cli-mate. High inflation and steep input costs far outpacing depressed market prices have put many farm families on a course toward bankruptcy, with multigenerational operations fighting to continue their family legacies. In December, Congress approved nat-ural disaster and emergency assistance to help producers obtain critical oper-ating loans for this crop year. Ensuring delivery of this aid will be one of her first priorities as Secretary. I am con-fident she will pursue policies to help rural America live up to its potential. While we first met during the first Trump administration, I have had the opportunity to get to know her better during her confirmation process, and she has demonstrated her enthusiasm for being a voice for smalltown Amer-ican agriculture producers. I am grate-ful she is willing to take on this big re-sponsibility and is willing to be a part of the solution to help rural America at this time of unprecedented chal-lenges. As chairman of the Senate Agri-culture Committee, I have met with         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:53 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G13FE6.003 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S959 February 13, 2025 

farmers, ranchers, and agriculture stakeholders from all over the country, and they have been sounding the alarm of the dire circumstances they face in producing a safe, affordable, and abun-dant supply of food. Farmers from my home State of Arkansas shared with the committee last week about the dif-ficult conversations they are forced to have right now about continuing their multigenerational farms and risking their families’ futures in the industry. Unfortunately, this is a conversation many more farm families across the country will have if we do not act quickly. Congress must deliver an updated 5-year farm bill that modernizes the safety net in order to minimize the li-abilities farm families take on when they plant their crops. Food security is national security. Our country is blessed to have grocery stores stocked with food to put on our tables. This is the result of the hard work of our farmers and ranchers. These producers need the tools to be successful and con-tinue to grow the food, fiber, and fuel our Nation depends on. I know Brooke Rollins shares my commitment to enhancing policies that help farm families and rural com-munities thrive. Given her executive leadership, she is well prepared to hit the ground running when she walks through the doors of the USDA as Sec-retary and to deliver this certainty and predictability our producers need. Ilook forward to working with her and strengthening rural America for the men, women, and families who call it home. I also want to thank everyone on both sides of the aisle for making it such that we can do this in such an ex-peditious way. It took a lot of coopera-tion. I think it just shows how impor-tant our farmers are to both Demo-crats and Republicans. It is one of the few areas in which it is not a partisan issue. It is all about helping the men and women who work so, so very hard to provide the food we eat. With that, I yield the floor. RECOGNITION OF THE MAJORITY LEADER The PRESIDING OFFICER. The ma-jority leader is recognized. NOMINATION OF BROOKE ROLLINS Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, anybody who knows me well knows that I say this a lot, and that is that agriculture is the lifeblood of South Dakota and the lifeblood of our country, and farm-ers and ranchers are hard at work every single day to feed America and the world. But what I hear lately from farmers and ranchers is not good. Agriculture producers across the country have faced strong headwinds in recent years—higher input costs, high interest rates, lower commodity prices—all leading to declining farm income year after year. Natural disas-ters have struck many of our farm re-gions, and the bird flu continues to ravage agriculture across the country. Of course, in the last few years, the Biden administration was hardly much help. It imposed burdensome regula-tions like WOTUS, or waters of the United States, that threatened to dev-astate the farm sector. The administra-tion put expanding market access on the back burner while our agricultural trade deficit grew to record levels, and their profligate spending led to infla-tion that hit farmers and ranchers es-pecially hard in the form of higher input costs. Meanwhile, Democrats here in Con-gress failed to prioritize a modernized farm bill to support agriculture through these challenges, and we are now more than a year past due for an updated farm bill. America’s farmers and ranchers deserve better—much bet-ter. I expect things will be different under President Trump, and I know that farmers and ranchers will have a friend in Brooke Rollins, the President’s choice for Secretary of Agriculture. Ms. Rollins grew up in the small, ag-ricultural town of Glen Rose, TX. She spent summers working for her family on their farm in Minnesota, helping with their corn, potato, and soybean crops. She was a 4–H-er, an FFA State officer, and a barrel racer, and her four kids are keeping up her family’s way of life by showing cattle in Texas. After studying agriculture develop-ment at Texas A&M, Ms. Rollins went to work for then-Governor Rick Perry, where she worked on agriculture pol-icy. She then continued her ag work by building up a Texas think tank, em-powering the voices of farmers, ranch-ers, and rural communities. Then she served in President Trump’s first ad-ministration—first leading the Office of American Innovation and then on the Domestic Policy Council. Brooke Rollins is a policy wonk with a farmer’s heart. She understands the needs of agriculture producers, and she knows how to deliver results. She promises to get right to work after she is confirmed on four key priorities: first, getting disaster and economic aid out the door and into the hands of farmers; second, getting the bird flu and other animal disease outbreaks under control; third, getting the farm bill done; and finally, revitalizing the U.S. Department of Agriculture to focus on its core mission and put America and American agriculture first. I am looking forward to working with Ms. Rollins on these key prior-ities. Under this Republican majority, de-livering a modernized farm bill is a pri-ority, and I am glad that Ms. Rollins has pledged to work with Congress on one of the top farm bill needs, which is strengthening the farm safety net—es-sential to keeping existing operations going—and encouraging the next gen-eration of producers to get started. I was also pleased to hear Ms. Rollins acknowledge the need to improve the management of national forests. The Black Hills National Forest, among others across the country, has seen its timber industry decimated by bad man-agement policies. So I look forward to working with the USDA, under Sec-retary Rollins, to provide relief from the dire situation in western South Da-kota. I am encouraged as well that she will prioritize getting disaster and eco-nomic assistance out the door. Last year, many parts of the country suf-fered from natural disasters, including South Dakota. As I said, farmers and ranchers have suffered lower com-modity prices and declining incomes. In December, Congress passed $31 bil-lion in agricultural disaster and eco-nomic assistance, and we need to get that money into the hands of farmers and ranchers working to rebuild. Brooke Rollins understands the mis-sion of the USDA. She understands the day-to-day needs of America’s farmers, and she has the expertise to deliver re-sults. I trust that she will put Amer-ica’s farmers and ranchers first as Sec-retary of Agriculture, and I look for-ward to working with her in this role. (The remarks of Mr. THUNE per-taining to the introduction of S. 587 are printed in today’s RECORD under ‘‘Statements on Introduced Bills and Joint Resolutions.’’) Mr. THUNE. I yield the floor. I suggest the absence of a quorum. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll. The senior assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll. Mr. WYDEN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. WYDEN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that I be permitted to speak for up to 15 minutes, Senator CRAPO for up to 5 minutes, and Senator S CHUMER for 2 minutes prior to the scheduled votes. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. NOMINATION OF ROBERT F . KENNEDY , JR .Mr. WYDEN. Mr. President, late into the night, Senators spoke on the Sen-ate floor about why Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., is the least qualified nominee to ever be tapped as America’s chief health officer. On issue after issue, Mr. Kennedy has demonstrated a profound lack of knowledge, at best, and deeply dan-gerous views, at worst. Mr. Kennedy has refused to tell Americans how we would manage healthcare issues that they are deeply worried about: vaccine safety, women’s reproductive health, drug pricing, and affordable healthcare, to name a few. This leaves millions of Americans alarmed about the future of health and science in America. Last week, two Oregon medical stu-dents approached me to talk about Mr. Kennedy’s nomination. These medical students told me they were less con-cerned about the damage Mr. Kennedy would do as HHS Secretary in the weeks and months to come. These med-ical students are not only worried         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:53 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G13FE6.015 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S960 February 13, 2025 

about the prospect of losing cures, treatments, and medical break-throughs if Mr. Kennedy is confirmed. These medical students from Oregon told me that his unwillingness to take science and medical data seriously is going to harm science for decades to come. So I ask my colleagues to think about those medical students’ words. Is that a legacy you want to leave behind as a result of supporting Mr. Kennedy? Senate Democrats have been making this exact case. In his hearing before the Finance Committee, I asked Mr. Kennedy to square his anti-vaccine views with more recent statements de-signed to appease a number of our Sen-ators who are quite nervous about his nomination. In his testimony, he used the fact that his own children were vaccinated to prove he was not anti-vaccine. But the record shows that just a few years ago, he said he would ‘‘do anything’’ and ‘‘pay anything’’ to go back in time in order to prevent them from getting those vaccines. Elsewhere in his testimony, Mr. Ken-nedy stated he was not anti-vaccine but, rather, ‘‘pro-safety.’’ But about 18 months ago, he said on a podcast: No vaccine is safe and effective. In other words, in the Senate Fi-nance Committee, we brought the evi-dence; we brought the receipts, and Mr. Kennedy said nothing to actually dis-avow his prior statements. He stuck by the timeworn tactics of a conspiracy theorist: Always ask for more evidence, and never accept the evidence that is placed in front of you. Even some of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle are now deeply disturbed by Mr. Kennedy’s refusal to entertain evidence that would require him to change his mind on vaccine safety. Nevertheless, it sure looks like my Republican colleagues have bowed to pressure from Donald Trump and are poised to hand Mr. Kennedy the plat-form he has been seeking for two dec-ades to push fringe views. Before the Senate votes, I would like to take a moment to talk a little bit about the fights ahead on healthcare. Republicans in the House are already pressing ahead this morning with their plan to kick millions of Americans off of their health insurance in order to fund more tax cuts for those who are very wealthy. And as HHS Secretary, Mr. Kennedy is going to be a key play-er in this effort. While Senators were on the floor speaking yesterday, the Senate Budget Committee debated a budget resolution that unlocks the legislative tools Re-publicans need to make good on their go-it-alone plan. At the same time, the House Budget Committee released its own budget resolution that will be de-bated today. What is clear in both of these blue-prints, in their game plan, is that Med-icaid cuts are at the top of the list. Eighty-one million Americans rely on healthcare coverage under Medicaid and the CHIP program for kids. Those people are folks with disabilities, low-income families, seniors, and, of course, children. The damage and destruction to American families if Republicans go through with their plans to gut Med-icaid cannot be overstated. Take nursing homes, for example. Two out of three nursing home resi-dents are currently being covered for their healthcare by Medicaid. Imagine you visit your mom in her nursing home in the months after the Republican bill makes steep cuts to Medicaid. Your mom complains there are fewer and fewer staff. She had to wait more than an hour after calling for help to use the bathroom on several occasions. The next time you visit, she tells you some of the new staff don’t have time for her. You learn that the facility no longer has the resources to conduct background checks and that they are desperate for workers. A few weeks later, the facility man-ager pulls you aside to deliver some bad news. Her nursing home can no longer accept patients with Medicaid after steep Federal cuts to the pro-gram. Unless you can find another fa-cility that accepts Medicaid, you have got to pay the high monthly costs out of your own pocket. Suddenly, and with no warning, you have got impossible options. Either you scramble to find the money to cover a new facility that costs thou-sands of dollars a month, or you bring your mom home with you. So between holding down a full-time job and raising young kids, suddenly, you have to deal with making sure your mom gets full-time care, and that requires nursing assistance around the clock. Unfortunately, this case I described is something you see in every nook and cranny of America. I know that from my days as codirector of the Gray Pan-thers. And I know that many of your friends and neighbors with aging par-ents and grandparents in nursing homes are facing the catastrophe that I have just described. Now, Republicans are going to do somersaults to disguise their cuts to Medicaid, and they are going to de-scribe it in healthcare lingo that they think plays well with people. For Republicans, every single child, senior, or family struggling to pay the bills that gets denied coverage is a win. That brings us to Mr. Kennedy. During his confirmation hearing on everything from abortion to vaccines to Medicare and Medicaid, Mr. Ken-nedy was given ample opportunity to go on the record about how he would improve these programs, bring down costs, save taxpayers money, and im-prove care. Instead, he showed a com-plete lack of understanding of the ba-sics of Medicaid and how it functions. I personally believe it shouldn’t be too much to ask for the future CEO of Medicaid to understand how important it is to provide affordable coverage for millions of families. Republicans, with Donald Trump at the helm, are steering our country to-ward a healthcare cliff. Their ultimate objective is to take away Medicaid from as many people as they can. Colleagues, so much for making America healthy again. What the American people need is a leader who will be the voice of reason in the room as Trump and his assist-ants in Congress start slicing and cut-ting. Our country needs a leader at Health and Human Services who is actually going to work to improve care and lower costs, defend the reproductive freedom of families, and listen, in par-ticular, to facts and science. The American people have no reason to believe, based on the record, the evi-dence that the Senate Finance Com-mittee has accumulated—to believe that Mr. Kennedy will be that leader. There is no question the healthcare system in America needs reforms. It has fallen short, and Democrats want to work in a bipartisan way on those issues. We are disillusioned by a system that puts profits over patients in too many circumstances. Nobody on this side of the aisle is arguing for the status quo. But the solution, colleagues—and Iam closing with this—does not lie in Donald Trump’s ‘‘concept of a plan’’ to make our country less healthy, less safe, and less successful. When kids are kicked off their Med-icaid coverage and forced to go without basic medical care and grow up with chronic illnesses that leave them in a lifetime of pain and suffering, Repub-licans are going to regret any vote they give to Robert Kennedy. When seniors are told they have to vacate their nursing homes because it no longer accepts Medicaid, Repub-licans again will regret a vote for Rob-ert Kennedy. When families are struggling to pay the bills and they are landed with amountain of medical debt because their kid got sick and they were kicked off their insurance, finally, Republicans will regret any vote they give to Rob-ert Kennedy. Mr. Kennedy will, no doubt, be right alongside Republicans, a willing partic-ipant in this future for healthcare that I have described today that is really stepping back from progress that has been made. I urge a ‘‘no’’ vote. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Sen-ator from Idaho. Mr. CRAPO. Mr. President, I rise today in support of Robert F. Kennedy, Jr.’s nomination to be Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and to urge my colleagues to vote in favor of his confirmation. Contrary to the attacks that have constantly been made on him, he has made it very clear that he will support safe vaccinations and just wants to see         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:53 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G13FE6.004 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S961 February 13, 2025 

that the research on them is done and done well. When his nomination for the role of Secretary at HHS was announced, Mr. Kennedy stated: We have a generational opportunity to bring together the greatest minds in science, medicine, industry, and government to put an end to the chronic disease epidemic facing Americans. I agree with him. We have got to get into the business of making America healthy again. Mr. Kennedy’s dedication to this commitment has been apparent throughout the nomination process. He will bring a fresh perspective to healthcare, prioritizing consumer choice, information transparency, and early interventions to strengthen the well-being of all Americans. He has been responsive to a wide va-riety of questions from Members on both sides of the aisle, appearing before two committees and answering hun-dreds of questions for the record, not to mention going through the extensive vetting process of the Finance Com-mittee, which I chair, which is the most extensive vetting process that any candidate for a position in this ad-ministration goes through in the Sen-ate. While some of my colleagues con-tinue to question his financial agree-ments, Mr. Kennedy met and then ex-ceeded the requirements set forth by the Office of Government Ethics. Mr. Kennedy has participated in one of the most extensive processes, as I have said, that our Senate puts a nominee through and has succeeded in meeting those standards, and I encourage my colleagues to support his nomination. HEALTHCARE FUNDING Mr. President, now, before I close, I want to respond briefly to the com-ments that we have heard today here on the floor and all day yesterday in a long, long Budget Committee hearing to set up the first reconciliation legis-lation to come before the Congress. It was said today that Republicans are going to take Medicaid away from children; they are going to take healthcare away from seniors. It was said yesterday that we were going to go after pretty much old people, young people, middle-aged people, and every other kind of people because we are going to destroy the support base that they have here in the Federal system. The fact is, this is the politics of fear, the politics of claiming things that are going to happen which are not going to happen. The reality is that yesterday’s Budg-et Committee meeting was not on healthcare. There was nothing done in the meeting yesterday that would have done any of the things that you have heard on the floor today. What we did do yesterday was to set up a process so we can provide some significant extra spending authority to our government to close the border and deport the vio-lent criminals who have come into our country in the millions in the last few years. We had another provision in it to give significant new resources to our national defense so that we can build back our Department of Defense and the ability of our armed services mem-bers to have the technology and the equipment and be capable of respond-ing to threats to our Nation. And, finally, we restarted and charged up our use and engagement in producing America’s energy in Amer-ica so that we can get back into the business of being independent and not relying on other nations for our energy policy. Those are the three things that we focused on in the committee yesterday. And, by the way, each one of those was a little bit costly, and every one of those was offset so that there was no increase in Federal spending. Mr. President, I think we need to argue over facts when we get into these debates. We are going to have a tre-mendous number of debates. And, yes, we will debate on healthcare at some point, but yesterday and what we did yesterday was focused on the border, on national defense, and on reboosting our energy production in America. I encourage a strong ‘‘yes’’ vote for Robert F. Kennedy to be the next Sec-retary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Sen-ator from Oregon. Mr. WYDEN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent for 1 minute for an opportunity to respond to my colleague from Idaho. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. WYDEN. Mr. President, I would only say to my friend from Idaho that he says this is not going to happen, that people are going to be safe and seniors on Medicaid and the like will be safe—I would just say to my col-league, it starts today—today—in the other body of Congress, I would say to my colleague. The process of setting in motion these cuts to essential healthcare services begins today. We can read about it in the publications about the congressional schedule. I look forward to working with my colleague when we can find common ground, but on this point that it is not going to happen and everybody is going to be safe, the efforts to cut these vital programs, including Medicaid, begins this morning in the other body. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Sen-ator from Idaho. Mr. CRAPO. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to have 30 seconds to just respond. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. CRAPO. Mr. President, I would simply say that we hear this every time we look at trying to address the spending excesses in our government. And I will just say to my colleague and to everyone: We are not going to take healthcare away from children. We are not going to take healthcare away from adults, from seniors, or from middle-aged people. We are not going to attack the benefits that peo-ple get under Medicare. And, frankly, we will reform some of the spending, yes, but we will not do all of the terrible things that are being spun up to try to attack this effort to control the excessive spending in our government. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Democratic leader. NOMINATION OF ROBERT F . KENNEDY , JR .Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, the fact that we are here right now—that we are even here right now—voting on this wildly unqualified conspiracy theorist to trust with one of the most life-or-death jobs, HHS Secretary, charged with protecting the health of every single American should be an af-front to every Senator and the millions of Americans that will be impacted by this horrific nomination. My colleagues on the other side of the aisle, I implore you, think one more time, one last time, about this vote. My colleagues on the Republican side, you know the consequences of what you are doing. My colleagues on the Republican side, you know how dangerous this is. My colleagues on the other side, you know you are not put-ting your constituents, their health, their families first when you vote yes. To quote my colleague the junior Senator from Texas just a few years ago, he said: We need an expert, we need a scientist, we need someone who knows something about healthcare leading the Health and Human Services Department. Well, which is Robert Kennedy? An expert? A scientist? Or what about the senior Senator from Louisiana, the chair of the HELP Committee and a well-respected med-ical professional himself? A few years ago, here is what he said: Previous HHS Secretaries have had a phar-maceutical industry background, been aState health commissioner, run health sys-tems, have been governors—somebody who has had a background in actually admin-istering the programs that HHS administers. I ask my colleagues: Which of these qualifications does RFK possess? You know the answer: None of them. The question in front of this body today—the question in front of this body—is not simply to confirm RFK to run the Nation’s Health Department. The question before us is very simple: Which is more important to you—the health and well-being of your constitu-ents or blindly obeying orders, know-ing full well the dangerous impacts your vote will enable? I plead with you one more time: Rethink this issue. This is dangerous. This is wrong—very wrong. I yield the floor. VOTE ON KENNEDY NOMINATION The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under the previous order, all postcloture time has expired. The question is, Will the Senate ad-vise and consent to the Kennedy nomi-nation?         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:53 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G13FE6.005 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S962 February 13, 2025 

Mr. SCHUMER. I ask for the yeas and nays. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a sufficient second? There appears to be a sufficient sec-ond. The clerk will call the roll. The senior assistant legislative clerk called the roll. The result was announced—yeas 52, nays 48, as follows: [Rollcall Vote No. 52 Ex.] YEAS—52 Banks Barrasso Blackburn Boozman Britt Budd Capito Cassidy Collins Cornyn Cotton Cramer Crapo Cruz Curtis Daines Ernst Fischer Graham Grassley Hagerty Hawley Hoeven Husted Hyde-Smith Johnson Justice Kennedy Lankford Lee Lummis Marshall McCormick Moody Moran Moreno Mullin Murkowski Paul Ricketts Risch Rounds Schmitt Scott (FL) Scott (SC) Sheehy Sullivan Thune Tillis Tuberville Wicker Young NAYS—48 Alsobrooks Baldwin Bennet Blumenthal Blunt Rochester Booker Cantwell Coons Cortez Masto Duckworth Durbin Fetterman Gallego Gillibrand Hassan Heinrich Hickenlooper Hirono Kaine Kelly Kim King Klobuchar Luja ´ n Markey McConnell Merkley Murphy Murray Ossoff Padilla Peters Reed Rosen Sanders Schatz Schiff Schumer Shaheen Slotkin Smith Van Hollen Warner Warnock Warren Welch Whitehouse Wyden The nomination was confirmed. The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. SHEEHY). Under the previous order, the motion to reconsider will be considered made and laid upon the table, and the President will be immediately notified of the Senate’s action. CLOTURE MOTION WITHDRAWN Under the previous order, the cloture motion with respect to the Rollins nomination is withdrawn. The cloture motion was withdrawn. 

f

EXECUTIVE CALENDAR The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will report the Rollins nomina-tion. The senior assistant legislative clerk read the nomination of Brooke Rollins, of Texas, to be Secretary of Agri-culture. NOMINATION OF BROOKE ROLLINS Mr. GRASSLEY. Mr. President, I rise today to speak in support of the nomi-nation of Brooke Rollins of Texas to be Secretary of the Department of Agri-culture. I met Mrs. Rollins during President Trump’s first term when we worked to-gether to pass the largest criminal jus-tice reform legislation since the 1990s, the First Step Act. Now, she is focusing on her agricul-tural roots, having grown up partici-pating in 4–H and FFA. I am encouraged by her attention to detail and hard work, something I am sure will serve her and America’s farm-ers well. Mrs. Rollins is taking on a large role, leading 100,000 employees, making pol-icy decisions that will affect family farmers across the country, and impact the efficiency and transparency of gov-ernment. In her confirmation hearing, Mrs. Rollins assured me that she would, to the best of her ability, respond to my letters and make the Department of Ag a place where whistleblowers can come forward confidently. I look forward to working with this highly capable nominee to advance policies that will help Iowa farmers, in-cluding the enforcement of the Packers and Stockyards Act and advocating for new markets for our ag products. VOTE ON ROLLINS NOMINATION The PRESIDING OFFICER. The question is, Will the Senate advise and consent to the Rollins nomination? Mrs. SHAHEEN. Mr. President, I ask for the yeas and nays. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there a sufficient second? There appears to be a sufficient sec-ond. The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk called the roll. The result was announced—yeas 72, nays 28, as follows: [Rollcall Vote No. 53 Ex.] YEAS—72 Baldwin Banks Barrasso Bennet Blackburn Booker Boozman Britt Budd Capito Cassidy Collins Cornyn Cortez Masto Cotton Cramer Crapo Cruz Curtis Daines Durbin Ernst Fetterman Fischer Gallego Graham Grassley Hagerty Hassan Hawley Heinrich Hickenlooper Hoeven Husted Hyde-Smith Johnson Justice Kennedy Klobuchar Lankford Lee Lummis Marshall McConnell McCormick Moody Moran Moreno Mullin Murkowski Ossoff Paul Peters Ricketts Risch Rosen Rounds Schiff Schmitt Scott (FL) Scott (SC) Shaheen Sheehy Slotkin Sullivan Thune Tillis Tuberville Warnock Welch Wicker Young NAYS—28 Alsobrooks Blumenthal Blunt Rochester Cantwell Coons Duckworth Gillibrand Hirono Kaine Kelly Kim King Luja ´ n Markey Merkley Murphy Murray Padilla Reed Sanders Schatz Schumer Smith Van Hollen Warner Warren Whitehouse Wyden The nomination was confirmed. The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. HAGERTY ). Under the previous order, the motion to reconsider is considered made and laid upon the table, and the President will be immediately notified of the Senate’s action. 

f

EXECUTIVE CALENDAR The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under the previous order, the Senate will re-sume consideration of the following nomination, which the clerk will re-port. The legislative clerk read the nomi-nation of Howard Lutnick, of New York, to be Secretary of Commerce. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Sen-ator from Mississippi. REMEMBERING PAUL GALLO Mrs. HYDE-SMITH. Mr. President, it is with a sense of sadness but also an honor to celebrate the life of someone who truly made a profound impact on my home State of Mississippi: Paul Gallo. My State mourns Paul, who died January 19, 2025, after a brave fight with cancer. Known across the airwaves as the host of ‘‘The Paul Gallo Show,’’ Paul was far more than just a broadcaster. If there is anyone who can be considered a Mississippi icon, it is him. He earned that status over decades as a steady voice for news and opinion in my State. I will never forget the first time Ihad the honor of being on ‘‘The Paul Gallo Show’’ as a newly elected State senator. Paul treated me with kind-ness, fairness, and respect, qualities he extended to everyone he encountered, whether they were politicians, movers and shakers, or simply everyday lis-teners. He made you feel like you were a part of every conversation, someone you could rely on and someone you could trust. In the 1990s, Paul helped transform a longtime vision into reality with the creation of SuperTalk Mississippi, astatewide network that gave Mississip-pians a platform to be heard, uniting our State through shared conversation. Paul, the son of the Mississippi Delta, was a true believer in Mis-sissippi. He recognized its potential and its strengths, but he wasn’t afraid to address its challenges head-on. He shaped the conversations that mattered to the people of Mississippi, no matter where they lived across the State. Throughout his career, Paul was avoice for change. He spoke out on crit-ical issues affecting our communities and held our leaders accountable. His dedication to the people of Mississippi and his unabashed commitment to doing right by them was evident in ev-erything he did. Beyond his broadcasting career, Paul and his colleagues at SuperTalk Mis-sissippi became champions for the Palmer Home for Children. Their tire-less efforts have raised millions of dol-lars to support children in need, giving them a better chance at a brighter fu-ture. Paul’s compassion for the people of Mississippi, especially its children, was unwavering. My heart goes out to his wife Patsy, their children, grandchildren, the en-tire SuperTalk family, and the count-less listeners whose lives he touched. Paul’s impact on Mississippi will be felt for generations through the stories he shared, the people he connected with, the policies he has influenced, and the legacy he leaves behind.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:53 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G13FE6.006 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S963 February 13, 2025 

Paul Gallo will always be part of Mis-sissippi’s story and always a part of our hearts. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Sen-ator from Texas. TRUMP ADMINISTRATION Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, last week, the Senate voted to confirm Pam Bondi as U.S. Attorney General. I was proud to support her nomination both at the Senate Judiciary Committee level and on the Senate floor. Today, the Senate Judiciary Com-mittee held a markup on the nomina-tion of Kash Patel for Director of the FBI. Likewise, I was happy to support his nomination in committee, and Ilook forward to supporting him here on the Senate floor as soon as that vote comes before us. One of President Trump’s most im-portant pledges during the campaign was to end the politicalization and the weaponization of the Department of Justice, including the FBI. Pam Bondi and Kash Patel, I think, are out-standing picks to fulfill this pledge, which is very important. I am pleased the Senate is moving to confirm them with no delay. I believe that the FBI and the De-partment of Justice are two of the most important institutions in Amer-ica. If you look around the world, you see a lot of countries that have a simi-lar economic system to ours, and you wonder, why is America uniquely pros-perous? Why is it that we succeed where others fail? I believe it is two things. One is our independent judiciary, and secondly, our institutions of justice like the FBI and the Department of Justice that are supposed to discharge their responsibil-ities without regard to politics and without regard to the sorts of activi-ties we have seen in recent years. We know that both of these individ-uals—Mr. Patel and Ms. Bondi—have their work cut out for them. The mission of the Department of Justice, after all, is to uphold the rule of law, to keep the country safe, and to protect civil rights. The FBI’s mission is to protect the American people and to uphold the Constitution of the United States. Under the Biden administration and even before that, the Department of Justice and the FBI failed to achieve those noble and worthy goals. Of course, back even during President Trump’s first term of office, there was the infamous Crossfire Hurricane FBI investigation. There was the so-called Russian hoax based on a phony piece of Russian propaganda known as the Steele dossier, which ultimately we found out was part of the opposition re-search that Hillary Clinton’s campaign collected during her campaign against President Trump back in 2016. This was dressed up to make it look like a cred-ible bit of intelligence, when, in fact, it was Russian propaganda, we ultimately found out, Russian disinformation. Two weeks ago, during his hearing at the Judiciary Committee, Kash Patel told me that the rule of law is one of the fundamental precepts that make America an exceptional nation. With-out the rule of law, he said, ‘‘we go back to the Uganda that my father fled.’’ Kash Patel’s adherence to the mis-sion of the FBI and its parent Agency, the Department of Justice, is a stark contrast from what we have seen in re-cent years. We saw, for example, Merrick Garland’s misguided memo in October of 2021 directing the FBI to work with U.S. attorneys to ‘‘discuss strategies for addressing threats from parents’’ who were taking an active role in their children’s education by participating in parent-teacher meet-ings and school board meetings. Similarly, we have the FBI Rich-mond Field Office that sent a memo in 2023 suggesting that traditional Catho-lics might pose a threat as violent do-mestic extremists. So we know that there is example after embarrassing example of how the FBI and the DOJ have gotten off track. A report from the House Judiciary Committee highlighted, for example, the FBI’s misguided attempt to artifi-cially inflate the number of domestic extremism threats by claiming Ameri-cans who were exercising their First Amendment rights were somehow po-tential domestic terrorist threats, not to mention the FBI’s role in censoring information related to Hunter Biden’s criminal activities. A Senate report from the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, in 2020, detailed many of Hunter’s and his associates’ un-seemly—and likely illegal—activities, including payments from Ukrainian, Russian, Kazakh, and Chinese nation-als and revealed that the FBI may have had knowledge of these activities for some time and done nothing. In September 2020, when the House Judiciary Committee sent a followup letter to Director Wray, related to Hunter Biden’s alleged misconduct, the FBI stonewalled them and refused to confirm or deny any ongoing investiga-tions. I know that is a common response by the FBI. Well, they are not going to talk about ongoing investigations, and, certainly, we understand that, as aroutine matter, there shouldn’t be any sort of interference in ongoing inves-tigations. But Congress has a unique constitutional role of oversight, and, essentially, what Director Wray was saying was, he wasn’t willing to give the Congress, as an oversight body, the information we need in order to do our job. Of course, despite these numerous ef-forts within the FBI and the Depart-ment of Justice to protect Hunter Biden from accountability for his crimes, we know his own father issued a Presidential pardon in the final weeks of his Presidency, even though for months he had said he would never do such a thing. But then he did, claim-ing his son was selectively and unfairly prosecuted. Well, my recollection was Hunter was convicted of one crime by a jury but pled guilty to others. So it is not clear to me how President Biden can say that he was selectively and unfairly prosecuted for the crimes that he pled guilty to. It is hard to imagine thinking some-one was unfairly targeted when the en-tire government—all the government Agencies involved—did everything they could to assist the Biden family and to protect that person from justice. While it is no surprise that the Amer-ican people were upset and even out-raged by this, who could forget the marked differences, the double stand-ard, in response to when President Trump was found to have sensitive doc-uments in his home in Mar-a-Lago and when President Biden was found to have sensitive documents in his home in Wilmington, DE. And all the while, during the historic crime wave we have experienced in re-cent years, Merrick Garland directed his Agency not to enforce mandatory minimums against most drug crimes. He did this while Americans across the country were suffering from fatal drug overdoses at record numbers, espe-cially from fentanyl, which took the lives of approximately 70,000 Americans last year alone. The results of all of these abuses of authority has been a loss of trust and confidence by the American people in these important institutions: the FBI and the Department of Justice. These institutions were no longer believed to be engaged in the fair administration of justice based on facts and evidence, as opposed to political gamesmanship. Now, I realize that Attorney General Bondi and soon-to-be Director Patel are going to have a huge task ahead of them to restore these Agencies to their core missions and to restore the trust that has been eroded of the American people in our American system of jus-tice. But both of these individuals have pledged to do just that, and I believe they should have an opportunity to do that. Pam Bondi, after all, has been a ca-reer prosecutor. She then went on to be attorney general of Florida for two terms. As a former attorney general of my State in Texas, I know how tough that job can be. But she has done an outstanding job, and I have no doubt that her promotion to U.S. Attorney General by President Trump was well deserved. She is prepared for this im-portant job. My goal for the Department of Jus-tice and the FBI is to restore the non-partisan functioning of our country’s chief law enforcement Agencies. The American people deserve an FBI and a Department of Justice that they can trust. They deserve to live under a sys-tem where the guilty are prosecuted and where the innocent are not un-fairly targeted. They deserve to live in a place where political views are not a basis for a criminal investigation and where an accused person is still pre-sumed innocent until proven guilty. In         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:53 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G13FE6.011 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S964 February 13, 2025 

short, we need a Department of Justice that will deal out justice evenhandedly, without fear or favor. I believe that being Attorney General is probably one of the toughest jobs here in Washington, DC, because you are not only the chief law enforcement officer for the country, you are also a member of the President’s Cabinet. But even given the difficult nature of the job, Merrick Garland practically abdicated his responsibilities as chief law enforcement officer in order to be a partisan advocate for President Biden’s policies. President Trump’s Attorney General will have a chance to turn the page from Merrick Garland’s failures by re-versing the partisan hackery that has been a part and parcel of President Biden’s Department of Justice. Presi-dent Trump’s Attorney General can re-store the Department of Justice to its core mission. Pam Bondi can serve President Trump and the Nation well by enforcing the law that is on the books and ending the weaponization of political enemies. Similarly, Kash Patel has an oppor-tunity to turn the page from the abuses and the lack of accountability that we have seen at the FBI in recent years. So I look forward to working with Ms. Bondi and Mr. Patel in their noble endeavor to restore trust in our Na-tion’s justice system, and by doing so, to restore the trust of the American people. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Sen-ator from Kansas. FOOD FOR PEACE PROGRAM Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, today I want to speak about a program that has shaped our Nation’s humanitarian efforts and made a significant impact on my home State of Kansas, a pro-gram called Food for Peace. In 1953, agricultural surpluses had reached an alltime high, but the price of storing excess commodities was too expensive to rationalize, and it was at risk of going to waste. Kansas farmers, like Cheyenne Coun-ty’s Peter O’Brien, worked hard to cul-tivate and grow these commodities. Looking for a solution, Peter suggested at a local Farm Bureau meeting that maybe the excess food could be sent to countries in need. Peter understood that, out of our abundance, we have a moral duty and opportunity to feed the hungry. His idea sparked the origin of a program we now know as Food for Peace. Another Kansan, one of my prede-cessors, Andy Schoeppel, led the Food for Peace Act in the Senate, which was signed into law by President Eisen-hower, another Kansan, in 1954, and Senator Bob Dole from Russell, KS, later championed the reauthorization of Food for Peace. The program’s premise was simple but impactful: By leveraging the food surpluses we produce in Kansas and across the Nation, we could address famine around the world, while cre-ating new markets for our commodities and bolstering our agricultural econ-omy. The first shipments of American wheat and corn were sent to Korea and Greece in 1954, and by the end of Food for Peace’s initial year of operation, it had fed 1.2 million people. Over the last 70 years, the program has fed more than 4 billion people in more than 150 countries, all with American-grown commodities. Hunger, whether driven by price in-creases or food shortages, can act as a catalyst for protest and armed conflict. We have seen how food can be used as a weapon of war as radical Islamic groups in Syria used food as a means to recruit soldiers. We have witnessed re-gions of the world that are critical to America’s strategic interest descend into chaos due to people not having ac-cess to affordable food. In a turbulent world, stricken with conflict, American leadership is more than just our military and our eco-nomic might. Food aid provided by the United States reduces despair and in-creases stability within fragile coun-tries by enabling economic produc-tivity and minimizing the risk of radicalization. For countless individuals around the world, their survival is dependent upon the resources provided by the Amer-ican people. These vulnerable popu-lations rely on the strength and pros-perity of the United States. However, much work remains in the ongoing bat-tle against hunger, and part of that battle is improving the process and programs that administer our aid. Food for Peace is administered by the USAID, and the inefficiency of USAID has been a growing concern. The Agency struggles with bureau-cratic delays, mismanagement, and alack of coordination, which undermines its ability to deliver effectively aid to those in need. This inefficiency not only wastes taxpayer dollars but also diminishes the impact of America’s foreign aid in addressing global crises. Reports suggest that millions of tax-payer dollars have been allocated to promoting tourism in Lebanon and Egypt, funding the purchase of electric vehicles for Vietnam, and inadvert-ently supporting the cultivation of opium in Afghanistan. Even more concerning, it has been confirmed that $9 million intended for civilian food and medical supplies in Syria fell into the hands of terrorist organizations linked to al-Qaida, due to the failed oversight of USAID. Amid these concerns of corruption, President Trump has taken steps to dismantle USAID. In conjunction with the President’s action and with ap-proval of the White House policy team, I have introduced a bill with Senator JOHN HOEVEN and Senator R OGER MAR -SHALL and Representative TRACEY MANN to move Food for Peace from the turbulent USAID program and move it to the Department of Agriculture, in an effort to prevent waste and bring the program closer to farmers that de-pend upon it. USDA has a long and proven history of managing agricultural policy and programs that support American farm-ers, food distribution systems, and global security efforts. USDA has boots on the ground and the infrastructure already in place to support the logis-tics for food assistance. The Agency understands how to move crops effi-ciently, sustainably, and quickly. This knowledge is indispensable when re-sponding to international crises, where speed and reliability can mean the dif-ference between life and death. By placing Food for Peace under USDA’s authority, we make certain that the program is in good hands and can con-tinue to bring revenue to American ag-riculture. As of just a little over an hour ago, the Senate confirmed the new Sec-retary of Agriculture, Brooke Rollins. I have no doubt she will be an excellent advocate for our Nation’s farmers, and I appreciate the conversations we have already had on this legislation. The Secretary has told me she is excited about this proposal and looks forward to working together on this issue. We produce more than we can con-sume in this Nation. So without pro-grams to export to, our ability to make a living in agriculture in Kansas and across the country disappears. In fiscal year 2023 alone, $713 million of U.S.-grown commodities were pur-chased by the Food for Peace program, putting money back into the hands of farmers. In rural America, food assist-ance programs like Food for Peace put American-grown products in the hands of the hungry, and this food is a tan-gible extension of the hard work and dedication of farmers and ranchers. I am pleased to help find ways to make our delivery of food aid more ef-fective, more efficient, and remove the challenges and things that we have seen that are so disturbing. America is the greatest country on Earth and the most prosperous. Food for Peace bolsters the farmers who feed us, creates a more stable world, and feeds the hungry. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Sen-ator from Massachusetts. Mr. MARKEY. Mr. President, I am here to speak in opposition to the con-firmation of Senator Kelly Loeffler to serve as Administrator of the Small Business Administration. I am concerned for the more than 722,000 small businesses that call Mas-sachusetts home and that last year re-lied on $708 million in loans from the Small Business Administration. I am concerned because of Donald Trump and Elon Musk, who have sent a clear message: They are here to ille-gally cut off funding for critical gov-ernment Agencies and services. They are here to make government work for billionaires but at the expense of work-ing-class people, and they are filling their Cabinet with people who are going to carry out that illegal bidding.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:53 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G13FE6.013 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S965 February 13, 2025 

As I stand here today, DOGE operatives continue to work under the cover of darkness, including at the Small Business Administration. The American people want answers. Is the private information of families and businesses and individuals safe at the SBA? Will an entrepreneur looking to open their beauty salon be looking to close on an SBA loan and get their money on schedule? Can government contractors, many of whom are vet-erans, continue providing critical serv-ices while getting paid on time? Lawmakers and American families alike are scrambling to figure out whether the government is open for business. Small business owners are wondering what will come from the il-legal access to their private data by Musk’s minions. These are just small business people across the country who have handed over the financial secrets of their families, and there is no guar-antee that all of those secrets of their families are being protected right now. They are small business people. We have 7 million people in Massachusetts and 722,000 small businesses. Meanwhile, Donald Trump continues to attack DEI—diversity, equity, and inclusion—when, in reality, the admin-istration is carrying out a different kind of DEI—‘‘defending Elon’s inter-ests.’’ So today, I stand in opposition to the confirmation of Kelly Loeffler because of this effort which is going to be throwing us into a constitutional crisis through their illegal actions. I fear that, as Administrator, Senator Loef-fler will put the interests—at the com-mand of Donald Trump and Elon Musk—of the more than 34 million small businesses second and of Elon and billionaire interests first. In a moment when our democracy is under threat, I expect a clearer com-mitment to the rule of law. So far, Sen-ator Loeffler has offered an unapologetic defense of Trump’s Exec-utive orders, which attempt to super-sede the law of the land, and has sup-ported pardons for the January 6 insur-rectionists. Taxpayers need to ensure they have an environment which is fair and im-partial at the SBA. Instead, Senator Loeffler has, in the past, basically bragged that she is more conservative even than Attila the Hun. I need to make sure that this envi-ronment that is being created is one which is going to be hospitable to small businesses, because they need to ensure that there is an Administrator who will act ethically and for the ben-efit of America’s entrepreneurs. Small businesses need an Administrator who will help them compete and innovate. They do not need an Administrator who is only listening to the White House’s, Trump’s, and Elon Musk’s or-ders. To conclude, under the Biden admin-istration, we saw a record number of new small businesses, but just because they were recovering, it doesn’t mean they weren’t hurting. So to all of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle, we have to work together to uplift our entrepreneurs and promote a ruthless Darwinian mar-ketplace that would bring a smile to ADAM SMITH . That is my goal. The vi-brancy of our communities depends on us ensuring small business can com-pete, expand, and create jobs. By crippling government from with-in, Trump is trying to damage the crit-ical services that help working families put food on the table. So I urge a ‘‘no’’ vote on the confirmation of Senator Loeffler to serve as Administrator of the Small Business Administration. Unfortunately, by now, we are able to look back and see the totality across the EPA, across the NIH, across the President’s call for the dismantlement of the Department of Education as to what the real story line is here as the Trump administration and the DOGE apparatchiks move into Agency after Agency and are in the Small Business Administration right now. So my goal is to try to protect that SBA that we have all known on a bi-partisan basis for generations—to just protect it from this storm of partisan-ship that is taking over our country, and on that basis, I recommend a ‘‘no’’ vote. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Sen-ator from Iowa. Ms. ERNST. Mr. President, later today, we have the opportunity to ad-vance the nomination of the Honorable Kelly Loeffler to be the Administrator of the Small Business Administration. Senator Loeffler is immensely quali-fied for this role. As a successful busi-nesswoman, it is abundantly clear that Senator Loeffler truly understands what it takes to be an entrepreneur and will be an effective voice for small businesses across America. Since President Trump’s election in November, optimism on Main Street has surged to its highest levels since 2018. Our Nation’s job creators—small businesses—are excited about the pros-pect of having a dedicated and knowl-edgeable leader at the helm of the SBA. Last week, the Small Business Com-mittee, on which I serve as chair, fa-vorably reported her nomination out with a bipartisan vote—a sure sign that my friends on both sides of the aisle believe she is fit to lead the SBA. Senator Loeffler will bring account-ability back to the Agency and pro-mote policies that will truly benefit America’s small businesses. As evi-denced in her nomination hearing, Sen-ator Loeffler’s experience and her ex-pertise make her the right person to lead the SBA and advocate for our small businesses. Growing up on her family’s farm in Bloomington, IL, Senator Loeffler ex-perienced firsthand the problems fac-ing America’s farmers and small busi-ness owners. And as a fellow farm girl myself, I look forward to having some more Midwest common sense in Wash-ington, DC. Senator Loeffler also witnessed her parents start up a small trucking busi-ness and navigate complex rules and regulations. She understands the strug-gles small businesses face because—do you know what?—she has experienced them. Fortunately, Senator Loeffler is ready to cut the redtape and reduce the burdens that so many of our job cre-ators still face today. Senator Loeffler is also a successful entrepreneur. She was the first em-ployee and CEO of a financial tech-nology company. Through her hard work and tenacity, she aggressively grew the company and took it public within 3 years. Additionally, Senator Loeffler knows what it means to work for Main Street and the American people. During COVID, as a U.S. Senator, she worked tirelessly to bring relief to the people of Georgia, specifically through the Paycheck Protection Program. How-ever, she, like me, recognizes that some took advantage of this program, and they need to be held accountable. During her confirmation hearing, Sen-ator Loeffler detailed her zero-toler-ance policy for waste, fraud, and abuse in the SBA. That should be welcome news for all of us. In addition, Senator Loeffler indi-cated the need for a full-scale audit—I started my political career as an audi-tor, so I agree with this—a full-scale audit at the SBA to uncover improper spending and stated she would rely on that data to make the best decisions for the future of the SBA. Senator Loeffler also noted the im-portance of working with Congress, particularly when it comes to disaster relief. She recognized the tragedy of the SBA’s disaster shortfall, which lasted for 66 days in the middle of back-to-back natural disasters. She recognized this should never happen again. SBA’s vital role in the disaster proc-ess cannot be overstated, and we must ensure we have an Administrator who will alert Congress at the first signs of any concerns. The SBA needs a strong leader with a proven track record in business man-agement, and Senator Loeffler brings all of that and more to the table. I look forward to working with Sen-ator Loeffler to ensure small busi-nesses all across America can thrive and maintain these high levels of opti-mism we are already seeing under this administration. I urge my colleagues to advance her nomination and support her with a‘‘yes’’ vote. I yield the floor. I suggest the absence of a quorum. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll. The senior assistant executive clerk proceeded to call the roll. Mr. CRUZ. Mr. President, I ask unan-imous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. NOMINATION OF HOWARD LUTNICK Mr. CRUZ. Mr. President, I rise in support of the nomination of Howard Lutnick to be Secretary of Commerce.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:53 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G13FE6.021 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S966 February 13, 2025 

Two weeks ago, Mr. Lutnick ap-peared before the Commerce Com-mittee, where he received a warm re-ception from Senators. The following week, he was reported out with bipar-tisan support, underscoring that many Commerce Committee members see Mr. Lutnick as highly qualified to serve as Secretary of Commerce. Mr. Lutnick has demonstrated great resilience and grit throughout his life. As he revealed at the hearing, growing up with some real personal adversity has given him a deeper understanding of the challenges faced by ordinary working Americans. He lost both of his parents before his 18th birthday, and he put himself through college and helped to raise his younger siblings. On 9/11, Howard personally witnessed the fall of the Twin Towers. On that day, he lost two-thirds of his staff, in-cluding his own brother. Few men can recover from an experience like that, but Howard not only rebuilt Cantor Fitzgerald, but he made it into an international powerhouse with 13,000 employees and operations in more than 20 countries. Just as importantly, he has dedicated his rebuilt company to helping support the families who lost loved ones on 9/11. He created the Cantor Fitzgerald Relief Fund to ensure that the families of em-ployees who were killed received healthcare and millions in financial support. And he continues to serve as a board member of the National Sep-tember 11th Memorial. Over the next few years, Mr. Lutnick will lead on key issues vital to the suc-cess of America’s economy: expanding commercial access to midband spec-trum, keeping the gulf open for oil and gas exploration, and spurring a resur-gence of manufacturing in America. Mr. Lutnick will ensure that Amer-ican taxpayer dollars are spent effi-ciently and that Congress gets ‘‘the benefit of the bargain’’ on legislation like the Chips and Science Act. Mr. Lutnick has earned the support of nearly 50 organizations and associa-tions. From agriculture to aviation, broadband to manufacturing, compa-nies across the spectrum support Presi-dent Trump’s selection of Howard Lutnick to serve as Secretary of Com-merce. As the Wireless Association put it, ‘‘Mr. Lutnick’s leadership will bring a fresh, innovative approach to the De-partment of Commerce.’’ He will ‘‘ad-vance policies that promote innova-tion, foster economic growth, and strengthen America’s position as aglobal leader in wireless technology and digital transformation.’’ Mr. President, it is my hope that, given the bipartisan support Mr. Lutnick received in committee, the full Senate will follow suit and agree that he is the forward-looking leader focused on jobs who we need at the De-partment. I urge my colleagues to support How-ard Lutnick’s nomination for Sec-retary of Commerce. WAIVING MANDATORY QUOROM CALL Mr. President, I ask unanimous con-sent that the mandatory quorum call with respect to the Lutnick and Loef-fler nominations be waived. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? Without objection, it is so ordered. Mr. CRUZ. Mr. President, I ask unan-imous consent that the scheduled roll-call votes begin immediately. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. CLOTURE MOTION Pursuant to rule XXII, the Chair lays before the Senate the pending cloture motion, which the clerk will state. The senior assistant executive clerk read as follows: C LOTURE M OTION We, the undersigned Senators, in accord-ance with the provisions of rule XXII of the Standing Rules of the Senate, do hereby move to bring to a close debate on the nomi-nation of Executive Calendar No. 19, Howard Lutnick, of New York, to be Secretary of Commerce. John Thune, John R. Curtis, Tommy Tuberville, Kevin Cramer, Ashley B. Moody, Mike Crapo, Markwayne Mullin, David McCormick, Mike Lee, Ron Johnson, John Barrasso, Pete Ricketts, Jim Justice, Jon A. Husted, Bernie Moreno, Josh Hawley, Tom Cot-ton. The PRESIDING OFFICER. By unan-imous consent, the mandatory quorum call has been waived. The question is, Is it the sense of the Senate that debate on the nomination of Howard Lutnick, of New York, to be Secretary of Commerce, shall be brought to a close? The yeas and nays are mandatory under the rule. The clerk will call the roll. The legislative clerk called the roll. Mr. BARRASSO. The following Sen-ator is necessarily absent: the Senator from Arkansas (Mr. B OOZMAN ). Mr. DURBIN. I announce that the Senator from Illinois (Ms. D UCKWORTH ), and the Senator from Arizona (Mr. G ALLEGO) are necessarily absent. The yeas and nays resulted—yeas 52, nays 45, as follows: [Rollcall Vote No. 54 Ex.] YEAS—52 Banks Barrasso Blackburn Britt Budd Capito Cassidy Collins Cornyn Cotton Cramer Crapo Cruz Curtis Daines Ernst Fischer Graham Grassley Hagerty Hawley Hoeven Husted Hyde-Smith Johnson Justice Kennedy Lankford Lee Lummis Marshall McConnell McCormick Moody Moran Moreno Mullin Murkowski Paul Ricketts Risch Rounds Schmitt Scott (FL) Scott (SC) Sheehy Sullivan Thune Tillis Tuberville Wicker Young NAYS—45 Alsobrooks Baldwin Bennet Blumenthal Blunt Rochester Booker Cantwell Coons Cortez Masto Durbin Fetterman Gillibrand Hassan Heinrich Hickenlooper Hirono Kaine Kelly Kim King Klobuchar Luja ´ n Markey Merkley Murphy Murray Ossoff Padilla Peters Reed Rosen Sanders Schatz Schiff Schumer Shaheen Slotkin Smith Van Hollen Warner Warnock Warren Welch Whitehouse Wyden NOT VOTING—3 Boozman Duckworth Gallego The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. MORENO). On this vote, the yeas are 52, the nays are 45. The motion is agreed to. 

f

CLOTURE MOTION The PRESIDING OFFICER. Pursuant to rule XXII, the Chair lays before the Senate the pending cloture motion, which the clerk will state. The legislative clerk read as follows: C LOTURE M OTION We, the undersigned Senators, in accord-ance with the provisions of rule XXII of the Standing Rules of the Senate, do hereby move to bring to a close debate on the nomi-nation of Executive Calendar No. 20, Kelly Loeffler, of Georgia, to be Administrator of the Small Business Administration. John Thune, John R. Curtis, Tommy Tuberville, Kevin Cramer, Ashley B. Moody, Mike Crapo, Markwayne Mullin, David McCormick, Mike Lee, Ron Johnson, John Barrasso, Pete Ricketts, Jim Justice, Jon A. Husted, Bernie Moreno, Josh Hawley, Tom Cot-ton. The PRESIDING OFFICER. By unan-imous consent, the mandatory quorum call has been waived. The question is, Is it the sense of the Senate that debate on the nomination of Kelly Loeffler, of Georgia, to be Ad-ministrator of the Small Business Ad-ministration, shall be brought to aclose? The yeas and nays are mandatory under the rule. The clerk will call the roll. The senior assistant legislative clerk called the roll. Mr. BARRASSO. The following Sen-ators are necessarily absent: the Sen-ator from Arkansas (Mr. B OOZMAN ), the Senator from Wisconsin (Mr. J OHNSON ), the Senator from Kansas (Mr. MAR -SHALL ), and the Senator from Ken-tucky (Mr. P AUL ). Further, if present and voting: the Senator from Wisconsin (Mr. J OHNSON )would have voted ‘‘YEA.’’ Mr. DURBIN. I announce that the Senator from Arizona (Mr. GALLEGO )and the Senator from Michigan (Mr. P ETERS) are necessarily absent. The yeas and nays resulted—yeas 51, nays 43, as follows: [Rollcall Vote No. 55 Ex.] YEAS—51 Banks Barrasso Blackburn Britt Budd Capito Cassidy Collins Cornyn Cotton Cramer Crapo Cruz Curtis Daines Ernst Fischer Graham Grassley Hagerty Hawley Hoeven Husted Hyde-Smith Justice Kelly Kennedy         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 02:53 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G13FE6.022 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S967 February 13, 2025 

> Lankford Lee Lummis McConnell McCormick Moody Moran Moreno Mullin Murkowski Ricketts Risch Rosen Rounds Schmitt Scott (FL) Scott (SC) Sheehy Sullivan Thune Tillis Tuberville Wicker Young

NAYS—43 Alsobrooks Baldwin Bennet Blumenthal Blunt Rochester Booker Cantwell Coons Cortez Masto Duckworth Durbin Fetterman Gillibrand Hassan Heinrich Hickenlooper Hirono Kaine Kim King Klobuchar Luja ´ n Markey Merkley Murphy Murray Ossoff Padilla Reed Sanders Schatz Schiff Schumer Shaheen Slotkin Smith Van Hollen Warner Warnock Warren Welch Whitehouse Wyden NOT VOTING—6 Boozman Gallego Johnson Marshall Paul Peters The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. BUDD). On this vote, the yeas are 51, the nays are 43. The motion is agreed to. 

f

EXECUTIVE CALENDAR The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will report the nomination. The legislative clerk read the nomi-nation of Kelly Loeffler, of Georgia, to be Administrator of the Small Business Administration. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Sen-ator from Alaska. (The remarks of Ms. M URKOWSKI per-taining to the submission of S. 573 are printed in today’s RECORD under ‘‘Statements on Introduced Bills and Joint Resolutions.’’) EXECUTIVE ORDERS Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, Iwant to shift gears for just a moment. Colleagues know that I am the chair-man of the Senate Indian Affairs Com-mittee. I have been on this committee since I came to the Senate, and it is a position that I hold very close. I rep-resent a constituency of Alaskan Na-tives back in my home State. We have over one-half the Tribes in the United States of America, and so my responsibility to them as their Fed-eral representative is one, again, that I take very, very seriously. There has been a fair amount of con-fusion, I think, uncertainty that has been brought about by many of the Ex-ecutive orders, some of the Federal ac-tions that we have seen, whether it is funding freezes or programs that are being put on pause. But one area that I want to make very, very clear to col-leagues, as I have sought to make clear to those who are part of the incoming administration, that when we are speaking about our Indian Tribes and our Tribal programs, and the Federal funding that they receive, they do not fall into the category, if you will, of di-versity, equity, inclusion. And so when the Executive order was announced in the very first week of the Trump administration, there was con-fusion as to whether or not Indian and Tribal programs were impacted, and in that confusion, I think, a lot of undue stress and anxiety. And so I immediately asked the OMB—I met with Mr. Vought person-ally, and I asked him to take steps im-mediately to reaffirm the unique treat-ment, the programs and services to In-dian Tribes based on their political and their legal status, which is recognized in our U.S. Constitution, in our trea-ties, under many Federal laws and poli-cies, to ensure that there is no disrup-tion to our Federal Tribal programs. We know—our Supreme Court has af-firmed our Indian Tribes are a unique political class—this is not a racial one—and their sovereignty and their trust relationship with the Federal Government must be upheld. And Ishared this in a letter to the Acting Di-rector of OMB. We have seen, at least in a couple of the Departments already, that they clearly understand this distinct legal and political relationship. The Depart-ment of the Interior very quickly moved to add clarification. On January 30, the Department of the Interior issued a Secretarial order that acknowledges that nothing in their order should be construed to affect the activities that implement the legal re-quirements, independent of the EOs, in-cluding the statutory authorities, trea-ty, and/or trust obligations of the De-partment to our Tribal nations and to our Native Hawaiian community. And so I appreciated that very clear mes-sage coming out of the Department of the Interior so early. I think that it can be used as that model, that template, for other Federal Agencies because it is not just within Interior that we see Tribal programs, it is in other areas. We have just recently seen, out of the Department of Health and Human Services, that they recog-nize that as well. We are working, again, to make sure that any Tribal program has the clarity that they need and assurance that they and the bene-ficiaries will not be impacted. We have a trust responsibility. We have an obligation that is clear. So avoiding any confusion, misunder-standing, or anxiety is something that I think we owe to our indigenous peo-ples across the country, and I am thankful that many within the new ad-ministration have stepped up to work with us to clear up any confusion that may be out there. I yield the floor. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Sen-ator from Alaska. 

f

LEGISLATIVE SESSION MORNING BUSINESS Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, Iask unanimous consent that the Sen-ate be in a period of morning business for debate only, with Senators per-mitted to speak therein for up to 10 minutes each. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. 

f

U.S. SENATE COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET RULES OF PROCEDURE Mr. GRAHAM. Mr. President, rule XXVI, paragraph 2, of the Standing Rules of the Senate requires each com-mittee to adopt rules to govern the procedure of the committee and to pub-lish those rules in the C ONGRESSIONAL RECORD not later than March 1 of the first year of each Congress. Today, the Committee on the Budget adopted committee rules of procedure. Consistent with Standing Rule XXVI, I ask unanimous consent to have acopy of the rules of procedure of the Committee on the Budget printed in the C ONGRESSIONAL RECORD. There being no objection, the mate-rial was ordered to be printed in the RECORD , as follows: C OMMITTEE ON THE B UDGET —R ULES FOR THE 119 TH C ONGRESS RULES OF PROCEDURE 

I. Meetings 

(1) Meeting Schedule. The committee shall hold its regular meeting on the first Thurs-day of each month. Additional meetings may be called by the chair as the chair deems necessary to expedite committee business. (2) Open to the Public. Each meeting of the committee, including meetings to conduct hearings, shall be open to the public, except that a portion or portions of any such meet-ing may be closed to the public if the com-mittee determines by record vote in open session of a majority of the members of the committee present that the matters to be discussed or the testimony to be taken at such portion or portions— (a) will disclose matters necessary to be kept secret in the interests of national de-fense or the confidential conduct of the for-eign relations of the United States; (b) will relate solely to matters of the com-mittee staff personnel or internal staff man-agement or procedure; (c) will tend to charge an individual with crime or misconduct, to disgrace or injure the professional standing of an individual, or otherwise to expose an individual to public contempt or obloquy, or will represent aclearly unwarranted invasion of the privacy of an individual; (d) will disclose the identity of any in-former or law enforcement agent or will dis-close any information relating to the inves-tigation or prosecution of a criminal offense that is required to be kept secret in the in-terests of effective law enforcement; (e) will disclose information relating to the trade secrets or financial or commercial in-formation pertaining specifically to a given person if— (i) an act of Congress requires the informa-tion to be kept confidential by Government officers and employees; or (ii) the information has been obtained by the Government on a confidential basis, other than through an application by such person for a specific Government financial or other benefit, and is required to be kept se-cret in order to prevent undue injury to the competitive position of such person; or (f) may divulge matters required to be kept confidential under other provisions of law or Government regulations. (3) Notice. Notice of, and the agenda for, any business meeting or markup shall be provided to each member and made available         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.003 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

---CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S968 February 13, 2025 

to the public at least 72 hours prior to such meeting or markup. 

II. Consideration of Budget Resolutions 

(1) Amendment Consideration Generally. If the chair of the committee makes proposed legislative text of a budget resolution avail-able to all committee members by 12:00 p.m., five days prior to the start of a meeting or markup to consider the resolution, during that meeting or markup: (a) it shall not be in order to consider a first degree amendment unless the amend-ment has been submitted to the chief clerk by 5:00 p.m. two days prior to the start of the meeting or markup, except that an amend-ment in the nature of a substitute offered by the chair of the committee shall not be re-quired to be filed in advance; (b) it shall not be in order to consider a second degree amendment unless the amend-ment has been submitted to the chief clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to the start of the meeting or markup; and (c) it shall not be in order to consider a side-by-side amendment unless the amend-ment has been submitted to the chief clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to the start of the meeting or markup, and the amendment is filed in relation to a particular first de-gree amendment that is considered by the committee. (2) Amendments with No Force or Effect. During consideration of a budget resolution, it shall not be in order to consider an amend-ment that would have no force or effect if adopted. 

III. Order of Recognition 

Those members who are present at the start of any meeting of the committee in-cluding meetings to conduct hearings, shall be recognized in order of seniority based on time served as a member of the committee. Any members arriving after the start of the meeting shall be recognized, in order of ap-pearance, after the most junior member. 

IV. Quorums and Voting 

(1) Definition of Quorum. Except as pro-vided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this sec-tion, a quorum for the transaction of com-mittee business shall consist of not less than one-third of the membership of the entire committee: Provided, that proxies shall not be counted in making a quorum. (2) Reporting. A majority of the committee shall constitute a quorum for reporting to the Senate budget resolutions, legislative measures, nominations, or recommenda-tions: Provided, that proxies shall not be counted in making a quorum. (3) Testimony. For the purpose of taking sworn or unsworn testimony, a quorum of the committee shall consist of one Senator. (4) Polling Authority. (a) The committee may poll— (i) internal committee matters including those concerning the committee’s staff, records, and budget; (ii) steps in an investigation, including issuance of subpoenas, applications for im-munity orders, and requests for documents from agencies; and (iii) other committee business that the committee has designated for polling at ameeting, except that the committee may not vote by poll on reporting to the Senate budg-et resolutions, legislative measures, nomina-tions, or recommendations, and may not vote by poll on closing a meeting or hearing to the public. (b) To conduct a poll, the chair shall cir-culate polling sheets to each member speci-fying the matter being polled and the time limit for completion of the poll. If any mem-ber requests, the matter shall be held for a meeting rather than being polled. The chief clerk shall keep a record of polls; if the com-mittee determines by record vote in open session of a majority of the members of the committee present that the polled matter is one of those enumerated in Committee on the Budget Rules of Procedure I(2)(a)–(f), then the record of the poll shall be confiden-tial. Any member may move at the com-mittee meeting following a poll for a vote on the polled decision. 

V. Proxies 

When a record vote is taken in the com-mittee on any budget resolutions, legislative measures, nominations, recommendations, amendments, or any other questions, aquorum being present, a member who is un-able to attend the meeting may vote by proxy if the absent member has been in-formed of the matter on which the vote is being recorded and has affirmatively re-quested to be so recorded; except that no member may vote by proxy during the delib-erations on budget resolutions unless a mem-ber is experiencing a health issue and the chair and ranking member agree to allow that member to vote by proxy on amend-ments to a budget resolution. While proxies may be voted on a motion to report a meas-ure or matter from the committee, such a motion shall also require the concurrence of a majority of the members who are phys-ically present at the time such action is taken. 

VI. Hearings and Hearing Procedures 

(1) Exemption from Two-Hour Rule. Pursu-ant to rule XXVI, paragraph 5(a), of the Standing Rules of the Senate, the committee is exempt from the prohibition on Senate committees meeting while the Senate is in session without special leave, after the con-clusion of the first two hours after the meet-ing of the Senate commenced and in no case after two o’clock postmeridian unless con-sent therefor has been obtained from the ma-jority leader and the minority leader (or in the event of the absence of either such lead-ers, from their designee(s)). (2) Notice. The committee shall make pub-lic announcement of the date, place, time, and subject matter of any hearing to be con-ducted on any measure or matter at least 1 week in advance of such hearing, unless the chair and ranking member determine that there is good cause to begin such hearing at an earlier date. (3) Witness Testimony Deadline. At least 24 hours prior to the scheduled start time of the hearing, a witness appearing before the committee shall file a written statement of proposed testimony, including visual exhib-its intended for display during testimony, with the chief clerk who is responsible for circulating the proposed testimony to all members at the same time. The requirement that a witness submit testimony 24 hours prior to a hearing may be waived by the chair and the ranking member, following their determination that there is good cause for the failure of compliance. (4) Witness Testimony Time Limit. Oral statements of witnesses shall be based upon their filed statements but shall be limited to 5 minutes duration. This period may be lim-ited or extended at the discretion of the chair presiding at the hearings. 

VII. Committee Reports 

(1) Report Generally. When the committee has ordered a measure or recommendation reported, following final action, the report thereon shall be filed in the Senate at the earliest practicable time. (2) Supplemental Report. A member of the committee, who gives notice of an intention to file supplemental, minority, or additional views at the time of final committee ap-proval of budget resolutions, legislative measures, nominations, or recommenda-tions, shall be entitled to not less than 3 cal-endar days in which to file such views, in writing, with the chief clerk of the com-mittee. Such views shall then be included in the committee report and printed in the same volume, as a part thereof, and their in-clusions shall be noted on the cover of the report. In the absence of timely notice, the committee report may be filed and printed immediately without such views. 

VIII. Use of Display Materials in Committee by Members 

Committee members may use the elec-tronic display system provided in the com-mittee hearing room or physical graphic dis-plays during any meetings or hearings of the committee. Physical graphic displays are limited to the following: Charts, photographs, or renderings: Size: no larger than 36 inches by 48 inches. Where: on an easel stand next to the mem-ber’s seat or at the rear of the committee room. The member may display such materials only at the time the member is speaking, and no more than two may be displayed at a time. 

IX. Confirmation Standards and Procedures 

(1) Standards. In considering a nomination, the committee shall inquire into the nomi-nee’s experience, qualifications, suitability, and integrity to serve in the position to which he or she has been nominated. The committee shall recommend confirmation if it finds that the nominee has the necessary integrity and is affirmatively qualified by reason of training, education, or experience to carry out the functions of the office to which he or she was nominated. (2) Information Concerning the Nominee. Each nominee shall submit the following in-formation to the chief clerk, who will dis-tribute to the chair and ranking member at the same time: (a) A detailed biographical resume which contains information concerning education, employment, and background which gen-erally relates to the position to which the in-dividual is nominated, and which is to be made public; (b) Information concerning financial and other background of the nominee which is to be made public; provided, that financial in-formation that does not relate to the nomi-nee’s qualifications to hold the position to which the individual is nominated, tax re-turns or reports prepared by federal agencies that may be submitted by the nominee shall, after review by the chair, ranking member, or any other member of the committee upon request, be maintained in a manner to en-sure confidentiality; and (c) Copies of other relevant documents and responses to pre-hearing questions and re-sponses to questions for the record sub-mitted in accordance with the deadline fol-lowing the committee hearing, as the com-mittee may so request, such as responses to questions concerning the policies and pro-grams the nominee intends to pursue upon taking office. (3) Report on the Nominee. After a review of all information pertinent to the nomina-tion, a confidential report on the nominee may be prepared by the committee staff for the chair, the ranking member, and, upon re-quest, for any other member of the com-mittee. The report shall summarize the steps taken and the results of the committee in-quiry, including any unresolved matters that have been raised during the course of the in-quiry. (4) Hearings. The committee shall conduct a hearing, subject to the hearing notice re-quirement, during which the nominee shall be called to testify under oath on all matters relating to the nominee’s suitability for of-fice, including the policies and programs         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.006 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S969 February 13, 2025                              

> which the nominee would pursue while in that position. No hearing or meeting to con-sider the confirmation shall be held until at least 72 hours after the following events have occurred: the nominee has responded to the requirements set forth in subsection (2)—in-cluding responding to pre-hearing questions and questions for the record for hearings and meetings, respectively, and, if a report de-scribed in subsection (3) has been prepared, it has been presented to the chair and ranking member, and is available to other members of the committee, upon request. (5) OMB Nominees. Pursuant to S. Res. 445, 108th Congr. § 101 (2004) (adopted), the Com-mittee on the Budget and the Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs shall have joint jurisdiction over the nomi-nations of persons nominated by the Presi-dent to fill the positions of Director of Dep-uty Director for Budget within the Office and Management and Budget, and if one committee votes to order reported such anomination, the other must report within 30 calendar days session, or be automatically discharged.
> f

BAHRAIN Mr. WYDEN. Mr. President, this month marks the 14th year since thou-sands of Bahraini citizens took to the streets to peacefully protest the op-pressive practices of the Bahraini Gov-ernment. These citizens—to include human rights defenders and pro-democ-racy activists—were brutally repressed by their own leaders. Since then, I have stood in solidarity with the Bahraini people demanding accountability, and I will continue to do so until we see real change. Unfortunately, all these years later, the Bahraini Government has failed to implement basic changes to guarantee the fundamental rights that every gov-ernment owes its citizens. The Govern-ment of Bahrain continues to impose restrictions on expression, assembly, and association. Bahraini elections are neither free nor fair, and authorities systemati-cally exclude and repress opposition voices. In 2023, the government ar-rested four men for simply suggesting on social media that Bahrain should improve its legislative system. The State Department’s most recent human rights report judged that there was no improvement in the human rights situation in Bahrain. No im-provement? Nearly 15 years to address these fundamental flaws and the Bah-raini Government still has nothing to show for it! I called on the Government of Bah-rain to release its political prisoners, and while I was heartened to hear that the Bahraini Government granted am-nesty to 2,500 prisoners last year, they should not have been detained in the first place. Many of these prisoners were unjustly detained, and thousands remain in prison under inhumane con-ditions and without fair trial. Hundreds of political prisoners re-main detained in the now-infamous Jau Prison in Bahrain, where two people died last year because of medical ne-glect. The U.N. has raised troubling concerns that detainees at this facility have been denied required medical care and do not have regular access to ade-quate food and safe drinking water. Some allegations have suggested that authorities have intentionally exposed prisoners to extreme heat in these fa-cilities, at times reaching 122 degrees Fahrenheit. These conditions are unac-ceptable, particularly when many of these prisoners have been denied fair trials and due process. My goal today is not to insult or un-dermine a U.S. ally. It is precisely be-cause of our strong ties that I feel com-pelled to speak out and demand better. It is my greatest hope that someday I will be able to stop issuing these state-ments into the record every February because the Bahraini regime has stopped repressing its citizens and has instead entered into a real and inclu-sive dialogue with them. In short, I am not asking for lip serv-ice; I am asking for real change. Irenew my call on Bahrain’s monarchy to halt its deliberate campaign of si-lencing peaceful opposition, to stop the indefensible revocation of citizenships, and to release political prisoners like Abdulhadi al-Khawaja and Abduljalil al-Singace. And I call on the Trump administra-tion and, in particular, Secretary Rubio—who has previously been astaunch advocate in the U.S. Senate for advancing human rights in Bah-rain—to take this issue seriously and demand more accountability from Bah-rain at the highest levels. 

> f

ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS TRIBUTE TO DR. BRIAN FONTES 

∑ Mr. CURTIS. Mr. President, I rise today to recognize and honor the dis-tinguished career of Dr. Brian Fontes, who recently announced his decision to step down as chief executive officer of NENA: The 9–1–1 Association after a re-markable decades-long career in public service, telecommunications, and 9–1–1. Dr. Fontes received his under-graduate and master’s degrees at Brigham Young University and his Ph.D. at Michigan State University. He then began his career as a communica-tions professor at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, establishing the groundwork for his future con-tributions to the field. Transitioning from academia to pub-lic service, Dr. Fontes served as senior adviser and chief of staff to FCC Com-missioner James H. Quello. In this role, he was instrumental in shaping tele-communications policy during a time of rapid technological advancement. In 1994, Dr. Fontes joined the Cellular Telecommunications Industry Associa-tion as senior vice president for policy and administration, where he contin-ued his involvement with international telecom policy. He was tasked with de-veloping policies and guiding regula-tion for wireless services in South Afri-ca, working with the transitioning new government under F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela. In 1995, President Clinton appointed Dr. Fontes as the head of the U.S. Dele-gation to the International Tele-communication Union’s World Radio Conference held in Geneva, Switzer-land, granting him the rank of Ambas-sador. Following the 1995 Dayton agreement in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Dr. Fontes served as chairman of the Com-munication Regulatory Agency Coun-cil, working to develop policies and en-sure wireless spectrum access in the newly formed country, thus guaran-teeing wireless availability for its pub-lic. Before joining NENA, Dr. Fontes was vice president of Federal relations for Cingular Wireless, continuing in that role following its merger with AT&T. In 2008, Dr. Fontes took the helm at NENA, where he has been instrumental in advocating for the development and adoption of Next Generation 9–1–1 tech-nologies and services. His leadership has helped ensure that Americans have access to reliable emergency services, that 9–1–1 centers have access to state-of-the-art technologies, and that 9–1–1 professionals receive best-in-class training. As Dr. Fontes moves on to an excit-ing future, we reflect on his legacy of service, innovation, and dedication to public safety. His visionary leadership has left an indelible mark on emer-gency communications systems at home and abroad, and his work will continue to benefit future generations. I ask my colleagues to join me in ex-pressing our deepest gratitude to Dr. Brian Fontes for his unwavering com-mitment to enhancing public safety and telecommunications. ∑

> f

RECOGNIZING STAGECOACH INN 

∑ Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, as a mem-ber and former chairman of the Senate Committee on Small Business and En-trepreneurship, each month I recognize and celebrate the American entrepre-neurial spirit by highlighting the suc-cess of small businesses in my home State of Idaho. Today, I am pleased to honor the Stagecoach Inn as the Idaho Small Business of the Month for Feb-ruary 2025. The Stagecoach Inn was founded in 1959 by Willie Schrier, a U.S. Coast Guard veteran and a trained horse jockey. Willie was a pioneer in the food and bar industry, priding himself on providing high-quality service and agreat meal to every customer at the Stagecoach Inn. For over two decades, Willie successfully ran the business be-fore passing it down to his fraternal twin daughters Mary and Marian Schrier in 1980. The sisters, alongside their cousin Nettie Allen, maintained the restaurant’s reputation for excep-tional food and hospitality. The sisters sold the establishment in 2009, and much to the dismay of many Treasure Valley residents, new man-agement closed the businesses in 2011.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:12 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.007 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

---CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S970 February 13, 2025 

Luckily, a group of loyal customers and former staff rallied to recruit Wanda Martinat, a longtime server at the Stagecoach, and customers Fred and Francie Oliver, to acquire the res-taurant. The Olivers dedicated count-less hours to updating the facilities while maintaining its beloved 1960s at-mosphere. With their encouragement and partnership, the Stagecoach Inn reopened its doors in 2015, welcoming back many of its original staff. Wanda Martinat’s story is one of per-severance and deep Idaho roots. Her parents’ families endured the injustices of World War II when they were forc-ibly relocated to the Minidoka intern-ment camp. Her mother was 13 at the time and her father, age 17, had joined the U.S. Army to avoid internment. After the war, her parents met in Caldwell and had seven children, Wanda being the middle child. Her par-ents passed down their values of resil-ience and hard work, which has shaped her approach to managing and co-own-ing the Stagecoach Inn. Today, the Stagecoach is thriving and remains a feature of Idaho’s polit-ical and social fabric. Throughout its history, the restaurant has been known as a gathering place where business contracts were signed on drink coast-ers and political discussions that changed Idaho’s legislative landscape occurred. Congratulations to the team at the Stagecoach Inn on their selection as the February 2025 Small Business of the Month. Thank you for serving Idaho as small business owners and en-trepreneurs. You make our great State proud, and I look forward to your con-tinued growth and success. ∑

f

RECOGNIZING THE GENERAL FED-ERATION OF WOMEN’S CLUB, WOMAN’S CENTURY CLUB Mr. RISCH. Mr. President, I rise today to celebrate the 125th anniver-sary of the General Federation of Wom-en’s Clubs (GFWC), Woman’s Century Club in Nampa, ID—a remarkable orga-nization that has been at the forefront of community service and education since its inception in 1900. As the first service club established in Nampa, the Woman’s Century Club has dem-onstrated commitment and dedication to enhancing the lives of Idahoans. Since joining the GFWC Idaho Fed-eration of Women’s Club, members have worked tirelessly to uplift their community. The club’s motto, ‘‘You find yourself when you lose yourself in the service of others,’’ embodies their commitment to service and the better-ment of society. The Women’s Club has initiated and supported many notable projects, in-cluding the establishment of the Car-negie Library in 1908, the creation of the Rose Garden at Lakeview Park, and the organization of the local Red Cross Chapter. These impactful efforts have enriched the community and set a precedent for future generations of service. In 2023, the club made significant contributions to Idaho’s local food banks, showcasing their commitment to alleviating hunger and supporting those in need. The club also recently made a 2-year commitment to support the Idaho Youth Ranch, an organiza-tion that provides resources like coun-seling, job training, and scholarships to Idaho teens facing trauma and chal-lenging circumstances. The Woman’s Century Club continues to inspire Idahoans through their an-nual Student Art and Poetry Contest, scholarships for high school seniors, support for local veterans, and pro-grams focused on preventing domestic violence. As we celebrate this significant mile-stone, I am proud to recognize the members of the Woman’s Century Club, both past and present, for their unwav-ering dedication and hard work. Their spirit of generosity and compassion has transformed the lives of countless Ida-hoans in Nampa and the greater Treas-ure Valley. Let us honor their legacy and continue to support the invaluable work they do to improve our commu-nity. 

f

MESSAGE FROM THE HOUSE At 11:57 a.m., a message from the House of Representatives delivered by Mrs. Cole, one of its reading clerks, an-nounced that the House has passed the following bills, in which it requests the concurrence of the Senate: H.R. 35. An act to impose criminal and im-migration penalties for intentionally fleeing a pursuing Federal officer while operating a motor vehicle. H.R. 77. An act to amend chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code, to provide for en bloc consideration in resolutions of disapproval for ‘‘midnight rules’’, and for other purposes. 

f

MEASURES REFERRED The following bills were read the first and the second times by unanimous consent, and referred as indicated: H.R. 35. An act to impose criminal and im-migration penalties for intentionally fleeing a pursuing Federal officer while operating a motor vehicle; to the Committee on the Ju-diciary. H.R. 77. An act to amend chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code, to provide for en bloc consideration in resolutions of disapproval for ‘‘midnight rules’’, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. 

f

PRIVILEGED NOMINATION REFERRED TO COMMITTEE On request by Senator RICHARD BLUMENTHAL , under the authority of S. Res. 116, 112th Congress, the following nomination was referred to the Com-mittee on Veterans’ Affairs: Richard Topping, of Ohio, to be Chief Financial Officer, Department of Veterans Af-fairs. 

f

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES The following reports of committees were submitted: By Mr. GRAHAM, from the Committee on the Budget, without amendment: S. Con. Res. 7. An original concurrent reso-lution setting forth the congressional budget for the United States Government for fiscal year 2025 and setting forth the appropriate budgetary levels for fiscal years 2026 through 2034. By Mr. PAUL, from the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Af-fairs, without amendment: S. Res. 77. An original resolution author-izing expenditures by the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Af-fairs. By Mr. GRAHAM, from the Committee on the Budget, without amendment: S. Res. 78. An original resolution author-izing expenditures by the Committee on the Budget. 

f

EXECUTIVE REPORT OF COMMITTEE The following executive report of anomination was submitted: By Mr. GRASSLEY for the Committee on the Judiciary. Kashyap Patel, of Nevada, to be Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation for aterm of ten years. (Nominations without an asterisk were reported with the recommenda-tion that they be confirmed.) 

f

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS AND JOINT RESOLUTIONS The following bills and joint resolu-tions were introduced, read the first and second times by unanimous con-sent, and referred as indicated: By Mr. SCOTT of South Carolina (for himself, Ms. R OSEN , Mr. LANKFORD ,Mr. S CHUMER , Mr. G RAHAM , Mr. B LUMENTHAL , Mr. S COTT of Florida, Ms. H ASSAN , Ms. C OLLINS , Mrs. G ILLI -BRAND , Mrs. C APITO , Mr. G ALLEGO ,Mr. B ARRASSO , Mr. H ICKENLOOPER ,Mr. C RAPO , Mr. W YDEN , Mrs. B RITT ,Mr. C OONS , Mr. C ORNYN , Ms. C ORTEZ M ASTO , Mr. C OTTON , Mr. B ENNET , Mr. BOOZMAN , Ms. C ANTWELL , Mr. R ICKETTS , Mr. FETTERMAN , Mr. G RASSLEY , Mr. S CHIFF , Mr. C RAMER ,Ms. S LOTKIN , Mrs. H YDE -S MITH , Mr. W ARNER , Mrs. F ISCHER , Mr. P ETERS ,Mr. D AINES , and Mr. B OOKER ): S. 558. A bill to provide for the consider-ation of a definition of antisemitism set forth by the International Holocaust Rembrance Alliance for the enforcement of Federal antidiscrimination laws concerning education programs or activities, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions. By Mrs. CAPITO: S. 559. A bill to amend the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 to permanently extend the allowance for depreciation, amortization, or depletion for purposes of determining the in-come limitation on the deduction for busi-ness interest; to the Committee on Finance. By Mr. GRASSLEY (for himself, Ms. CORTEZ M ASTO , Mr. S COTT of Florida, Mr. K ING , Ms. C OLLINS , Ms. H ASSAN ,and Mr. R ICKETTS ): S. 560. A bill to amend title 18, United States Code, to reauthorize and expand the National Threat Assessment Center of the Department of Homeland Security; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By Mr. LEE (for himself, Mr. C RAMER ,and Mrs. B RITT ):         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G13FE6.018 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S971 February 13, 2025 

S. 561. A bill to amend the Food and Nutri-tion Act of 2008 to require the Secretary to designate food and food products to be made available under the supplemental nutrition assistance program, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry. By Mr. HEINRICH (for himself and Mr. L UJA ´ N): S. 562. A bill to approve the settlement of water rights claims of the Pueblos of Acoma and Laguna in the Rio San Jose Stream Sys-tem and the Pueblos of Jemez and Zia in the Rio Jemez Stream System in the State of New Mexico, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Indian Affairs. By Mr. HEINRICH (for himself and Mr. LUJA ´ N): S. 563. A bill to approve the settlement of water rights claims of Ohkay Owingeh in the Rio Chama Stream System, to restore the Bosque on Pueblo Land in the State of New Mexico, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on Indian Affairs. By Mr. HEINRICH (for himself and Mr. LUJA ´ N): S. 564. A bill to approve the settlement of water rights claims of the Zuni Indian Tribe in the Zuni River Stream System in the State of New Mexico, to protect the Zuni Salt Lake, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Indian Affairs. By Mr. HEINRICH (for himself and Mr. LUJA ´ N): S. 565. A bill to approve the settlement of water rights claims of the Navajo Nation in the Rio San Jose Stream System in the State of New Mexico, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Indian Affairs. By Mr. HICKENLOOPER (for himself, Mr. L ANKFORD , Mr. B ENNET , and Mr. C URTIS ): S. 566. A bill to amend the Disaster Recov-ery Reform Act of 2018 to require the Presi-dent to automatically waive certain critical document fees for individuals and households affected by major disasters for which assist-ance is provided under the Individuals and Households program; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Af-fairs. By Mr. WHITEHOUSE (for himself, Mr. GRAHAM , Mr. R EED , Mr. C ASSIDY , Mr. B LUMENTHAL , Ms. H IRONO , Mr. H OEVEN , Mr. K AINE , Mr. K ING , Ms. KLOBUCHAR , Mrs. S HAHEEN , Mr. B EN -NET , Ms. S MITH , Mr. F ETTERMAN , and Mr. H EINRICH ): S. 567. A bill to award a Congressional Gold Medal, collectively, to the First Rhode Is-land Regiment, in recognition of their dedi-cated service during the Revolutionary War; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs. By Mr. BENNET (for himself and Mr. H ICKENLOOPER ): S. 568. A bill to authorize compensation to individuals, organizations, and companies impacted by the Gold King Mine wastewater spill of 2015, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By Ms. LUMMIS (for herself, Ms. H AS -SAN , Mr. B ARRASSO , and Mrs. S HA -HEEN ): S. 569. A bill to limit the closure or con-solidation of any United States Postal Serv-ice processing and distribution center in States, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on Homeland Security and Govern-mental Affairs. By Mr. KELLY (for himself and Mr. CRAMER ): S. 570. A bill to amend the Water Infra-structure Finance and Innovation Act of 2014 to establish payment and performance secu-rity requirements for projects, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works. By Mr. CRUZ (for himself, Mr. C ASSIDY ,Mr. C RAMER , Mr. J USTICE , and Mr. LANKFORD ): S. 571. A bill to require benefit eligibility determination to be made within a certain period of time; to the Committee on the Ju-diciary. By Mr. GALLEGO (for himself, Mr. K ELLY , Mr. H OEVEN , and Mr. L ANKFORD ): S. 572. A bill to enhance the effectiveness of the Shadow Wolves Program, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Home-land Security and Governmental Affairs. By Ms. MURKOWSKI (for herself and Mr. S ULLIVAN ): S. 573. A bill to designate a mountain in the State of Alaska as Denali; to the Com-mittee on Energy and Natural Resources. By Mr. WICKER (for himself, Mr. C OONS , Mr. F ETTERMAN , Mr. G RAHAM ,Mr. O SSOFF , Mr. R ICKETTS , Ms. S MITH , Mr. TILLIS , Mr. TUBERVILLE ,Mr. V AN H OLLEN , Mr. B OOZMAN , Mr. C ORNYN , Mrs. H YDE -S MITH , Ms. B LUNT ROCHESTER , and Mr. P ADILLA ): S. 574. A bill to amend the Animal Health Protection Act to provide compensation for poultry growers and layers in control areas, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry. By Mr. MERKLEY (for himself and Ms. L UMMIS ): S. 575. A bill to amend titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act to increase access to services provided by advanced practice registered nurses under the Medicare and Medicaid programs, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finance. By Mr. MARSHALL (for himself, Mrs. HYDE -S MITH , Ms. L UMMIS , and Mr. WICKER ): S. 576. A bill to prohibit the flying, drap-ing, or other display of any flag other than the flag of the United States at covered pub-lic buildings, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By Mr. KENNEDY (for himself, Mrs. CAPITO , Mr. PETERS , and Mr. W ARNOCK ): S. 577. A bill to amend the Securities Ex-change Act of 1934 to expand access to cap-ital for rural-area small businesses, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Bank-ing, Housing, and Urban Affairs. By Mr. LANKFORD (for himself, Mr. K ELLY , and Mr. C ORNYN ): S. 578. A bill to pilot the use of image tech-nician positions in the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Office of Field Operations; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. By Mr. DURBIN (for himself, Mr. D AINES , Mr. S CHUMER , Ms. M UR -KOWSKI , Mr. YOUNG , and Mr. P ADILLA ): S. 579. A bill to amend the National Quan-tum Initiative Act to provide for a research, development, and demonstration program, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. By Mr. PETERS (for himself, Ms. L UM -MIS , and Mr. C URTIS ): S. 580. A bill to require the Secretary of Commerce to provide training and guidance relating to human rights abuses, including such abuses perpetrated against the Uyghur population by the Government of the Peo-ple’s Republic of China, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. By Mrs. GILLIBRAND (for herself, Ms. C OLLINS , and Mrs. S HAHEEN ): S. 581. A bill to amend the Agricultural Marketing Act of 1946 with respect to man-datory reporting of dairy products proc-essing costs; to the Committee on Agri-culture, Nutrition, and Forestry. By Mr. CRUZ (for himself and Mr. P ETERS ): S. 582. A bill to provide for the authorized use of Federal vehicle transportation by cer-tain astronauts; to the Committee on Com-merce, Science, and Transportation. By Mr. LEE: S. 583. A bill to amend chapter 9 of title 5, United States Code, to reauthorize the exec-utive reorganization authority of the Presi-dent and to ensure efficient executive reor-ganization, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Homeland Security and Gov-ernmental Affairs. By Mrs. GILLIBRAND (for herself and Mrs. B LACKBURN ): S. 584. A bill to amend the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 to exclude from gross in-come any judgements, awards, and settle-ments with respect to sexual assault or sex-ual harassment claims, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on Finance. By Mr. KING (for himself, Mr. R OUNDS ,Mr. C RAMER , and Ms. D UCKWORTH ): S. 585. A bill to amend title 38, United States Code, to establish a pre-transition health care registration process to facilitate enrollment in the patient enrollment system of the Department of Veterans Affairs by members of the Armed Forces who are sepa-rating from the Armed Forces, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Veterans’ Af-fairs. By Mr. CASSIDY (for himself and Mr. B OOKER ): S. 586. A bill to amend the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 to provide an advance re-fundable credit to offset certain flood insur-ance premiums, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finance. By Mr. THUNE (for himself, Mr. GRASSLEY , Mr. L ANKFORD , Mrs. H YDE -S MITH , Mr. H AGERTY , Mr. D AINES , Mr. TUBERVILLE , Mr. S HEEHY , Mr. J OHN -SON , Mr. M ULLIN , Mrs. C APITO , Mr. J USTICE , Mr. C ORNYN , Mr. W ICKER ,Mr. SCOTT of South Carolina, Mrs. BLACKBURN , Mr. TILLIS , Mr. BUDD ,Mr. C RAPO , Mr. H OEVEN , Mr. B AR -RASSO , Mr. R ISCH , Mr. B OOZMAN , Ms. E RNST , Mr. MORAN , Mr. MARSHALL ,Mr. C RAMER , Mr. R ICKETTS , Mr. SCOTT of Florida, Mr. K ENNEDY , Mr. R OUNDS , Ms. L UMMIS , Mrs. F ISCHER ,Mr. G RAHAM , Mr. M CC ORMICK , Mrs. B RITT , Mr. Y OUNG , Mr. C OTTON , Mr. M CC ONNELL , Mr. B ANKS , Mr. C URTIS ,Mr. S CHMITT , Mr. L EE , Mr. H AWLEY ,Mr. C RUZ , and Mr. M ORENO ): S. 587. A bill to amend the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 to repeal the estate and generation-skipping transfer taxes, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Fi-nance. By Mr. WYDEN (for himself, Ms. K LO -BUCHAR , Mr. K AINE , Ms. W ARREN , Mr. MERKLEY , Mr. WHITEHOUSE , Mr. SANDERS , Ms. C ANTWELL , and Mr. V AN H OLLEN ): S. 588. A bill to amend the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 to provide for examination and disclosure with respect to Presidential income tax returns, to amend the chapter 131 of title 5, United States Code, to require the disclosure of certain tax returns by Presi-dents and certain candidates for the office of the President, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finance. By Ms. WARREN (for herself, Mr. M ERKLEY , Mrs. M URRAY , Mr. SAND -ERS , Mr. W ELCH , Mr. W YDEN , Mr. BLUMENTHAL , Ms. H IRONO , Mr. B OOK -ER , Mr. M ARKEY , Ms. C ORTEZ M ASTO ,and Mr. D URBIN ): S. 589. A bill to prohibit disinformation in the advertising of abortion services, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Com-merce, Science, and Transportation. 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.015 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S972 February 13, 2025 

By Mr. SCHATZ: S. 590. A bill to require the Under Sec-retary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmos-phere to maintain the National Mesonet Pro-gram, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on Commerce, Science, and Transpor-tation. By Mr. SCOTT of Florida (for himself, Mrs. B LACKBURN , Mrs. H YDE -S MITH ,and Mr. T UBERVILLE ): S. 591. A bill to reform the Federal hiring process, to restore merit to Government service, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on Homeland Security and Govern-mental Affairs. By Mr. RISCH (for himself, Mr. C RAPO ,Mr. H ICKENLOOPER , Mr. K ENNEDY , and Mr. Y OUNG ): S. 592. A bill to amend the Small Business Act to require that plain writing statements regarding the solicitation of subcontractors be included in certain subcontracting plans, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship. By Mrs. FISCHER (for herself, Ms. D UCKWORTH , Mrs. C APITO , Ms. K LO -BUCHAR , Mr. T HUNE , Mr. R ICKETTS ,Mr. D URBIN , Mr. M ORAN , Mr. M AR -SHALL , Mr. G RASSLEY , Ms. E RNST , Ms. B ALDWIN , Ms. S MITH , and Mr. ROUNDS ): S. 593. A bill to amend the Clean Air Act to modify Reid Vapor Pressure requirements and to provide for the return of certain re-tired credits, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works. By Mr. PETERS (for himself and Mr. K ENNEDY ): S. 594. A bill to amend the Post-Katrina Management Reform Act of 2006 to repeal certain obsolete requirements, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Homeland Se-curity and Governmental Affairs. By Mr. MURPHY (for himself, Ms. B ALDWIN , Mr. B LUMENTHAL , Mr. B OOKER , Ms. KLOBUCHAR , Mr. S CHATZ ,Mr. S CHIFF , and Mr. V AN H OLLEN ): S. 595. A bill to establish the Office of Gun Violence Prevention, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary. By Mr. HICKENLOOPER (for himself, Mr. G RAHAM , Mr. COONS , and Mr. Y OUNG ): S. 596. A bill to establish a pilot program to support domestic critical material proc-essing, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on Energy and Natural Resources. By Mr. PADILLA (for himself, Mr. BLUMENTHAL , Mr. B OOKER , Mr. C OONS ,Ms. D UCKWORTH , Mr. D URBIN , Mrs. G ILLIBRAND , Ms. H IRONO , Mr. K AINE ,Ms. K LOBUCHAR , Mr. M URPHY , Mrs. MURRAY , Mr. R EED , Mr. S ANDERS , Mr. SCHATZ , Mr. S CHIFF , Ms. W ARREN , Mr. W HITEHOUSE , and Mr. W YDEN ): S. 597. A bill to amend title 18, United States Code, to prohibit the purchase of cer-tain firearms by individuals under 21 years of age, and for other purposes; to the Com-mittee on the Judiciary. By Mr. HICKENLOOPER (for himself and Mr. T ILLIS ): S. 598. A bill to establish a mineral and mining innovation program within the De-partment of Energy to advance domestic mineral resources, economic growth, and na-tional security, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Re-sources. By Mr. WELCH (for himself, Mr. P ADILLA , Ms. CORTEZ M ASTO , Ms. H IRONO , Mrs. S HAHEEN , Ms. S MITH ,Mr. W YDEN , and Mr. B OOKER ): S. 599. A bill to amend title 38, United States Code, to increase the mileage rate of-fered by the Department of Veterans Affairs through their Beneficiary Travel program for health related travel, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on Veterans’ Af-fairs. By Ms. KLOBUCHAR (for herself and Mr. C RAMER ): S. 600. A bill to enhance pre- and post-adoption support services, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on Finance. By Mr. PAUL (for himself and Mr. M CC ONNELL ): S. 601. A bill to remove restrictions from a parcel of land in Paducah, Kentucky; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Re-sources. By Mr. PADILLA (for himself, Ms. H IRONO , Mr. M ORAN , and Mr. L ANKFORD ): S. 602. A bill to amend the Food, Agri-culture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 to support research and development of ungulate grazing land management tech-niques for purposes of wildfire mitigation, fuel reduction, and post-fire recovery; to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry. By Mr. KAINE (for himself and Mr. W ARNER ): S. 603. A bill to designate the General George C. Marshall House in the Common-wealth of Virginia, as an affiliated area of the National Park System, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. By Ms. KLOBUCHAR (for herself and Mr. C RAMER ): S. 604. A bill to amend the adoption oppor-tunities program to define unregulated cus-tody transfers of children and to improve awareness and prevention of such transfers, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions. By Mr. SCOTT of South Carolina (for himself, Mr. R OUNDS , Mr. H AGERTY ,Mr. C RAPO , Mr. T ILLIS , Mr. C RAMER ,Mrs. B RITT , Mr. M ORAN , Mr. R ISCH ,Mr. B OOZMAN , Mr. W ICKER , Ms. L UM -MIS , Mr. R ICKETTS , and Mr. M ORENO ): S.J. Res. 18. A joint resolution dis-approving the rule submitted by the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection relating to ‘‘Overdraft Lending: Very Large Financial Institutions’’; to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs. By Mr. KENNEDY: S.J. Res. 19. A joint resolution providing for congressional disapproval under chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code, of the rule submitted by the Environmental Protection Agency relating to ‘‘Trichloroethylene (TCE); Regulation Under the Toxic Sub-stances Control Act (TSCA)’’; to the Com-mittee on Environment and Public Works. 

f

SUBMISSION OF CONCURRENT AND SENATE RESOLUTIONS The following concurrent resolutions and Senate resolutions were read, and referred (or acted upon), as indicated: By Mr. PAUL: S. Res. 77. An original resolution author-izing expenditures by the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Af-fairs; from the Committee on Homeland Se-curity and Governmental Affairs; to the Committee on Rules and Administration. By Mr. GRAHAM: S. Res. 78. An original resolution author-izing expenditures by the Committee on the Budget; from the Committee on the Budget; to the Committee on Rules and Administra-tion. By Mr. SCOTT of Florida (for himself and Mrs. M OODY ): S. Res. 79. A resolution honoring the memories of the victims of the senseless at-tack at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School on February 14, 2018; considered and agreed to. By Mr. ROUNDS (for himself, Mr. T HUNE , Mr. B ARRASSO , Mr. L ANKFORD ,Mr. C OTTON , Mrs. C APITO , Mr. S COTT of South Carolina, Mrs. F ISCHER , Ms. LUMMIS , Mr. Y OUNG , Mr. T ILLIS , Mr. J USTICE , Mr. R ICKETTS , Ms. M UR -KOWSKI , Mr. MCC ONNELL , Mr. BOOZ -MAN , Mr. M ORAN , Mr. W ICKER , Mrs. BLACKBURN , Mr. CRAPO , Mr. R ISCH ,Mr. M ULLIN , Mr. G RAHAM , Ms. C ORTEZ MASTO , Mr. K ING , Mr. HICKENLOOPER ,Mr. G ALLEGO , Mrs. MURRAY , Mr. K IM ,Mr. R EED , Ms. B LUNT R OCHESTER , Mr. DURBIN , Mr. B OOKER , Mr. C OONS , Mr. BENNET , Mr. S CHUMER , Ms. K LO -BUCHAR , Mr. LUJA ´ N, Mr. W HITEHOUSE ,Mrs. S HAHEEN , Mr. B LUMENTHAL , Mr. WARNOCK , Mr. PETERS , Ms. R OSEN ,and Mr. K ELLY ): S. Res. 80. A resolution expressing grati-tude to the Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies, the Architect of the Capitol, the Sergeant at Arms, the Sec-retary of the Senate, law enforcement offi-cers, emergency personnel, and volunteers for their support in making the Presidential Inauguration a success; considered and agreed to. By Mr. RICKETTS (for himself, Mr. C ORNYN , Mr. B ARRASSO , Mrs. C APITO ,Mrs. BLACKBURN , Mr. JUSTICE , Mr. HAGERTY , Mr. S HEEHY , Mr. S ULLIVAN ,Ms. L UMMIS , Mr. C RAPO , Mrs. F ISCH -ER , Mr. C RUZ , and Mr. Y OUNG ): S. Res. 81. A resolution calling on the United Kingdom, France, and Germany (E3) to initiate the snapback of sanctions on Iran under United Nations Security Council Reso-lution 2231 (2015); to the Committee on For-eign Relations. By Mr. GRAHAM: S. Con. Res. 7. An original concurrent reso-lution setting forth the congressional budget for the United States Government for fiscal year 2025 and setting forth the appropriate budgetary levels for fiscal years 2026 through 2034; from the Committee on the Budget; placed on the calendar. 

f

ADDITIONAL COSPONSORS S. 187 At the request of Mr. L ANKFORD , the name of the Senator from Montana (Mr. S HEEHY ) was added as a cosponsor of S. 187, a bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to permanently allow a tax deduction at the time an investment in qualified property is made. S. 199 At the request of Mr. CRAPO , the names of the Senator from Hawaii (Ms. HIRONO ), the Senator from Oklahoma (Mr. LANKFORD ), the Senator from Michigan (Mr. P ETERS ) and the Senator from Georgia (Mr. WARNOCK ) were added as cosponsors of S. 199, a bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide special rules for the tax-ation of certain residents of Taiwan with income from sources within the United States. S. 226 At the request of Mr. SHEEHY , the names of the Senator from Tennessee (Mr. HAGERTY ) and the Senator from Alabama (Mr. T UBERVILLE ) were added as cosponsors of S. 226, a bill to require a strategy to oppose financial or mate-rial support by foreign countries and 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.017 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S973 February 13, 2025 

nongovernmental organizations to the Taliban, and for other purposes. S. 317 At the request of Mr. L ANKFORD, the name of the Senator from North Caro-lina (Mr. B UDD ) was added as a cospon-sor of S. 317, a bill to amend the Inter-nal Revenue Code of 1986 to modify and extend the deduction for charitable contributions for individuals not itemizing deductions. S. 334 At the request of Mr. RISCH, the name of the Senator from Indiana (Mr. YOUNG) was added as a cosponsor of S. 334, a bill to permanently enact certain appropriations Act restrictions on the use of funds for abortions and involun-tary sterilizations, and for other pur-poses. S. 380 At the request of Ms. HASSAN , the name of the Senator from West Vir-ginia (Mrs. C APITO) was added as a co-sponsor of S. 380, a bill to improve ob-stetric emergency care. S. 383 At the request of Mr. KAINE , the names of the Senator from Nebraska (Mr. RICKETTS ) and the Senator from Idaho (Mr. RISCH ) were added as co-sponsors of S. 383, a bill to extend Fed-eral Pell Grant eligibility of certain short-term programs. S. 424 At the request of Mrs. BRITT , the names of the Senator from Tennessee (Mr. HAGERTY ) and the Senator from Idaho (Mr. CRAPO) were added as co-sponsors of S. 424, a bill to amend the Federal securities laws to enhance 403(b) plans, and for other purposes. S. 455 At the request of Mr. BLUMENTHAL ,the names of the Senator from New Mexico (Mr. LUJA ´ N) and the Senator from Oregon (Mr. M ERKLEY ) were added as cosponsors of S. 455, a bill to amend section 287 of the Immigration and Na-tionality Act to limit immigration en-forcement actions at sensitive loca-tions, to clarify the powers of immigra-tion officers at sensitive locations, and for other purposes. S. 498 At the request of Mr. BOOKER , the name of the Senator from Massachu-setts (Mr. M ARKEY ) was added as a co-sponsor of S. 498, a bill to post-humously award a Congressional Gold Medal, collectively, to the African Americans who served with Union forces during the Civil War, in recogni-tion of their bravery and outstanding service. S. 537 At the request of Mr. DAINES, the name of the Senator from Indiana (Mr. BANKS) was added as a cosponsor of S. 537, a bill to prohibit the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agri-culture from prohibiting the use of lead ammunition or tackle on certain Fed-eral land or water under the jurisdic-tion of the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture, and for other purposes. S. 540 At the request of Mr. TUBERVILLE ,the name of the Senator from Okla-homa (Mr. L ANKFORD ) was added as a cosponsor of S. 540, a bill to amend title 38, United States Code, to require the consideration of continuity of health care in determining best med-ical interest under the Veterans Com-munity Care Program, and for other purposes. S. 557 At the request of Mr. K ENNEDY , the name of the Senator from Nebraska (Mr. R ICKETTS ) was added as a cospon-sor of S. 557, a bill to repeal the small business loan data collection require-ments under the Equal Credit Oppor-tunity Act. S. RES . 53 At the request of Mr. YOUNG , the names of the Senator from West Vir-ginia (Mr. J USTICE), the Senator from South Dakota (Mr. ROUNDS ) and the Senator from California (Mr. SCHIFF )were added as cosponsors of S. Res. 53, a resolution recognizing the 80th anni-versary of the amphibious landing on the Japanese island of Iwo Jima during World War II and the raisings of the flag of the United States on Mount Suribachi. S. RES . 68 At the request of Mr. KAINE , the name of the Senator from Rhode Island (Mr. R EED ) was added as a cosponsor of S. Res. 68, a resolution expressing the sense of the Senate that the United States shall not deploy United States military assets or personnel to Gaza for purposes of ‘‘taking over’’ Gaza. 

f

STATEMENTS ON INTRODUCED BILLS AND JOINT RESOLUTIONS By Mr. SCOTT of South Carolina (for himself, Ms. ROSEN, Mr. LANKFORD , Mr. SCHUMER, Mr. GRAHAM , Mr. B LUMENTHAL , Mr. SCOTT of Florida, Ms. H ASSAN, Ms. COLLINS , Mrs. GILLIBRAND ,Mrs. C APITO , Mr. G ALLEGO , Mr. B ARRASSO , Mr. HICKENLOOPER ,Mr. CRAPO, Mr. WYDEN , Mrs. BRITT , Mr. C OONS, Mr. C ORNYN ,Ms. C ORTEZ MASTO , Mr. C OTTON, Mr. B ENNET , Mr. B OOZMAN , Ms. CANTWELL , Mr. RICKETTS , Mr. FETTERMAN , Mr. G RASSLEY, Mr. SCHIFF , Mr. CRAMER , Ms. SLOTKIN , Mrs. H YDE -S MITH , Mr. WARNER , Mrs. FISCHER, Mr. PETERS, Mr. DAINES , and Mr. BOOKER ): S. 558. A bill to provide for the con-sideration of a definition of anti-semitism set forth by the International Holocaust Rembrance Alliance for the enforcement of Federal antidiscrimina-tion laws concerning education pro-grams or activities, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions. Mr. SCOTT of South Carolina. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the text of the bill be printed in the R ECORD. There being no objection, the text of the bill was ordered to be printed in the R ECORD , as follows: S. 558 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Rep-resentatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, 

> SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Anti-semitism Awareness Act of 2025’’. 

> SEC. 2. SENSE OF CONGRESS.

It is the sense of Congress that— (1) title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), prohibits discrimina-tion on the basis of race, color, and national origin in programs and activities receiving Federal financial assistance; (2) while such title does not cover discrimi-nation based solely on religion, individuals who face discrimination based on actual or perceived shared ancestry or ethnic charac-teristics do not lose protection under such title for also being members of a group that share a common religion; (3) discrimination against Jews may give rise to a violation of such title when the dis-crimination is based on race, color, or na-tional origin, which can include discrimina-tion based on actual or perceived shared an-cestry or ethnic characteristics; (4) it is the policy of the United States to enforce such title against prohibited forms of discrimination rooted in antisemitism as vigorously as against all other forms of dis-crimination prohibited by such title; and (5) as noted in the U.S. National Strategy to Counter Antisemitism issued by the White House on May 25, 2023, it is critical to— (A) increase awareness and understanding of antisemitism, including its threat to America; (B) improve safety and security for Jewish communities; (C) reverse the normalization of anti-semitism and counter antisemitic discrimi-nation; and (D) expand communication and collabora-tion between communities. 

> SEC. 3. FINDINGS.

Congress finds the following: (1) Antisemitism is on the rise in the United States and is impacting Jewish stu-dents in K–12 schools, colleges, and univer-sities. (2) The International Holocaust Remem-brance Alliance (referred to in this Act as the ‘‘IHRA’’) Working Definition of Anti-semitism is a vital tool which helps individ-uals understand and identify the various manifestations of antisemitism. (3) On December 11, 2019, Executive Order 13899 extended protections against discrimi-nation under the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to individuals subjected to antisemitism on col-lege and university campuses and tasked Federal agencies to consider the IHRA Work-ing Definition of Antisemitism when enforc-ing title VI of such Act. (4) Since 2018, the Department of Edu-cation has used the IHRA Working Defini-tion of Antisemitism when investigating vio-lations of that title VI. (5) The use of alternative definitions of antisemitism impairs enforcement efforts by adding multiple standards and may fail to identify many of the modern manifestations of antisemitism. (6) The White House released the first-ever United States National Strategy to Counter Antisemitism on May 25, 2023, making clear that the fight against this hate is a national, bipartisan priority that must be successfully conducted through a whole-of-government-and-society approach. 

> SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.

For purposes of this Act, the term ‘‘defini-tion of antisemitism’’—         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.020 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S974 February 13, 2025                                                   

> (1) means the definition of antisemitism adopted on May 26, 2016, by the IHRA, of which the United States is a member, which definition has been adopted by the Depart-ment of State; and (2) includes the ‘‘[c]ontemporary examples of antisemitism’’ identified in the IHRA defi-nition.
> SEC. 5. RULE OF CONSTRUCTION FOR TITLE VI OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964.
> In reviewing, investigating, or deciding whether there has been a violation of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.) on the basis of race, color, or na-tional origin, based on an individual’s actual or perceived shared Jewish ancestry or Jew-ish ethnic characteristics, the Department of Education shall take into consideration the definition of antisemitism as part of the De-partment’s assessment of whether the prac-tice was motivated by antisemitic intent.
> SEC. 6. OTHER RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
> (a) GENERAL RULE OF CONSTRUCTION .— Nothing in this Act shall be construed— (1) to expand the authority of the Sec-retary of Education; (2) to alter the standards pursuant to which the Department of Education makes a determination that harassing conduct amounts to actionable discrimination; or (3) to diminish or infringe upon the rights protected under any other provision of law that is in effect as of the date of enactment of this Act. (b) C ONSTITUTIONAL PROTECTIONS .—Nothing in this Act shall be construed to diminish or infringe upon any right protected under the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.

By Ms. MURKOWSKI (for herself and Mr. S ULLIVAN ): S. 573. A bill to designate a mountain in the State of Alaska as Denali; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Re-sources. Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, Irise today to speak about a century-long dispute. A hundred years plus, there has been a dispute about the Fed-eral designation of North America’s tallest mountain. It is a pretty majes-tic picture, but it does nothing to real-ly convey the amazing grandeur of Denali. It is majestic. It is breath-taking. It is something that as Alas-kans and as a lifelong Alaskan, there is not a day when I am able to see Denali and just say—just kind of breathe deep, because it is that extraordinary. And in my hometown of Anchorage, we are about 250 miles away from Denali, and on clear days, when you are on the road, just about a mile from my house, just a little bit of elevation, you can see the mountain. And we talk about it that way. We say: She is out. The mountain is out today. The big one is out today. It is an extraordinary gift from God, really. Snow-blanketed crevasses, the ridges are just gleaming in the sun. How this mountain connects earth to sky beyond, it is just extraordinary. And, again, this picture is beautiful— obviously, on a summer day. There is never a time when she is not covered in snow, but Denali can also be one of the coldest, most treacherous places on Earth. It has storms in the middle of winter. You expect that. But it has storms in the middle of July that obey no rules. It has its own rules. Denali creates its own weather. It literally creates its own weather. I had an opportunity to go up on Ruth Glacier on my birthday. My birthday happens to be the end of May. It was going to be an extraordinary big-ticket item—it was a big-ticket item, but we were chased off that mountain after about 40 minutes be-cause the weather which, when we had arrived at the mountain, was pretty great, and in 40 minutes, she was shut-ting down, and we were either going to be spending the night there, which was not prime condition to do, or we were getting off in order to get out safely. You respect her. But it is a place where you respect the nature around you because what can be that perfect day can descend with wind and snow into chaos. It falls on you so quickly, you can’t see your own footprints in the snow. The lives that have been lost and the legends of the stories told remain, but no matter what happens with the weather, as transitory as all that is, Denali stands resilient and true. For centuries, the Koyukon Athabascans have lived, they have hunted, they have foraged, they have loved, they have died, they have sur-vived in the shadow of this great moun-tain. They have been on the waterways, in the valleys, on the hills, and in the ridges. Alaska Natives have persevered in one of the most challenging cli-mates, and they have done so in har-mony with the food supply and the sur-roundings around them. Denali is Koyukon for ‘‘the Great One,’’ for ‘‘the Great One.’’ This is how Native people have always known it, and as the great witness of untold sto-ries from their ancestors. The very first-ever map to label the mountain read ‘‘Tenada,’’ and this is a transcription of Denali—again, the Great One. The first mountaineers to summit the peak called it Denali. It is inter-esting to note that the first individual to actually summit was not the moun-taineers who had paid for the climb, but it was the Alaskan Native guide who took them safely and successfully to the top. But it is the same Native people, those same mountaineers that were baffled that anyone would dare to modify the original Native name. And yet, in 1917, the mountain was not named Denali. And there is a fair amount of legend that comes with that as well, that there was a trapper who came out of the woods—this was during the early days of the President McKin-ley administration—and he said: Out of respect, let’s honor the new President. But much like Native lands, health, and culture, you just don’t come in and say we are going to disregard, we are going to disrespect the rightful name, the name that had been in place for generations, for thousands of years. And so since that time in 1917, the U.S. Board on Geographic Names has received over 20,000 letters and signa-tures, most of them—the vast majority of them calling for the name Denali to be restored. This massive mountain commands a reverent name, a steadfast name—not the name of an individual, a person who comes and goes, who may have had an impact for a brief moment in time. But this is ageless, timeless. The Great One, 20,310 feet tall, the tallest mountain in North America. So when you have something that is that sig-nificant, that is that connected as part of the land in ways that are beyond just a mere name—but, again, a rev-erence with which you speak of this piece of land, this geography. When Alaskans leave our home State and boast to outsiders, whether spin-ning a globe or just talking about it, we say: That is Denali. That is the Great One. She is out today. So that is why today I have intro-duced legislation that would officially restore the federally recognized name of this quintessential mountain as Denali. Now, this is not the first time I have done this. This is actually the fourth Congress that I have introduced this legislation. Maybe I am persistent; Ithink Alaskans are just very resilient, and we will continue to be. We will continue to be because this magnifi-cent mountain is something that each of us holds in our hearts, that we hold dear. For these last 100 years or so, we have continued to call our great moun-tain Denali, regardless, and will con-tinue to do that 100 years going for-ward. Denali existed before any person, and it will remain long after we are dust. So I share this with my colleagues today, letting you know that we put this legislation out there. My introduc-tion follows on the actions of the Alas-ka State Legislature—both the house and the senate have moved a resolution urging us in Congress to move forward with this and officially restore the fed-erally recognized name, and so I am pleased to be able to begin that process today. By Mr. DURBIN (for himself, Mr. DAINES , Mr. S CHUMER , Ms. M UR -KOWSKI , Mr. YOUNG, and Mr. PADILLA ): S. 579. A bill to amend the National Quantum Initiative Act to provide for a research, development, and dem-onstration program, and for other pur-poses; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the text of the bill be printed in the R ECORD .There being no objection, the text of the bill was ordered to be printed in the R ECORD , as follows: S. 579         

> Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Rep-resentatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
> SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
> This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Department of Energy Quantum Leadership Act of 2025’’.
> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.021 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S975 February 13, 2025   

> SEC. 2. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY QUANTUM IN-FORMATION SCIENCE RESEARCH PROGRAM.

Section 401 of the National Quantum Ini-tiative Act (15 U.S.C. 8851) is amended— (1) by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following: ‘‘(a) IN G ENERAL .—The Secretary of Energy shall carry out a research, development, and demonstration program on quantum infor-mation science, engineering, and tech-nology.’’; (2) in subsection (b)— (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ‘‘, engi-neering, and technology’’ after ‘‘science’’; (B) in paragraph (2), by inserting ‘‘, engi-neering, and technology’’ after ‘‘science’’; (C) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following: ‘‘(3) provide research experiences and training for additional undergraduate and graduate students in quantum information science, engineering, and technology, includ-ing in the fields specified in paragraph (4);’’; (D) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (5) as paragraphs (5) through (7), re-spectively; (E) by inserting after paragraph (2) the fol-lowing: ‘‘(3) operate National Quantum Informa-tion Science Research Centers under section 402 to accelerate and scale scientific and technical breakthroughs in quantum infor-mation science, engineering, and technology, and maintain state-of-the-art infrastructure for quantum researchers and industry part-ners; ‘‘(4) conduct cooperative basic and applied research with industry, National Labora-tories, institutions of higher education, and other research institutions to facilitate the development, demonstration, and commer-cial application of quantum information science, engineering, and technology prior-ities, as determined by the Secretary of En-ergy, including in the fields of— ‘‘(A) quantum information theory; ‘‘(B) quantum physics; ‘‘(C) quantum computational science, in-cluding hardware and software, machine learning, and data science; ‘‘(D) applied mathematics and algorithm development; ‘‘(E) quantum communications and net-working, including hardware and software for quantum communications and net-working; ‘‘(F) quantum sensing, imaging, and detec-tion; ‘‘(G) materials science and engineering; ‘‘(H) quantum modeling and simulation, in-cluding molecular modeling; ‘‘(I) near- and long-term application devel-opment, as determined by the Secretary of Energy; ‘‘(J) quantum chemistry; ‘‘(K) quantum biology; ‘‘(L) superconductive and high-perform-ance microelectronics; and ‘‘(M) quantum security technologies;’’; (F) in paragraph (6) (as so redesignated), in subparagraph (F), by striking ‘‘and’’ at the end; (G) in paragraph (7) (as so redesignated)— (i) by striking ‘‘and’’ before ‘‘potential’’; and (ii) by striking the period at the end and inserting ‘‘, and other relevant stakeholders, as determined by the Secretary of Energy; and’’; and (H) by adding at the end the following: ‘‘(8) leverage the collective body of knowl-edge and data, including experience and re-sources from existing Federal research ac-tivities and commercially available quantum computing hardware and software, to the ex-tent practicable.’’; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ‘‘(c) I NDUSTRY O UTREACH .—In carrying out the program under subsection (a), the Sec-retary of Energy shall engage with the quan-tum technology industry and promote com-mercialization of applications of quantum technology relevant to the activities of the Department of Energy by— ‘‘(1) educating— ‘‘(A) the energy industry on near-term and commercially available quantum tech-nologies; and ‘‘(B) the quantum industry on potential en-ergy applications; ‘‘(2) accelerating the advancements of United States quantum computing, commu-nications, networking, sensing, and security capabilities to protect and optimize the en-ergy sector; ‘‘(3) advancing relevant domestic supply chains, manufacturing capabilities, and asso-ciated simulations or modeling capabilities; ‘‘(4) facilitating commercialization of quantum technologies from National Lab-oratories and engaging with the Quantum Economic Development Consortium and other organizations, as applicable, to transi-tion component technologies that advance the development of a quantum supply chain; and ‘‘(5) to the extent practicable, ensuring in-dustry partner access, especially for small-and medium-sized businesses, to specialized quantum instrumentation, equipment, testbeds, and other infrastructure to design, prototype, and test novel quantum hardware and streamline user access to reduce costs and other administrative burdens. ‘‘(d) H IGH - PERFORMANCE C OMPUTING S TRA -TEGIC PLAN .— ‘‘(1) IN GENERAL .—Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this sub-section, the Secretary of Energy shall sub-mit to Congress a 10-year strategic plan to guide Federal programs in designing, ex-panding, and procuring hybrid, energy-effi-cient high-performance computing systems capable of integrating with a diverse set of accelerators, including quantum, artificial intelligence, and machine learning accelera-tors, to enable the computing facilities of the Department of Energy to advance na-tional computing resources. ‘‘(2) C ONTENTS .—The strategic plan under paragraph (1) shall include the following: ‘‘(A) A conceptual plan to leverage capa-bilities and infrastructure from the exascale computing program, as the Secretary of En-ergy determines necessary. ‘‘(B) A plan to minimize disruptions to the advanced scientific computing workforce. ‘‘(C) A consideration of a diversity of quan-tum computing modalities. ‘‘(D) A plan to integrate cloud access of commercially available quantum hardware and software to complement on-premises high-performance computing systems and re-sources consistent with the QUEST program established under section 404. ‘‘(e) E ARLY -STAGE Q UANTUM H IGH - PERFORM -ANCE C OMPUTING R ESEARCH AND D EVELOP -MENT P ROGRAM .— ‘‘(1) D EFINITION OF QUANTUM HIGH -PERFORM -ANCE COMPUTING .—In this subsection, the term ‘quantum high-performance computing’ means the use of classical high-performance computing systems with quantum processing units and hybrid quantum-classical algo-rithms to leverage the strength of computa-tional architectures and solve complex prob-lems. ‘‘(2) P ROGRAM .—The Secretary of Energy shall establish an early-stage research and development program in quantum high-per-formance computing— ‘‘(A) to inform the 10-year strategic plan described in subsection (d)(1); and ‘‘(B) to build the necessary scientific com-puting workforce to fulfill the objectives of that plan. ‘‘(3) A CTIVITIES .—The program established under paragraph (2) shall— ‘‘(A) support early-stage quantum super-computing testbeds and prototypes; and ‘‘(B) connect early-stage quantum high-performance computing projects to the Cen-ters funded under this Act. ‘‘(4) F UNDING .—Of funds made available under subsection (i)(1), the Secretary of En-ergy shall use not more than $20,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2026 through 2030 to carry out the activities under this subsection. ‘‘(f) S UPPLY C HAIN S TUDY .—Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this sub-section, the Secretary of Energy, in con-sultation with the Secretary of Commerce, shall conduct a study on quantum science, engineering, and technology supply chain needs, including— ‘‘(1) identifying hurdles to growth in the quantum industry by leveraging the exper-tise of relevant stakeholders in academia and industry, including the Quantum Eco-nomic Development Consortium; and ‘‘(2) making recommendations on how to strengthen the domestic supply of materials and technologies necessary for the develop-ment of a robust manufacturing base and workforce. ‘‘(g) T RAINEESHIP P ROGRAM .— ‘‘(1) I N GENERAL .—The Secretary of Energy shall establish a university-led traineeship program— ‘‘(A) to address workforce development needs in quantum information science, engi-neering, and technology; and ‘‘(B) that will focus on supporting in-creased participation, workforce develop-ment, and research experiences for underrep-resented undergraduate and graduate stu-dents. ‘‘(2) F UNDING .—Of funds made available under subsection (i)(1), the Secretary of En-ergy shall use not more than $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2026 through 2030 to carry out the activities under this subsection. ‘‘(h) C OORDINATION OF A CTIVITIES .—In car-rying out this section, the Secretary of En-ergy shall, to the maximum extent prac-ticable, coordinate with the Director of the National Science Foundation, the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, the Administrator of the Na-tional Aeronautics and Space Administra-tion, the Director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, and the heads of other relevant Federal departments and agencies to ensure that programs and activi-ties carried out under this section com-plement and do not duplicate existing efforts across the Federal government. ‘‘(i) F UNDING .— ‘‘(1) I N GENERAL .—Of amounts authorized to be appropriated for the Department of En-ergy, the Secretary of Energy shall use not more than $175,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2026 through 2030 to carry out activities under this section. ‘‘(2) RESTRICTIONS .— ‘‘(A) C ONFUCIUS INSTITUTE .—None of the funds made available under this subsection may be obligated to or expended by an insti-tution of higher education that maintains a contract or other agreement with a Confu-cius Institute or any successor of a Confu-cius Institute. ‘‘(B) F OREIGN COUNTRIES AND ENTITIES OF CONCERN .— ‘‘(i) D EFINITIONS .—In this subparagraph: ‘‘(I) F OREIGN COUNTRY OF CONCERN .—The term ‘foreign country of concern’ means— ‘‘(aa) a covered nation (as defined in sec-tion 4872(d) of title 10, United States Code); and         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.023 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S976 February 13, 2025 

‘‘(bb) any other country that the Secretary of Energy, in consultation with the Sec-retary of Defense, the Secretary of State, and the Director of National Intelligence, de-termines to be engaged in conduct that is detrimental to the national security or for-eign policy of the United States. ‘‘(II) F OREIGN ENTITY OF CONCERN .—The term ‘foreign entity of concern’ means a for-eign entity that— ‘‘(aa) is designated as a foreign terrorist organization by the Secretary of State under section 219(a) of the Immigration and Na-tionality Act (8 U.S.C. 1189(a)); ‘‘(bb) is included on the list of specially designated nationals and blocked persons maintained by the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the Department of the Treasury; ‘‘(cc) is owned by, controlled by, or subject to the jurisdiction or direction of a govern-ment of a foreign country that is a covered nation (as defined in section 4872(d) of title 10, United States Code); ‘‘(dd) is alleged by the Attorney General to have been involved in activities for which a conviction was obtained under— ‘‘(AA) chapter 37 of title 18, United States Code (commonly known as the ‘Espionage Act’); ‘‘(BB) section 951 or 1030 of title 18, United States Code; ‘‘(CC) chapter 90 of title 18, United States Code (commonly known as the ‘Economic Es-pionage Act of 1996’); ‘‘(DD) the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2751 et seq.); ‘‘(EE) section 224, 225, 226, 227, or 236 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2274, 2275, 2276, 2277, 2284); ‘‘(FF) the Export Control Reform Act of 2018 (50 U.S.C. 4801 et seq.); or ‘‘(GG) the International Emergency Eco-nomic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.); or ‘‘(ee) is determined by the Secretary of En-ergy, in consultation with the Secretary of Defense and the Director of National Intel-ligence, to be engaged in unauthorized con-duct that is detrimental to the national se-curity or foreign policy of the United States. ‘‘(ii) R ESTRICTION .—None of the funds made available under this subsection may be obli-gated or expended to promote, establish, or finance quantum research activities between a United States entity and a foreign country of concern or a foreign entity of concern.’’. 

> SEC. 3. DOE QUANTUM INSTRUMENTATION AND FOUNDRY PROGRAM.

The National Quantum Initiative Act is amended by inserting after section 401 (15 U.S.C. 8851) the following:   

> ‘‘SEC. 401A. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY QUANTUM INSTRUMENTATION AND FOUNDRY PROGRAM.

‘‘(a) IN G ENERAL .—The Secretary of Energy shall establish an instrumentation and infra-structure program to carry out the fol-lowing: ‘‘(1) Maintain United States leadership in quantum information science, engineering, and technology. ‘‘(2) Develop domestic quantum supply chains. ‘‘(3) Provide resources for the broader sci-entific community. ‘‘(4) Support activities carried out under sections 401, 402, 403, and 404. ‘‘(b) P ROGRAM COMPONENTS .—In carrying out the program under subsection (a), the Secretary of Energy shall— ‘‘(1) develop, design, build, purchase, and commercialize specialized equipment, lab-oratory infrastructure, and state-of-the-art instrumentation to advance quantum engi-neering research and the development of quantum component technologies at a scale sufficient to meet the needs of the scientific community and enable commercialization of quantum technology; ‘‘(2) leverage the capabilities of National Laboratories and Nanoscale Science Re-search Centers, including facilities and ex-perts that research and develop novel quan-tum materials and devices; and ‘‘(3) consider the technologies and end-use applications that have significant economic potential, as determined by the Secretary, based on consultation with relevant stake-holders in academia and industry, including the Quantum Economic Development Con-sortium. ‘‘(c) Q UANTUM FOUNDRIES .—In carrying out the program under subsection (a), and in co-ordination with institutions of higher edu-cation and industry, the Secretary of Energy shall support the development of quantum foundries focused on meeting the device, hardware, software, and materials needs of the scientific community and the quantum supply chain. ‘‘(d) C ONSULTATION .—In carrying out the program under subsection (a), the Secretary of Energy shall consult with the following entities to identify the instrumentation, equipment, infrastructure, and materials needed to support the objectives of that pro-gram: ‘‘(1) The National Institute of Standards and Technology. ‘‘(2) The National Science Foundation. ‘‘(3) The National Aeronautics and Space Administration. ‘‘(4) Any other relevant Federal agency. ‘‘(5) The National Laboratories. ‘‘(6) National Quantum Information Science Research Centers. ‘‘(7) Industry stakeholders. ‘‘(8) Institutions of higher education. ‘‘(9) Any other research institution. ‘‘(e) F UNDING .—Of amounts authorized to be appropriated for the Department of En-ergy, the Secretary of Energy shall use not more than $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2026 through 2030 to carry out this section.’’.     

> SEC. 4. NATIONAL QUANTUM INFORMATION SCIENCE RESEARCH CENTERS.

Section 402 of the National Quantum Ini-tiative Act (15 U.S.C. 8852) is amended— (1) in subsection (a)— (A) in paragraph (1)— (i) by striking ‘‘basic’’; and (ii) by striking ‘‘science and technology and to support research conducted under sec-tion 401’’ and inserting ‘‘science, engineer-ing, and technology, expand capacity for the domestic quantum workforce, and support research conducted under sections 401, 403, and 404’’; and (B) in paragraph (2)(C), by inserting ‘‘that may include 1 or more commercial entities’’ after ‘‘collaborations’’; (2) in subsection (b), by inserting ‘‘and should be inclusive of the variety of viable quantum technologies, as appropriate’’ be-fore the period at the end; (3) in subsection (c)— (A) by striking ‘‘basic’’; and (B) by inserting ‘‘, engineering, and tech-nology, accelerating quantum workforce de-velopment,’’ after ‘‘science’’; (4) in subsection (e), by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following: ‘‘(2) R ENEWAL .—Each Center established under this section may be renewed for an ad-ditional period of 5 years following a success-ful, merit-based review and approval by the Director.’’; and (5) in subsection (f), in the first sentence— (A) by striking ‘‘$25,000,000’’ and inserting ‘‘$35,000,000’’; and (B) by striking ‘‘2019 through 2023’’ and in-serting ‘‘2026 through 2030’’. 

> SEC. 5. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY QUANTUM NET-WORK INFRASTRUCTURE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.

Section 403 of the National Quantum Ini-tiative Act (15 U.S.C. 8853) is amended— (1) in subsection (a)— (A) in paragraph (4)— (i) by inserting ‘‘, including’’ after ‘‘net-working’’; and (ii) by striking ‘‘and’’ at the end; (B) in paragraph (5), by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ‘‘(6) as applicable, leverage a diversity of modalities and commercially available quan-tum hardware and software; and ‘‘(7) develop education and training path-ways related to quantum network infrastruc-ture investments, aligned with existing pro-grammatic investments by the Department of Energy.’’; and (2) in subsection (b)— (A) in paragraph (1)— (i) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and (D) as subparagraphs (D) and (E), respec-tively; and (ii) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following: ‘‘(C) the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the head of any other relevant Federal agen-cy, as determined by the Secretary;’’; (B) in paragraph (2)— (i) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ‘‘ground-to-space and’’ before ‘‘space-to-ground’’; (ii) in subparagraph (E), by striking ‘‘pho-ton-based’’ and inserting ‘‘all applicable mo-dalities of’’; (iii) in subparagraph (F), by inserting ‘‘, quantum sensors,’’ after ‘‘quantum repeat-ers’’; (iv) in subparagraph (G)— (I) by inserting ‘‘data centers,’’ after ‘‘re-peaters,’’; and (II) by striking ‘‘and’’ at the end; (v) in subparagraph (H)— (I) by striking ‘‘the quantum technology stack’’ and inserting ‘‘quantum technology modality stacks’’; and (II) by striking ‘‘National Laboratories in’’ and inserting ‘‘National Laboratories such as’’; and (vi) by adding at the end the following: ‘‘(I) development of quantum network and entanglement distribution protocols or ap-plications, including development of net-work stack protocols and protocols enabling integration with existing technologies or in-frastructure; and ‘‘(J) development of high-efficiency room-temperature photon detectors for quantum photonic applications, including quantum networking and communications;’’; (C) in paragraph (4)— (i) by striking ‘‘basic’’; and (ii) by striking ‘‘material’’ and inserting ‘‘materials’’; and (D) in paragraph (5), by striking ‘‘funda-mental’’; and (3) in subsection (d), by striking ‘‘basic re-search’’ and inserting ‘‘research, develop-ment, and demonstration’’.      

> SEC. 6. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY QUANTUM USER EXPANSION FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PROGRAM.

Section 404 of the National Quantum Ini-tiative Act (15 U.S.C. 8854) is amended— (1) in subsection (a)— (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking ‘‘and quantum computing clouds’’ and inserting ‘‘, software, and cloud-based quantum computing’’; (B) in paragraph (3), by striking ‘‘and’’ at the end; (C) in paragraph (4), by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon; and (D) by adding at the end the following: ‘‘(5) to enable development of software and applications, including estimation of re-sources needed to scale applications; and         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.023 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S977 February 13, 2025 

‘‘(6) to develop near-term quantum applica-tions to solve public and private sector prob-lems.’’; (2) in subsection (b)— (A) in paragraph (4), by striking ‘‘and’’ at the end; (B) in paragraph (5), by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ‘‘(6) enable users to develop algorithms, software tools, simulators, and applications for quantum systems using cloud-based quantum computers; and ‘‘(7) partner with appropriate public- and private-sector entities to develop training and education opportunities on prototype and early-stage devices to support commer-cial applications.’’; (3) in subsection (c)— (A) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (8) as paragraphs (5) through (9), re-spectively; and (B) by inserting after paragraph (3) the fol-lowing: ‘‘(4) the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration;’’; and (4) in subsection (e)— (A) in paragraph (4), by striking ‘‘and’’ at the end; (B) in paragraph (5), by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ‘‘(6) $38,000,000 for fiscal year 2028; ‘‘(7) $39,900,000 for fiscal year 2029; and ‘‘(8) $41,895,000 for fiscal year 2030.’’. By Mr. THUNE (for himself, Mr. GRASSLEY , Mr. L ANKFORD, Mrs. HYDE -S MITH, Mr. H AGERTY , Mr. D AINES , Mr. TUBERVILLE , Mr. S HEEHY, Mr. JOHNSON, Mr. M ULLIN , Mrs. C APITO, Mr. J US-TICE, Mr. C ORNYN, Mr. W ICKER ,Mr. SCOTT of South Carolina, Mrs. BLACKBURN , Mr. TILLIS, Mr. B UDD , Mr. CRAPO , Mr. HOEVEN, Mr. BARRASSO , Mr. RISCH , Mr. BOOZMAN, Ms. E RNST, Mr. MORAN, Mr. MAR-SHALL, Mr. CRAMER, Mr. R ICKETTS , Mr. S COTT of Florida, Mr. K ENNEDY, Mr. R OUNDS, Ms. L UMMIS , Mrs. F ISCHER , Mr. G RA-HAM , Mr. MCC ORMICK, Mrs. BRITT, Mr. Y OUNG, Mr. C OTTON ,Mr. MCC ONNELL, Mr. BANKS, Mr. CURTIS , Mr. SCHMITT, Mr. LEE , Mr. HAWLEY , Mr. CRUZ ,and Mr. M ORENO): S. 587. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to repeal the es-tate and generation-skipping transfer taxes, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finance. Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, later today, I will introduce a bill to repeal the death tax. As I mentioned, as a resident of arural State filled with family farms and ranches, I have made death tax re-peal a priority for a long time, and I was proud to help secure a doubling of the death tax exemption in the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. This doubled exemption has provided certainty to a lot of farms and ranches and small businesses over the past 7 years, but the expanded exemption is expiring at the end of this year. It is my hope that we will not merely extend this exemp-tion but that we will get rid of this fundamentally flawed tax once and for all. The death tax is fundamentally flawed both in theory and in practice. There should be a limit to how many times the government can tax you. The money you leave at your death has al-ready been taxed by the government at least once, which makes the death tax double taxation, and the government isn’t even profiting all that much from this double taxation. That is right. The death tax accounts for a teeny, tiny fraction of government revenue. In fact, there is reason to believe that the government would collect more in taxes if it got rid of the death tax en-tirely due to the economic growth and job creation that would stem from its elimination. So how is there any support left for this burdensome tax? That is a good question. For some, of course, heavy taxation is axiomatic. ‘‘Do well,’’ their thinking runs, ‘‘and the government should come after you.’’ Some think that you shouldn’t be able to pass the results of hard work down to your chil-dren upon your death. Well, death tax proponents tend to talk as if the death tax only affects the extremely wealthy, but nothing, of course, could be further from the truth. The death tax can sweep up those who have very little in the bank—notably, family farms and ranches and family businesses. How? Well, farming and ranching is often a cash-poor business. A farmer might have substantial look-ing assets on paper, but the vast major-ity of that is land and farming equip-ment. Only a small fraction of it is money in the bank. On top of that, farmland can often be valued at a level that is inconsistent with its agricultural productivity value. A farmer might have land with a substantial value on paper, but the crop yield on that land could be worth far, far less. So what happens when a farmer or a rancher dies and his estate is subject to the tax? There is a very good chance that his liquid assets—in other words, the cash he has available in the bank— won’t come close to covering the tax bill from the Federal Government, and the only alternative for his heirs may be to start selling off land or farm equipment to pay the tax. In some cases, they will be able to keep the farm, just a smaller version of it; in others, they may have to sell off the family farm entirely. The case is similar with family-owned businesses. The owner might ap-pear to have substantial looking assets on paper, but only a small fraction of that may be money in the bank. The vast majority may be tied up in the business. Once again, when the Federal Government comes around, demanding a huge portion of this individual’s tax-able estate, there may not be anywhere close to enough money in the bank to pay the tax. To pay the Federal Gov-ernment, the owner’s descendants will have to sell off part or all of the family business. Now, family farms and ranches are the lifeblood of the rural communities in South Dakota. They are a source of jobs. They provide support for local businesses. They help build up local schools and local infrastructure. Los-ing a local farm can hit rural commu-nities very, very hard, especially when that farm or ranch is bought up by an out-of-State business with few ties to the community and limited interest in building it up. It is not just those who actually get hit by the estate tax who suffer. A lot of family farms and ranches and family businesses spend a lot of time and money on estate planning to avoid being hit by this tax. That is time and money that could have gone into build-ing their business, investing in new equipment, hiring new workers, and the list goes on. Some set aside capital to prepare for the death tax—capital that, again, could go into building up a farm or ranch or hiring new workers for the family business. As one of my Democrat colleagues, the senior Senator from Washington, said a while back: The estate tax is bad for businesses. It is bad for workers and new job creation. And it is bad for our communities who are watching their local, family-owned businesses get swallowed up by large corporations. As I said, we protected a lot more family farms and family businesses by doubling the death tax exemption in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act back in 2017, but we didn’t protect them all. And those we did protect will lose those protections at the end of this year. It is time to end this punishing and burden-some tax once and for all. I want to thank my Republican col-leagues who have joined me in spon-soring this legislation. I hope that 2025 will be the year that we permanently bid farewell to the death tax. Mr. President, I ask unanimous con-sent that the text of the bill be printed in the R ECORD. There being no objection, the text of the bill was ordered to be printed in the R ECORD , as follows: S. 587 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Rep-resentatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, 

> SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Death Tax Repeal Act of 2025’’.       

> SEC. 2. REPEAL OF ESTATE AND GENERATION-SKIPPING TRANSFER TAXES.

(a) E STATE T AX R EPEAL .—Subchapter C of chapter 11 of subtitle B of the Internal Rev-enue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: 

> ‘‘SEC. 2210. TERMINATION.

‘‘(a) I N G ENERAL .—Except as provided in subsection (b), this chapter shall not apply to the estates of decedents dying on or after the date of the enactment of the Death Tax Repeal Act of 2025. ‘‘(b) CERTAIN DISTRIBUTIONS F ROM Q UALI -FIED D OMESTIC T RUSTS .—In applying section 2056A with respect to the surviving spouse of a decedent dying before the date of the en-actment of the Death Tax Repeal Act of 2025— ‘‘(1) section 2056A(b)(1)(A) shall not apply to distributions made after the 10-year pe-riod beginning on such date, and         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.023 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE
> ---

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S978 February 13, 2025 

‘‘(2) section 2056A(b)(1)(B) shall not apply on or after such date.’’. (b) G ENERATION -S KIPPING T RANSFER T AX R EPEAL .—Subchapter G of chapter 13 of sub-title B of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new section: 

> ‘‘SEC. 2664. TERMINATION.

‘‘This chapter shall not apply to genera-tion-skipping transfers on or after the date of the enactment of the Death Tax Repeal Act of 2025.’’. (c) C ONFORMING A MENDMENTS .— (1) The table of sections for subchapter C of chapter 11 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the fol-lowing new item: ‘‘Sec. 2210. Termination.’’. (2) The table of sections for subchapter G of chapter 13 of such Code is amended by add-ing at the end the following new item: ‘‘Sec. 2664. Termination.’’. (d) EFFECTIVE D ATE .—The amendments made by this section shall apply to the es-tates of decedents dying, and generation-skipping transfers, after the date of the en-actment of this Act. 

> SEC. 3. MODIFICATIONS OF GIFT TAX.

(a) C OMPUTATION OF G IFT T AX .—Subsection (a) of section 2502 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ‘‘(a) C OMPUTATION OF T AX .— ‘‘(1) I N GENERAL .—The tax imposed by sec-tion 2501 for each calendar year shall be an amount equal to the excess of— ‘‘(A) a tentative tax, computed under para-graph (2), on the aggregate sum of the tax-able gifts for such calendar year and for each of the preceding calendar periods, over ‘‘(B) a tentative tax, computed under para-graph (2), on the aggregate sum of the tax-able gifts for each of the preceding calendar periods. ‘‘(2) R ATE SCHEDULE .— 

‘‘If the amount with respect to which the tentative tax to be computed is: ........................................ The tentative tax is: 

Not over $10,000 ................................................................................................................................... 18% of such amount. Over $10,000 but not over $20,000 ......................................................................................................... $1,800, plus 20% of the excess over $10,000. Over $20,000 but not over $40,000 ......................................................................................................... $3,800, plus 22% of the excess over $20,000. Over $40,000 but not over $60,000 ......................................................................................................... $8,200, plus 24% of the excess over $40,000. Over $60,000 but not over $80,000 ......................................................................................................... $13,000, plus 26% of the excess over $60,000. Over $80,000 but not over $100,000 ........................................................................................................ $18,200, plus 28% of the excess over $80,000. Over $100,000 but not over $150,000 ...................................................................................................... $23,800, plus 30% of the excess over $100,000. Over $150,000 but not over $250,000 ...................................................................................................... $38,800, plus 32% of the excess over $150,000. Over $250,000 but not over $500,000 ...................................................................................................... $70,800, plus 34% of the excess over $250,000. Over $500,000 ........................................................................................................................................ $155,800, plus 35% of the excess over $500,000.’’. (b) T REATMENT OF C ERTAIN T RANSFERS IN TRUST .—Section 2511 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ‘‘(c) T REATMENT OF C ERTAIN T RANSFERS IN TRUST .—Notwithstanding any other provi-sion of this section and except as provided in regulations, a transfer in trust shall be treated as a taxable gift under section 2503, unless the trust is treated as wholly owned by the donor or the donor’s spouse under sub-part E of part I of subchapter J of chapter 1.’’. (c) L IFETIME G IFT E XEMPTION .— (1) IN GENERAL .—Paragraph (1) of section 2505(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ‘‘(1) the amount of the tentative tax which would be determined under the rate schedule set forth in section 2502(a)(2) if the amount with respect to which such tentative tax is to be computed were $10,000,000, reduced by’’. (2) I NFLATION ADJUSTMENT .—Section 2505 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ‘‘(d) I NFLATION A DJUSTMENT .— ‘‘(1) I N GENERAL .—In the case of any cal-endar year after 2011, the dollar amount in subsection (a)(1) shall be increased by an amount equal to— ‘‘(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by ‘‘(B) the cost-of-living adjustment deter-mined under section 1(f)(3) for such calendar year by substituting ‘calendar year 2010’ for ‘calendar year 2016’ in subparagraph (A)(ii) thereof. ‘‘(2) R OUNDING .—If any amount as adjusted under paragraph (1) is not a multiple of $10,000, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $10,000.’’. (d) C ONFORMING A MENDMENTS .— (1) Section 2505(a) of such Code is amended by striking the last sentence. (2) The heading for section 2505 of such Code is amended by striking ‘‘ UNIFIED ’’. (3) The item in the table of sections for subchapter A of chapter 12 of such Code re-lating to section 2505 is amended to read as follows: ‘‘Sec. 2505. Credit against gift tax.’’. (e) EFFECTIVE D ATE .—The amendments made by this section shall apply to gifts made on or after the date of the enactment of this Act. (f) T RANSITION R ULE .— (1) I N GENERAL .—For purposes of applying sections 1015(d), 2502, and 2505 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the calendar year in which this Act is enacted shall be treated as 2 separate calendar years one of which ends on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act and the other of which begins on such date of enactment. (2) A PPLICATION OF SECTION 2504(b).—For purposes of applying section 2504(b) of the In-ternal Revenue Code of 1986, the calendar year in which this Act is enacted shall be treated as one preceding calendar period. By Mr. PADILLA (for himself, Mr. BLUMENTHAL , Mr. BOOKER ,Mr. C OONS , Ms. D UCKWORTH , Mr. DURBIN , Mrs. GILLIBRAND , Ms. H IRONO , Mr. KAINE , Ms. KLO -BUCHAR , Mr. MURPHY , Mrs. MURRAY , Mr. REED, Mr. SAND -ERS , Mr. SCHATZ , Mr. SCHIFF, Ms. WARREN, Mr. WHITEHOUSE ,and Mr. W YDEN ): S. 597. A bill to amend title 18, United States Code, to prohibit the purchase of certain firearms by indi-viduals under 21 years of age, and for other purposes; to the Committee on the Judiciary. Mr. PADILLA. Mr. President, I rise today to introduce the Age 21 Act, avital piece of legislation aimed at re-ducing gun violence and enhancing the safety of all Americans. The Age 21 Act would prohibit the sale of assault weapons, large-capacity ammunition, and related items to indi-viduals under the age of 21. However, this bill includes reason-able exceptions to allow temporary transfer or possession of assault weap-ons for specific activities, such as rec-reational use or work-related respon-sibilities, including Active military service. Every American has the right to live free from the fear of gun violence. Yet this epidemic continues to devastate our communities, claiming over 46,000 lives in 2023 alone, the third-highest number of gun-related deaths ever re-corded. This ongoing crisis demands ur-gent and meaningful action.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.025 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE
> ---

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S979 February 13, 2025 

Assault weapons—engineered for military purposes—are designed to in-flict maximum damage in the shortest amount of time. Unsurprisingly, they are frequently chosen by those who perpetrate mass violence. Their deadly impact is tragically evident in many of our Nation’s darkest moments. In 2022, an 18-year-old gunman in Uvalde, TX, used an AR–15-style rifle to kill 19 children and 2 teachers at Robb Elementary School. In 2018, a 19-year-old gunman at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, FL, murdered 17 students and staff mem-bers with an AR–15 rifle. And in 2012, a 20-year-old gunman used an AR–15-style rifle to kill 20 children and 6 edu-cators at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, CT. These are not isolated incidents but part of devastating pattern. Data shows that more than 85 percent of fa-talities in public mass shootings in-volving four or more deaths are caused by assault rifles. The evidence is clear: These weapons amplify the scale of vio-lence and loss of life. Scientific research supports raising the minimum age for accessing such destructive weapons. Studies show that the human brain continues to develop into a person’s mid-20s, particularly in areas related to impulse control, judg-ment, and long-term planning. Recog-nizing this, Federal law already re-stricts the purchase of alcohol and to-bacco to individuals over 21, common-sense measures to protect public safe-ty. Assault weapons, with their unpar-alleled potential for destruction, de-serve no less consideration. Americans deserve to feel safe in their schools, places of worship, and neighborhoods. By passing the Age 21 Act, we can take a meaningful step to reduce the availability of these deadly weapons to young individuals, helping to save lives and prevent future trage-dies. Public safety is a shared responsi-bility, and this bill represents an im-portant measure to strengthen our col-lective efforts to combat gun violence. I urge my colleagues to join me in sup-porting this legislation and working to pass the Age 21 Act as swiftly as pos-sible. By Mr. PADILLA (for himself, Ms. HIRONO, Mr. MORAN, and Mr. L ANKFORD ): S. 602. A bill to amend the Food, Ag-riculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 to support research and develop-ment of ungulate grazing land manage-ment techniques for purposes of wild-fire mitigation, fuel reduction, and post-fire recovery; to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and For-estry. Mr. PADILLA. Mr. President, I rise to introduce the bipartisan Wildfire Resilience Through Grazing Research Act. This legislation aims to advance research into the use of hooved animal grazing as a tool for wildfire preven-tion, mitigation, and recovery. Wildfires in the U.S. are becoming more frequent, intense, and destruc-tive, posing significant threats to lives, ecosystems, and property. The eco-nomic and ecological costs of these fires are devastating. To mitigate fu-ture risks and support postfire recov-ery, we must adopt effective land man-agement strategies. One promising and natural method is ungulate grazing, which has proven effective in reducing the fuel loads that exacerbate fire spread. However, we still lack sufficient sci-entific understanding of how to opti-mize grazing practices for wildfire mitigation while avoiding potential en-vironmental harms. Supporting this re-search will allow the Federal Govern-ment, as well as private landowners, to make grazing a core, cost-effective tool in wildfire prevention, working along-side other mitigation strategies to pro-tect our landscapes, our communities, and our way of life. Our bipartisan bill would add the Grazing for Wildfire Mitigation Initia-tive to the National Institute of Food and Agriculture’s (NIFA) High-Priority Research List. Specifically, this initia-tive would support research and devel-opment of ungulate grazing land man-agement techniques that promote wild-fire mitigation, fuels reduction, and postfire recovery. In addition, it would support information dissemination of ungulate grazing land management techniques that support wildfire miti-gation to public and private land-owners, land managers, and livestock owners. I would like to thank my colleagues Senators MORAN , HIRONO, and L ANKFORD for their leadership in intro-ducing this bipartisan legislation with me. I urge my colleagues to support the Wildfire Resilience Through Graz-ing Research Act, and I look forward to working together to ensure our com-munities are better prepared to face the challenges posed by increasingly frequent and severe wildfires. By Mr. KAINE (for himself and Mr. W ARNER): S. 603. A bill to designate the General George C. Marshall House in the Com-monwealth of Virginia, as an affiliated area of the National Park System, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. Mr. KAINE. Mr. President, today, Iam joining with Senator M ARK WARNER to again introduce legislation to des-ignate the General George C. Marshall House, also known as the Dodona Manor, in Leesburg, VA, as an affili-ated area under the National Park Service. This same bill passed unani-mously in the Senate at the end of the 118th Congress. The legislation will be the final step in the yearslong effort to recognize the Dodona Manor as a unit of the Na-tional Park System. It will also pro-mote the public appreciation of the sig-nificant historic contributions made by U.S. military leader and statesman George C. Marshall. George C. Marshall was an American hero, playing a significant role in the Allied victory in World War II and serving as an architect of one of the most significant foreign policy initia-tives in our country’s history. He led a lifetime of public service, serving as Chief of Staff to the Army during America’s entry into World War II, as Secretary of State, where he orches-trated the historic Marshall Plan to re-build Europe following the war and provided counsel to Presidents Roo-sevelt and Truman, and as Secretary of Defense after the onset of the Korean war. He acquired Dodona Manor while serving as the Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army in 1941 and lived there until his death in 1959. Today, the George C. Marshall House is dedicated to preserving and advanc-ing General Marshall’s life’s work and legacy by hosting international ex-changes, historical exhibits, and com-munity events, and supporting edu-cational programming based on Gen-eral Marshall’s desire to inspire future leaders. The legislation would bring greater resources, including technical assistance, accessibility improvements, and new programming, to this histor-ical site and enable the Marshall House to improve and expand its work. I am hopeful that this designation will provide new resources to preserve, honor, and celebrate General Mar-shall’s legacy at this historic site, and I am pleased that companion legisla-tion is also being introduced in the U.S. House of Representatives by my colleague Representative SUHAS SUBRAMANYAM .

> f

SUBMITTED RESOLUTIONS SENATE RESOLUTION 77—AUTHOR-IZING EXPENDITURES BY THE COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SE-CURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS Mr. PAUL submitted the following resolution; from the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs which was referred to the Com-mittee on Rules and Administration: S. R ES . 77                                                                 

> Resolved,
> SECTION 1. GENERAL AUTHORITY.
> In carrying out its powers, duties, and functions under the Standing Rules of the Senate, in accordance with its jurisdiction under rule XXV of the Standing Rules of the Senate and Senate Resolution 445 (108th Con-gress), agreed to October 9, 2004, including holding hearings, reporting such hearings, and making investigations as authorized by paragraphs 1and 8of rule XXVI of the Standing Rules of the Senate, the Com-mittee on Homeland Security and Govern-mental Affairs (in this resolution referred to as the ‘‘committee’’) is authorized from March 1, 2025, through February 28, 2027, in its discretion, to— (1) make expenditures from the contingent fund of the Senate; (2) employ personnel; and (3) with the prior consent of the Govern-ment department or agency concerned and
> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.027 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S980 February 13, 2025 

the Committee on Rules and Administration, use on a reimbursable or nonreimbursable basis the services of personnel of any such department or agency. 

> SEC. 2. EXPENSES.

(a) E XPENSES FOR P ERIOD E NDING S EP -TEMBER 30, 2025.—The expenses of the com-mittee for the period March 1, 2025, through September 30, 2025, under this resolution shall not exceed $8,380,388, of which amount— (1) not to exceed $400,000 may be expended for the procurement of the services of indi-vidual consultants, or organizations thereof (as authorized by section 202(i) of the Legis-lative Reorganization Act of 1946 (2 U.S.C. 4301(i))); and (2) not to exceed $20,000 may be expended for the training of the professional staff of the committee (under procedures specified by section 202(j) of that Act). (b) E XPENSES FOR F ISCAL Y EAR 2026 P E-RIOD .—The expenses of the committee for the period October 1, 2025, through September 30, 2026, under this resolution shall not exceed $14,366,379, of which amount— (1) not to exceed $400,000 may be expended for the procurement of the services of indi-vidual consultants, or organizations thereof (as authorized by section 202(i) of the Legis-lative Reorganization Act of 1946 (2 U.S.C. 4301(i))); and (2) not to exceed $20,000 may be expended for the training of the professional staff of the committee (under procedures specified by section 202(j) of that Act). (c) E XPENSES FOR P ERIOD E NDING F EBRUARY 28, 2027.—The expenses of the committee for the period October 1, 2026, through February 28, 2027, under this resolution shall not ex-ceed $5,985,991, of which amount— (1) not to exceed $400,000 may be expended for the procurement of the services of indi-vidual consultants, or organizations thereof (as authorized by section 202(i) of the Legis-lative Reorganization Act of 1946 (2 U.S.C. 4301(i))); and (2) not to exceed $20,000 may be expended for the training of the professional staff of the committee (under procedures specified by section 202(j) of that Act). 

> SEC. 3. EXPENSES AND AGENCY CONTRIBUTIONS.

(a) E XPENSES OF THE C OMMITTEE .— (1) IN GENERAL .—Except as provided in paragraph (2), expenses of the committee under this resolution shall be paid from the contingent fund of the Senate upon vouchers approved by the chairman of the committee. (2) V OUCHERS NOT REQUIRED .—Vouchers shall not be required for— (A) the disbursement of salaries of employ-ees paid at an annual rate; (B) the payment of telecommunications provided by the Office of the Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper; (C) the payment of stationery supplies pur-chased through the Keeper of the Stationery; (D) payments to the Postmaster of the Senate; (E) the payment of metered charges on copying equipment provided by the Office of the Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper; (F) the payment of Senate Recording and Photographic Services; or (G) the payment of franked and mass mail costs by the Sergeant at Arms and Door-keeper. (b) A GENCY C ONTRIBUTIONS .—There are au-thorized to be paid from the appropriations account for ‘‘Expenses of Inquiries and Inves-tigations’’ of the Senate such sums as may be necessary for agency contributions re-lated to the compensation of employees of the committee— (1) for the period March 1, 2025, through September 30, 2025; (2) for the period October 1, 2025, through September 30, 2026; and (3) for the period October 1, 2026, through February 28, 2027. 

> SEC. 4. INVESTIGATIONS.

(a) I N G ENERAL .—The committee, or any duly authorized subcommittee of the com-mittee, is authorized to study or inves-tigate— (1) the efficiency and economy of oper-ations of all branches of the Government in-cluding the possible existence of fraud, mis-feasance, malfeasance, collusion, mis-management, incompetence, corruption, or unethical practices, waste, extravagance, conflicts of interest, and the improper ex-penditure of Government funds in trans-actions, contracts, and activities of the Gov-ernment or of Government officials and em-ployees and any and all such improper prac-tices between Government personnel and corporations, individuals, companies, or per-sons affiliated therewith, doing business with the Government, and the compliance or noncompliance of such corporations, compa-nies, or individuals or other entities with the rules, regulations, and laws governing the various governmental agencies and its rela-tionships with the public; (2) the extent to which criminal or other improper practices or activities are, or have been, engaged in the field of labor-manage-ment relations or in groups or organizations of employees or employers, to the detriment of interests of the public, employers, or em-ployees, and to determine whether any changes are required in the laws of the United States in order to protect such inter-ests against the occurrence of such practices or activities; (3) organized criminal activity which may operate in or otherwise utilize the facilities of interstate or international commerce in furtherance of any transactions and the manner and extent to which, and the iden-tity of the persons, firms, or corporations, or other entities by whom such utilization is being made, and further, to study and inves-tigate the manner in which and the extent to which persons engaged in organized criminal activity have infiltrated lawful business en-terprise, and to study the adequacy of Fed-eral laws to prevent the operations of orga-nized crime in interstate or international commerce, and to determine whether any changes are required in the laws of the United States in order to protect the public against such practices or activities; (4) all other aspects of crime and lawless-ness within the United States which have an impact upon or affect the national health, welfare, and safety, including but not lim-ited to investment fraud schemes, com-modity and security fraud, computer fraud, and the use of offshore banking and cor-porate facilities to carry out criminal objec-tives; (5) the efficiency and economy of oper-ations of all branches and functions of the Government with particular reference to— (A) the effectiveness of present national se-curity methods, staffing, and processes as tested against the requirements imposed by the rapidly mounting complexity of national security problems; (B) the capacity of present national secu-rity staffing, methods, and processes to make full use of the Nation’s resources of knowledge and talents; (C) the adequacy of present intergovern-mental relations between the United States and international organizations principally concerned with national security of which the United States is a member; and (D) legislative and other proposals to im-prove these methods, processes, and relation-ships; (6) the efficiency, economy, and effective-ness of all agencies and departments of the Government involved in the control and management of energy shortages including, but not limited to, their performance with respect to— (A) the collection and dissemination of ac-curate statistics on fuel demand and supply; (B) the implementation of effective energy conservation measures; (C) the pricing of energy in all forms; (D) coordination of energy programs with State and local government; (E) control of exports of scarce fuels; (F) the management of tax, import, pric-ing, and other policies affecting energy sup-plies; (G) maintenance of the independent sector of the petroleum industry as a strong com-petitive force; (H) the allocation of fuels in short supply by public and private entities; (I) the management of energy supplies owned or controlled by the Government; (J) relations with other oil producing and consuming countries; (K) the monitoring of compliance by gov-ernments, corporations, or individuals with the laws and regulations governing the allo-cation, conservation, or pricing of energy supplies; and (L) research into the discovery and devel-opment of alternative energy supplies; and (7) the efficiency and economy of all branches and functions of Government with particular references to the operations and management of Federal regulatory policies and programs. (b) E XTENT OF INQUIRIES .—In carrying out the duties provided in subsection (a), the in-quiries of this committee or any sub-committee of the committee shall not be construed to be limited to the records, func-tions, and operations of any particular branch of the Government and may extend to the records and activities of any persons, corporation, or other entity. (c) S PECIAL C OMMITTEE A UTHORITY .—For the purposes of this section, the committee, or any duly authorized subcommittee of the committee, or its chairman, or any other member of the committee or subcommittee designated by the chairman is authorized, in its, his, her, or their discretion— (1) to require by subpoena or otherwise the attendance of witnesses and production of correspondence, books, papers, and docu-ments; (2) to hold hearings; (3) to sit and act at any time or place dur-ing the sessions, recess, and adjournment pe-riods of the Senate; (4) to administer oaths; and (5) to take testimony, either orally or by sworn statement, or, in the case of staff members of the Committee and the Perma-nent Subcommittee on Investigations, by deposition in accordance with the Com-mittee Rules of Procedure. (d) A UTHORITY OF O THER C OMMITTEES .— Nothing contained in this section shall affect or impair the exercise of any other standing committee of the Senate of any power, or the discharge by such committee of any duty, conferred or imposed upon it by the Standing Rules of the Senate or by the Legislative Re-organization Act of 1946. (e) S UBPOENA A UTHORITY .—All subpoenas and related legal processes of the committee and any duly authorized subcommittee of the committee authorized under Senate Res-olution 59 (118th Congress), agreed to Feb-ruary 15, 2023, are authorized to continue. 

f

SENATE RESOLUTION 78—AUTHOR-IZING EXPENDITURES BY THE COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET Mr. GRAHAM submitted the fol-lowing resolution; from the Committee         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.032 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S981 February 13, 2025 

on the Budget which was referred to the Committee on Rules and Adminis-tration: S. R ES . 78 

Resolved, 

> SECTION 1. GENERAL AUTHORITY.

In carrying out its powers, duties, and functions under the Standing Rules of the Senate, in accordance with its jurisdiction under rule XXV of the Standing Rules of the Senate, including holding hearings, report-ing such hearings, and making investiga-tions as authorized by paragraphs 1 and 8 of rule XXVI of the Standing Rules of the Sen-ate, the Committee on the Budget (in this resolution referred to as the ‘‘committee’’) is authorized from March 1, 2025, through Feb-ruary 28, 2027, in its discretion, to— (1) make expenditures from the contingent fund of the Senate; (2) employ personnel; and (3) with the prior consent of the Govern-ment department or agency concerned and the Committee on Rules and Administration, use on a reimbursable or nonreimbursable basis the services of personnel of any such department or agency. 

> SEC. 2. EXPENSES.

(a) E XPENSES FOR P ERIOD E NDING S EP -TEMBER 30, 2025.—The expenses of the com-mittee for the period March 1, 2025, through September 30, 2025, under this resolution shall not exceed $4,630,478, of which amount— (1) not to exceed $23,333 may be expended for the procurement of the services of indi-vidual consultants, or organizations thereof (as authorized by section 202(i) of the Legis-lative Reorganization Act of 1946 (2 U.S.C. 4301(i))); and (2) not to exceed $17,500 may be expended for the training of the professional staff of the committee (under procedures specified by section 202(j) of that Act). (b) E XPENSES FOR F ISCAL Y EAR 2026 P E-RIOD .—The expenses of the committee for the period October 1, 2025, through September 30, 2026, under this resolution shall not exceed $7,937,962, of which amount— (1) not to exceed $40,000 may be expended for the procurement of the services of indi-vidual consultants, or organizations thereof (as authorized by section 202(i) of the Legis-lative Reorganization Act of 1946 (2 U.S.C. 4301(i))); and (2) not to exceed $30,000 may be expended for the training of the professional staff of the committee (under procedures specified by section 202(j) of that Act). (c) E XPENSES FOR P ERIOD E NDING F EBRUARY 28, 2027.—The expenses of the committee for the period October 1, 2026, through February 28, 2027, under this resolution shall not ex-ceed $3,307,484, of which amount— (1) not to exceed $16,667 may be expended for the procurement of the services of indi-vidual consultants, or organizations thereof (as authorized by section 202(i) of the Legis-lative Reorganization Act of 1946 (2 U.S.C. 4301(i))); and (2) not to exceed $12,500 may be expended for the training of the professional staff of the committee (under procedures specified by section 202(j) of that Act). 

> SEC. 3. EXPENSES AND AGENCY CONTRIBUTIONS.

(a) E XPENSES OF THE C OMMITTEE .— (1) IN GENERAL .—Except as provided in paragraph (2), expenses of the committee under this resolution shall be paid from the contingent fund of the Senate upon vouchers approved by the chairman of the committee. (2) V OUCHERS NOT REQUIRED .—Vouchers shall not be required for— (A) the disbursement of salaries of employ-ees paid at an annual rate; (B) the payment of telecommunications provided by the Office of the Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper; (C) the payment of stationery supplies pur-chased through the Keeper of the Stationery; (D) payments to the Postmaster of the Senate; (E) the payment of metered charges on copying equipment provided by the Office of the Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper; (F) the payment of Senate Recording and Photographic Services; or (G) the payment of franked and mass mail costs by the Sergeant at Arms and Door-keeper. (b) A GENCY C ONTRIBUTIONS .—There are au-thorized to be paid from the appropriations account for ‘‘Expenses of Inquiries and Inves-tigations’’ of the Senate such sums as may be necessary for agency contributions re-lated to the compensation of employees of the committee— (1) for the period March 1, 2025, through September 30, 2025; (2) for the period October 1, 2025, through September 30, 2026; and (3) for the period October 1, 2026, through February 28, 2027. 

f

SENATE RESOLUTION 79—HON-ORING THE MEMORIES OF THE VICTIMS OF THE SENSELESS AT-TACK AT MARJORY STONEMAN DOUGLAS HIGH SCHOOL ON FEB-RUARY 14, 2018 Mr. SCOTT of Florida (for himself and Mrs. MOODY ) submitted the fol-lowing resolution; which was consid-ered and agreed to: S. R ES . 79 Whereas, on February 14, 2018, a mass shooting that took the lives of 17 teachers and students took place at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida; Whereas the people of the United States continue to pray for the individuals who were affected by this tragedy; Whereas the Parkland community has shown strength, compassion, and unity over the past 6 years; and Whereas February 14, 2025, marks 7 years since the horrific attack: Now, therefore, be it 

Resolved, That the Senate— (1) honors the memories of the victims of the senseless attack at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School on February 14, 2018, and offers heartfelt condolences and deepest sympathies to the families, loved ones, and friends of the victims; (2) honors the survivors of the attack and pledges continued support for their recovery; (3) recognizes the strength and resilience of the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School community; and (4) expresses gratitude to the emergency medical and health care professionals of the Parkland community for their efforts in re-sponding to the attack and caring for the victims and survivors. SENATE RESOLUTION 80—EX-PRESSING GRATITUDE TO THE JOINT CONGRESSIONAL COM-MITTEE ON INAUGURAL CERE-MONIES, THE ARCHITECT OF THE CAPITOL, THE SERGEANT AT ARMS, THE SECRETARY OF THE SENATE, LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS, EMERGENCY PER-SONNEL, AND VOLUNTEERS FOR THEIR SUPPORT IN MAKING THE PRESIDENTIAL INAUGURATION A SUCCESS. Mr. ROUNDS (for himself, Mr. THUNE , Mr. B ARRASSO, Mr. L ANKFORD ,Mr. C OTTON , Mrs. C APITO , Mr. S COTT of South Carolina, Mrs. FISCHER , Ms. LUMMIS , Mr. YOUNG , Mr. TILLIS, Mr. J USTICE, Mr. RICKETTS, Ms. MUR -KOWSKI , Mr. M CC ONNELL , Mr. B OOZMAN, Mr. MORAN , Mr. WICKER, Mrs. BLACK -BURN , Mr. CRAPO , Mr. RISCH, Mr. MULLIN , Mr. GRAHAM , Ms. CORTEZ M ASTO, Mr. KING , Mr. HICKENLOOPER ,Mr. G ALLEGO , Mrs. M URRAY , Mr. K IM ,Mr. R EED , Ms. B LUNT ROCHESTER , Mr. D URBIN , Mr. BOOKER , Mr. COONS , Mr. B ENNET , Mr. S CHUMER, Ms. K LOBUCHAR ,Mr. L UJA ´ N, Mr. W HITEHOUSE , Mrs. S HA -HEEN , Mr. B LUMENTHAL , Mr. W ARNOCK ,Mr. PETERS, Ms. ROSEN, and Mr. K ELLY ) submitted the following resolu-tion; which was considered and agreed to: S. R ES . 80 Whereas, on January 20, 2025, the inaugura-tion of the 47th President of the United States, President Donald J. Trump (referred to in this preamble as the ‘‘Presidential In-auguration’’), took place under unique and challenging circumstances, requiring the re-location of certain events indoors due to un-seasonably cold weather; Whereas, during the Presidential Inaugura-tion, the Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies, the Architect of the Capitol, the Sergeant at Arms, the Secretary of the Senate, law enforcement officers, emergency personnel, and volunteers dis-played exceptional dedication and profes-sionalism in adapting to unforeseen chal-lenges to guarantee the safety, security, and smooth operation of all inaugural events; Whereas the tireless efforts of the Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Cere-monies, the Architect of the Capitol, the Sergeant at Arms, the Secretary of the Sen-ate, law enforcement officers, emergency personnel, and volunteers during the Presi-dential Inauguration facilitated a historic and dignified transfer of power, reflecting the best traditions of the United States; Whereas the Joint Congressional Com-mittee on Inaugural Ceremonies, the Archi-tect of the Capitol, the Sergeant at Arms, and the Secretary of the Senate spent years planning and preparing for the events of the Presidential Inauguration and executed that plan flawlessly, even with unforeseen chal-lenges; Whereas the cold weather during the Presi-dential Inauguration presented additional logistical and operational difficulties, which were overcome through extraordinary com-mitment and teamwork; and Whereas the vigilance and preparedness of the Joint Congressional Committee on Inau-gural Ceremonies, the Architect of the Cap-itol, the Sergeant at Arms, the Secretary of the Senate, law enforcement officers, emer-gency personnel, and volunteers allowed attendees of the Presidential Inauguration to celebrate the momentous occasion in a        

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.033 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S982 February 13, 2025 

safe and secure environment: Now, therefore, be it 

Resolved, That the Senate— (1) expresses its profound gratitude to the Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies, the Architect of the Capitol, the Sergeant at Arms, the Secretary of the Sen-ate, law enforcement officers, emergency personnel, and volunteers whose hard work and dedication made the inauguration of President Donald J. Trump on January 20, 2025 (referred to in this resolution as the ‘‘Presidential Inauguration’’), a resounding success; (2) commends the professionalism and re-silience of the Joint Congressional Com-mittee on Inaugural Ceremonies, the Archi-tect of the Capitol, the Sergeant at Arms, the Secretary of the Senate, law enforce-ment officers, emergency personnel, and vol-unteers in adapting to the unexpected chal-lenges posed by the cold weather and the re-location of events during the Presidential In-auguration; (3) recognizes the invaluable hard work of the Joint Congressional Committee on Inau-gural Ceremonies, the Architect of the Cap-itol, the Sergeant at Arms, the Secretary of the Senate, law enforcement officers, emer-gency personnel, and volunteers in upholding the safety and security of all participants and attendees of the Presidential Inaugura-tion; (4) extends heartfelt thanks to the families and loved ones of the law enforcement offi-cers, emergency personnel, and volunteers, whose support enables their service; and (5) calls upon all people of the United States to join in acknowledging the critical role played by the Joint Congressional Com-mittee on Inaugural Ceremonies, the Archi-tect of the Capitol, the Sergeant at Arms, the Secretary of the Senate, law enforce-ment officers, emergency personnel, and vol-unteers in ensuring the success of the Presi-dential Inauguration, a significant national event. 

f

SENATE RESOLUTION 81—CALLING ON THE UNITED KINGDOM, FRANCE, AND GERMANY (E3) TO INITIATE THE SNAPBACK OF SANCTIONS ON IRAN UNDER UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION 2231 (2015) Mr. RICKETTS (for himself, Mr. C OR-NYN , Mr. B ARRASSO , Mrs. C APITO, Mrs. B LACKBURN, Mr. J USTICE , Mr. H AGERTY ,Mr. SHEEHY , Mr. SULLIVAN , Ms. LUM -MIS , Mr. CRAPO, Mrs. FISCHER , Mr. C RUZ , and Mr. YOUNG) submitted the following resolution; which was re-ferred to the Committee on Foreign Relations: S. R ES . 81 Whereas, on July 15, 2015, the P5+1 (the United States, the United Kingdom, France, the People’s Republic of China, the Russian Federation, and Germany), the European Union, and the Islamic Republic of Iran fi-nalized the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Ac-tion (JCPOA); Whereas the JCPOA required the Govern-ment of Iran to implement constraints on its uranium enrichment and heavy water nu-clear reactor programs, as well as allow the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to monitor compliance with the agreement; Whereas, on July 20, 2015, the United Na-tions Security Council (UNSC) passed Reso-lution 2231 (UNSCR 2231), which endorsed the JCPOA and provided for the termination of all previous UNSC resolutions targeting Iran’s nuclear program (1696, 1737, 1747, 1803 1835, and 1929), while maintaining United Na-tion’s arms restrictions on Iran for 5 years and United Nation’s prohibitions on Iran’s missile and drone activity for 8 years; Whereas, pursuant to the JCPOA, Iran re-ceived significant sanctions relief from the previous sanctions imposed by the European Union, the United States, and previous UNSC resolutions; Whereas Iran used this sanctions relief to fund its terrorist proxies, regional aggres-sion, and its expansion of its ballistic missile program; Whereas, on May 8, 2018, President Donald J. Trump announced the United States was ceasing its participation in the JCPOA and reimposing sanctions against Iran that had been previously waived; Whereas President Trump’s successful maximum pressure campaign imposed sig-nificant financial costs on Iran’s regime ‘‘to alter its course of malign activities and en-sure that Iranian bad acts are no longer re-warded’’; Whereas, Iran has repeatedly violated the terms of the JCPOA and UNSCR 2231, includ-ing by— (1) lifting the cap on its stockpile of uranium; (2) increasing its enrichment activities to 60 percent purity, expanding its enrich-ment capabilities; (3) resuming its activity at prohibited nuclear facilities; and (4) preventing the International Atom-ic Energy Agency (IAEA) from being able to effectively monitor its nuclear activities; Whereas, Iran repeatedly violated UNSCR 2231’s restrictions on ballistic missile testing and development, as well as United Nations-imposed and internationally binding arms export and import embargoes; Whereas UNSCR 2231 includes a formal mechanism for a participant state of the JCPOA, if it believes there has been signifi-cant non-performance of commitments under the JCPOA by Iran, to trigger a process that would require the UNSC to ‘‘snapback’’ all United Nation sanctions on Iran that has been lifted pursuant to UNSCR 2231; Whereas, on September 14, 2024, in a joint statement, the United States and United Kingdom acknowledged publicly that Iran’s nuclear program ‘‘has never been more ad-vanced and posed a clear threat to regional and global peace and security’’; Whereas, in June and November of 2024, in efforts led by France, Germany, the United Kingdom (E3), and the United States, the IAEA’s Board of Governors voted to censure Iran for non-compliance with its obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, done at Washington, Lon-don, and Moscow July 1, 1968 (commonly re-ferred to as the ‘‘Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty’’ or ‘‘NPT’’); Whereas, on December 9, 2024, the E3 sent a letter to the United Nations Security Council stating, ‘‘We reiterate our deter-mination to use all diplomatic tools to pre-vent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon, including using snapback if necessary.’’; Whereas, on January 6, 2025, President of France Emmanuel Macron said the accelera-tion of Iran’s nuclear program was ‘‘bringing us very close to the breaking point’’ and said, ‘‘We will have to ask ourselves whether to use the mechanism for re-establishing sanctions. We are ready to do so if the ques-tion arises.’’; Whereas, on January 23, 2025, the Director General of the IAEA, Rafael Grossi, said that Iran has increased production of 60 percent enriched uranium from 7 kilograms to over 30 kilograms per month, and currently pos-sess about 200 kilograms, which if enriched to 90 percent would amount to at least 5 nu-clear weapons; and Whereas, under UNSCR 2231, the resolu-tion, including the ‘‘snapback’’ mechanism, terminates 10 years after Adoption Day for the JCPOA, which will be October 18, 2025: Now, therefore, be it 

Resolved, That the Senate— (1) recognizes that Iran’s possession of a nuclear weapon would threaten not only the security of the United States, but global se-curity at large, including United States al-lies and partners in Europe and the Middle East; (2) condemns the Government of Iran’s flagrant and repeated violations of commit-ments it made under the JCPOA and its international obligations under UNSCR 2231; (3) condemns the Russian Federation and the People’s Republic of China, who remain participants in the JCPOA, for their role in supporting Iran’s malign activities; (4) reaffirms that the United States Gov-ernment maintains the right to take any necessary measures to prevent the Govern-ment of Iran from acquiring nuclear weap-ons; (5) supports the imposition and enforce-ment of robust sanctions on Iran for it nu-clear and missile programs and on entities and individuals involved in these programs to deter further proliferation efforts; and (6) urges the E3 to invoke the ‘‘snap-back’’ of United Nations sanctions against Iran under UNSCR 2231 as soon as possible before the option expires on October 18, 2025. 

f

SENATE CONCURRENT RESOLU-TION 7—SETTING FORTH THE CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET FOR THE UNITED STATES GOVERN-MENT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND SETTING FORTH THE AP-PROPRIATE BUDGETARY LEVELS FOR FISCAL YEARS 2026 THROUGH 2034 Mr. GRAHAM; from the Committee on the Budget submitted the following concurrent resolution; which was placed on the calendar: S. C ON . R ES . 7 

Resolved by the Senate (the House of Rep-resentatives concurring), 

> SECTION 1. CONCURRENT RESOLUTION ON THE BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025.

(a) D ECLARATION .—Congress declares that this resolution is the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2025 and that this resolution sets forth the appropriate budgetary levels for fiscal years 2026 through 2034. (b) T ABLE OF C ONTENTS .—The table of con-tents for this concurrent resolution is as fol-lows: Sec. 1. Concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2025. TITLE I—RECOMMENDED LEVELS AND AMOUNTS Subtitle A—Budgetary Levels in Both Houses Sec. 1101. Recommended levels and amounts. Sec. 1102. Major functional categories. Subtitle B—Levels and Amounts in the Senate Sec. 1201. Social Security in the Senate. Sec. 1202. Postal Service discretionary ad-ministrative expenses in the Senate. TITLE II—RECONCILIATION Sec. 2001. Reconciliation in the House of Representatives. Sec. 2002. Reconciliation in the Senate. TITLE III—RESERVE FUNDS Sec. 3001. Reserve fund for reconciliation legislation.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0655 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.035 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S983 February 13, 2025 

Sec. 3002. Reserve fund for deficit-neutral legislation. TITLE IV—OTHER MATTERS Sec. 4001. Enforcement filing. Sec. 4002. Budgetary treatment of adminis-trative expenses. Sec. 4003. Application and effect of changes in allocations, aggregates, and other budgetary levels. Sec. 4004. Adjustment authority for revi-sions to statutory caps. Sec. 4005. Adjustments to reflect changes in concepts and definitions. Sec. 4006. Adjustment for changes in the baseline. Sec. 4007. Exercise of rulemaking powers. 

TITLE I—RECOMMENDED LEVELS AND AMOUNTS Subtitle A—Budgetary Levels in Both Houses SEC. 1101. RECOMMENDED LEVELS AND AMOUNTS. 

The following budgetary levels are appro-priate for each of fiscal years 2025 through 2034: (1) F EDERAL REVENUES .—For purposes of the enforcement of this resolution: (A) The recommended levels of Federal revenues are as follows: Fiscal year 2025: $3,853,053,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: $4,005,633,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: $4,095,208,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: $4,221,709,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: $4,343,708,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: $4,536,585,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: $4,744,851,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: $4,939,252,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: $5,155,399,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: $5,375,311,000,000. (B) The amounts by which the aggregate levels of Federal revenues should be changed are as follows: Fiscal year 2025: ¥$5,916,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: ¥$211,035,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: ¥$421,185,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: ¥$415,138,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: ¥$416,123,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: ¥$422,056,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: ¥$435,419,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: ¥$449,460,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: ¥$467,244,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: ¥$484,719,000,000. (2) F EDERAL REVENUE CHANGES RELATIVE TO CURRENT POLICY .—The amounts by which the aggregate levels of Federal revenues should be changed compared to current policy are as follows: Fiscal year 2025: $0. Fiscal year 2026: $0. Fiscal year 2027: $0. Fiscal year 2028: $0. Fiscal year 2029: $0. Fiscal year 2030: $0. Fiscal year 2031: $0. Fiscal year 2032: $0. Fiscal year 2033: $0. Fiscal year 2034: $0. (3) N EW BUDGET AUTHORITY .—For purposes of the enforcement of this resolution, the ap-propriate levels of total new budget author-ity are as follows: Fiscal year 2025: $4,660,822,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: $4,787,172,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: $4,918,969,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: $5,195,931,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: $5,348,812,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: $5,634,695,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: $5,877,961,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: $6,148,105,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: $6,480,776,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: $6,681,550,000,000. (4) B UDGET OUTLAYS .—For purposes of the enforcement of this resolution, the appro-priate levels of total budget outlays are as follows: Fiscal year 2025: $4,636,002,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: $4,803,228,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: $4,995,184,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: $5,283,709,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: $5,338,399,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: $5,621,606,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: $5,845,033,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: $6,078,132,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: $6,437,602,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: $6,592,030,000,000. (5) D EFICITS .—For purposes of the enforce-ment of this resolution, the amounts of the deficits are as follows: Fiscal year 2025: $782,949,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: $797,595,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: $899,976,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: $1,062,000,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: $994,691,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: $1,085,021,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: $1,100,182,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: $1,138,880,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: $1,282,203,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: $1,216,719,000,000. (6) P UBLIC DEBT .—Pursuant to section 301(a)(5) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 632(a)(5)), the appropriate levels of the public debt are as follows: Fiscal year 2025: $36,371,784,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: $37,521,488,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: $38,649,388,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: $39,897,925,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: $41,251,544,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: $42,552,065,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: $43,855,127,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: $45,199,622,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: $46,803,080,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: $48,714,403,000,000. (7) D EBT HELD BY THE PUBLIC .—The appro-priate levels of debt held by the public are as follows: Fiscal year 2025: $29,141,533,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: $30,151,121,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: $31,291,493,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: $32,629,565,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: $33,930,044,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: $35,349,716,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: $36,814,512,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: $38,364,377,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: $40,073,109,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: $41,747,907,000,000. 

> SEC. 1102. MAJOR FUNCTIONAL CATEGORIES.

Congress determines and declares that the appropriate levels of new budget authority and outlays for fiscal years 2025 through 2034 for each major functional category are: (1) National Defense (050): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $933,481,000,000. (B) Outlays, $909,629,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $901,220,000,000. (B) Outlays, $904,412,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $923,020,000,000. (B) Outlays, $911,956,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $944,111,000,000. (B) Outlays, $934,660,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $966,203,000,000. (B) Outlays, $942,419,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $989,212,000,000. (B) Outlays, $966,361,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $1,012,715,000,000. (B) Outlays, $984,795,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $1,036,723,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,003,888,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $1,062,319,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,037,888,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $1,087,382,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,054,430,000,000. (2) International Affairs (150): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $65,962,000,000. (B) Outlays, $69,206,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $61,716,000,000. (B) Outlays, $67,669,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $62,249,000,000. (B) Outlays, $66,456,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $63,512,000,000. (B) Outlays, $62,391,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $64,944,000,000. (B) Outlays, $62,832,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $66,408,000,000. (B) Outlays, $63,077,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $67,878,000,000. (B) Outlays, $64,002,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $69,343,000,000. (B) Outlays, $65,176,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $70,874,000,000. (B) Outlays, $66,517,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $72,435,000,000. (B) Outlays, $67,889,000,000. (3) General Science, Space, and Technology (250): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $42,084,000,000. (B) Outlays, $41,734,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $41,345,000,000. (B) Outlays, $41,844,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $42,264,000,000. (B) Outlays, $41,923,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $43,099,000,000. (B) Outlays, $42,198,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $44,017,000,000. (B) Outlays, $42,887,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $44,980,000,000. (B) Outlays, $43,633,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $45,946,000,000. (B) Outlays, $44,551,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $46,922,000,000. (B) Outlays, $45,486,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $47,936,000,000. (B) Outlays, $46,460,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $48,985,000,000. (B) Outlays, $47,466,000,000. (4) Energy (270): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $39,842,000,000. (B) Outlays, $37,587,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $39,958,000,000. (B) Outlays, $44,514,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $34,098,000,000. (B) Outlays, $52,768,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $34,825,000,000. (B) Outlays, $51,623,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $35,770,000,000. (B) Outlays, $48,582,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $33,946,000,000. (B) Outlays, $42,596,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $35,188,000,000. (B) Outlays, $40,366,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $39,697,000,000. (B) Outlays, $41,611,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $24,489,000,000. (B) Outlays, $25,941,000,000.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.037 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S984 February 13, 2025 

Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $16,203,000,000. (B) Outlays, $17,040,000,000. (5) Natural Resources and Environment (300): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $88,219,000,000. (B) Outlays, $90,074,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $67,633,000,000. (B) Outlays, $80,552,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $45,140,000,000. (B) Outlays, $75,844,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $45,985,000,000. (B) Outlays, $71,673,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $46,956,000,000. (B) Outlays, $67,691,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $47,707,000,000. (B) Outlays, $63,948,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $48,854,000,000. (B) Outlays, $60,580,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $49,918,000,000. (B) Outlays, $56,444,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $51,246,000,000. (B) Outlays, $55,797,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $52,225,000,000. (B) Outlays, $55,480,000,000. (6) Agriculture (350): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $58,457,000,000. (B) Outlays, $41,846,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $28,163,000,000. (B) Outlays, $46,212,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $31,716,000,000. (B) Outlays, $33,686,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $33,008,000,000. (B) Outlays, $34,426,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $33,334,000,000. (B) Outlays, $32,441,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $30,857,000,000. (B) Outlays, $30,098,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $30,468,000,000. (B) Outlays, $29,609,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $31,239,000,000. (B) Outlays, $30,163,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $32,276,000,000. (B) Outlays, $30,893,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $32,912,000,000. (B) Outlays, $31,721,000,000. (7) Commerce and Housing Credit (370): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $12,477,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$18,175,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $32,747,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$626,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $28,145,000,000. (B) Outlays, $7,710,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, ¥$56,796,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$65,194,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $25,562,000,000. (B) Outlays, $15,976,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $25,712,000,000. (B) Outlays, $12,680,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $25,941,000,000. (B) Outlays, $7,932,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $26,354,000,000. (B) Outlays, $5,060,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $20,192,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$4,224,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $29,862,000,000. (B) Outlays, $2,451,000,000. (8) Transportation (400): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $173,158,000,000. (B) Outlays, $144,771,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $167,673,000,000. (B) Outlays, $152,541,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $132,085,000,000. (B) Outlays, $158,068,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $133,386,000,000. (B) Outlays, $162,528,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $134,447,000,000. (B) Outlays, $160,846,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $129,994,000,000. (B) Outlays, $150,790,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $130,964,000,000. (B) Outlays, $147,539,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $138,846,000,000. (B) Outlays, $150,163,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $140,544,000,000. (B) Outlays, $149,247,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $142,271,000,000. (B) Outlays, $149,454,000,000. (9) Community and Regional Development (450): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $87,762,000,000. (B) Outlays, $78,752,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $20,135,000,000. (B) Outlays, $64,267,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $19,259,000,000. (B) Outlays, $56,506,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $19,462,000,000. (B) Outlays, $45,101,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $19,888,000,000. (B) Outlays, $35,976,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $20,326,000,000. (B) Outlays, $31,026,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $20,727,000,000. (B) Outlays, $27,543,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $21,007,000,000. (B) Outlays, $24,658,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $21,462,000,000. (B) Outlays, $22,754,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $21,864,000,000. (B) Outlays, $21,733,000,000. (10) Education, Training, Employment, and Social Services (500): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $149,303,000,000. (B) Outlays, $171,916,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $152,714,000,000. (B) Outlays, $151,605,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $154,949,000,000. (B) Outlays, $150,975,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $157,763,000,000. (B) Outlays, $152,697,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $160,740,000,000. (B) Outlays, $155,316,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $163,649,000,000. (B) Outlays, $158,173,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $166,633,000,000. (B) Outlays, $161,098,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $169,998,000,000. (B) Outlays, $164,267,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $173,554,000,000. (B) Outlays, $167,569,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $176,600,000,000. (B) Outlays, $170,648,000,000. (11) Health (550): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $945,070,000,000. (B) Outlays, $961,180,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $992,092,000,000. (B) Outlays, $976,652,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $1,020,326,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,021,179,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $1,055,396,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,052,323,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $1,098,848,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,094,015,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $1,142,891,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,132,318,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $1,176,522,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,175,476,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $1,226,824,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,216,998,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $1,276,881,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,266,068,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $1,310,000,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,298,975,000,000. (12) Medicare (570): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $950,891,000,000. (B) Outlays, $950,641,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $1,006,800,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,008,719,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $1,066,571,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,066,276,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $1,209,735,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,208,310,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $1,125,645,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,125,229,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $1,275,864,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,275,566,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $1,357,791,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,357,726,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $1,445,195,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,445,191,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $1,663,779,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,663,796,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $1,666,492,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,666,497,000,000. (13) Income Security (600): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $712,446,000,000. (B) Outlays, $709,132,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $691,755,000,000. (B) Outlays, $690,914,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $709,037,000,000. (B) Outlays, $704,040,000,000.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.037 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S985 February 13, 2025 

Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $727,612,000,000. (B) Outlays, $727,412,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $729,224,000,000. (B) Outlays, $715,149,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $748,243,000,000. (B) Outlays, $739,546,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $761,438,000,000. (B) Outlays, $752,199,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $779,471,000,000. (B) Outlays, $769,491,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $800,819,000,000. (B) Outlays, $797,512,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $809,385,000,000. (B) Outlays, $799,089,000,000. (14) Social Security (650): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $67,259,000,000. (B) Outlays, $67,259,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $81,690,000,000. (B) Outlays, $81,690,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $89,447,000,000. (B) Outlays, $89,447,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $94,419,000,000. (B) Outlays, $94,419,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $100,138,000,000. (B) Outlays, $100,138,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $106,208,000,000. (B) Outlays, $106,208,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $112,114,000,000. (B) Outlays, $112,114,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $118,485,000,000. (B) Outlays, $118,485,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $125,325,000,000. (B) Outlays, $125,325,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $132,539,000,000. (B) Outlays, $132,539,000,000. (15) Veterans Benefits and Services (700): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $361,349,000,000. (B) Outlays, $357,760,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $382,555,000,000. (B) Outlays, $378,814,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $404,594,000,000. (B) Outlays, $401,319,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $427,329,000,000. (B) Outlays, $444,241,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $447,757,000,000. (B) Outlays, $422,317,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $466,616,000,000. (B) Outlays, $461,720,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $486,716,000,000. (B) Outlays, $481,638,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $507,187,000,000. (B) Outlays, $502,655,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $528,733,000,000. (B) Outlays, $548,734,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $550,662,000,000. (B) Outlays, $547,796,000,000. (16) Administration of Justice (750): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $83,111,000,000. (B) Outlays, $85,235,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $88,992,000,000. (B) Outlays, $87,024,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $87,701,000,000. (B) Outlays, $86,420,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $89,687,000,000. (B) Outlays, $88,514,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $92,142,000,000. (B) Outlays, $90,690,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $94,574,000,000. (B) Outlays, $92,986,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $96,848,000,000. (B) Outlays, $94,869,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $104,463,000,000. (B) Outlays, $101,844,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $107,160,000,000. (B) Outlays, $104,339,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $109,431,000,000. (B) Outlays, $106,934,000,000. (17) General Government (800): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $10,089,000,000. (B) Outlays, $37,960,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $30,666,000,000. (B) Outlays, $38,285,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $32,065,000,000. (B) Outlays, $38,261,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $32,994,000,000. (B) Outlays, $37,957,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $33,770,000,000. (B) Outlays, $37,793,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $34,614,000,000. (B) Outlays, $37,985,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $35,247,000,000. (B) Outlays, $37,024,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $36,189,000,000. (B) Outlays, $36,307,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $36,960,000,000. (B) Outlays, $36,758,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $37,681,000,000. (B) Outlays, $37,266,000,000. (18) Net Interest (900): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $1,010,050,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,010,050,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $1,022,935,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,022,935,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $1,064,571,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,064,571,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $1,130,048,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,130,048,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $1,186,820,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,186,820,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $1,237,051,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,237,051,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $1,294,533,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,294,533,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $1,354,493,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,354,493,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $1,407,576,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,407,576,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $1,469,426,000,000. (B) Outlays, $1,469,426,000,000. (19) Allowances (920): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$1,002,585,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$982,952,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$888,507,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$899,685,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$890,385,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$894,338,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$848,499,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$850,453,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$851,993,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$853,311,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$874,575,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$874,575,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$874,548,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$874,548,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$894,135,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$894,135,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$945,247,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$945,247,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$913,790,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$913,790,000,000. (20) Undistributed Offsetting Receipts (950): Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$127,603,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$127,603,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$135,110,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$135,110,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$137,883,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$137,883,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$141,145,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$141,165,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$145,400,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$145,407,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$149,582,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$149,581,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$154,014,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$154,013,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$160,114,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$160,113,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$166,102,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$166,101,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, 

¥$171,015,000,000. (B) Outlays, ¥$171,014,000,000. 

Subtitle B—Levels and Amounts in the Senate SEC. 1201. SOCIAL SECURITY IN THE SENATE. 

(a) S OCIAL S ECURITY R EVENUES .—For pur-poses of Senate enforcement under sections         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.037 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S986 February 13, 2025 

302 and 311 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 633 and 642), the amounts of revenues of the Federal Old-Age and Sur-vivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund are as fol-lows: Fiscal year 2025: $1,303,924,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: $1,363,672,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: $1,418,444,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: $1,471,555,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: $1,530,067,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: $1,590,856,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: $1,653,864,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: $1,717,636,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: $1,781,872,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: $1,848,256,000,000. (b) S OCIAL S ECURITY O UTLAYS .—For pur-poses of Senate enforcement under sections 302 and 311 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 633 and 642), the amounts of outlays of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Dis-ability Insurance Trust Fund are as follows: Fiscal year 2025: $1,413,704,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: $1,496,323,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: $1,585,399,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: $1,686,635,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: $1,786,689,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: $1,890,295,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: $1,998,538,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: $2,111,627,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: $2,224,148,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: $2,324,954,000,000. (c) S OCIAL S ECURITY A DMINISTRATIVE E X-PENSES .—In the Senate, the amounts of new budget authority and budget outlays of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insur-ance Trust Fund for administrative expenses are as follows: Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $6,408,000,000. (B) Outlays, $6,338,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $6,268,000,000. (B) Outlays, $6,287,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $6,455,000,000. (B) Outlays, $6,422,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $6,644,000,000. (B) Outlays, $6,584,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $6,832,000,000. (B) Outlays, $6,765,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $7,033,000,000. (B) Outlays, $6,963,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $7,233,000,000. (B) Outlays, $7,162,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $7,437,000,000. (B) Outlays, $7,365,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $7,651,000,000. (B) Outlays, $7,576,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $7,869,000,000. (B) Outlays, $7,792,000,000.    

> SEC. 1202. POSTAL SERVICE DISCRETIONARY AD-MINISTRATIVE EXPENSES IN THE SENATE.

In the Senate, the amounts of new budget authority and budget outlays of the Postal Service for discretionary administrative ex-penses are as follows: Fiscal year 2025: (A) New budget authority, $268,000,000. (B) Outlays, $268,000,000. Fiscal year 2026: (A) New budget authority, $279,000,000. (B) Outlays, $279,000,000. Fiscal year 2027: (A) New budget authority, $289,000,000. (B) Outlays, $289,000,000. Fiscal year 2028: (A) New budget authority, $299,000,000. (B) Outlays, $299,000,000. Fiscal year 2029: (A) New budget authority, $309,000,000. (B) Outlays, $309,000,000. Fiscal year 2030: (A) New budget authority, $319,000,000. (B) Outlays, $319,000,000. Fiscal year 2031: (A) New budget authority, $330,000,000. (B) Outlays, $330,000,000. Fiscal year 2032: (A) New budget authority, $341,000,000. (B) Outlays, $341,000,000. Fiscal year 2033: (A) New budget authority, $352,000,000. (B) Outlays, $352,000,000. Fiscal year 2034: (A) New budget authority, $364,000,000. (B) Outlays, $364,000,000. 

TITLE II—RECONCILIATION SEC. 2001. RECONCILIATION IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. 

(a) C OMMITTEE ON A GRICULTURE .—The Com-mittee on Agriculture of the House of Rep-resentatives shall report changes in laws within its jurisdiction that reduce the deficit by not less than $1,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (b) C OMMITTEE ON A RMED S ERVICES .—The Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives shall report changes in laws within its jurisdiction that increase the deficit by not more than $150,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (c) C OMMITTEE ON E DUCATION AND W ORK -FORCE .—The Committee on Education and Workforce of the House of Representatives shall report changes in laws within its juris-diction that reduce the deficit by not less than $1,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (d) C OMMITTEE ON E NERGY AND C OM -MERCE .—The Committee on Energy and Com-merce of the House of Representatives shall report changes in laws within its jurisdiction that reduce the deficit by not less than $1,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (e) C OMMITTEE ON N ATURAL R ESOURCES .— The Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives shall report changes in laws within its jurisdiction that reduce the deficit by not less than $1,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (f) COMMITTEE ON H OMELAND S ECURITY .— The Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives shall report changes in laws within its jurisdiction that increase the deficit by not more than $175,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (g) C OMMITTEE ON THE J UDICIARY .—The Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives shall report changes in laws within its jurisdiction that increase the def-icit by not more than $175,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (h) C OMMITTEE ON T RANSPORTATION AND IN-FRASTRUCTURE .—The Committee on Trans-portation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives shall report changes in laws within its jurisdiction that increase the def-icit by not more than $20,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (i) S UBMISSIONS .—In the House of Rep-resentatives, not later than March 7, 2025, the committees named in the subsections of this section shall submit their recommenda-tions to the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives to carry out this section. 

> SEC. 2002. RECONCILIATION IN THE SENATE.

(a) C OMMITTEE ON A GRICULTURE , N UTRITION ,AND FORESTRY .—The Committee on Agri-culture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Sen-ate shall report changes in laws within its jurisdiction that reduce the deficit by not less than $1,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (b) C OMMITTEE ON A RMED S ERVICES .—The Committee on Armed Services of the Senate shall report changes in laws within its juris-diction that increase the deficit by not more than $150,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (c) C OMMITTEE ON COMMERCE , S CIENCE , AND T RANSPORTATION .—The Committee on Com-merce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate shall report changes in laws within its jurisdiction that increase the deficit by not more than $20,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (d) C OMMITTEE ON E NERGY AND N ATURAL R ESOURCES .—The Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate shall report changes in laws within its jurisdiction that reduce the deficit by not less than $1,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (e) C OMMITTEE ON E NVIRONMENT AND P UBLIC WORKS .—The Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate shall report changes in laws within its jurisdiction that increase the deficit by not more than $1,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (f) C OMMITTEE ON F INANCE .—The Com-mittee on Finance of the Senate shall report changes in laws within its jurisdiction that reduce the deficit by not less than $1,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (g) C OMMITTEE ON H EALTH , EDUCATION ,L ABOR , AND P ENSIONS .—The Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate shall report changes in laws with-in its jurisdiction that reduce the deficit by not less than $1,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (h) C OMMITTEE ON H OMELAND S ECURITY AND G OVERNMENTAL A FFAIRS .—The Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Af-fairs of the Senate shall report changes in laws within its jurisdiction that increase the deficit by not more than $175,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (i) C OMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY .—The Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate shall report changes in laws within its juris-diction that increase the deficit by not more than $175,000,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (j) S UBMISSIONS .—In the Senate, not later than March 7, 2025, the committees named in the subsections of this section shall submit their recommendations to the Committee on the Budget of the Senate. Upon receiving all such recommendations, the Committee on the Budget of the Senate shall report to the Senate a reconciliation bill carrying out all such recommendations without any sub-stantive revision. 

TITLE III—RESERVE FUNDS SEC. 3001. RESERVE FUND FOR RECONCILIATION LEGISLATION. 

(a) H OUSE OF R EPRESENTATIVES .— (1) I N GENERAL .—In the House of the Rep-resentatives, the chair of the Committee on the Budget may revise the allocations of a committee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution for any bill or joint resolution considered pursuant to section 2001 containing the rec-ommendations of one or more committees, or for one or more amendments to, a con-ference report on, or an amendment between the Houses in relation to such a bill or joint resolution, by the amounts necessary to ac-commodate the budgetary effects of the leg-islation, if the budgetary effects of the legis-lation comply with the reconciliation in-structions under this concurrent resolution. (2) D ETERMINATION OF COMPLIANCE .—For purposes of this section, compliance with the 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.037 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S987 February 13, 2025 

reconciliation instructions under this con-current resolution shall be determined by the chair of the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives. (3) E XCEPTION FOR LEGISLATION .—The point of order set forth in clause 10 of rule XXI of the House of Representatives shall not apply to reconciliation legislation reported by the Committee on the Budget pursuant to sub-missions under section 2001. (b) S ENATE .— (1) I N GENERAL .—In the Senate, the Chair-man of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may revise the allocations of a com-mittee or committees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution, and make adjustments to the pay-as-you-go ledg-er, for any bill or joint resolution considered pursuant to section 2002 containing the rec-ommendations of one or more committees, or for one or more amendments to, a con-ference report on, or an amendment between the Houses in relation to such a bill or joint resolution, by the amounts necessary to ac-commodate the budgetary effects of the leg-islation, if the budgetary effects of the legis-lation comply with the reconciliation in-structions under this concurrent resolution. (2) DETERMINATION OF COMPLIANCE .—For purposes of this section, compliance with the reconciliation instructions under this con-current resolution shall be determined by the Chairman of the Committee on the Budg-et of the Senate. (3) E XCEPTIONS FOR LEGISLATION .— (A) S HORT - TERM .—Section 404 of S. Con. Res. 13 (111th Congress), the concurrent reso-lution on the budget for fiscal year 2010, as amended by section 3201(b)(2) of S. Con. Res. 11 (114th Congress), the concurrent resolu-tion on the budget for fiscal year 2016, shall not apply to legislation for which the Chair-man of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate has exercised the authority under paragraph (1). (B) LONG -TERM .—Section 3101 of S. Con. Res. 11 (114th Congress), the concurrent reso-lution on the budget for fiscal year 2016, shall not apply to legislation for which the Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate has exercised the authority under paragraph (1).      

> SEC. 3002. RESERVE FUND FOR DEFICIT-NEU-TRAL LEGISLATION.

(a) S ENATE .—The Chairman of the Com-mittee on the Budget of the Senate may re-vise the allocations of a committee or com-mittees, aggregates, and other appropriate levels in this resolution, and make adjust-ments to the pay-as-you-go ledger, for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, amendments between the Houses, motions, or conference reports by the amounts pro-vided in such legislation, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit over the period of the total of fiscal years 2025 through 2034. (b) H OUSE OF R EPRESENTATIVES .—The chair of the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives may revise the alloca-tions of a committee or committees, aggre-gates, and other appropriate levels in this concurrent resolution for one or more bills, joint resolutions, amendments, or conference reports by the amounts provided in such leg-islation, provided that such legislation would not increase the deficit for the period of fiscal year 2025 to fiscal year 2034. 

TITLE IV—OTHER MATTERS SEC. 4001. ENFORCEMENT FILING. 

(a) I N THE H OUSE OF R EPRESENTATIVES .—In the House of Representatives, if a concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2025 is adopted without the appointment of acommittee of conference on the disagreeing votes of the two Houses with respect to this concurrent resolution on the budget, for the purpose of enforcing the Congressional Budg-et Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 621 et seq.) and appli-cable rules and requirements set forth in the concurrent resolution on the budget, the al-locations provided for in this subsection shall apply in the House of Representatives in the same manner as if such allocations were in a joint explanatory statement ac-companying a conference report on the budg-et for fiscal year 2025. The chair of the Com-mittee on the Budget of the House of Rep-resentatives shall submit a statement for publication in the Congressional Record con-taining— (1) for the Committee on Appropriations, committee allocations for fiscal year 2025 consistent with title I for the purpose of en-forcing section 302 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 633); and (2) for all committees other than the Com-mittee on Appropriations, committee alloca-tions consistent with title I for fiscal year 2025 and for the period of fiscal years 2025 through 2034 for the purpose of enforcing 302 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 633). (b) I N THE S ENATE .—If this concurrent reso-lution on the budget is agreed to by the Sen-ate and House of Representatives without the appointment of a committee of con-ference on the disagreeing votes of the two Houses, the Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may submit astatement for publication in the Congres-sional Record containing— (1) for the Committee on Appropriations, committee allocations for fiscal year 2025 consistent with the levels in title I for the purpose of enforcing section 302 of the Con-gressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 633); and (2) for all committees other than the Com-mittee on Appropriations, committee alloca-tions for fiscal years 2025, 2025 through 2029, and 2025 through 2034 consistent with the lev-els in title I for the purpose of enforcing sec-tion 302 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 633). 

> SEC. 4002. BUDGETARY TREATMENT OF ADMINIS-TRATIVE EXPENSES.

(a) S ENATE .— (1) IN GENERAL .—In the Senate, notwith-standing section 302(a)(1) of the Congres-sional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 633(a)(1)), section 13301 of the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990 (2 U.S.C. 632 note), and section 2009a of title 39, United States Code, the report or the joint explanatory statement accom-panying this concurrent resolution on the budget or the statement filed pursuant to section 4001(b), as applicable, shall include in an allocation under section 302(a) of the Con-gressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 633(a)) to the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate of amounts for the discretionary ad-ministrative expenses of the Social Security Administration and the United States Postal Service. (2) S PECIAL RULE .—In the Senate, for pur-poses of enforcing section 302(f) of the Con-gressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 633(f)), estimates of the level of total new budget au-thority and total outlays provided by ameasure shall include any discretionary amounts described in paragraph (1). (b) H OUSE OF R EPRESENTATIVES .— (1) I N GENERAL .—In the House of Represent-atives, notwithstanding section 302(a)(1) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 633(a)(1)), section 13301 of the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990 (2 U.S.C. 632 note), and section 2009a of title 39, United States Code, the report or the joint explanatory statement accompanying this concurrent resolution on the budget or the statement filed pursuant to section 4001(a), as applica-ble, shall include in an allocation under sec-tion 302(a) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 633(a)) to the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representa-tives of amounts for the discretionary ad-ministrative expenses of the Social Security Administration and the United States Postal Service. (2) S PECIAL RULE .—In the House of Rep-resentatives, for purposes of enforcing sec-tion 302(f) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 633(f)), estimates of the level of total new budget authority and total outlays provided by a measure shall include any dis-cretionary amounts described in paragraph (1).         

> SEC. 4003. APPLICATION AND EFFECT OF CHANGES IN ALLOCATIONS, AGGRE-GATES, AND OTHER BUDGETARY LEVELS.

(a) A PPLICATION .—Any adjustments of allo-cations, aggregates, and other budgetary lev-els made pursuant to this concurrent resolu-tion shall— (1) apply while that measure is under con-sideration; (2) take effect upon the enactment of that measure; and (3) be published in the Congressional Record as soon as practicable. (b) E FFECT OF C HANGED A LLOCATIONS , A G-GREGATES , AND O THER B UDGETARY L EVELS .— Revised allocations, aggregates, and other budgetary levels resulting from these adjust-ments shall be considered for the purposes of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 621 et seq.) as the allocations, aggre-gates, and other budgetary levels contained in this concurrent resolution. (c) B UDGET C OMMITTEE D ETERMINATIONS .— For purposes of this concurrent resolution, the levels of new budget authority, outlays, direct spending, new entitlement authority, revenues, deficits, and surpluses for a fiscal year or period of fiscal years shall be deter-mined on the basis of estimates made by the chair of the Committee on the Budget of the applicable House of Congress. 

> SEC. 4004. ADJUSTMENT AUTHORITY FOR REVI-SIONS TO STATUTORY CAPS.

During the 119th Congress, if a legislative measure is enacted that revises the discre-tionary spending limit established under subsection (c) of section 251 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 U.S.C. 901), the Chair of the Com-mittee on the Budget of the Senate may, consistent with the legislative measure and as necessary— (1) adjust the allocation required under section 302(a) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 633(a)) to the appro-priate committee or committees of the Sen-ate; and (2) adjust all other budgetary aggregates, allocations, levels, and limits established under this Concurrent Resolution. 

> SEC. 4005. ADJUSTMENTS TO REFLECT CHANGES IN CONCEPTS AND DEFINITIONS.

(a) H OUSE OF R EPRESENTATIVES .—In the House of Representatives, the chair of the Committee on the Budget may adjust the ap-propriate aggregates, allocations, and other budgetary levels in this concurrent resolu-tion for any change in budgetary concepts and definitions consistent with section 251(b)(1) of the Balanced Budget and Emer-gency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 U.S.C. 901(b)(1)). (b) SENATE .—In the Senate, upon the en-actment of a bill or joint resolution pro-viding for a change in concepts or defini-tions, the Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may make adjustments to the levels and allocations in this concur-rent resolution in accordance with section 251(b) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 U.S.C. 901(b)). 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.037 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S988 February 13, 2025       

> SEC. 4006. ADJUSTMENT FOR CHANGES IN THE BASELINE.

The chair of the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives and the Chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate may adjust the allocations, ag-gregates, and other appropriate budgetary levels in this concurrent resolution to reflect changes resulting from the Congressional Budget Office’s updates to its baseline for fiscal years 2025 through 2034, including the effects of legislation enacted before the date on which this concurrent resolution is agreed to. 

> SEC. 4007. EXERCISE OF RULEMAKING POWERS.

Congress adopts the provisions of this title— (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and the House of Representa-tives, respectively, and as such they shall be considered as part of the rules of each House or of that House to which they specifically apply, and such rules shall supersede other rules only to the extent that they are incon-sistent with such other rules; and (2) with full recognition of the constitu-tional right of either the Senate or the House of Representatives to change those rules (insofar as they relate to that House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as is the case of any other rule of the Senate or House of Representatives. 

f

AUTHORITY FOR COMMITTEES TO MEET Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, I have seven requests for committees to meet during today’s session of the Senate. They have the approval of the Majority and Minority Leaders. Pursuant to rule XXVI, paragraph 5(a), of the Standing Rules of the Sen-ate, the following committees are au-thorized to meet during today’s session of the Senate: COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES The Committee on Armed Services is authorized to meet in open and closed session during the session of the Sen-ate on Thursday, February 13, 2025, at 9:30 a.m., to receive testimony. COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN RELATIONS The Committee on Foreign Relations is authorized to meet during the ses-sion of the Senate on Thursday, Feb-ruary 13, 2025, at 10:30 a.m., to conduct a hearing. COMMITTEE ON HEALTH , EDUCATION , LABOR ,AND PENSIONS The Committee on Health, Edu-cation, Labor, and Pensions is author-ized to meet during the session of the Senate on Thursday, February 13, 2025, at 10 a.m., to conduct a hearing on a nomination. COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS The Committee on Homeland Secu-rity and Governmental Affairs is au-thorized to meet during the session of the Senate on Thursday, February 13, 2025, at 10 a.m., to conduct a business meeting. COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY AND GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS The Committee on Homeland Secu-rity and Governmental Affairs is au-thorized to meet during the session of the Senate on Thursday, February 13, 2025, at 10 a.m., to conduct a hearing. COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY The Committee on the Judiciary is authorized to meet during the session of the Senate on Thursday, February 13, 2025, at 9 a.m., to conduct an execu-tive business meeting. COMMITTEE ON SMALL BUSINESS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP The Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship is authorized to meet during the session of the Senate on Thursday, February 13, 2025, at 2p.m., to reconvene a business meeting. 

f

PRIVILEGES OF THE FLOOR Mr. BOOZMAN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that our intern on the Committee on Agriculture, Nutri-tion, and Forestry Kylee Henneberry be granted floor privileges through May 9, 2025, and the CFTC detailee Kevin Webb also be granted floor privi-leges through the end of the 119th Con-gress. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. 

f

TOOLS TO ADDRESS KNOWN EXPLOTATIONS BY IMMO-BILIZING TECHNOLOGICAL DEEPTAKES ON WEBSITES AND NETWORKS ACT Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, Iask unanimous consent that the Com-mittee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation be discharged from fur-ther consideration of S. 146 and the Senate proceed to its immediate con-sideration. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will report the bill by title. The senior assistant executive clerk read as follows: A bill (S. 146) to require covered platforms to remove nonconsensual intimate visual de-pictions, and for other purposes. There being no objection, the com-mittee was discharged, and the Senate proceeded to consider the bill. Ms. MURKOWSKI. I ask unanimous consent that the bill be considered read a third time and passed and the motion to reconsider be considered made and laid upon the table. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The bill (S. 146) was ordered to be en-grossed for a third reading, was read the third time, and passed, as follows: S. 146 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Rep-resentatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, 

> SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ‘‘Tools to Ad-dress Known Exploitation by Immobilizing Technological Deepfakes on Websites and Networks Act’’ or the ‘‘TAKE IT DOWN Act’’.         

> SEC. 2. CRIMINAL PROHIBITION ON INTEN-TIONAL DISCLOSURE OF NON-CONSENSUAL INTIMATE VISUAL DE-PICTIONS.

(a) I N G ENERAL .—Section 223 of the Com-munications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 223) is amended— (1) by redesignating subsection (h) as sub-section (i); and (2) by inserting after subsection (g) the fol-lowing: ‘‘(h) I NTENTIONAL D ISCLOSURE OF N ON -CONSENSUAL I NTIMATE V ISUAL D EPICTIONS .— ‘‘(1) D EFINITIONS .—In this subsection: ‘‘(A) C ONSENT .—The term ‘consent’ means an affirmative, conscious, and voluntary au-thorization made by an individual free from force, fraud, duress, misrepresentation, or coercion. ‘‘(B) D IGITAL FORGERY .—The term ‘digital forgery’ means any intimate visual depiction of an identifiable individual created through the use of software, machine learning, artifi-cial intelligence, or any other computer-gen-erated or technological means, including by adapting, modifying, manipulating, or alter-ing an authentic visual depiction, that, when viewed as a whole by a reasonable person, is indistinguishable from an authentic visual depiction of the individual. ‘‘(C) I DENTIFIABLE INDIVIDUAL .—The term ‘identifiable individual’ means an indi-vidual— ‘‘(i) who appears in whole or in part in an intimate visual depiction; and ‘‘(ii) whose face, likeness, or other distin-guishing characteristic (including a unique birthmark or other recognizable feature) is displayed in connection with such intimate visual depiction. ‘‘(D) I NTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE .—The term ‘interactive computer service’ has the meaning given the term in section 230. ‘‘(E) I NTIMATE VISUAL DEPICTION .—The term ‘intimate visual depiction’ has the meaning given such term in section 1309 of the Con-solidated Appropriations Act, 2022 (15 U.S.C. 6851). ‘‘(F) M INOR .—The term ‘minor’ means any individual under the age of 18 years. ‘‘(2) OFFENSE INVOLVING AUTHENTIC INTI -MATE VISUAL DEPICTIONS .— ‘‘(A) I NVOLVING ADULTS .—Except as pro-vided in subparagraph (C), it shall be unlaw-ful for any person, in interstate or foreign commerce, to use an interactive computer service to knowingly publish an intimate visual depiction of an identifiable individual who is not a minor if— ‘‘(i) the intimate visual depiction was ob-tained or created under circumstances in which the person knew or reasonably should have known the identifiable individual had a reasonable expectation of privacy; ‘‘(ii) what is depicted was not voluntarily exposed by the identifiable individual in apublic or commercial setting; ‘‘(iii) what is depicted is not a matter of public concern; and ‘‘(iv) publication of the intimate visual de-piction— ‘‘(I) is intended to cause harm; or ‘‘(II) causes harm, including psychological, financial, or reputational harm, to the iden-tifiable individual. ‘‘(B) I NVOLVING MINORS .—Except as pro-vided in subparagraph (C), it shall be unlaw-ful for any person, in interstate or foreign commerce, to use an interactive computer service to knowingly publish an intimate visual depiction of an identifiable individual who is a minor with intent to— ‘‘(i) abuse, humiliate, harass, or degrade the minor; or ‘‘(ii) arouse or gratify the sexual desire of any person. ‘‘(C) E XCEPTIONS .—Subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall not apply to— ‘‘(i) a lawfully authorized investigative, protective, or intelligence activity of— ‘‘(I) a law enforcement agency of the United States, a State, or a political subdivi-sion of a State; or ‘‘(II) an intelligence agency of the United States; ‘‘(ii) a disclosure made reasonably and in good faith— 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.037 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S989 February 13, 2025 

‘‘(I) to a law enforcement officer or agency; ‘‘(II) as part of a document production or filing associated with a legal proceeding; ‘‘(III) as part of medical education, diag-nosis, or treatment or for a legitimate med-ical, scientific, or education purpose; ‘‘(IV) in the reporting of unlawful content or unsolicited or unwelcome conduct or in pursuance of a legal, professional, or other lawful obligation; or ‘‘(V) to seek support or help with respect to the receipt of an unsolicited intimate vis-ual depiction; ‘‘(iii) a disclosure reasonably intended to assist the identifiable individual; ‘‘(iv) a person who possesses or publishes an intimate visual depiction of himself or herself engaged in nudity or sexually explicit conduct (as that term is defined in section 2256(2)(A) of title 18, United States Code); or ‘‘(v) the publication of an intimate visual depiction that constitutes— ‘‘(I) child pornography (as that term is de-fined in section 2256 of title 18, United States Code); or ‘‘(II) a visual depiction described in sub-section (a) or (b) of section 1466A of title 18, United States Code (relating to obscene vis-ual representations of the sexual abuse of children). ‘‘(3) O FFENSE INVOLVING DIGITAL FOR -GERIES .— ‘‘(A) I NVOLVING ADULTS .—Except as pro-vided in subparagraph (C), it shall be unlaw-ful for any person, in interstate or foreign commerce, to use an interactive computer service to knowingly publish a digital for-gery of an identifiable individual who is not a minor if— ‘‘(i) the digital forgery was published with-out the consent of the identifiable indi-vidual; ‘‘(ii) what is depicted was not voluntarily exposed by the identifiable individual in apublic or commercial setting; ‘‘(iii) what is depicted is not a matter of public concern; and ‘‘(iv) publication of the digital forgery— ‘‘(I) is intended to cause harm; or ‘‘(II) causes harm, including psychological, financial, or reputational harm, to the iden-tifiable individual. ‘‘(B) I NVOLVING MINORS .—Except as pro-vided in subparagraph (C), it shall be unlaw-ful for any person, in interstate or foreign commerce, to use an interactive computer service to knowingly publish a digital for-gery of an identifiable individual who is aminor with intent to— ‘‘(i) abuse, humiliate, harass, or degrade the minor; or ‘‘(ii) arouse or gratify the sexual desire of any person. ‘‘(C) E XCEPTIONS .—Subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall not apply to— ‘‘(i) a lawfully authorized investigative, protective, or intelligence activity of— ‘‘(I) a law enforcement agency of the United States, a State, or a political subdivi-sion of a State; or ‘‘(II) an intelligence agency of the United States; ‘‘(ii) a disclosure made reasonably and in good faith— ‘‘(I) to a law enforcement officer or agency; ‘‘(II) as part of a document production or filing associated with a legal proceeding; ‘‘(III) as part of medical education, diag-nosis, or treatment or for a legitimate med-ical, scientific, or education purpose; ‘‘(IV) in the reporting of unlawful content or unsolicited or unwelcome conduct or in pursuance of a legal, professional, or other lawful obligation; or ‘‘(V) to seek support or help with respect to the receipt of an unsolicited intimate vis-ual depiction; ‘‘(iii) a disclosure reasonably intended to assist the identifiable individual; ‘‘(iv) a person who possesses or publishes a digital forgery of himself or herself engaged in nudity or sexually explicit conduct (as that term is defined in section 2256(2)(A) of title 18, United States Code); or ‘‘(v) the publication of an intimate visual depiction that constitutes— ‘‘(I) child pornography (as that term is de-fined in section 2256 of title 18, United States Code); or ‘‘(II) a visual depiction described in sub-section (a) or (b) of section 1466A of title 18, United States Code (relating to obscene vis-ual representations of the sexual abuse of children). ‘‘(4) P ENALTIES .— ‘‘(A) O FFENSES INVOLVING ADULTS .—Any person who violates paragraph (2)(A) or (3)(A) shall be fined under title 18, United States Code, imprisoned not more than 2years, or both. ‘‘(B) O FFENSES INVOLVING MINORS .—Any person who violates paragraph (2)(B) or (3)(B) shall be fined under title 18, United States Code, imprisoned not more than 3 years, or both. ‘‘(5) R ULES OF CONSTRUCTION .—For purposes of paragraphs (2) and (3)— ‘‘(A) the fact that the identifiable indi-vidual provided consent for the creation of the intimate visual depiction shall not es-tablish that the individual provided consent for the publication of the intimate visual de-piction; and ‘‘(B) the fact that the identifiable indi-vidual disclosed the intimate visual depic-tion to another individual shall not establish that the identifiable individual provided con-sent for the publication of the intimate vis-ual depiction by the person alleged to have violated paragraph (2) or (3), respectively. ‘‘(6) T HREATS .— ‘‘(A) T HREATS INVOLVING AUTHENTIC INTI -MATE VISUAL DEPICTIONS .—Any person who intentionally threatens to commit an offense under paragraph (2) for the purpose of in-timidation, coercion, extortion, or to create mental distress shall be punished as provided in paragraph (4). ‘‘(B) T HREATS INVOLVING DIGITAL FOR -GERIES .— ‘‘(i) T HREATS INVOLVING ADULTS .—Any per-son who intentionally threatens to commit an offense under paragraph (3)(A) for the pur-pose of intimidation, coercion, extortion, or to create mental distress shall be fined under title 18, United States Code, imprisoned not more than 18 months, or both. ‘‘(ii) T HREATS INVOLVING MINORS .—Any per-son who intentionally threatens to commit an offense under paragraph (3)(B) for the pur-pose of intimidation, coercion, extortion, or to create mental distress shall be fined under title 18, United States Code, imprisoned not more than 30 months, or both. ‘‘(7) F ORFEITURE .— ‘‘(A) I N GENERAL .—The court, in imposing a sentence on any person convicted of a viola-tion of paragraph (2) or (3), shall order, in ad-dition to any other sentence imposed and ir-respective of any provision of State law, that the person forfeit to the United States— ‘‘(i) any material distributed in violation of that paragraph; ‘‘(ii) the person’s interest in property, real or personal, constituting or derived from any gross proceeds of the violation, or any prop-erty traceable to such property, obtained or retained directly or indirectly as a result of the violation; and ‘‘(iii) any personal property of the person used, or intended to be used, in any manner or part, to commit or to facilitate the com-mission of the violation. ‘‘(B) P ROCEDURES .—Section 413 of the Con-trolled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 853), with the exception of subsections (a) and (d), shall apply to the criminal forfeiture of property under subparagraph (A). ‘‘(8) R ESTITUTION .—The court shall order restitution for an offense under paragraph (2) or (3) in the same manner as under section 2264 of title 18, United States Code. ‘‘(9) R ULE OF CONSTRUCTION .—Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the application of any other relevant law, in-cluding section 2252 of title 18, United States Code.’’. (b) D EFENSES .—Section 223(e)(1) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 223(e)(1)) is amended by striking ‘‘or (d)’’ and inserting ‘‘, (d), or (h)’’. (c) T ECHNICAL AND C ONFORMING A MEND -MENT .—Subsection (i) of section 223 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 223), as so redesignated by subsection (a), is amended by inserting ‘‘D EFINITIONS .—’’ be-fore ‘‘For purposes of this section’’.    

> SEC. 3. NOTICE AND REMOVAL OF NONCONSEN-SUAL INTIMATE VISUAL DEPIC-TIONS.

(a) I N G ENERAL .— (1) N OTICE AND REMOVAL PROCESS .— (A) E STABLISHMENT .—Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, acovered platform shall establish a process whereby an identifiable individual (or an au-thorized person acting on behalf of such indi-vidual) may— (i) notify the covered platform of an inti-mate visual depiction published on the cov-ered platform that— (I) includes a depiction of the identifiable individual; and (II) was published without the consent of the identifiable individual; and (ii) submit a request for the covered plat-form to remove such intimate visual depic-tion. (B) R EQUIREMENTS .—A notification and re-quest for removal of an intimate visual de-piction submitted under the process estab-lished under subparagraph (A) shall include, in writing— (i) a physical or electronic signature of the identifiable individual (or an authorized per-son acting on behalf of such individual); (ii) an identification of, and information reasonably sufficient for the covered plat-form to locate, the intimate visual depiction of the identifiable individual; (iii) a brief statement that the identifiable individual has a good faith belief that any intimate visual depiction identified under clause (ii) is not consensual, including any relevant information for the covered plat-form to determine the intimate visual depic-tion was published without the consent of the identifiable individual; and (iv) information sufficient to enable the covered platform to contact the identifiable individual (or an authorized person acting on behalf of such individual). (2) N OTICE OF PROCESS .—A covered platform shall provide on the platform a clear and conspicuous notice, which may be provided through a clear and conspicuous link to an-other web page or disclosure, of the notice and removal process established under para-graph (1)(A) that— (A) is easy to read and in plain language; and (B) provides information regarding the re-sponsibilities of the covered platform under this section, including a description of how an individual can submit a notification and request for removal. (3) R EMOVAL OF NONCONSENSUAL INTIMATE VISUAL DEPICTIONS .—Upon receiving a valid removal request from an identifiable indi-vidual (or an authorized person acting on be-half of such individual) using the process de-scribed in paragraph (1)(A)(ii), a covered platform shall, as soon as possible, but not 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.009 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S990 February 13, 2025 

later than 48 hours after receiving such re-quest— (A) remove the intimate visual depiction; and (B) make reasonable efforts to identify and remove any known identical copies of such depiction. (4) L IMITATION ON LIABILITY .—A covered platform shall not be liable for any claim based on the covered platform’s good faith disabling of access to, or removal of, mate-rial claimed to be a nonconsensual intimate visual depiction based on facts or cir-cumstances from which the unlawful pub-lishing of an intimate visual depiction is ap-parent, regardless of whether the intimate visual depiction is ultimately determined to be unlawful or not. (b) E NFORCEMENT BY THE C OMMISSION .— (1) UNFAIR OR DECEPTIVE ACTS OR PRAC -TICES .—A failure to reasonably comply with the notice and takedown obligations under subsection (a) shall be treated as a violation of a rule defining an unfair or a deceptive act or practice under section 18(a)(1)(B) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 57a(a)(1)(B)). (2) P OWERS OF THE COMMISSION .— (A) I N GENERAL .—Except as provided in subparagraph (D), the Commission shall en-force this section in the same manner, by the same means, and with the same jurisdiction, powers, and duties as though all applicable terms and provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.) were incorporated into and made a part of this section. (B) P RIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES .—Any per-son who violates this section shall be subject to the penalties and entitled to the privi-leges and immunities provided in the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.). (C) A UTHORITY PRESERVED .—Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit the au-thority of the Federal Trade Commission under any other provision of law. (D) SCOPE OF JURISDICTION .—Notwith-standing sections 4, 5(a)(2), or 6 of the Fed-eral Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 44, 45(a)(2), 46), or any jurisdictional limitation of the Commission, the Commission shall also enforce this section in the same manner provided in subparagraph (A), with respect to organizations that are not organized to carry on business for their own profit or that of their members. 

> SEC. 4. DEFINITIONS.

In this Act: (1) COMMISSION .—The term ‘‘Commission’’ means the Federal Trade Commission. (2) C ONSENT ; DIGITAL FORGERY ; IDENTIFI -ABLE INDIVIDUAL ; INTIMATE VISUAL DEPIC -TION .—The terms ‘‘consent’’, ‘‘digital for-gery’’, ‘‘identifiable individual’’, ‘‘intimate visual depiction’’, and ‘‘minor’’ have the meaning given such terms in section 223(h) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 223), as added by section 2. (3) C OVERED PLATFORM .— (A) I N GENERAL .—The term ‘‘covered plat-form’’ means a website, online service, on-line application, or mobile application— (i) that serves the public; and (ii)(I) that primarily provides a forum for user-generated content, including messages, videos, images, games, and audio files; or (II) for which it is in the regular course of trade or business of the website, online serv-ice, online application, or mobile application to publish, curate, host, or make available content of nonconsensual intimate visual de-pictions. (B) E XCLUSIONS .—The term ‘‘covered plat-form’’ shall not include the following: (i) A provider of broadband internet access service (as described in section 8.1(b) of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, or successor regulation). (ii) Electronic mail. (iii) Except as provided in subparagraph (A)(ii)(II), an online service, application, or website— (I) that consists primarily of content that is not user generated but is preselected by the provider of such online service, applica-tion, or website; and (II) for which any chat, comment, or inter-active functionality is incidental to, directly related to, or dependent on the provision of the content described in subclause (I). 

> SEC. 5. SEVERABILITY.

If any provision of this Act, or an amend-ment made by this Act, is determined to be unenforceable or invalid, the remaining pro-visions of this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall not be affected. 

f

HONORING THE MEMORIES OF THE VICTIMS OF THE SENSELESS AT-TACK AT MARJORY STONEMAN DOUGLAS HIGH SCHOOL ON FEB-RUARY 14, 2018 Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, Iask unanimous consent that the Sen-ate proceed to the consideration of S. Res. 79, which was submitted earlier today. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will report the resolution by title. The senior assistant executive clerk read as follows: A resolution (S. Res. 79) honoring the memories of the victims of the senseless at-tack at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School on February 14, 2018. There being no objection, the Senate proceeded to consider the resolution. Ms. MURKOWSKI. I ask unanimous consent that the resolution be agreed to, the preamble be agreed to, and the motions to reconsider be considered made and laid upon the table with no intervening action or debate. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The resolution (S. Res. 79) was agreed to. The preamble was agreed to. (The resolution, with its preamble, is printed in today’s R ECORD under ‘‘Sub-mitted Resolutions.’’) 

f

EXPRESSING GRATITUDE TO THE JOINT CONGRESSIONAL COM-MITTEE ON INAUGURAL CERE-MONIES, THE ARCHITECT OF THE CAPITOL, THE SERGEANT AT ARMS, THE SECRETARY OF THE SENATE, LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS, EMERGENCY PER-SONNEL, AND VOLUNTEERS Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, Iask unanimous consent that the Sen-ate proceed to the consideration of S. Res. 80, which was submitted earlier today. The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will report the resolution by title. The senior assistant executive clerk read as follows: A resolution (S. Res. 80) expressing grati-tude to the Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies, the Architect of the Capitol, the Sergeant at Arms, the Sec-retary of the Senate, law enforcement offi-cers, emergency personnel, and volunteers for their support in making the Presidential Inauguration a success. There being no objection, the Senate proceeded to consider the resolution. Ms. MURKOWSKI. I ask unanimous consent that the resolution be agreed to, the preamble be agreed to, and that the motions to reconsider be consid-ered made and laid upon the table with no intervening action or debate. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. The resolution (S. Res. 80) was agreed to. The preamble was agreed to. (The resolution, with its preamble, is printed in today’s R ECORD under ‘‘Sub-mitted Resolutions.’’) 

f

ORDERS FOR FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 2025, THROUGH TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 2025 Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, Iask unanimous consent that when the Senate completes its business today, it adjourn to then convene for pro forma session only with no business being conducted on Friday, February 14, at 9 a.m.; further, that when the Senate ad-journs on February 14, it stand ad-journed until 3 p.m. on Tuesday, Feb-ruary 18; that following the prayer and pledge, Senator WICKER be recognized to deliver Washington’s Farewell Ad-dress, as provided under the previous order; and that following his remarks, the Journal of proceedings be approved to date, the morning hour be deemed expired, the time for the two leaders be reserved for their use later in the day, and the Senate be in a period of morn-ing business for debate only until 5:30 p.m., with Senators permitted to speak for up to 10 minutes each; finally, that at 5:30 p.m. the majority leader be rec-ognized. The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered. Ms. MURKOWSKI. For the informa-tion of all Senators, Senators should expect a procedural vote at 5:30 p.m. in relation to filing cloture on the Patel nomination, followed by the confirma-tion vote on the Lutnick nomination, and further votes are possible. 

f

ADJOURNMENT UNTIL 9 A.M. TOMORROW Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, if there is no further business to come before the Senate, I ask that it stand adjourned under the previous order. There being no objection, the Senate, at 3:41 p.m., adjourned until Friday, February 14, 2025, at 9 a.m.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00034 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.009 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S991 February 13, 2025 

CONFIRMATIONS Executive nominations confirmed by the Senate February 13, 2025: DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE BROOKE ROLLINS, OF TEXAS, TO BE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES ROBERT F. KENNEDY, JR., OF CALIFORNIA, TO BE SEC-RETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES. 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:07 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00035 Fmt 0624 Sfmt 9801 E:\CR\FM\A13FE6.008 S13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with SENATE EXTENSIONS OF REMARKS 

∑ This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor. Matter set in this typeface indicates words inserted or appended, rather than spoken, by a Member of the House on the floor. CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks E125 February 13, 2025 

RECOGNIZING ANNA AMERICA LAROSA’S 100TH BIRTHDAY 

# HON. BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK 

> OF PENNSYLVANIA IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Mr. FITZPATRICK. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Ann Laughlin, an outstanding constituent from my district who recently cele-brated her 100th birthday. Born on January 13, 1925, in the Bronx, New York, Ann’s par-ents had recently arrived in the United States from Italy. As was the custom of her family, being the first-born daughter, she was named Anna, followed by the country of birth: Anna America LaRosa. Ann had one brother, Jack, and the family eventually settled in Bucks County. Ann’s father, Frank, was forever grateful for the freedom and opportunities he found in America. He loved this country and passed along that love to Ann, who proudly flew an American flag from her Doylestown balcony for many years. Ann learned important life les-sons from her father during their many week-end excursions around New York City. He taught her compassion and an understanding of others, which are evident in the fine person she is today. Ann graduated from Trenton High School and soon began working in Philadelphia where she met her husband, Hodge. On March 26, 1949, they eloped, beginning their life to-gether. Their first home was in Philadelphia where their son Richard was born. In 1958, they moved to Levittown, Pennsylvania where they formed many lifelong friendships. Ann has two grandchildren, Scott and Mad-eline. Ann loves to exchange photos and texts messages with her family and many friends. She is an avid reader of biographies and the newspaper, and she loves to watch old mov-ies; both are habits she learned from her fa-ther. As we celebrate her 100 years of life, we are grateful for the wonderful example of how to live life that she has shown to all who know her. 

> f

HONORING STAFF SEARGENT FELIX LOPEZ ON HIS 100TH BIRTHDAY 

# HON. DARREN SOTO 

> OF FLORIDA IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Mr. SOTO. Mr. Speaker, Staff Seargent Felix Lopez was born on February 17, 1925, in Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico. He was raised with his brother, Lorenzo, by his single moth-er, Calixta Bonano. SSG Lopez entered the Army voluntarily in 1943 at the age of 17 and served as a rifleman with the 65th Infantry Regiment—known as the Borinqueneers—in Europe during World War II. He was later called to duty in 1952 to serve in the Korean War. SSG Lopez remained on active duty and served with the 972nd Signal Battalion, USARPAC, in Qui Nhon, Vietnam. After numerous postings throughout the United States, including three tours in Ger-many, SSG Lopez retired from the military in 1971 with over 23 years of dedicated service. He then returned to Puerto Rico and became a U.S. Marshal. SSG Lopez proudly served the Puerto Rican people until 1978, when he moved with his family to Orlando, Florida. For his selfless and dedicated military serv-ice, SSG Lopez’s awards and decorations in-clude an Army Commendation Medal, Good Conduct Medal (5th award), American De-fense Service Medal, World War II Victory Medal, Army of Occupation Medal (with Ger-many clasp), Nation Defense Service Medal (with bronze silver star), Korean Service Medal (with two bronze service stars), Viet-nam Service Medal (with two bronze serving stars), United Nations Service Medal, Republic of Vietnam Campaign Ribbon (with Devise— 1960), and Expert Badge (with carbine bar & rifle bar). On April 13, 2016, in Washington, D.C., SSG Lopez and members of the Borinqueneers were presented with a Con-gressional Gold Medal for the regiment’s val-orous service in WWI, WWII, and Korea. He is lovingly known as Felix ‘‘The Cat’’ Lopez, his favorite childhood cartoon. He has dedicated his life to his wife, Carmen, and three daughters, Maria, Mayra, and Sonia: his six grandchildren, Lourdes, Wendy, Kelly, Christian, Jonathan, and Giovanny; his nine great grandchildren, Joshua, Alyssa, Loriann, Alina, Briana, Lymarie, Lera, Emma, and Camilla; and his 3 great-great grandchildren, Victoria, Valentina, and Jenesis. 

> f

SPECIAL RECOGNITION OF CHARLES F. KONECNY’S 93RD BIRTHDAY 

# HON. ROBERT E. LATTA 

> OF OHIO IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Mr. LATTA. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to cel-ebrate a constituent of mine, Charles F. Konecny, on his 93rd birthday. Charles Konecny is a proud husband, father, grand-father, and Korean War Veteran. Konecny is a resident of Bowling Green, Ohio and has been a member of St. Aloysius Catholic Church for more than six decades. Charles was born on February 13, 1932. He began his service to our country in the U.S. Army when he was drafted in September of 1952 during the Korean War. Serving as aCorporal and doppler transmitter operator in the U.S. Army, Charles was first sent to Fort Meade in Maryland and then headed to the U.S. Army’s Aberdeen Proving Ground in Har-ford County, Maryland. In October of 1952, Charles was transferred to Redstone Arsenal located in Huntsville, Alabama, where he stud-ied missile maintenance. Then, in March of 1953, Charles was transferred to White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico and continued his service as a doppler transmitter operator. In July of 1954, Charles was honorably dis-charged from the U.S. Army. Mr. Speaker, we are grateful to men like Charles who honorably served his Nation and fellow countrymen. Today, on Charles’ 93rd birthday, we recognize his unwavering service to our country and thank him for his service. 

> f

TRIBUTE TO STUART K. SPENCER 

# HON. KEN CALVERT 

> OF CALIFORNIA IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Mr. CALVERT. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor and pay tribute to my good friend, Navy veteran, and acclaimed political adviser, Stuart (Stu) Spencer, who passed away in Palm Desert on Sunday, January 12, 2025. Stu was an incredibly influential and accomplished po-litical leader in addition to being a personal friend, and he will be deeply missed. In 1927, Stu was born in Phoenix, Arizona. His family relocated to southern California just two years later. After high school, Stu enlisted in the U.S. Navy where he served as a radar specialist onboard the USS Rocky Mount com-mand ship. Following his discharge from the Navy, Stu earned a degree from California State University, Los Angeles. He worked as the Parks and Recreation Director for the City of Alhambra for many years before leaping into the world of politics. After volunteering on various campaigns, Stu was hired by the Los Angeles County GOP as an organizer. The following year, Stu joined together with his partner, Bill Roberts, to establish the Spencer-Roberts political consulting firm. Over the many years since its formation, the firm would go on to manage more than 400 campaigns. In 1964, Stu managed the unsuccessful presidential primary campaign of Nelson Rockefeller, who ultimately lost to Barry Gold-water. His luck and life would change dramati-cally one year later when then-actor Ronald Reagan asked Stu to manage his longshot bid for governor in California. In a remarkable campaign guided by Stu, Reagan was elected governor in 1966 and then re-elected in 1970. In 1976, Stu had agreed to manage President Gerald Ford’s election campaign before Rea-gan’s decision to challenge Ford in a primary. Stu stayed loyal to Ford throughout that cam-paign but was asked by Reagan to manage his campaign for president in 1980. Through-out Reagan’s eight years in the White House, Stu was a trusted aide close by his side. When he presented Stu with the Presidential Citizens Medal in 1989, Reagan said ‘‘he pre-vented more than a few poor decisions and aided in more than a few very good deci-sions.’’ In 1993, Spencer was inducted into the Association of American Political Consultants Hall of Fame. VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:46 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 0626 Sfmt 9920 E:\CR\FM\A13FE8.001 E13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with REMARKS CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks E126 February 13, 2025 

Stu is survived by his beloved wife of 32 years, Barbara Spencer; two children from a previous marriage, Karen Spencer of Palm Desert and Steven Spencer of Dana Point; a stepdaughter, Debbie DeSilva of Carlsbad, and six grandchildren. I extend my personal and heartfelt condolences to the Spencer fam-ily, his friends, and everyone fortunate enough to know Stu. Although he may be gone, Stu’s many contributions to our Nation have left an enduring legacy. 

> f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION 

# HON. BRITTANY PETTERSEN 

> OF COLORADO IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Ms. PETTERSEN. Mr. Speaker, I recently gave birth and am unable to travel to D.C. to vote. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 40 and NAY on Roll Call No. 41. 

> f

RECOGNIZING CASCADIA COLLEGE FOR 25 YEARS OF SERVING THE COMMUNITY 

# HON. SUZAN K. DelBENE 

> OF WASHINGTON IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Ms. D EL BENE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor Cascadia College for 25 years of invalu-able service to students, faculty, and staff in Washington’s 1st Congressional District and beyond. Since 2000, Cascadia College has strived to create a community that encourages life-long learning and delivers accessible and equitable educational experiences that moti-vate every person to achieve their academic goals and pursue a meaningful career. Offer-ing 80 different certificates and degree path-ways, Cascadia College places emphasis on teaching students how to think critically, learn actively, interact in diverse and complex envi-ronments, and communicate with clarity. Recognized as an award-winning green campus, Cascadia College has made strides in sustainability. The campus is managed 100 percent pesticide free, and Cascadia has ranked number one in the Nation by the Asso-ciation for the Advancement of Sustainability in Higher Education (AASHE) for six consecu-tive years. Given the school’s devotion to maintaining the 58-acres of wetlands on cam-pus, pollinator gardens, and their Food Forest, Cascadia students have the opportunity to pursue academic degrees and programs re-volving around sustainability and are offered a hands-on learning experience to enhance both their campus and the greater community. It’s an honor to represent Cascadia College in Congress, and I hope to see them operate for many more years to come. Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Cascadia College and their continued service to inspire students and faculty to achieve their academic and career goals. 

RECOGNITION OF CHARLOTTE CREMIN, SENIOR POLICY ADVISOR 

# HON. BRYAN STEIL 

> OF WISCONSIN IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Mr. STEIL. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor the service and dedication of Charlotte Cremin. Charlotte served my office for over six years. She was one of the first members of my team when I came to Congress in 2019 and has remained a loyal and trusted advisor throughout her tenure. As every Member of Congress and staffer knows, taking on a new role in a freshman of-fice is no easy task. Even throughout the chal-lenges we faced as my office was stood up, Charlotte was always ready to take on some-thing new for the team. I tasked Charlotte with managing the health care, veterans, foreign affairs, and defense legislative portfolio. Whether it was late nights reviewing NDAA amendments, or spending time listening to and helping each health care group or veteran who walked through my office door, I could al-ways rely on Charlotte to get the job done well. Charlotte has treated her colleagues and my constituents with kindness, professionalism, and respect. Everyone in the office could al-ways rely on Charlotte. She has been a trust-ed advisor and staffer for Wisconsin’s First Congressional District and her dedication and service will be greatly missed. While Charlotte’s title in my office has been Senior Policy Advisor, she has recently taken on the new role and title as a mom. Charlotte and her husband David welcomed Isabel Lo-retta Cremin into the world on November 20, 2024. I thank Charlotte for her steadfast com-mitment to serving Wisconsin’s First Congres-sional District and wish her and her family the very best. 

> f

HONORING THE CAREER OF JUAN FRANCISCO OCHOA 

# HON. HENRY CUELLAR 

> OF TEXAS IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Mr. CUELLAR. Mr. Speaker, today I rise to honor Juan Francisco ‘‘Don Pancho’’ Ochoa of Laredo, Texas. Mr. Ochoa is a longtime La-redo restaurateur and is integral to the culture of South Texas and beyond. Born in a large family in Sinaloa, Mexico, Mr. Ochoa first operated a small shoe store. After creating a novel way to marinate chick-en, Mr. Ochoa knew he had a successful busi-ness opportunity. Soon after, Mr. Ochoa’s restaurant success began in 1975 when he opened El Pollo Loco, a legendary restaurant chain across Mexico and into California. In 1987, Mr. Ochoa founded Taco Palenque, a second successful Mexican fast-casual chain. Today, Taco Palenque features 42 locations in Texas and Mexico. Finally, in Laredo 2005, Mr. Ochoa started Palenque Grill, a family-style restaurant fea-turing live music and authentic Mexican rec-ipes, many of which were created by his wife, Flerida. Mr. Ochoa is an exemplar of the American Dream. It is our country’s promise that any dedicated, hard-working individual can build a business and thrive. As someone born and raised in Laredo, Texas, I have always enjoyed spending time with family and friends at Taco Palenque and Palenque Grill. These restaurants are an insti-tution in South Texas and are a cornerstone of our community. On top of achieving the American Dream, Mr. Ochoa is also one of Laredo’s greatest cultural ambassadors. His restaurants and kitchens bring the cuisine of south Texas and northern Mexico to the world. Mr. Speaker, please join me in congratu-lating ‘‘Don Pancho’’ Ochoa for his incredible success. Let us all strive to share our passion for our communities and honor those who show what it means to be an American. 

> f

PERSONAL EXPLANATION 

# HON. JIMMY GOMEZ 

> OF CALIFORNIA IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Mr. GOMEZ. Mr. Speaker, on February 12, 2025, I was not recorded on Roll Call Votes No. 40 and No. 41. Had I been present, I would have voted ‘‘YEA’’ on Roll Call Vote No. 40, and ‘‘NAY’’ on Roll Call Vote No. 41. On February 13, 2025, I was not recorded on Roll Call Vote No. 42. Had I been present, I would have voted ‘‘NAY’’ on Roll Call Vote No. 42. 

> f

RECOGNIZING ERIC KIM 

# HON. ZACHARY NUNN 

> OF IOWA IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Mr. NUNN of Iowa. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize Eric Kim, for his distinguished service as the Legislative Director for our Con-gressional Office. Eric stepped into a high de-mand environment and helped successfully execute on a series of legislative victories to improve national security, reduce government red tape, and improve America’s financial op-erations. Together, with a team of four legislative as-sistants, Eric helped drive our defense sector’s innovation in unmanned aerial vehicles, cyber-security, and joint ventures with key inter-national partners, like Israel, to protect our na-tional interests. These efforts were enshrined in the National Defense Authorization Act. Moreover, Eric brought his tenacity to devel-oping legislation directly impacting the citizens of Iowa, by traveling and hearing from con-stituents first-hand. From these efforts, Eric helped deliver as one of the Top 10 most bi-partisan members of the 118th Congress, ac-cording to the non-partisan Lugar Center and the McCourt School of Public Policy at Georgetown University. Ultimately, I am proud to recognize Eric’s ef-forts, his thoughtful consideration and his kind-ness, as a reflection of his service to Iowa, and the American people. VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:46 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 0626 Sfmt 9920 E:\CR\FM\A13FE8.004 E13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with REMARKS CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks E127 February 13, 2025 

SUPPORTING AUTOMATIC ORGAN DONATION REFERRALS 

# HON. ROBERT J. WITTMAN 

> OF VIRGINIA IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Mr. WITTMAN. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to discuss the importance of studying the imple-mentation of automated software tools that will improve and expedite the organ donation re-ferral process. The United States has one of the best organ donation and transplantation systems in the world. Still, over 100,000 Americans re-main on the national waitlist for an organ transplant. Just one organ donor can save as many as eight lives, which is why we must en-sure the process for identifying and evaluating potential deceased organ donors is as efficient and accurate as possible. Hospitals are currently required to notify their collaborating organ procurement organi-zation (OPO) of all imminent patient deaths in a timely manner to ensure they can maximize the number of organs recovered for transplant. The standard practice of hospital staff manu-ally identifying patients to refer to donation, and then manually notifying OPOs of those patients, is not only time consuming and bur-densome for busy hospital staff but increases the likelihood of human error missing a poten-tial donor. Today, automated electronic deceased organ donor referral systems exist at a select few hospitals. These systems automate the donor referral process, allowing hospital staff more time to focus on direct patient care, mini-mizing the risk of human error, and potentially increasing the number of organs available for transplant. I am proud to have introduced the bipartisan Organ Donation Referral Improvement Act to help remove barriers to the national adoption of automated electronic organ donor referrals in health systems so we can give hope to pa-tients waiting for the gift of life. The Organ Donation Referral Improvement Act would authorize a voluntary study of the current use of automated electronic deceased organ donor referral technology across the Nation. This study will allow us to identify the best practices for the use of such technology and develop informed recommendations for its broad adoption. The following organizations support the Organ Donation Referral Improvement Act: United Network for Organ Sharing, Association of Organ Procurement Organizations, National Kidney Foundation, American Kidney Fund, Virginia Hospital and Healthcare Association, American Society of Transplantation, Amer-ican Society of Nephrology, American Society of Transplant Surgeons, American Liver Foun-dation, American Nephrology Nurses Associa-tion, North American Transplant Coordinators Association, American Society of Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics, Amer-ican Association of Kidney Patients, Waitlist Zero, Kidney Transplant Collaborative, LifeNet Health, Gift of Life Donor Program, Gift of Hope, Infinite Legacy, Association of Multicul-tural Affairs in Transplantation, Transplant Families, LifeCenter Northwest, Life Connec-tion of Ohio, Lifebanc, HonorBridge, One Leg-acy, New Jersey Sharing Network, Lifesharing Donate Life Organization, LifeGift, LifeQuest Organ Recovery Services, and Lifeline of Ohio. I would like to thank the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) for being a steadfast partner on this critical issue. UNOS is a mis-sion-driven non-profit that has led the United States’ Organ Procurement and Transplant Network for nearly 40 years. UNOS employ-ees have a significant and consistent impact on the Greater Richmond Region area, and I am proud to have so many passionate con-stituents in my district who work every day to support our Nation’s organ donation and trans-plant system. UNOS continues to lead efforts to improve the system, including advocating for the importance of automated electronic de-ceased donor referrals. I thank them for their work to promote the gift of life through organ donation and transplantation. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I ask that you rise with me to honor the work being done to ad-vance the automatic organ donor referral pro-grams across the Nation. 

> f

HONORING WWII VETERAN RICH-ARD REARDON ON HIS 100TH BIRTHDAY 

# HON. NICHOLAS A. LANGWORTHY 

> OF NEW YORK IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Mr. LANGWORTHY. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize and honor the extraor-dinary life and service of Private First-Class Richard F. Reardon of Bemus Point, New York, as he celebrates his 100th birthday. During World War II, Richard Reardon served with the 245th Port Company in the Pacific Theater. His service took him from training camps in the United States to the jun-gles and beaches of New Guinea and Luzon, where he played a vital role in unloading crit-ical supplies for Allied forces. Richard was among a group of 10 soldiers from the James-town area, affectionately known as the ‘‘Jamestonians’’ who remarkably stayed to-gether throughout much of their deployment. For his courageous service, Richard was awarded numerous commendations, including the Asiatic-Pacific Theater Ribbon with Bronze Stars, the Philippine Liberation Ribbon, the Good Conduct Medal, the Arrowhead Victory Medal, and the World War II Victory Medal. His dedication and sacrifice are a testament to the bravery and resilience of the Greatest Generation. Today, as we celebrate Richard Reardon’s 100th birthday, we honor his service to our Nation and his lasting legacy. On behalf of New York’s 23rd Congressional District, I ex-tend my heartfelt gratitude and congratulations to Richard and his family on this monumental occasion. 

> f

HONORING THE LIFE WILLIAM ‘‘BILL’’ LESTER SPRUILL, JR. 

# HON. ROSA L. DeLAURO 

> OF CONNECTICUT IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Ms. D ELAURO. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize the incredible life and legacy of Wil-liam ‘‘Bill’’ Lester Spruill, Jr., a brilliant man who left us peacefully on January 18, 2025. Born and raised in New Haven, Bill was a lifelong public servant, member of St. Luke’s Episcopal Church, and proud veteran who was exceptionally passionate and determined to make the world a better place for all. Shortly after graduating from James Hillhouse High School in 1953, Bill enlisted in the Marine Corps and received the honorable rank of Sergeant. His career after serving our country began at Pratt and Whitney where he worked as a machine operator. Bill continued his passion for serving his country by working for various initiatives in Connecticut’s public sector. Bill was a housing specialist at the Redevelopment Agency, Ex-ecutive Director of the Commission on Equal Opportunities for the City of New Haven, and finished his successful career as an Affirma-tive Action Administrator of the State of Con-necticut’s Department of Social Services. In these roles, he continued to fight for the great-er good and helped improve the lives of thou-sands in our community and beyond. Even after retirement, Bill continued to work by assisting others as a volunteer at the Hos-pital of Saint Raphael’s for fifteen years—this is just one example of how passionate Bill was to help those around him. Bill had a presence in this world that lifted others up, making ev-eryone feel loved and supported. If you knew Bill, you would know he believed in serving his community and always being there. My heart and my prayers are with his family, loved ones, and friends, and I know that he will always be remembered for making Con-necticut a better place. 

> f

RECOGNIZING FEBRUARY 16, 2025, AS NATIONAL ALMOND DAY 

# HON. ADAM GRAY 

> OF CALIFORNIA IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Mr. GRAY. Mr. Speaker, I rise today, joined by my colleagues, to recognize February 16, 2025, as National Almond Day. This day serves as an opportunity to cele-brate the incredible contributions made by al-mond farmers, processors, workers, and all those whose dedication sustains this vital in-dustry. National Almond Day shines a light on the remarkable achievements and innovations that have made the almond industry a corner-stone of our agricultural economy and asource of pride for our nation. Almonds, often hailed as a nutritional pow-erhouse, offer an array of health benefits. They are a naturally gluten-free, shelf-stable protein, packed with essential nutrients like healthy fats, fiber, vitamin E, calcium, magne-sium, iron, potassium, and niacin. Almonds are known to promote heart health, support healthy cholesterol and blood sugar levels, and contribute to radiant skin and overall well-being. Few foods can claim such a combina-tion of health benefits and versatility. Beyond their nutrition, almonds are an es-sential ingredient in countless recipes and cul-inary traditions. Whether enjoyed as a whole-some snack or incorporated into baking and cooking, almonds have become a staple in households nationwide, adding flavor, texture, and nourishment to our meals. VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:46 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 0626 Sfmt 9920 E:\CR\FM\A13FE8.011 E13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with REMARKS CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks E128 February 13, 2025 

The almond industry also exemplifies envi-ronmental stewardship. Almond orchards play a significant role in carbon sequestration, stor-ing an impressive 30 million metric tons of car-bon annually. Over the past three decades, al-mond farmers have made tremendous strides in water conservation, reducing water usage by nearly 50 percent through advanced prac-tices and precision irrigation technology. Fur-thermore, the industry is committed to sustain-ability, utilizing every part of the almond—from the nut to the shell and hull—in a zero-waste approach that benefits the environment and strengthens the industry’s resilience. California, my home state, is the proud heart of this industry. Home to 7,600 almond farms, most of which are family-owned and operated by multi-generational farmers, Cali-fornia leads the world in almond production. These dedicated farmers embody the values of hard work, innovation, and community, pre-serving farmland and fostering sustainable practices for future generations. The almond industry’s economic impact is profound. It supports 110,000 jobs in Cali-fornia and contributes $9.2 billion annually to the state’s economy. California’s almond farm-ers supply 100 percent of the almonds in the United States and 80 percent of the world’s al-mond supply, cementing our role as a global leader in almond production. That is why Iproudly carried state legislation in 2017 to name almonds as California’s official state nut. On this National Almond Day, we honor the hardworking men and women whose efforts ensure that almonds remain a nutritious and sustainable staple on tables around the world. Their innovation and dedication inspire us all and remind us of the vital connection between agriculture and our shared prosperity. Mr. Speaker, I invite my colleagues in the United States House of Representatives to join me in celebrating National Almond Day and in recognizing the profound contributions of almond farmers and all those who make this industry a shining example of American ingenuity and resilience. May National Almond Day continue to in-spire appreciation for the many ways the al-mond industry enriches our lives and strength-ens our communities. 

RECOGNIZING UNITED STATES MA-RINE CORPS, WORLD WAR II VETERAN CHUCK KUNES’S 100TH BIRTHDAY 

# HON. BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK 

> OF PENNSYLVANIA IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Mr. FITZPATRICK. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize an exceptional constituent from my district, Chuck Kunes. Throughout his life, Chuck has embodied a selfless and fearless spirit, resulting in a life rich in stories and memories. I commend Chuck for his service to our country and thank him for his great sac-rifices and honorable legacy. As he celebrates his 100th birthday on February 27, 2025, Iwould like to recognize Chuck and wish happi-ness for him and his family. Chuck was born in Trenton, New Jersey to Jewish immigrants Sam and Doris (Weinstock) Kunes on February 27, 1925. He attended schools in Trenton and the Bronx and worked shining shoes to help support his family when his father passed away suddenly in 1935, when Chuck was only ten years old. At age 18, before he could be drafted for World War II, Chuck enlisted in the United States Marine Corps, attended boot camp in North Carolina, and then went to flight school in Maine, where he was trained as a flight mechanic. He was then sent to the South Pacific as part of VMF–214, most famously known as the ‘‘Black Sheep Squadron,’’ where he spent four years in Okinawa and China, attaining the rank of Sergeant. Following the service, Chuck attended the University of Illinois on the G.I. Bill, then moved to Levittown, Pennsylvania and spent the remainder of his life in Bucks County. He worked as an executive for the 3– M Company in Bristol for over 40 years. Chuck was an original owner in the Stony Brook section of Levittown, eventually moving to Quincy Hollow and then, finally, to Forsythia Gate, where he cared for his wife, Alma, and three children, Karen, Steven and Susan. To date, Chuck and Alma have been married for 71 years. Chuck has spent a lifetime enjoying fishing, hunting, baking, and as a private pilot. Chuck also loves his visits to Parx Casino. His family is so very proud that Chuck has reached this milestone in his life. Our Nation owes Chuck a debt that can never be repaid. We wish Chuck countless blessings, and I remain deeply appreciative of Chuck Kunes for his life of service and sacrifice for our community, dis-trict, and country. His commitment to his fellow neighbors, veterans, and servicemembers alike is a testament to his character and spirit. I am more than honored to recognize him today and wish him nothing but the best for his 100th birthday and the future beyond. 

> f

HONORING THE RETIREMENT OF RONNIE RASMUSSEN, U.S. ARMY STAFF SEARGENT AND FEDERAL AIR MARSHAL 

# HON. DARREN SOTO 

> OF FLORIDA IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, February 13, 2025 

Mr. SOTO. Mr. Speaker, Staff Seargent Ronnie Rasmussen, a resident of St. Cloud, Florida, graduated from Osceola High School in 1983 and enlisted in the U.S. Navy, com-pleting Aviation Machinist Mate training and serving at NAS Miramar and NAS Oceana. He reached the rank of Petty Officer Third Class before completing his service in 1987. In 2008, inspired by a conversation with a coworker, he joined the Army Reserve, train-ing as a unit supply specialist and later as a cargo specialist. Over the years, he served in multiple roles, including Drill Sergeant Com-pany Member, Military Police, and Operations NCO. In 2014, he deployed to Bagram, Afghani-stan, supporting Operation Enduring Freedom. Rising to the rank of Staff Sergeant, he took on leadership roles in supply, security, and training. In 2023, he transferred to the 76th Expeditionary Terminal Operations Element for a final deployment to Kuwait in support of Op-eration Spartan Shield. In March 2025, he will retire from the U.S. Army Reserve after nearly 23 years of combined service. Parallel to his military career, Rasmussen had a distinguished law enforcement career. He worked as a police officer in St. Cloud, Florida, and as a detective with the Osceola County Sheriff’s Office, investigating crimes against tourists. In 1998, he joined the State Fire Marshal’s Office, investigating over 100 fires annually. Following the 9/11 attacks, he became aFederal Air Marshal in 2002, flying over five million miles and conducting international se-curity operations. He also contributed to the VIPR program, enhancing security at transit locations nationwide. After 23 years as a Federal Air Marshal and nearly 40 years in law enforcement, Ras-mussen will retire on March 28, 2025, to spend well-earned time with his family, having sacrificed countless birthdays, anniversaries, and holidays in service of his country. VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:46 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 0626 Sfmt 9920 E:\CR\FM\A13FE8.014 E13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with REMARKS D151 

# Thursday, February 13, 2025 Daily Digest 

# HIGHLIGHTS Senate confirmed the nomination of Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., of Cali-fornia, to be Secretary of Health and Human Services. Senate confirmed the nomination of Brooke Rollins, of Texas, to be Sec-retary of Agriculture. Senate 

# Chamber Action Routine Proceedings, pages S957–S991 

# Measures Introduced: Forty-seven bills and eight resolutions were introduced, as follows: S. 558–604, S.J. Res. 18–19, S. Res. 77–81, and S. Con. Res. 7. 

> Pages S970–72

# Measures Reported: 

# S. Res. 77, authorizing expenditures by the Com-mittee on Homeland Security and Governmental Af-fairs. S. Res. 78, authorizing expenditures by the Com-mittee on the Budget. S. Con. Res. 7, setting forth the congressional budget for the United States Government for fiscal year 2025 and setting forth the appropriate budg-etary levels for fiscal years 2026 through 2034. 

> Page S970

# Measures Passed: 

# TAKE IT DOWN Act: Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation was discharged from fur-ther consideration of S. 146, to require covered plat-forms to remove nonconsensual intimate visual de-pictions, and the bill was then passed. Pages S988–90 

# Honoring the Victims of the Attack at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School: Senate agreed to S. Res. 79, honoring the memories of the victims of the senseless attack at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School on February 14, 2018. Page S990 

# Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies: Senate agreed to S. Res. 80, expressing gratitude to the Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies, the Architect of the Capitol, the Sergeant at Arms, the Secretary of the Senate, law enforcement officers, emergency personnel, and volunteers for their support in making the Presi-dential Inauguration a success. Page S990 

# Washington’s Farewell Address—Agreement: Aunanimous-consent agreement was reached providing that at 3 p.m., on Tuesday, February 18, 2025, fol-lowing the prayer and pledge, Senator Wicker be recognized to deliver Washington’s Farewell Ad-dress, as provided under the order of Tuesday, Feb-ruary 11, 2025; that following his remarks, Senate be in a period of morning business for debate only until 5:30 p.m., with Senators permitted to speak for up to 10 minutes each; and that at 5:30 p.m., the Majority Leader be recognized. Page S990 

# Lutnick Nomination: Senate resumed consideration of the nomination of Howard Lutnick, of New York, to be Secretary of Commerce. Pages S962–66 

# During consideration of this nomination today, Senate also took the following action: By 52 yeas to 45 nays (Vote No. EX. 54), Senate agreed to the motion to close further debate on the nomination. Page S966 

# Loeffler Nomination: Senate resumed consideration of the nomination of Kelly Loeffler, of Georgia, to be Administrator of the Small Business Administra-tion. Pages S966–67 

# During consideration of this nomination today, Senate also took the following action: By 51 yeas to 43 nays (Vote No. EX. 55), Senate agreed to the motion to close further debate on the nomination. Pages S966–67 

# Nominations Confirmed: Senate confirmed the fol-lowing nominations: By 52 yeas to 48 nays (Vote No. EX. 52), Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., of California, to be Secretary of Health and Human Services. Pages S957–62, S991 

# By 72 yeas to 28 nays (Vote No. EX. 53), Brooke Rollins, of Texas, to be Secretary of Agriculture.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:13 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 0627 Sfmt 0627 E:\CR\FM\D13FE5.REC D13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with DIGEST

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST D152 February 13, 2025 

# (Pursuant to the order of Wednesday, February 12, 2025, the motion to invoke cloture on confirmation of the nomination was withdrawn.) Pages S962, S991 

# Messages from the House: Page S970 

# Measures Referred: Page S970 

# Executive Reports of Committees: Pages S970–72 

# Additional Cosponsors: Pages S972–73 

# Statements on Introduced Bills/Resolutions: 

> Pages S973–88

# Additional Statements: Pages S969–70 

# Authorities for Committees to Meet: Page S988 

# Privileges of the Floor: Page S988 

# Record Votes: Four record votes were taken today. (Total—55) Pages S962, S966–67 

# Adjournment: Senate convened at 9:30 a.m. and adjourned at 3:41 p.m., until 9 a.m. on Friday, Feb-ruary 14, 2025. (For Senate’s program, see the re-marks of the Acting Majority Leader in today’s Record on page S990.) 

# Committee Meetings 

## (Committees not listed did not meet) 

# DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION REQUEST AND FUTURE YEARS DEFENSE PROGRAM 

# Committee on Armed Services: Committee concluded open and closed hearings to examine the posture of United States Northern Command and United States Southern Command in review of the Defense Au-thorization Request for Fiscal Year 2026 and the Fu-ture Years Defense Program, after receiving testi-mony from General Gregory M. Guillot, USAF, Commander, United States Northern Command and North American Aerospace Defense Command, and Admiral Alvin Holsey, USN, Commander, United States Southern Command, both of the Department of Defense. 

# BUSINESS MEETING 

# Committee on the Budget: Committee ordered favorably reported an original resolution (S. Res. 78) author-izing expenditures by the Committee, and adopted its rules of procedure for the 119th Congress. 

# SYRIA AFTER ASSAD 

# Committee on Foreign Relations: Committee concluded a hearing to examine navigating Syria policy after Assad, after receiving testimony from Michael Singh, and Dana Stroul, both of The Washington Institute for Near East Policy, Washington, D.C. 

# BUSINESS MEETING 

# Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Af-fairs: Committee ordered favorably reported an origi-nal resolution (S. Res. 77) authorizing expenditures by the committee. 

# ELIMINATING WASTE 

# Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Af-fairs: Committee concluded a hearing to examine eliminating waste by the foreign aid bureaucracy, after receiving testimony from Michael Shellenberger, Public, Albany, California; and Wil-liam Ruger, American Institute for Economic Re-search, Great Barrington, Massachusetts. 

# NOMINATION 

# Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions: 

# Committee concluded a hearing to examine the nomination of Linda McMahon, of Connecticut, to be Secretary of Education, after the nominee, who was introduced by Senators Scott (SC) and Britt, tes-tified and answered questions in her own behalf. 

# BUSINESS MEETING 

# Committee on the Judiciary: Committee ordered favor-ably reported the nomination of Kashyap Patel, of Nevada, to be Director of the Federal Bureau of In-vestigation, Department of Justice. 

# h

# House of Representatives 

# Chamber Action 

# Public Bills and Resolutions Introduced: 86 pub-lic bills, H.R. 1276–1361; and 10 resolutions, H.J. Res. 59; H. Con. Res. 12; and H. Res. 129–136, were introduced. Pages H705–10 

# Additional Cosponsors: Page H712 

# Reports Filed: There were no reports filed today. 

# Speaker: Read a letter from the Speaker wherein he appointed Representative Bost to act as Speaker pro tempore for today. Page H681         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:13 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 0627 Sfmt 0627 E:\CR\FM\D13FE5.REC D13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with DIGEST

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST D153 February 13, 2025 

# Agent Raul Gonzalez Officer Safety Act: The House passed H.R. 35, to impose criminal and im-migration penalties for intentionally fleeing a pur-suing Federal officer while operating a motor vehicle, by a yea-and-nay vote of 264 yeas to 155 nays, Roll No. 42. Pages H682–91 

# H. Res. 5, the rule providing for consideration of the bill (H.R. 35), was agreed to on Friday, January 3rd. 

# Work Period Designation: Read a letter from the Speaker wherein he designated the period from Thursday, February 13, 2025, through Sunday, Feb-ruary 23, 2025, as a ‘‘district work period’’ under clause 13 of rule 1. Page H695 

# Senate Referral: S. 32 was held at the desk. 

> Page H691

# Senate Message: Message from the Senate appears on page S691. 

# Quorum Calls—Votes: One yea-and-nay vote de-veloped during the proceedings of today and appears on pages H690–91. 

# Adjournment: The House met at 9 a.m. and ad-journed at 1:06 p.m. 

# Committee Meetings 

# MISCELLANEOUS MEASURE 

# Committee on the Budget: Full Committee held a mark-up on the Concurrent Resolution on the Budget for Fiscal Year 2025. The Concurrent Resolution on the Budget for Fiscal Year 2025 was ordered reported, as amended. 

# THE USAID BETRAYAL 

# Committee on Foreign Affairs: Full Committee held a hearing entitled ‘‘The USAID Betrayal’’. Testimony was heard from former Member Ted Yoho, and pub-lic witnesses. 

# Joint Meetings 

# No joint committee meetings were held. 

## f

# COMMITTEE MEETINGS FOR FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 2025 

## (Committee meetings are open unless otherwise indicated) 

# Senate 

# No meetings/hearings scheduled. 

# House 

# No hearings are scheduled.         

> VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:13 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 0627 Sfmt 0627 E:\CR\FM\D13FE5.REC D13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with DIGEST

# CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — DAILY DIGEST 

# Congressional Record The Congressional Record (USPS 087–390). The Periodicals postage is paid at Washington, D.C. The public proceedings of each House of Congress, as reported by the Official Reporters thereof, are printed pursuant to directions of the Joint Committee on Printing as authorized by appropriate provisions of Title 44, United States Code, and published for each day that one or both Houses are in session, excepting very infrequent instances when two or more unusually small consecutive issues are printed one time. ¶ Public access to the Congressional Record is available online through the U.S. Government Publishing Office, at www.govinfo.gov , free of charge to the user. The information is updated online each day the 

Congressional Record is published. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202–512–1800, or 866–512–1800 (toll-free). E-Mail, contactcenter@gpo.gov . ¶ To place an order for any of these products, visit the U.S. Government Online Bookstore at: bookstore.gpo.gov. Mail orders to: Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO 63197–9000, or phone orders to 866–512–1800 (toll-free), 202–512–1800 (D.C. area), or fax to 202–512–2104. Remit check or money order, made payable to the Superintendent of Documents, or use VISA, MasterCard, Discover, American Express, or GPO Deposit Account. ¶ Following each session of Congress, the daily Congressional Record is revised, printed, permanently bound and sold by the Superintendent of Documents in individual parts or by sets. ¶ With the exception of copyrighted articles, there are no restrictions on the republication of material from the Congressional Record .

POSTMASTER: Send address changes to the Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Record , U.S. Government Publishing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402, along with the entire mailing label from the last issue received. UNUMEPLURIBUS

# D154 February 13, 2025 

## Next Meeting of the SENATE 9 a.m., Friday, February 14 Senate Chamber Program for Friday: Senate will meet in a pro forma session. 

## Next Meeting of the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 1:30 p.m., Friday, February 14 House Chamber Program for Friday: House will meet in Pro Forma ses-sion at 1:30 p.m. 

# Extensions of Remarks, as inserted in this issue 

HOUSE Calvert, Ken, Calif., E125 Cuellar, Henry, Tex., E126 DeLauro, Rosa L., Conn., E127 DelBene, Suzan K., Wash., E126 Fitzpatrick, Brian K., Pa., E125, E128 Gomez, Jimmy, Calif., E126 Gray, Adam, Calif., E127 Langworthy, Nicholas A., N.Y., E127 Latta, Robert E., Ohio, E125 Nunn, Zachary, Iowa, E126 Pettersen, Brittany, Colo., E126 Soto, Darren, Fla., E125, E128 Steil, Bryan, Wisc., E126 Wittman, Robert J., Va., E127 

VerDate Sep 11 2014 04:13 Feb 14, 2025 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 0664 Sfmt 0664 E:\CR\FM\D13FE5.REC D13FEPT1 DMWilson on DSKJM0X7X2PROD with DIGEST
