Title: Donald Trump and fascism

URL Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparisons_between_Donald_Trump_and_fascism

Published Time: 2024-09-21T15:39:39Z

Markdown Content:
Jump to content
Main menu
Search
Appearance
Donate
Create account
Log in
Personal tools

Photograph a historic site, help Wikipedia, and win a prize. Participate in the world's largest photography competition this month!
Learn more

Toggle the table of contents
Donald Trump and fascism
3 languages
Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history
Tools
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
(Redirected from Comparisons between Donald Trump and fascism)

There has been significant academic and political debate about whether Donald Trump, the 45th and 47th president of the United States, can be considered a fascist, especially during his 2024 presidential campaign and second term as president.[a] A number of prominent scholars, former officials and critics have drawn comparisons between him and fascist leaders with respect to authoritarian actions and rhetoric,[b] while others have rejected the label.

Trump has supported political violence against opponents; many academics cited Trump's involvement in the January 6 United States Capitol attack as an example of fascism. Trump has been accused of racism and xenophobia with respect to his rhetoric about illegal immigrants and his policies of mass deportation and family separation. Trump has a large, dedicated following sometimes referred to as a cult of personality. Trump and his allies' rhetoric and authoritarian tendencies, especially during his second term, have been compared to previous fascist leaders by several experts of fascism. Some scholars have instead found Trump to be more of an authoritarian populist, a far-right populist, a nationalist, or a different ideology.[2][3]

Background
An October 2024 poll held by ABC News and Ipsos indicated that of the candidates in the 2024 United States presidential election, 49% of registered voters[c] considered Trump to be a fascist.[4]

Donald Trump is an American politician, media personality, and businessman who served as the 45th president of the United States from 2017 to 2021[5] and has served as the 47th president since January 2025.[6][7] He ran three times as the Republican Party's candidate for the presidency, winning against Hillary Clinton in 2016, losing to Joe Biden in 2020, and winning again facing Kamala Harris in 2024.[8]

Fascism is an ideological term which refers to a broad set of aspirations and influences that emerged in the early 20th century, exemplified by the European dictators Benito Mussolini, Adolf Hitler, and Francisco Franco; and include elements of nationalism, enforcement of social hierarchies, hatred towards social minority groups, opposition to liberalism, the cult of personality, racism, and the love of militaristic symbols.[9][10]

Since Trump was elected to office in 2016, many academics have compared Trump's politics to fascism. Several have pointed out that contrasts exist between historical fascism and Trump's politics. Many also argued that "fascist elements" have operated within and around Trump's movement. Following the January 6 United States Capitol attack, some voices within the academic community felt that things had changed and that Trump's politics and connections with fascism deserved greater scrutiny.[11][12] According to an October 2024 poll held by ABC News and Ipsos, 49% of American registered voters considered Trump to be a fascist,[c] defined in the poll as "a political extremist who seeks to act as a dictator, disregards individual rights and threatens or uses force against their opponents", while 23% considered Kamala Harris to be a fascist.[4] Another YouGov survey from the same year reported that about 20% of Americans believed that Trump saw Hitler as completely bad; among Republican respondents, four in ten believed that Trump held such position. The same poll reported that nearly half of Trump voters would continue to support a political candidate even if he or she stated that Hitler had done some good things, a position that was held by a quarter of all respondents.[13]

Comparisons
Anti-democratic sentiment and illiberalism
Further information: Trumpism § Parallels with fascism and trend towards illiberal democracy
See also: Donald Trump 2024 presidential campaign § Authoritarian and antidemocratic statements
Historians and election experts have compared Trump's anti-democratic tendencies and egotistical personality to the sentiments and rhetoric of Benito Mussolini and Italian fascism.[1]

Trumpism has been likened to Benito Mussolini's Italian fascism by critics of Trump.[1] Historians and election experts have compared Trump's anti-democratic tendencies and egotistical personality to the sentiments and rhetoric of Benito Mussolini and Italian fascism.[1] Trumpism heavily features authoritarian elements,[14][15][16] over the prevalence of fascism and neo-fascism within Trumpism.[17][18] Several scholars have rejected comparisons with fascism, instead viewing Trump as authoritarian and populist.[15][16]

During his 2016 campaign, Trump implied that he would not accept the results of the 2016 United States presidential election if he did not win, preemptively claiming that he could only lose due to electoral fraud.[19] Following his defeat by Joe Biden in the 2020 United States presidential election, Trump and other Republicans tried to overturn the results, making widespread false claims of fraud.[20] Due to these false claims, in addition to the January 6 United States Capitol attack that Trump incited, political opponents have labeled Trump as a "threat to democracy".[21][22]

By 2020, journalist Patrick Cockburn stated that Trump's politics risked turning the United States into an illiberal democracy similar to Turkey, Poland, Hungary, Brazil, and the Philippines.[23] According to civil rights lawyer Burt Neuborne and political theorist William E. Connolly, Trump's rhetoric employs tropes similar to those used by fascists in Germany[24] to persuade citizens (at first a minority) to give up democracy, by using a barrage of falsehoods, half-truths, personal invective, xenophobia, national-security scares, religious bigotry, white racism, exploitation of economic insecurity, and a never-ending search for scapegoats.[25] Some research has highlighted Trump's connections to neoliberalism and has argued that his policies represent an intensification of such policies as part of a "fascist creep" on American politics.[12] Corporatocracy and plutocracy are concepts often used to describe corporate elitism associated with Trump.[26][page needed][27][28][page needed]

During his 2024 campaign, Trump has made numerous authoritarian and antidemocratic statements.[29] Trump's previous comments, such as suggesting he can "terminate" the Constitution to reverse his election loss,[30][31] his claim that he would only be a dictator on "day one" of his presidency and not after,[d] his promise to use the Justice Department to go after his political enemies,[32] and his plan to use the Insurrection Act of 1807 to deploy the military in Democratic cities and states,[33][34] have raised concerns over Trump's rhetoric.[35]

During his tenure as president, Trump and his allies attempted to designate Antifa, an opposition movement, as a terrorist organization. Previous attempts at framing opponents of fascism as terrorists were also done by 1930s fascists.[36]

Trump has stated that he would deploy the military on American soil to fight "the enemy from within", which he describes as "radical left lunatics" and Democratic politicians such as Adam Schiff.[35] His political rhetoric since 2016 has been based on an us vs. them framework, with the in-group being defined as "real Americans" and the rival, out-groups including Muslims, leftists, intellectuals and immigrants. He has repeatedly encouraged weaponized chants at his rallies, including calls to imprison 2016 Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, and has promoted the conspiracy theory that Jewish philanthropist George Soros was responsible for a large influx of illegal immigration from Mexico to the United States.[37][38]

Trump has repeatedly voiced support for outlawing political dissent and criticism he considers misleading or challenges his claims to power.[39][40] After General Mark Milley said that Trump would start persecuting his political opponents if he won the 2024 presidential election, Trump suggested that Milley should be executed for treason, with Republican representative Paul Gosar further stating that, in a better society, "sodomy-promoting General Milley would be hung". Retired general Barry McCaffrey said, regarding Trump's statements, that "what we are seeing is a parallel to the 1930s in Nazi Germany".[41][42][43] Trump's formal policy plan for a second term, Agenda 47, has been characterized as fascist.[44][45][46] Historian Ruth Ben-Ghiat stated that the similarities between the Heritage Foundation's Project 2025 and Mussolini's "Laws for the Defense of the State", which transformed Italy into a repressive regime, are "striking", citing the elimination of judicial independence and the strengthening of executive authority.[47]

How Democracies Die author Daniel Ziblatt said that Trump's combined employment of false allegations against his political opponents and allusions of retribution by American patriots is similar to tactics used by Venezuela's Hugo Chávez and 1930s European fascists.[48] An analysis by NPR found that between 2022 and October 2024, "Trump has made more than 100 threats to investigate, prosecute, imprison or otherwise punish his perceived opponents."[49]

In February 2025, Trump posted a computer-generated image of himself wearing a crown, declaring "Long live the king!" Critics took this as evidence of Trump having monarchist tendencies.[50][51]

Political violence

Trump has repeatedly expressed support for violent actions by law enforcement and his supporters since the early days of his first presidential campaign in August 2015. He was reported to, during his presidency, have called for undocumented immigrants to be shot in the leg as a way of deterrence.[52][53] He suggested that his hecklers be "knocked the hell" out by his supporters and praised then-House candidate Greg Gianforte after he body-slammed The Guardian reporter Ben Jacobs while he was asking questions, stating that, "any guy who can do a body slam is my kind of guy."[52][54][55] Trump said at a 2016 rally that, "I could stand in the middle of 5th Avenue and shoot somebody and I wouldn't lose voters." He had previously joked about the topic of killing journalists several times prior, including when he said that he "would never kill them", before reconsidering: "Uh, let's see, uh? ... No I wouldn't. I would never kill them, but I do hate them. And some of them are such lying, disgusting people, it's true."[56][57] Some historians consider Trump's praise of violence against his critics, among other behaviors, as fitting a characteristic of fascism.[58][59]

In a Missouri rally that resulted in multiple fights and arrests, Trump complained, after being interrupted by protesters, that there were no longer any "consequences" for protesting and stated that, "You know, part of the problem and part of the reason it takes so long is nobody wants to hurt each other anymore, right?" In a 2017 speech directed at law-enforcement officers, Trump encouraged them to be "rough" on suspects. Trump has described, in 2016, instances of violence at his rallies as "appropriate".[60]

He said during the 2016 election that "the Second Amendment people" could prevent the nomination of Democratic Supreme Court justices. In 2019, he stated that, "I have the support of the police, the support of the military, the support of the Bikers for Trump, I have the tough people, but they don't play it tough, until they go to a certain point, and then it would be very bad, very bad."[61] In a 2018 interview with Axios reporter Jim Vandehei, the interviewer asked, "when you're saying 'enemy of the people, enemy of the people', ... what happens if all of a sudden someone gets shot, somebody shoots one of these reporters?", to which Trump answered, "it is my only form of fighting back."[62] Trump has praised modern authoritarian leaders several times. In 2016, he expressed respect for Kim Jong Un for murdering his uncle, saying, "It's incredible. He wiped out the uncle. He wiped out this one, that one." He has praised Vladimir Putin several times, and, in 2018, he spoke positively of Xi Jinping's ability to eliminate his term limits. About the Tiananmen Square protests, he said that, "When the students poured into Tiananmen Square, the Chinese government almost blew it. Then they were vicious, they were horrible, but they put it down with strength. That shows you the power of strength."[63] Trump has often used negative terms to describe democratic leaders, calling Germany's Angela Merkel "stupid", Canada's Justin Trudeau "two-faced" and France's Emmanuel Macron "very, very nasty". He called Egyptian president Abdel Fattah el-Sisi "my favorite dictator".[64]

During the George Floyd protests, Trump urged his general Mark Milley to take charge of dealing with the protesters. After Milley resisted, saying that the National Guard should be deployed instead, Trump told his staff, "You are all losers!" and asked Mark Milley, "Can't you just shoot them? Just shoot them in the legs or something?" Subsequently, Milley wrote a letter of resignation for Trump, which stated, referring to America's role in the Second World War, that, "That generation, like every generation, has fought against that, has fought against fascism, has fought against Nazism, has fought against extremism... It's now obvious to me that you don't understand that world order. You don't understand what the war was all about. In fact, you subscribe to many of the principles that we fought against." He ultimately decided not to send the letter to Trump and stayed in his position.[64]

After General Milley refused to engage with George Floyd protesters, Trump staged a dramatic walk alongside him (in the green uniform at 0:17) and his other staff through Lafayette Square in order to take a picture holding the Bible. Both Milley and defense secretary Mark Esper, who also participated in the walk, feared that this stunt would politicize the military. Milley then drafted a resignation letter stating that Trump betrayed the values of the American generation that "has fought against fascism".[64][65]
Protesters being dispersed by police ahead of Trump's arrival. Authoritarianism expert Ruth Ben-Ghiat said that, "this was an authoritarian spectacle... A cocktail of all the elements authoritarians have used in history: a lawless ruler attacking protesters."[63]
Three Percenters at a Virginia rally, January 2020

Bob Dreyfuss, writing for The Nation, notes that Trump has been offered support and security by paramilitary groups including the Oath Keepers, the Proud Boys, and the Three Percenters, and Dreyfuss proposes a parallel to the civilian militias that Hitler and Mussolini engaged. He describes Mussolini's Fasci Italiani di Combattimento, which was established in the early 1920s as a decentralized street militia that would attack his political opponents, and Hitler's Sturmabteilung (SA), which provided protection to Hitler during his street events and engaged in violence against political opponents, violently taking control of the city of Coburg in November 1922.[66] Trump told the Proud Boys to "stand back and stand by" in 2020, before the group participated in the January 6 attack, and during Trump's presidency, several of his armed supporters occupied several state capitols, organized around the Mexican border, and engaged in street fights with Antifa and Black Lives Matter protesters.[66] After a Black protester was beaten by his supporters during a 2015 rally, Trump said that the man "should have been roughed up". Fascism scholar Steve Ross said that, although he did not believe that Trump was Hitler, "We had the same thing happening in Germany in the 1920s with people being roughed up by the Brownshirts and they deserved it because they were Jews and Marxists and radicals and dissidents and gypsies. That was what Hitler was saying."[58]

During the 2016 election, several fights broke out between Trump supporters and those of Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders. Both Clinton and Sanders distanced themselves from their violent supporters. Trump, conversely, has praised violent actions by his supporters several times and offered to pay their legal fees. In the same year, Trump accused Sanders of sending "his disruptors" to his events and tweeted, "Be careful Bernie, or my supporters will go to yours!"[67][68]

After a protester was removed from his rally in 2016, Trump said, "Try not to hurt him. If you do, I'll defend you in court. Don't worry about it." In the same year, he said, "If you see someone getting ready to throw tomatoes knock the crap out of them, would you? Seriously. OK. Just knock the hell... I promise you, I will pay for the legal fees." He said, "I love the old days, you know? You know what I hate? There's a guy totally disruptive, throwing punches. We're not allowed to punch back anymore. I love the old days. You know what they used to do to guys like that when they were in a place like this? They'd be carried out on a stretcher, folks."[60][67] Trump said in the same year, about an anti-Trump protester that was being removed from his rally, that, "I'd like to punch him in the face."[69]

January 6 attack
The January 6 United States Capitol attack has been compared to the Beer Hall Putsch by some academics.[59]

The attack on the United States Capitol by supporters of Donald Trump on January 6, 2021, has been compared by some academics to the Beer Hall Putsch,[59][70] a failed coup attempt in Germany by Nazi Party leader Adolf Hitler against the Weimar government in 1923.[71]

Anatomy of Fascism author Robert Paxton, a political scientist and historian specializing in the study of fascism, previously denied that Trump should be labeled a fascist but changed his views following the January 6 attack.[19][72] Paxton saw the attack on the Capitol as similar to both Mussolini's 1922 march on Rome, in which his blackshirts successfully took over Italy's capital, and the 1934 far-right anti-parliamentary riot in Paris; however, he also believes that "the word fascism has been debased into epithet, making it a less and less useful tool for analyzing political movements of our times".[72] In 2024, Historian Ruth Ben-Ghiat wrote in that, just as Mussolini eventually pardoned the blackshirts who helped him ascend to power, "Trump has also already vowed to pardon" his supporters who were convicted of crimes related to January 6.[47] In 2025, Trump pardoned nearly every January 6 Capitol rioter, including those who assaulted police officers and defendants with domestic violence, manslaughter, "production of child sexual abuse material", rape, and child sexual abuse on their criminal records.[73][74]

Storming of Michigan state capitol
See also: April 30 storming of the Michigan State Capitol

On April 30, 2020, less than a year prior to the January 6 attack and two weeks after Trump published social media posts urging his supporters to "liberate" the state of Michigan from COVID-19 policies, hundreds of Trump supporters, including militia members, gathered around the Michigan state capitol to prevent a public health measure from coming into effect. About 100 protesters entered the capitol, where they displayed nooses and carried Confederate flags, as well as signs that read "Tyrants Get the Rope". During the incident, Trump endorsed the protesters and urged governor Gretchen Whitmer to negotiate with them, tweeting that, "These are very good people, but they are angry. They want their lives back again, safely! See them, talk to them, make a deal with the protesters." The protesters successfully convinced Republican state senators to kill the measure.[75]

American Journal of Public Health editor Alfredo Morabia cited the Michigan attacks, the plot to kidnap Whitmer and other incidents of disruption by armed political groups as build ups to the January 6 attacks.[76]

Dehumanization and racism
Further information: Racial views of Donald Trump, Rhetoric of Donald Trump § Violence and dehumanization, and Persecution of transgender people under the second Trump administration
See also: Donald Trump 2024 presidential campaign § Violent and dehumanizing statements

Trump's embrace of far-right extremism[77][78] and several statements and actions have been accused of echoing fascism, Nazi rhetoric, far-right ideology, antisemitism, and white supremacy.[79][80][81] In 2018, Dr. Mike Cole, emeritus professor in education and equality at Bishop Grosseteste University (UK),[82] stated that Trump's racist and fascistic rhetoric and accompanying agenda targeted at people of color in the US and elsewhere, and his use of Twitter promoted a public pedagogy of hate to add legitimacy to fascism. Cole highlighted neo-Nazi Andrew Anglin's connections to the alt-right to claim it is a new (neo-) fascist movement, but with links to older fringe white supremacist movements, rather than just a component of right-wing conservatism.[83] Mattias Gardell has argued that Trump's "key fascist vision of national rebirth" featured "banal nationalism, Americanism, nativism, white supremacy, manifest destiny, and racialized discourse and practice". Gardell argues that while most Trump voters were not fascist, his rhetoric featured a return to "fascist elements" of political nostalgia and that a "heterogenous milieu of white nationalists, radical traditionalists, alt-right identitarians, conspiracy exposers, militias, neo-Confederates, and sovereign citizens" were knowingly catered to by Trump, which related to an important "affective dimension which fascism frequently caters to".[84]

Trump's comments comparing his political enemies to "vermin" who will be "rooted out" have been compared by several historians to fascistic rhetoric made by Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini.[85][86][87][88] During a rally in 2023, Trump stated:[89]

In honor of our great veterans on Veterans Day, we pledge to you that we will root out the communists, Marxists, fascists, and the radical-left thugs that live like vermin within the confines of our country—that lie and steal and cheat on elections, and will do anything possible; they'll do anything, whether legally or illegally, to destroy America, and to destroy the American Dream.

The comments were compared to comments made by Nazi politician Wilhelm Kube in February 1933 in a Nazi propaganda publication where he stated, "The Jews, like vermin, form a line from Potsdamerplatz until Anhalter Bahnhof ... The only way to smoke out the vermin is to expel them." They were also compared to Oswald Mosley's British fascists referring to Jews as "rats and vermin from the gutters of Whitechapel" and a 1934 Hitler interview where he stated, "I have the right to remove millions of an inferior race that breeds like vermin!"[89] French translator of Mein Kampf Olivier Mannoni also argued that the term "root out" was very similar to the term "ausrotten" used by nazis, which also meant "to exterminate".[88]

Responding to critics, Trump's campaign later said that "their sad, miserable existence will be crushed when President Trump returns to the White House", which was also criticized for echoing the rhetoric of authoritarian leaders, along with Trump's statement that, "the threat from outside forces is far less sinister, dangerous and grave than the threat from within. Our threat is from within."[90][91] According to The New York Times, scholars are undecided about whether Trump's more fascist-sounding language is to antagonize the left, an evolution in his beliefs, or the "dropping of a veil".[92] When a reporter asked Trump in 2015 about how his proposed national registry of Muslims would differ from Nazi Germany's persecution of Jews, Trump responded, "you tell me."[58]

Since the fall of 2023,[93] Trump has repeatedly used fascist-sounding rhetoric by stating that undocumented immigrants are "poisoning the blood of our country", which has been compared to language echoing that of white supremacists and Adolf Hitler's Mein Kampf.[94] He later claimed that immigrants who commit murder have "bad genes".[95][81] According to Politico, his rally speeches contain "what some experts in political rhetoric, fascism, and immigration say is a strong echo of authoritarians and Nazi ideology".[81] Other fascistic comments include statements that immigrants are the "enemy from within" who are ruining the "fabric" of the country.[81] Trump has stated that some immigrants are "not people",[96] "not humans",[97] and "animals".[98] At rallies, Trump has stated that undocumented immigrants will "rape, pillage, thieve, plunder and kill" American citizens,[99] that they are "stone-cold killers", "monsters", "vile animals", "savages", and "predators" that will "walk into your kitchen, they'll cut your throat"[100] and "grab young girls and slice them up right in front of their parents".[99] Donald Trump also threatened to examine the skulls of Jews who did not vote for him.[88] Donald Trump called for the "remigration" of undocumented immigrants in the United States during the 2024 election, a term that is commonly used by European white identitarian movements as a euphemism for ethnic cleansing.[101] On October 27, 2024, Trump held a rally in Madison Square Garden that featured speakers making various racist and dehumanizing remarks, including Tony Hinchcliffe's statement that Puerto Rico was an "island of garbage".[102][103] The event drew comparisons from media and politicians to the 1939 Nazi rally that took place in the same location.[104] In 2020, Trump told a nearly all-white crowd, "You have good genes ... The racehorse theory. You think we're so different?".[105]

Cult of personality
See also: Cult of personality and Attempted assassination of Donald Trump in Pennsylvania

Historians Enzo Traverso, Ruth Ben-Ghiat, and Manon Lefebvre (experts in totalitarianism, fascism, and the United States), and the French translator of Mein Kampf, Olivier Mannoni, argued that Donald Trump fosters a cult of personality thanks to his charismatic, masculinist, reactionary, accessible, and identifiable rhetoric, where his aura matters much more than the quality of his arguments in the eyes of his followers. The four experts drew as such similarities between the fascists of the 1920s–1930s and the MAGA movement.[106][107][47]

Furthermore, the three historians believed that the cult of personality skyrocketed since the attempted assassination of Donald Trump in July 2024 by furthering Trump's charismatic aspect as a barrier between US citizens and the "enemy". As such Trump's followers went as far as to talk about "divine intervention" when seeing that the assassination attempt failed.[106][47]

Internment camps
See also: Remigration, Opposition to immigration § United States, Immigration reduction in the United States, Deportation and removal from the United States, and Alligator Alcatraz § Response
A migrant detention camp in 2019

The Trump administration family separation policy was compared to the use of internment camps by previous fascist regimes. In 2018, Trump instituted a "zero tolerance" policy which mandated the criminal prosecution of all adults who were accused of violating immigration laws by immigration authorities.[108][109][110] This policy directly led to the large-scale,[111][112] forcible separation of children and parents arriving at the United States-Mexico border,[113] including those who were seeking asylum from violence in their home countries.[114] Parents were arrested and put into criminal detention, while their children were taken away, classified as unaccompanied alien minors, to be put into child immigrant detention centers.[110][115]

Although Trump signed an executive order which ostensibly ended the family separation component of his administration's migrant detentions in June 2018, it continued under alternative justifications into 2019.[116]

By the end of 2018, the number of children being held had swelled to a high of nearly 15,000,[117][118] which by August 2019 had been reduced to less than 9,000.[119] In 2019, many experts, including Andrea Pitzer, the author of One Long Night: A Global History of Concentration Camps, have acknowledged the designation of the detention centers as "concentration camps"[120] particularly given that the centers, previously cited by Texas officials for more than 150 health violations[121] and reported deaths in custody,[122] reflect a record typical of the history of deliberate substandard healthcare and nutrition in concentration camps.[123] There has been significant disagreement as to whether or not to label these facilities "concentration camps".[124][125][126]

In 2023, Current Affairs profiled how Trump in his 2024 campaign likewise pledged to build internment camps, warning that Trump's plan was to "build huge camps and put millions of people in them without any semblance of due process", which might include political opponents and critics.[127]

In 2025, Trump announced plans to use the Guantanamo Bay detention camp to detain immigrants.[128][129] He also began deporting immigrants, which he claimed to be members of the Venezuelan Tren de Aragua gang, to the Terrorism Confinement Center in El Salvador, in spite of court orders to not do so.[130][131] He further suggested that he would deport anti-Tesla protesters to the same prison, calling attention to the prison's cruel conditions.[132]

Connections to self-identified fascists
Former KKK leader and Louisiana representative David Duke endorsed Trump in 2016, pledged to "fulfill the promises of Donald Trump" at a neo-Nazi rally in 2017 and endorsed Trump again in 2020. Trump disavowed Duke in August 2015, refused to disavow him in a January 2016 interview and disavowed Duke again later that month. Duke decided not to support Trump in 2024 due to his "subservience to Israel".[133][134][135]

In the 2016 United States presidential election, Trump was supported by multiple self-described Nazi or fascist groups, including the National Socialist Movement and Ku Klux Klan. These groups engaged in voter intimidation by monitoring polling locations in 2016, claiming to have done so both "informally" and "through the Trump campaign".[136] In 2016, Trump was endorsed by self-identified Nazis such as David Duke,[137] alt-right activist Richard Spencer and Nazi activist Andrew Anglin. Trump disavowed Duke in August 2015, refused to disavow him in a January 2016 interview, and wrote a tweet disavowing the former KKK leader shortly afterwards. Trump has shared social media content linked to neo-Nazi websites, refused to condemn antisemitic attacks on Jewish journalists, and, after winning the election, appointed Steve Bannon, an admirer of Mussolini, as his chief of staff. During the Charlottesville protests in Virginia, Trump stated that there were good people on both sides.[138][134] Duke endorsed Trump once again during the 2020 presidential election[139] and criticized him in 2024.[140] In September 2024, CNN reported that Mark Robinson, whom Trump endorsed in the 2024 North Carolina gubernatorial election, had previously identified himself as a "Black Nazi".[141] Trump's Inaugural Address was written by alt-right activists Stephen Miller and Steve Bannon.[142]

Trump discusses the Unite the Right rally, August 2017.

Stormfront founder Don Black supported Trump for, he said, fighting against white demoralization and building a long-term movement that would outlast him. Trump was described by alt-right activist and millionaire donor William Regnery II as someone who helped white nationalism go "from being conversation you could hold in a bathroom, to the front parlor". Rocky Suhayda, chairman of a split from the American Nazi Party, said that Trump provided a "real opportunity" for his cause. White Nationalist Jared Taylor supported Trump for "talking about policies that would slow the dispossession of whites" and said that, "all of his policies, at least those pertaining to immigration, align very nicely with the sorts of things we've been saying for many year."[143] Anglin, who founded The Daily Stormer, had multiple pro-Trump articles published on his website and said that, "virtually every Alt-Right Nazi I know is volunteering for the Trump campaign." In November 2016, Spencer shouted "Hail Trump, hail our people, hail victory!" during a speech at a National Policy Institute convention. By November 2017, and throughout 2018, many alt-right activists expressed disappointment at Trump after he started supporting Muslims in Saudi Arabia and Jews in Israel. Trump's decision to remove Bannon from the National Security Council also impacted their impression about him.[143]

Following Trump's victory in the 2024 presidential election, Blood Tribe leader Christopher Pohlhaus celebrated by thanking Trump that "cheaper gas will make it easier to spread White Power across the whole country". Far-right activist Lauren Witzke thanked "men, especially white men, who turned out in force to put women back in their place". Turning Point USA ambassador Evan Kilgore said in his 100,000-followers X account, "Women, back to the kitchen; Abortions, illegal; Gays, back in the closet; Interracial marriage, banned; Illegals, pack your bags; trannies, back to the asylums; Jesus, back in our schools."[144] In November, an investigation by Politico found that a Pennsylvania-based field staffer hired by the Republican Party to work at the Trump campaign was a co-host alongside Richard Spencer at a white nationalist podcast. The podcast host, Luke Meyer, confirmed to the news organization that he was indeed a worker for the Trump campaign and was fired shortly afterwards. In his podcast, he stated, "Why can't we make New York, for example, white again? Why can't we clear out and reclaim Miami?... A return to 80%, 90% white would probably be, probably the best we could hope for, to some degree." He also told Politico that, "in a few years, one of those groypers might even quietly bring me back in, with a stern warning for me to 'be more careful next time'."[145]

A man at a 2017 rally holding a sign likening Trump to Adolf Hitler

In 1990, Ivana Trump, Donald Trump's former wife, stated that he kept a copy of My New Order, a collection of speeches written by Adolf Hitler, by his bedside.[146] According to Vanity Fair reporter Marie Brenner, Trump told her in a 1990s interview that it was "my friend Marty Davis from Paramount who gave me a copy of Mein Kampf, and he's a Jew". When Brenner asked Davis if he had given the book to Trump, he said that, "it was My New Order, Hitler's speeches, not Mein Kampf. I thought he would find it interesting. I am his friend, but I'm not Jewish." Trump further told Brenner that, "if I had these speeches, and I am not saying that I do, I would never read them." After saying that illegal immigrants were "poisoning the blood of our country" in 2023, Trump said "they said Hitler said that". He further stated that Hitler used those words in a different way and said, "it's true. They're destroying the blood of the country, they're destroying the fabric of our country, and we're going to have to get them out."[147][64] John F. Kelly, Trump's former chief of staff, stated in October 2024 that Trump spoke positively of Hitler during his tenure as president, including by saying that "Hitler did some good things" such as rebuilding the economy.[148][149][150] Kelly also stated that Trump had told him that he desired military generals similar to the generals who served Hitler.[149][151][152] Kelly's statements came after Trump's statements about Hitler and his generals were reported by several books a few years prior.[64]

A post by Trump's Department of Homeland Security paraphrasing a quote by American neo-Nazi activist William Gayley Simpson

In early 2016, Trump tweeted Mussolini's quote that "it is better to live one day as a lion than 100 years as a sheep", attributed to social media account @ilduce2016 (Il Duce was Mussolini's honorific), an anonymous account secretly set-up by Gawker that posted #MakeAmericaGreatAgain tweets alongside Mussolini-related content and whose profile picture featured Mussolini's face with Trump's hair edited over it. When Trump was asked about the social media post in an interview with Chuck Todd, he said, "Chuck, it's OK to know it's Mussolini. Look, Mussolini was Mussolini... it's a very good quote, it's a very interesting quote, and I know it... and I know who said it. But what difference does it make whether it's Mussolini or somebody else? It's certainly a very interesting quote."[64][153][154] In the same year, Trump shared a Twitter post from neo-Nazi account @WhiteGenocideTM and, three weeks after, he retweeted the same account again. Two days after, he retweeted another account with the handle @EustaceFash, whose profile banner included the words "white genocide". Trump's second retweet of @WhiteGenocideTM was shortly deleted. Andrew Anglin, from The Daily Stormer, said that Trump was "giving us the old wink-wink" and that "it isn't statistically possible" that Trump could have retweeted the two accounts "back to back" by accident.[155] Also in 2016, Trump posted an image that showed the Star of David with the words "most corrupt candidate ever" written on it, juxtaposed with the face of Hillary Clinton in front of a pile of money. The image was later deleted and replaced with another version that featured a circle instead of the Star of David.[156]

According to NPR, Trump's golf club in Bedminster, New Jersey twice held speeches by Nazi sympathizer Timothy Hale-Cusanelli, who had previously said that, "Hitler should have finished the job."[157][64] In 2022, Trump was visited by self-described Nazi[158] musical artist Kanye West and Holocaust denier Nick Fuentes at Mar-a-Lago. West said shortly after the dinner that, "I like Hitler."[64][159] Trump said after the incident that he did not know who Fuentes was.[159]

In August 2025, Trump's Department of Homeland Security published an ICE recruitment poster on Twitter labeled with the caption "Which way, American man?". This was a reference to Which Way Western Man?, a white supremacist book published by American neo-Nazi activist William Gayley Simpson. The title of the book is a popular Internet meme among the neo-Nazi movement.[160]

In August 2025 Henry Stout, founder of the Neo Nazi group Aryan Freedom Network said "Trump awakened a lot of people to the issues we've been raising for years. He's the best thing that's happened to us." He continued by stating that "our side won the election."[161]

Historical parallels
The U.S. experienced a proliferation of fascist movements during the Great Depression. The Madison Square Garden pro-Nazi rally (pictured) drew about 20,000 participants in 1939.[162]

The idea of modern America being analogous to Weimar Germany before Hitler's seizure of power was brought up by New York Times reporter Roger Cohen and journalist Andrew Sullivan in 2015.[163] American professor John Russo stated in 1995 that public concerns over job loss would lead to a resurgence of fascism in the United States in the future (the U.S. had previously seen a rise in fascist movements during the 1930s, partly due to the Great Depression, with Leon Milton Birkhead identifying 800 Nazi-friendly organizations in 1938). In a 1995 interview with Dale Maharidge, Russo predicted the emergence of a new American leader similar to Donald Trump, a prediction on which he doubled down in the 2020s.[162]

Jonathan Chait stated that the decision by American conservatives of embracing Trump is analogous to that of German conservatives of supporting Hitler with the hope that they could "tame" him. The same argument was made by historians Nathan Stoltzfus and Eric Weitz. Paul Robin Krugman, in a 2016 article titled How Republics End, stated that, "it takes willful blindness not to see the parallels between the rise of fascism and our current political nightmare." Geoff Eley, despite believing that Trump was not Hitler, also drew parallels between societal fears regarding globalization and immigration in contemporary America and in the 1930s.[163] American historian Timothy Ryback, author of Takeover: Hitler's Final Rise to Power, wrote in 2024 that, "our republic appears to be plagued by the myriad ills that doomed Weimar: political fragmentation, social polarization, hate-filled demagoguery, a legislature gridlocked by partisan posturing, and structural anomalies in voting processes."[164]

American vice-president Mike Pence posing with a police officer (left) wearing a QAnon badge, November 2018

Conspiracy theories have been a central factor in the emergence of fascist movements. Hannah Arendt wrote in 1951 that, "The ideal subject of totalitarian rule is not the convinced Nazi or the convinced Communist, but people for whom the distinction between fact and fiction (i.e. the reality of experience) and the distinction between true and false (i.e. the standards of thought) no longer exists." In Germany, Nazi activists employed conspiracy theories such as The Protocols of the Elders of Zion to portray Jews as attempting to take over the world, an idea that Hitler defended in Mein Kampf. In the 21st century, QAnon became one of the most prominent conspiracy theories among the pro-Trump movement, alleging that Trump has been involved with a years-long fight with the "deep state". Its believers have included House members Marjorie Taylor Greene and Lauren Boebert.[165][166] The conspiracy theory that white people were being deliberately ethnically replaced by immigrants also became prominent and was promoted by Fox News' Tucker Carlson.[167][168] A 2022 survey carried out by the Southern Poverty Law Center and Turchin Research involving 1,500 respondents reported that nearly 70% of Republicans believed "to at least some extent" this was taking place.[169][170]

In Weimar Germany, Hitler scapegoated the Jews as one of the causes of the Great Depression. During the 1930s, public support for centrist parties diminished and political infighting broke among leftist parties, which resulted in there being no unified opposition to the NSDAP. Time writer Christine Adams said that although the current political state of the United States may seem analogous to that of Weimar Germany, the presence of a cross-ideological opposition to Trump is a factor that makes America different from Germany in the 1930s.[171]

David Dyzenhaus wrote that although the government of the United States, including conservative judges and vice-president Mike Pence, managed to reject Trump's attempts of overturning election results, the state of democracy in Weimar Germany was also "similarly salvageable" until late 1932, for which reason the analogy between Weimar Germany and 2024 America is, he stated, strong. In that year, the Staatsgerichtshof, the court responsible for settling constitutional disputes related to the federal government and the states, upheld the constitutionality of the right-wing German government's decision to change the government of Prussia under an emergency clause of the Weimar Constitution, a decision that is regarded as a precursor to Hitler's rise to power in the following year. Dyzenhaus stated that the decisions of the mostly conservative U.S. Supreme Court during Trump's post-2024 tenure as president will affect the future of American democracy analogously to how the Staatsgerichtshof's decisions affected German politics in the 1930s. Trump has stated that he would, if re-elected in 2024, use the Insurrection Act to suppress dissident protesters.[172] Holocaust historian Christopher R. Browning wrote in 2022 that a hypothetical emergence of a minority-ruled, authoritarian government in the United States led by Donald Trump and his Republican allies would resemble more an illiberal democracy than a Nazi-like dictatorship. Browning stated that the appointment of election deniers to key positions in state governments in the United States was an "ominous warning", and that the patterns of behavior of the Republican Party amounted to an attempt at a "legal revolution", a term coined by German historian Karl Dietrich Bracher to describe the legal pathways that the Nazi Party undertook in order to seize power following Hitler's unsuccessful 1923 coup attempt.[173]

After Hitler lost his 1932 run for presidency by a margin of 6 million voters, he claimed voter fraud and went to court in order to overturn the election results. According to Hitler, his party had actually gotten 2 million more votes than what was recorded. His case was ultimately dismissed, with a judge stating that the high margin by which Hitler lost precluded the possibility of any significant fraud. At that time, the New York Times published an article titled Hitler to Contest Validity of Election.[174][175]

Authoritarianism

In September 2025, historians Diana Garvin, Tiffany Florvil and Claudia Koonz argued Donald Trump's government was weaponizing and objectifying women similarly to previous fascist regimes. They explained that like fascist Italy and nazi Germany, Trump pushes natalistic policies mixed with white supremacism, normalizes the idea of the woman body being "state resources", and rely on women's serfdom to bash themselves and other women.[176]

In October 2025, political scientist Asma Mhalla argues Trump's second administration is fascist since the State wants to enhance its power in order to achieve the rank of a hobbesian Leviathan by "accelerat[ing] authoritarianism". Nonetheless she expresses differences with original fascism becauses of alliances with tech moguls, massive use of social media, and proximity with neoreactionnary accelerationism, partly in order to curb China's growing clout.[177]

Invocations of the comparison
See also: Fascism in the United States
A protest sign at a 2018 rally describing Trump as a fascist
Invocations before the January 6, 2021 Capitol attack

Trump was described as a fascist by philosophers such as Judith Butler[178] and Noam Chomsky.[179] In 2017, Holocaust historian Timothy Snyder published On Tyranny, warning about the danger signs of fascism in the Trump era.[180] Political theorist William E. Connolly analyzed Trump's rhetorical appeal to the working class, exploring its affinities with fascist rhetoric.[181] In her 2018 book Fascism: A Warning, former US Secretary of State and then Professor in the Practice of Diplomacy at Georgetown University's School of Foreign Service Madeleine Albright referenced Donald Trump several times; she refused to directly define Trump as a fascist, while comparing his rhetoric and methods with fascist leaders, and characterizing him as the first modern antidemocratic U.S. president.[182] In 2018, American-Canadian cultural critic Henry Giroux wrote an essay linking the subjects of fascism, right-wing populism, Trump, white nationalism, education, and politics.[183] In 2016, Ewan McGaughey in the British Journal of American Legal Studies suggested that Trump's movement was weaker than previous fascists as it was "too hostile to insider welfare", and instead highlighted the Supreme Court's decisions in Citizens United and Buckley v. Valeo as an assault on democracy and human rights, starting a long-term trend towards fascism. McGaughey stated the Court's decisions enabled to the election of Trump but that Trump's politics should properly be characterized as "fascism-lite".[184] In How Fascism Works (2018), Jason Stanley wrote that Trump employed "fascist techniques to excite his base and erode liberal democratic institutions".[185]

In 2016, JD Vance said that, "I go back and forth between thinking Trump is a cynical asshole like Nixon... or that he's America's Hitler."[186]

After Trump called for a Muslim travel ban in late 2015, he was described as a fascist by some Democratic and Republican figures, including Conservative activists Max Boot, Robert Kagan, Bret Stephens, John Noonan, former Virginia governor Jim Gilmore, and Libertarian politician Gary Johnson. Republican former governor Christine Todd Whitman referred to Trump's 2015 calls for the travel ban as "the kind of rhetoric that allowed Hitler to move forward".[187] Conservative commentator Glenn Beck compared Trump with Hitler in 2016, calling him "dangerous" and stating that, "we all look at Adolf Hitler in 1940. We should look at Adolf Hitler in 1929... He was a kind of a funny kind of a character who said the things that people are thinking... Where Donald Trump takes it, I have absolutely no idea."[188] Former Republican governor of Virginia Jim Gilmore said that Trump's plans of creating a "deportation force" was "fascist talk".[58] JD Vance said in 2016 that he saw Trump as either a politician like Richard Nixon or "America's Hitler", also calling him "reprehensible". Despite this, he went on to run alongside Trump in his 2024 presidential campaign.[186][189] Fascism scholar Federico Finchelstein said about Trump that, "Fascism sometimes becomes an attribute to describe someone that is intolerant or totalitarian or even racist... When dealing with an important part of the nation such as Hispanics, I think he definitely fits those categories."[58]

Robert F. Kennedy Jr. has previously compared Trump to Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, and Charles Coughlin.[190]

American politician Robert F. Kennedy Jr. has compared Trump to both Hitler and Mussolini, described him as a "threat to democracy" in April 2024 and endorsed the suggestion that some of Trump's base supporters were "outright Nazis". He said in December 2016 that Trump was different from Hitler in at least one way, that being that "Hitler was interested in policy". Kennedy has also compared Trump to Father Coughlin, an American Nazi sympathizer radio host from the 1930s. In 2024, Kennedy endorsed Trump for president, who then nominated him for Secretary of Health and Human Services.[190][191][192]

Anne Frank's stepsister Eva Schloss said in 2016 that Trump was "acting like another Hitler".[193] In 2020, American journalist Rich Benjamin stated that Trump's political movement is "shot through with fascism".[194] Professor Nicholas de Genova described Trump as the leader of a "white supremacist fascist movement" and examined Trump's birtherism, racist rhetoric, voter fraud falsehoods, anti-immigration policies, terrorist and white supremacist events that happened during his presidency, plus Republican capitulation to Trumpism, signaling the whole as the birth of a civil war ethos, in which "everything is permitted".[195]

Invocations after the January 6, 2021 Capitol attack

Following the January 6 Capitol attack, Robert Paxton, who had initially resisted calling Trump a fascist, announced that the label now seemed necessary.[196] Mattias Gardell argued that Trump's MAGA campaign centered fascist visions of a national rebirth and that Hitler and Mussolini were also dismissed as "egomaniacs, big-mouths, and buffoons" by commentators at the time. David Renton has said that figures such as Hitler, Mussolini, and Mosley became fascists over time and that January 6 served as a warning to America about how vulnerable it is to authoritarianism. Maria Bucur has argued that the "surfacing of fascist sympathies" were facilitated by Trump. Brian Hughes has called for further study of Trumpism and Trump's fascist merits through Lacanian terms, arguing that Trump "not only meets the criteria of charismatic strongman" but "he exceeds them".[197]

Ruth Wodak has said that while Trump's rhetoric applies "salient discursive practices of fascism", it is not useful to lose oneself in "terminological debates", and instead encouraged greater study on Trumpism's socio-political, historical and situative contexts, along with the ideological positions of his close advisors such as Steve Bannon. Raul Cârstocea argues that Trump has "adopted fascist ideological or stylistic trappings without embracing fascism's revolutionary impetus" and that whether or not Trump is a fascist is less relevant, as "Trump did radicalize the Republican Party considerably and he did mobilize actual fascists to seek a violent overthrow of the establishment" and that Trump may or may not represent a "2.0 version of analogue fascism for our digital post-fascist present".[198]

In Fascism in America, a book published after the January 6 attacks, Ruth Ben-Ghiat stated that, "Trump can be called a fascist because he differed from any previous American president in having the explicit goal of destroying democracy at home, disengaging America from democratic international networks, and allying with the autocrats he admires, like Putin."[199] Ben-Ghiat further stated that she "started writing about Trump in 2015 because everything about him seemed familiar to me as someone who had studied fascism for decades: the rallies, the attacks on the press, the lying, the loyalty oaths, the declarations of violent intent, the need to dominate and humiliate".[200]

Trump's former advisor Steve Bannon (center-right, blue shirt) said that he thought "that's Hitler" when he saw Trump descend from the Trump Tower elevator in 2015.[201][64]

In Jeremy W. Peters's 2022 book Insurgency, former Trump staffer Steve Bannon was repeatedly quoted comparing Trump to Hitler. Bannon said that Trump's aides showing him misleading polling data during the 2020 election was "like showing Hitler fake armor divisions when the Reichstag is burning down". According to the book, Bannon said that the sight of Trump descending from an elevator in New York made a Triumph of the Will scene in which Hitler exits his aircraft to an adoring crowd "flash" through his mind. According to the book, Bannon told Peters that he thought "that's Hitler", meaning it as a compliment to Trump.[64][202][203][204]

Trump and Hitler: A Comparative Study in Lying author Henk de Berg said that there are "massive differences" between Trump and Hitler, but also that both politicians shared similar rhetorical patterns. He stated that, "most of their electorate are dissatisfied with the status quo for a variety of reasons (globalization, automation) so they want to change the system and here you have an anti-establishment candidate who is not politically correct."[205]

Mike Godwin, the creator of Godwin's Law, stated in 2023 that, "Trump's opening himself up to the Hitler comparison." He also said that, "You could say the 'vermin' remark or the 'poisoning the blood' remark, maybe one of them would be a coincidence. But both of them pretty much make it clear that there's something thematic going on, and I can't believe it's accidental."[206]

Invocations during the 2024 presidential campaign
Further information: Donald Trump 2024 presidential campaign § Authoritarian and antidemocratic statements

Comparisons between Trump and fascism drawn by mainstream media increased substantially in 2023 and 2024,[207] and during his 2024 presidential campaign, a growing number of scholars, historians, commentators, politicians, former Trump officials, and generals described Trump as a fascist.[a]

Former senior Trump administration officials John F. Kelly (left) and Mark Milley (right) have both described Trump as a fascist.
Duration: 2 minutes and 55 seconds.
2:55
Voice of America coverage of comparisons drawn between Trump and fascism by former Trump staff[208]

Trump was described as a fascist in October 2024 by John F. Kelly, Trump's former chief of staff during his presidential tenure. Referring to the definition of fascism as a far-right authoritarian ideology with elements of ultranationalism and a dictatorial leader, Kelly stated that Trump "certainly" meets the definition of a fascist,[148][209] making it the first time a president has been called a fascist by a former hand-picked top adviser.[64] Following the statements by Kelly, Karine Jean-Pierre stated that United States President Joe Biden agreed with the assertion that Trump is a fascist.[210] Kamala Harris, Biden's vice president and Trump's opponent in the 2024 election, also stated that she considers Trump to be a fascist.[211][212] Thirteen former Trump officials signed an open letter agreeing with Kelly's statements.[213] Mark Esper, Secretary of Defense under Trump, also agreed with Kelly, saying Trump meets the definition of a fascist and has fascist instincts.[214]

Additionally, Mark Milley, the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, described Trump as "fascist to the core".[215]

Cornel West has described Trump as a fascist.[216] Professor and former Secretary of Labor Robert Reich has publicly described Trump as a fascist.[217][218][219] The Economist said it was reasonable to describe Trump as a modern iteration of fascism.[220] Howard French stated that Trump is a fascist, but questioned whether the message would have helped Democrats to win the 2024 election.[221] Peter Baker described Trump as the president who most aggressively discredited democracy at home while affiliating himself with autocrats abroad.[64]

Invocations during Trump's second presidency

In 2025, Timothy Snyder, Marci Shore, and Jason Stanley, three experts of fascism from Yale University, fled from the United States to Canada. They cited what they perceived to be America's descent into a fascist dictatorship as their reason for leaving the country.[222][223][224] Additionally, an April 2025 survey of over 500 political scientists found that the majority considered the United States under Trump to be quickly becoming an authoritarian regime.[225] In May 2025, Jason Stanley stated that Trump's frequent attempts to target institutions of higher education such as Harvard University was due to them being a "threat to the glory of the dictator" and that "all dictators smash universities".[226]

In a United States Senate hearing in March 2025, Bernie Sanders presented a graphic created by Trump's 2024 campaign and compared it to a piece of Hungarian fascist propaganda. Both images depicted Jews controlling political leaders as puppets on strings. Three expert witnesses on the subject of antisemitism agreed that Trump's publication was antisemitic propaganda similar to the fascist example.[227] Matthew Kriner, a scholar of far-right extremism, argues that the Elon Musk salute controversy was far from the only instance of fascist imagery appearing from supporters of Donald Trump while noting how many of the examples of veiled fascism have plausible deniability.[228] Larry Diamond argued in March 2025 that Trump had some but not yet all of the characteristics of a fascist leader.[229]

Former U.S. Vice President Al Gore compared Trump to Adolf Hitler in an April 2025 speech.

In an April 2025 speech, former United States Vice President Al Gore directly compared Trump to Adolf Hitler, drawing comparisons between Trump's political actions and those of the Nazi regime. He quoted antifascist philosopher Theodor W. Adorno describing the use of misinformation by the Nazi regime to convert "all questions of truth into questions of power", saying that Trump uses the same tactic.[230][231] Adrienne LaFrance cited scholars who see Trump's second term as textbook fascism.[232]

Following the assault and forceful removal of senator Alex Padilla from a press conference in June 2025 after he attempted to ask a question, several United States senators described the event as fascistic. Elizabeth Warren stated that "it's looking more and more like a fascist state out there every day",[233] and Scott Wiener stated that "anyone who continues to doubt whether this is fascism is living in an alternate reality".[234] Additionally, journalist Jim Acosta said that "what happened to Senator Padilla is not homeland security. That's homeland fascism."[235]

In June 2025, the day of the United States Army 250th Anniversary Parade, more than 400 scholars including 31 Nobel laureates from more than 30 countries signed an open letter labeled "A Renewed Open Letter Against the Return of Fascism", which is a renewal of the 1925 Italian Manifesto of the Anti-Fascist Intellectuals.[236][237] In July 2025, Joe Rogan, who had endorsed Trump during his 2024 campaign, expressed regret for the endorsement, saying that Trump's policies during his second presidency resembled fascism.[238]

Criticism of the comparison
See also: Fascist (insult)

In response to multiple authors claiming that the then-presidential candidate Donald Trump was a fascist,[239][240] a 2016 article for Vox cited five historians who study fascism, including Roger Griffin, author of The Nature of Fascism, who stated that Trump either does not hold or even is opposed to several political viewpoints that are integral to fascism, including viewing violence as an inherent good and an inherent rejection of or opposition to a democratic system.[241] In 2020, Vox contacted a group of experts on fascism for their view, with most rejecting the comparison but expressing concern about Trump's authoritarian and violent tendencies, including historians Roger Griffin and Stanley Payne.[242] Historian Richard J. Evans also rejected comparisons to fascism. In 2018, he wrote a negative review of both Albright and Snyder's books as having a "vague and confused" view of what defines fascism.[243][244] A paper in International Critical Thought stated in 2017 that the Trump's administration was not hegemonic nor fascist, but that it signaled the rise of a right-wing nationalist movement.[245] Benjamin R. Teitelbaum has stated he "unequivocally reject[s] using the term" fascist to describe Trump on epistemological and pedagogical grounds, viewing it as "an end of inquiry".[246] Roger Griffin also argued that Trump displayed some but not all traits of fascism, and that his actions on January 6 were not those of a fascist leader but of an "ochlocrat".[247]

In a 2024 Guardian column, Jan Werner-Müller argued that rejecting the label can be done while acknowledging the dangers Trump creates to democracy.[3] Geoff Boucher, writing for The Conversation in 2024, argues Trump represents instead a 'new authoritarianism' that relies on administration instead of paramilitaries to subvert democracy,[15] a definition seconded by The Herald.[248] Daniel Steinmetz-Jenkins, a historian at Wesleyan University, in an interview with Historian Joshua Zeitz, stated while he thought Trump had an authoritarian and illiberal vision, he was unsure if Trump was a fascist, but that by "not framing him this way, it does not at all mean that he is not a threat".[249] Griffin has since caveated this with the following statement that "in standard academic terms, he (Trump) is not one (a fascist), he is something worse".[250] In Brazilian Portuguese, the term biliocracia ('rule by billionaires')[251][252] was used to describe his administration and ideology.[253][254]

Following the attempted assassination of Donald Trump in Pennsylvania, some Republicans including JD Vance,[19] Stephen Miller,[255] and Robert F. Kennedy Jr.[256] argued that comparing Trump to a fascist or a Nazi could incite violence.[22][256] Susan Benesch, founding director of the Dangerous Speech Project, has called such comparisons "a pot calling the kettle black", and noted that Trump's continued use of inflammatory rhetoric against Democrats has not stopped.[257][258] In response to John F. Kelly and Mark Milley calling Trump a fascist, Vance dismissed their claims and characterized them both as "disgruntled former employees".[208]

Many articles have been written in an attempt to name precisely what Trump's ideology is, either to specify what type of fascist he is or to claim he is something else instead. He has been called a hypercapitalist,[259] petty tyrant,[260] new authoritarian,[15] far-right populist,[3] Machiavellian,[261] authoritarian populist,[262] mercantilist,[263] deep nationalist[264] and a Trumpist.

See also
Democratic backsliding in the United States
Donald Trump and antisemitism
Donald Trump and the American Civil War
Racial views of Donald Trump
Trump derangement syndrome
Donald Trump in popular culture
Notes
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Attributed to multiple references:
Homans 2024: "No major American presidential candidate has talked like he now does at his rallies—not Richard Nixon, not George Wallace, not even Donald Trump himself."
Bender & Gold 2023
Lehmann 2023
Basu 2023
Cassidy 2023
Lutz 2023
Browning 2023
Kim & Ibssa 2023
Ward 2024: "It's a stark escalation over the last month of what some experts in political rhetoric, fascism, and immigration say is a strong echo of authoritarians and Nazi ideology."
Applebaum 2024: "In the 2024 campaign, that line has been crossed. ... The deliberate dehumanization of whole groups of people; the references to police, to violence, to the 'bloodbath' that Trump has said will unfold if he doesn't win; the cultivation of hatred not only against immigrants but also against political opponents—none of this has been used successfully in modern American politics. But neither has this rhetoric been tried in modern American politics."
Rubin 2024
Brooks 2024: "Trump, however, has also used the term fascist to describe Harris as he has doubled down on his insults against Harris and ratcheted up the intensity of his own rhetoric against political opponents. 'She's a marxist, communist, fascist, socialist', Trump said at a rally in Arizona in September. Johnson and McConnell made no mention of Trump's rhetoric in their statement, keeping the focus on their political rival."
Schmidt 2024
Balk 2024
^ Trumpism has been likened to Benito Mussolini's Italian fascism by historians and election experts.[1]
^ 
Jump up to:
a b From a poll of 2,392 registered voters, including 44% that describe "only Trump" as fascist and 5% that describe both Trump and Harris as fascists.
^ Attributed to multiple references: Ronaldi 2023; Graham 2023; Wren 2023; Jackson 2023; Gold 2023b; Alfero 2023
References
^ 
Jump up to:
a b c d Haltiwanger 2020.
^ Thulin, Lila (January 22, 2025). "There's a term for Trump's political style: Authoritarian populism". UC Berkley News. Archived from the original on January 23, 2025.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b c Müller 2024.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Langer & Sparks 2024.
^ Panton 2022.
^ Baker 2025.
^ The Washington Post 2025.
^ The New York Times 2024.
^ Blackburn 2016.
^ Illing 2021.
^ Jackson 2021, pp. 1–2.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Maher 2023, pp. 392–393.
^ Bump 2024b: "... poll respondents were asked what they would do if a candidate they supported said that Hitler had done some good things.... Among those who said they plan to vote for Trump this year, just under half said they would vote for the candidate anyway.... On the other hand, only a fifth of Americans think that Trump sees Hitler as completely bad — a percentage that's pushed up by the just under 4 in 10 Republicans who believe that's his position."
^ Lachmann 2019, pp. 9–10, 17–18, 23, 26.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b c d Boucher 2024.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Zeitz 2024.
^ The Economist 2016.
^ The Economist 2024a.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b c Runciman 2024.
^ Miller, Long & Eeggert 2020.
^ Acemoglu 2024.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Chait 2024.
^ Cockburn 2020.
^ Connolly 2017, p. 7.
^ Neuborne 2019, p. 32.
^ Torres-Spelliscy 2024.
^ Pierson 2017, p. 105.
^ Bone 2022.
^ Colvin & Barrow 2023; Bender & Gold 2023; Stone 2023; Baker 2023
^ Ibrahim 2022: "In sum, Trump posted on Truth Social that, what he believed to be, election fraud in the 2020 presidential election allows "for the termination of all rules, regulations, and articles, even those found in the Constitution." For that reason, we rated this claim "Correct Attribution.""
^ Astor 2022.
^ Swan, Savage & Haberman 2023.
^ Arnsdorf, Dawsey & Barrett 2023.
^ Fields 2023.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Vazquez 2024.
^ Smith 2020: "The characterisation of opposition to fascism as terrorism is not new. It was a regular feature of fascist rhetoric in the 1930s. Oswald Mosley's British Union of Fascists routinely referred to anti-fascist actions against them as "red terrorism" while portraying themselves as the defenders of free speech. A 1936 edition of the BUF's Blackshirt newspaper... proclaimed: "In two years, the Blackshirt spirit has triumphed. In two short years Red Terrorism and its Jew and Soviet inspired gangs have lost their dominion of the streets of East London... Fascism won the freedom of the streets.""
^ Jackson 2021, p. 5.
^ Tourish 2024, p. 13.
^ Blake 2024.
^ Kapur 2024.
^ Bedigan 2023.
^ Macias 2023.
^ Dress 2023.
^ DeVega 2023: "(...) In many ways, Agenda 47 is a continuation of the fascist and other authoritarian policies Trump put in place during his first regime but now made even more extreme and cruel. (...) But nothing about Agenda 47 is childish, innocent, or funny. Fascism in its various forms is a revolutionary project that draws inspiration from a fictive past and "golden age" in order to destroy the current order and replace with some type of ideal society based upon the authoritarian leader and the movement. Trump's Agenda 47 fits that model almost perfectly. (...)"
^ Baba 2023: "(...) Let's talk about what he'll actually do on day one if he wins, according to his plans outlined in Agenda 47, the comprehensive plans outlined by his allies working on Project 2025, and media reporting sourced directly from people in his campaign. (...) All of this can only be characterized as the agenda of a wannabe dictator. That's not hyperbole. Countless authoritarian experts have raised alarms, comparing Trump's rhetoric and plans to those of 20th-century fascists. (...)"
^ Polychroniou 2024: "(...) More important, while Trump and his campaign staff have pointed out that Agenda 47 is their official policy platform for the 2024 presidential election, Project 2025 and Agenda 47 have a lot of overlap in terms of ideas and policy plans. They both contain plans for the reshaping of U.S. government and civil society that can only be described as "fascist." They both assert that the mission they serve is to rescue the country from the influence of the radical left. (...)"
^ 
Jump up to:
a b c d Ben-Ghiat 2024.
^ Camaiti Hostert et al. 2023, p. 52.
^ Dreisbach & Fadel 2024.
^ Yang A. 2025.
^ Yang M. 2025.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Morini 2020: "The president described right-wing extremists as "very fine people" (Jacobs & Laughland, 2017), encouraged supporters to "knock the crap out of protestors" (White, 2016), and endorsed attacks on the press by his party's congressional representatives (BBC News, 2018). And he has a history of calling for violent acts against those who protest at his events that goes back until at least August 2015, those of the very early days of his presidential campaign."
^
Abramsky 2024
Dreyfuss 2024
Saramo 2017
^ Leonhardt 2019.
^ Griffiths 2018.
^ Diamond 2016a.
^ Vitali 2015.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b c d e Lee 2015.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b c Trouillard 2025.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Morini 2020.
^ Abramsky 2024.
^ Chait 2018.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Date 2020.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b c d e f g h i j k l Baker 2024.
^ Glasser & Baker 2022.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Dreyfuss 2024.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Saramo 2017, p. 8.
^ "Donald Trump warns Sanders: 'Be careful, Bernie'". MSNBC. March 13, 2016. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved November 12, 2024.
^ Finnegan & Bierman 2016.
^ Nichols et al. 2022, p. 569.
^ Kerr & Wright 2015.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Zerofsky 2024: "Paxton, who is 92, is one of the foremost American experts on fascism and perhaps the greatest living American scholar of mid-20th-century European history."
^ Richer, Kunzelman & Khalil 2025.
^ Dreisbach 2025.
^
Iglesias 2021
Morabia 2021, pp. 538–539
DiMaggio 2021, pp. 28, 194–195
Gray 2021
^ Morabia 2021, pp. 538–539.
^ Baker 2022: "Analysts and strategists see Mr. Trump's pivot toward the far right as a tactic to re-create political momentum ... Mr. Trump has long flirted with the fringes of American society as no other modern president has, openly appealing to prejudice based on race, religion, national origin and sexual orientation, among others ... Mr. Trump's expanding embrace of extremism has left Republicans once again struggling to figure out how to distance themselves from him."
^ Swenson & Kunzelman 2023: "Trump has amplified social media accounts that promote QAnon, which grew from the far-right fringes of the internet to become a fixture of mainstream Republican politics ... In his 2024 campaign, Trump has ramped up his combative rhetoric with talk of retribution against his enemies. He recently joked about the hammer attack on Paul Pelosi and suggested that retired Gen. Mark Milley, a former Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman, should be executed for treason."
^ Oreskes 2024.
^ Peice & Gomez Licon 2024.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b c d Ward 2024.
^ "Emeritus Professor Mike Cole". Bishop Grosseteste University. 2024. Retrieved November 2, 2024.
^ Cole 2018: FROM ABSTRACT: "Beginning with an examination of the history of traditional fascism in the twentieth century, the book looks at the similarities and differences between the Trump regime and traditional Western post-war fascism. Cole goes on to consider the alt-right movement, the reasons for its rise, and the significance of the internet being harnessed as a tool with which to promote a fascistic public pedagogy. Finally, the book examines the resistance against these discourses and addresses the question of: what is to be done?" [The webpage provides abstracts for the Introduction and each one of the 6 chapters.]
^ Jackson 2021, p. 3.
^ Kim & Ibssa 2023.
^ LeVine 2023.
^ Dorn 2023.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b c Mannoni, Olivier (October 10, 2025). L'échappée. Olivier Mannoni : « Le fascisme commence par le langage » [The Escape. Olivier Mannoni: "Fascism begins with language"] (in French).
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Cassidy 2023.
^ Gold 2023a.
^ Basu 2023.
^ Bender & Gold 2023.
^ Astor 2024.
^ Gabriel 2023; Sullivan 2023; Kim & Ibssa 2023; Layne 2023
^ Svitek 2024.
^ Iati 2024.
^ Layne, Slattery & Reid 2024: "While speaking of Laken Riley – a 22-year-old nursing student from Georgia allegedly murdered by a Venezuelan immigrant in the country illegally – Trump said some immigrants were sub-human. "The Democrats say, 'Please don't call them animals. They're humans.' I said, 'No, they're not humans, they're not humans, they're animals,'" said Trump, president from 2017 to 2021."
^ Huynh & Gold 2024.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Oliphant 2024.
^ Gold 2024; Hutzler 2024b; Reid 2024; Oliphant 2024
^ Mathias 2024.
^ Colvin & Price 2024.
^ Gabbatt & Pilkington 2024.
^ Holland, Mason & Oliphant 2024; Pellish 2024; Suter 2024; Bump 2024a; Matthews 2024; Capehart 2024
^ Tensley 2020.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Mannoni 2025.
^ Bernard 2025.
^ Scherer & Dawsey 2018.
^ Ramirez 2018.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Touchberry 2018.
^ Harris 2018.
^ Brennan 2019.
^ Jordan 2019.
^ Platoff et al. 2018.
^ Davis & Shear 2018.
^ Kriel & Begley 2019.
^ Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs (ASPA) (July 6, 2018). "Frequently Asked Questions Regarding Unaccompanied Alien Children". U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Archived from the original on June 21, 2019. Retrieved June 21, 2019.
^ Merchant 2018.
^ "Fact Sheet: Unaccompanied Alien Child Shelter at Homestead Job Corps Site, Homestead, Florida" (PDF). U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 8, 2024. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
^ Holmes 2019.
^ Kates 2018.
^ Acevedo 2019.
^ Pitzer 2019.
^ Hollinger 2019.
^ Dolsten 2019.
^ Bartov et al. 2019.
^ Robinson 2023.
^ Kube et al. 2025.
^ Mason, Ali & Hesson 2025.
^ Alemán 2025.
^ Kunzelman & Whitehurst 2025.
^ Berkowitz 2025.
^ Hajdenberg 2024.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Coleburn 2016.
^ Helmore & Beckett 2017.
^ Schreckinger 2016.
^ Osnos 2016.
^ Rosenfeld 2019, pp. 563–4.
^ Naughtie 2020.
^ Duke & Konst 2024.
^ Steck & Kaczynski 2024.
^ Rosenfeld 2017, pp. 403–404: "Trump's Inaugural Address was scripted by two aides from the self-identified Alternative Right, Stephen Miller and Steve Bannon."
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Mirrlees 2022, pp. 67–96.
^ Owen 2024.
^ Tondo 2024.
^ Brenner 1990.
^ Karl 2023.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Schmidt 2024.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Goldberg 2024.
^ Richards 2024.
^ Merica 2024a.
^ Merica 2024b.
^ Schneider 2016.
^ Wright 2018.
^ Kharakh & Primack 2016.
^ Diamond 2016b.
^ Benen 2024.
^ "Self-described Nazi rapper Kanye West releases new song titled 'Heil Hitler'". Times of Israel. Jewish Telegraphic Agency. Archived from the original on June 3, 2025. Retrieved May 13, 2025.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Caputo 2022.
^ Merlan, Anna (August 15, 2025). "The official voice of the US government is cruel, gross, and weird. What is that doing to us?". Mother Jones. San Francisco. ISSN 0362-8841. Retrieved August 21, 2025.
^ "American Nazis: The Aryan Freedom Network is riding high in Trump era". Reuters. August 9, 2025.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Maharidge 2021.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Rosenfeld 2019, p. 565.
^ Ryback 2024b.
^ MacDonald-Evoy 2020.
^ Walters 2020.
^ Miller-Idriss 2020, pp. 53, 58.
^ Place 2021.
^ "Racist 'Replacement' Theory Believed by Half of Americans". Southern Poverty Law Center. June 1, 2022. Archived from the original on January 24, 2025. Retrieved January 26, 2025.
^ Tourish 2024, p. 16.
^ Adams 2024.
^ Dyzenhaus 2024.
^ Browning 2022.
^ Zoellner 2024.
^ Ryback 2024a.
^ Matei, Adrienne (September 21, 2025). "From Nazi Germany to Trump's America: why strongmen rely on women at home". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved September 25, 2025.
^ HugoDécrypte (October 1, 2025). Vous n'avez rien vu, Trump a déjà changé votre monde. Retrieved October 3, 2025 – via YouTube.
^ Salmon 2016.
^ Polychroniou 2022.
^ Illing 2017.
^ Connolly 2017, pp. 23–24: "(...) My agenda today is to drill down into how the Trumpian politics of persuasion is joined to shock politics. First, to think more closely about the rhetorical power of the Trump phenomenon, second, to explore counter-rhetorical skills needed today and, third, to ask how to fold a larger section of the white working class once again into pluralizing, egalitarian movements that have largely forsaken them. Radicals, liberals and democrats have recently ceded large sections of that class to Trump. I treat it as axiomatic that counter movements of today must oppose exploitative race and class hierarchies with demands for sharp reductions in inequality, must counter the aggressive white territorial nationalism of Trump with the politics of pluralism and pluralization, and must counter the aggressive leadership principle that has been pursued (in different ways) by Trump, Putin, Hitler and Lenin with multi-tiered horizontal communications, charismatic democratic leadership, care for the earth, and concerted efforts to address class, race and gender hierarchies. (...) Perhaps we can gain preliminary bearings by listening to things Hitler said about the potent mixture he pursued of leadership, propaganda, and violence in Mein Kampf, a two-part book published in 1926 and 1927 when the Nazi movement was consolidating itself. I consult this text not because Trump is on a course that must end in death camps, or because the scapegoats he identifies are the same as those marked by Hitler, or because the institutional restraints against Trumpism are definitely as weak as those were against Hitlerism, or because Hitler launched a world war and Trump will necessarily lead us to a nuclear winter. The latter is indeed possible. But real differences between the two circumstances and drives must be kept in mind as we explore affinities in style and organization between them. (...)"
^ Multiple sources:
Fattal 2018: "(...) Albright (...) acknowledged that fascism is hard to define. She pointed to a few signifiers: identification with a tribe or group and discrimination against those who aren't members; a lack of attention to democratic institutions; the use of propaganda and rallies where political opponents are vilified; and the encouragement of violence. (...) Goldberg pointed out that Albright indirectly references President Trump several times in her book; she mentions, for example, that one of Benito Mussolini's mottos was "drain the swamp."
Goldberg asked Albright directly: Is Donald Trump a fascist? "He is not a fascist," she responded. "I do think he is the least democratic president of modern history." Trump, it seems, contributes to the petri dish: "His instincts are not democratic," Albright argued, pointing to his attacks on the press, "how he treats the judiciary," and his tendency to create "us-versus-them" divisions in his rhetoric. These are "tendencies that make me very nervous," she said. (...) Some readers of Albright's book had hoped she'd take a harder line in identifying the difference between a fascist and an almost-fascist. Asked by Goldberg what her "red line" is—at what point she'd turn to unequivocally calling someone a fascist—Albright gave a few metrics. She said that it depended on how much violence is involved, on the leader's attempts to undermine democratic institutions, and on a sense the leader has that he or she is above the law. (That last one is a threat she suggested Americans should worry about, if Trump were to fire Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein or Special Counsel Robert Mueller.) (...)"
Wright 2018: "(...) The future of American politics is the subtext of Albright's book. "The elephant rampaging through these pages is, of course, Donald Trump," she writes. He won the Presidency "because he convinced enough voters in the right states that he was a teller of blunt truths, a masterful negotiator, and an effective champion of American interests. That he is none of those things should disturb our sleep, but there is a larger cause for unease. Trump is the first antidemocratic president in modern U.S. history."
There are other worrying signs. The Economist's index—which factors in due process, individual freedoms, and space for civil society—reduced the United States' ranking from a full democracy to a "flawed democracy." In the early nineteen-sixties, more than seventy per cent of Americans told Pew researchers that they had faith in government "most of the time" or "just about always." In 2016, faith had sunk below twenty per cent. American politics is increasingly defined by contempt rather than a sense of common good.
"We are becoming disconnected from the ideals that have long inspired and united us," Albright warns. "It doesn't take much imagination to conceive of circumstances—another major recession, a corruption scandal, racial unrest, more terror incidents, assassination, a series of natural disasters, or a sudden plunge into an unexpected war—that might trigger a demand for answers that our Constitution, democracy's manual, is too slow to provide.""
Wagner 2018: "(...) Albright, who served during the administration of President Bill Clinton, appeared on the BBC's "Andrew Marr Show," where she was asked about her book "Fascism: A Warning" and whether she considers Trump to be a fascist.
"I do not think he is a fascist," Albright said. "I do think he is the most undemocratic president in modern American history, and that troubles me." (...) "Fascism is hard to define, by the way," she told Marr, "but a fascist leader is somebody who identifies himself with one group, tribal of some kind, in order to really isolate and insulate the people that are disagreed with. Ultimately a fascist leader is somebody who uses violence to achieve what he wants."
"So I do not think that Trump is a fascist leader," Albright continued, "but I think his attitude towards freedom of speech and the role of the media and his disregard for institutions worries me.""
Rawnsley 2018: "(...) She agrees that we ought to be careful not to casually throw around the F-word lest we drain the potency from what should be a powerful term. "I'm not calling Trump a fascist," she says. Yet she seems to be doing all but that when she puts him in the same company as historical fascists in a book that seeks to sound "an alarm bell" about a fascist revival.
She frequently nudges the reader to make connections between the president of the United States and past dictatorships. She reminds us who first coined the Trumpian phrase "drain the swamp". It was drenare la palude in the original, Mussolini Italian. She quotes Hitler talking about the secret of his success: "I will tell you what has carried me to the position I have reached. Our political problems appeared complicated. The German people could make nothing of them... I...reduced them to the simplest terms. The masses realised this and followed me." Sound familiar?
I suggest to her that the book struggles to offer a satisfactory definition of fascism. "Defining fascism is difficult," she responds. "First of all, I don't think fascism is an ideology. I think it is a method, it's a system."
It is in his methods that Trump can be compared with, if not precisely likened to, the dictators of the 1930s. Fascists are typically masters of political theatre. They feed on and inflame grievances by setting "the people" against their "enemies". Fascists tell their supporters that there are simple fixes for complex problems. They present as national saviours and conflate themselves with the state. They seek to subvert, discredit and eliminate liberal institutions. She reminds us that they have often ascended to power through the ballot box and then undermined democracy from within. She is especially fond of a Mussolini quote about "plucking a chicken feather by feather" so that people will not notice the loss of their freedoms until it is too late.
In her book, Trump is one nasty plucker. She labels him "the first anti-democratic president in modern US history". (...)"
Tennis 2018: "(...) "When I've gone around to talk to people they really do see that there is an elite group in the United States, that there are people that don't have jobs. And this is the part that really does worry me, if you have a leader who then blames it on somebody else, because part of the whole fascist aspect is you always have to find a scapegoat."
In the United States, she added, President Trump portrays America as a victim, while scapegoating foreigners and immigrants. However, Albright would not call Donald Trump a fascist. Instead, she described him as the most un-democratic leader that the United States has ever seen. (...) [Includes link to video Fascism: A conversation with Madeleine Albright and Strobe Talbott, Friday Sep 07, 2018]"
^ Giroux 2018, p. 711: "ABSTRACT: The inability to learn from the past takes on a new meaning as a growing number of authoritarian regimes emerge across the globe. This essay argues that central to understanding the rise of a fascist politics in the United States is the necessity to address the power of language and the intersection of the social media and the public spectacle as central elements in the rise of a formative culture that produces the ideologies and agents necessary for an American-style fascism. In this project, education is central to politics, which demands understanding and critically interrogating, in particular, the role of the conservative media in suppressing history, normalizing a discourse of racial hatred, and advancing the most poisonous elements of neoliberalism. The essay calls for a comprehensive notion of politics and education that draws from history, imagines a present that does not imitate the future, and employs a language of critique and hope in the service of building a new broad-based political formation. If fascism begins with language so does the possibility of a radical social imaginary in which to envision a democratic socialist order that both challenges the menacing momentum of a fascist politics and the savagery of neoliberal capitalism."
^ McGaughey 2018, p. 294.
^ Rosenfeld 2019, p. 562.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Kaczynski & Steck 2024.
^ Rosenfeld 2019, p. 557.
^ Bellware 2016.
^ Pengelly 2024.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Kaczynski 2024.
^ Marcus 2024.
^ Gibson 2021.
^ Rosenfeld 2019, p. 558.
^ Benjamin 2020.
^ De Genova 2020: "(...) Whereas fascism has historically tended to be ushered into state power only following the gestation of a fascist social movement organized on the basis of paramilitary violence, the ethos of civil war that has come to more or less universally animate Republican politics in the United States has delivered a populist opportunist into power, and now, only in the aftermath of that cataclysmic systemic backfire, in the aura and orbit of that nonstop demagogical spectacle, a white supremacist fascist movement—albeit in convulsive fits and starts—is gathering its forces. (...)"
^ Paxton 2021.
^ Jackson 2021, p. 13.
^ Jackson 2021, p. 10.
^ Rosenfeld & Ward 2023, p. 400.
^ Rosenfeld & Ward 2023, p. 398.
^ Heer 2024.
^ Pengelly 2022.
^ Green 2022.
^ Noah 2022.
^ Smith 2024.
^ McHugh 2023.
^ Chandrasekar & Mehta 2024.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Voice of America 2024.
^ Bustillo 2024.
^ Waldenberg & Williams 2024.
^ Weissert & Kellman 2024.
^ McDuffie et al. 2024.
^ Lebowitz 2024.
^ Reich 2024.
^ Cramer 2024.
^ Cruz 2023.
^ Reich 2023: "(...) How do we describe what Trump wants for America?
"Authoritarianism" isn't adequate. It is fascism. Fascism stands for a coherent set of ideas different from – and more dangerous than – authoritarianism.
To fight those ideas, it's necessary to be aware of what they are and how they fit together.
Borrowing from the cultural theorist Umberto Eco, the historians Emilio Gentile and Ian Kershaw, the political scientist Roger Griffin, and the former US secretary of state Madeleine Albright, I offer five elements that distinguish fascism from authoritarianism. (...)"
^ Robert Reich, Donald Trump (August 8, 2023). Is Donald Trump a Fascist? (Internet video). Robert Reich. Archived from the original on November 17, 2024. Retrieved November 3, 2024 – via YouTube.
^ Robert Reich, Donald Trump (March 19, 2024). How Trump is Following Hitler's Playbook (Internet video). Robert Reich. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved November 3, 2024 – via YouTube.
^ The Economist 2024b.
^ French 2024.
^ Leingang 2025.
^ Wang & Lopez 2025.
^ DW News (April 3, 2025). Is the US descending into fascism? Interview with Professor Jason Stanley. Retrieved April 6, 2025 – via YouTube.
^ Langfitt 2025.
^ 'Brutal attack on America's freedoms': Yale professor shares why he's leaving U.S. MSNBC. March 31, 2025. Retrieved May 28, 2025 – via YouTube.
^ Bernie Sanders Compares Graphic From Trump Campaign Email To Holocaust-Era Antisemitic Propaganda. Forbes. March 27, 2025. Retrieved April 8, 2025 – via YouTube.
^ Kriner 2025.
^ Muñoz 2025.
^ Shabad 2025.
^ Kahn 2025.
^ LaFrance 2025: "While people are still debating whether to call it authoritarianism or fascism, Trump is seizing control of one independent agency after another. (And for what it's worth, the smartest scholars I know have told me that what Trump is trying to do in America is now textbook fascism—beyond the authoritarian impulses of his first term. Take, for example, his administration's rigid ideological purity tests, or the extreme overreach of government into freedom of scientific and academic inquiry.) ... People sometimes call the descent into authoritarianism a 'slide', but that makes it sound gradual and gentle. Maria Ressa, the journalist who earned the Nobel Peace Prize for her attempts to save freedom of expression in the Philippines, told me that what she experienced during the presidency of Rodrigo Duterte is now, with startling speed and remarkable similarity, playing out in the United States under Donald Trump. Her country's democratic struggles are highly instructive. And her message to me was this: Authoritarian leaders topple democracy faster than you can imagine. If you wait to speak out against them, you have already lost."
^ Kashinsky, Lisa; McCarthy, Mia (June 12, 2025). "Alex Padilla confrontation in LA shocks senators". POLITICO. Archived from the original on June 12, 2025. Retrieved June 12, 2025.
^ Wiener, Scott (June 12, 2025). "Senator Wiener's Statement on DHS Manhandling of U.S. Senator Alex Padilla". Senator Scott Wiener. Archived from the original on June 13, 2025. Retrieved June 12, 2025.
^ Acosta, Jim (June 12, 2025). "What happened to Senator Padilla is not homeland security. That's homeland fascism. That's homeland authoritarianism". Twitter. Archived from the original on July 17, 2025.
^ Manfredini, Elisa; Acquistapace, Andrea (June 14, 2025). "31 Nobel Laureates Warn: The Signs of Fascism are Here". Time. Archived from the original on July 25, 2025. Retrieved July 15, 2025.
^ "We are Nobel laureates, scientists, writers and artists. The threat of fascism is back". The Guardian. June 13, 2025. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on June 30, 2025. Retrieved July 15, 2025.
^ Olinga, Luc (July 5, 2025). "Joe Rogan Feels Trump Betrayed Him on Immigration". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on July 10, 2025. Retrieved July 5, 2025.
^ BBC News 2015.
^ Gopnik 2016; Swift 2015; Hodges 2015
^ Matthews 2016.
^ Matthews 2020.
^ Evans 2018.
^ Evans 2021.
^ Harris et al. 2017: "ABSTRACT: The election of Donald Trump reflects the rise of a Right-wing nationalist movement. Central to Trump's appeal has been his advocacy of anti-immigrant, racist, and misogynist ideas. At its core, his ruling power bloc consists of neo-liberal fundamentalists, the religious Right, and white nationalists. There are similarities between the new power bloc and fascism, and there are many who see Trump's administration as such. Nevertheless, the new president's authoritarian power bloc is neither hegemonic nor fascist, but such a definition can send oppositional strategy in the wrong direction."
^ Jackson 2021, p. 6.
^ Jackson 2021, p. 15.
^ McGeoghegan 2024: "(...) The MAGA Republicans are what David Renton, historian of the British fascist and anti-fascist movements of the 1930s and 1940s, calls the New Authoritarians. Their politics start out looking like radical, but democratic right-wing populism. It is not until push comes to shove that they are revealed as anti-democratic extremists, as President Trump was when he encouraged the January 6 insurrection. (...) The New Authoritarians, however, hollow out democratic institutions from within. They pack the judiciary with loyalists, purge and disempower the legislature, undermine the integrity of elections, and transform the professional civil service into a personal, political vehicle. (...)"
^ Zeitz & Steinmetz-Jenkins 2024: "(...) This is where it's hard to parse, because the last thing the Democratic Party wants to do is to tell swing voters that they're potentially fascist. What they're trying to say is that the candidate is fascist, therefore don't vote for him. This is why it's risky, because it seems to be suggesting that maybe the people themselves who are voting for him are fascist, or if they are even thinking about voting for him, they are knowingly and willingly voting for a monster. And that can be alienating, I think, to voters. (...) I teach at a liberal arts school, everyone I know is terrified about what's happening. They do not want Donald Trump to be president of the United States. It's just how we go about managing to defeat him and the way that we do it, I think that is the issue. And as a historian who's trained in these areas, there's also a professional obligation. So I just want to make that point, that by not framing him this way, it does not at all mean that he is not a threat. (...)"
^ Cambridge Union 2025.
^ Redação (January 20, 2025). "Com 11 bilionários, gabinete de Trump vale mais do que o PIB de 154 países" [With 11 billionaires, Trump's cabinet is worth more than the GDP of 154 countries]. A Gazeta do Amapá (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on May 11, 2025. Retrieved April 30, 2025.
^ "Falta de transparência algorítmica e institucional dificulta regulamentação da IA, alerta estudo" [Lack of algorithmic and institutional transparency hinders AI regulation, study warns]. SindPD Ceará (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on May 11, 2025. Retrieved April 30, 2025.
^ Menezes 2025.
^ Aroeira 2024.
^ Samuels 2024.
^ 
Jump up to:
a b Shabad 2024.
^ Hutzler 2024a.
^ Brooks 2024.
^ Zabala, Santiago; Gallo, Claudio (May 4, 2025). "No, Trump is not a fascist. He is a hypercapitalist and just as dangerous". Al Jazeera. Retrieved September 10, 2025.
^ Ganz, John (September 9, 2025). "Trump's Petty-Tyrant Brand of Fascism". The Nation. ISSN 0027-8378. Retrieved September 10, 2025.
^ Brown, Ruairidh (December 2, 2024). "Donald Trump's Machiavellian philosophy". The Loop. Retrieved September 10, 2025.
^ Thulin, Lila (January 22, 2025). "There's a term for Trump's political style: authoritarian populism". Berkeley News. Retrieved September 10, 2025.
^ "The ideology of Donald J. Trump | Global Policy Journal". www.globalpolicyjournal.com. November 19, 2024. Retrieved September 10, 2025.
^ Marietta, Morgan (September 6, 2017). "Deep Nationalism and the Ideology of Trumpism - Niskanen Center". Niskanen Center - Improving Policy, Advancing Moderation. Retrieved September 10, 2025.
Works cited
Abramsky, Sasha (October 4, 2024). "Trump—and His Supporters—Are Now Reveling in Blatantly Fascist Calls to Violence". ISSN 0027-8378. Archived from the original on November 15, 2024. Retrieved November 7, 2024.
Acemoglu, Daron (August 30, 2024). "The Trump Threat to Democracy Has Only Grown". Project Syndicate. Archived from the original on September 21, 2024. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Acevedo, Nicole (May 29, 2019). "Why are migrant children dying in U.S. custody?". NBC News. Archived from the original on November 18, 2024. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Adams, Christine (November 5, 2024). "Why People Should Stop Comparing the U.S. to Weimar Germany". TIME. Archived from the original on November 12, 2024. Retrieved November 12, 2024.
Alemán, Marcos (March 25, 2025). "Venezuelan migrants deported by the US ended up in a Salvadoran prison. This is their legal status". AP News. Archived from the original on April 1, 2025. Retrieved March 28, 2025.
Alfero, Mariana (December 6, 2023). "Trump says he wouldn't be a dictator 'except for Day One'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 9, 2023. Retrieved December 6, 2023.
Applebaum, Anne (October 18, 2024). "Trump Is Speaking Like Hitler, Stalin, and Mussolini". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on October 24, 2024. Retrieved October 18, 2024.
Aroeira, Renato (November 10, 2024). "Biliocracia" [Billiocracy]. Brasil 247 (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on November 23, 2024. Retrieved March 7, 2025.
Arnsdorf, Isaac; Dawsey, Josh; Barrett, Devlin (November 5, 2023). "Trump and allies plot revenge, Justice Department control in a second term". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 5, 2023. Retrieved December 10, 2023.
Astor, Maggie (December 4, 2022). "Trump's Call for 'Termination' of Constitution Draws Rebukes". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 4, 2022. Retrieved December 4, 2022.
Astor, Maggie (March 17, 2024). "Trump Doubles Down on Migrants 'Poisoning' the Country". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 25, 2024. Retrieved October 26, 2024.(subscription required)
Baba, Ahmed (December 6, 2023). "Trump is telling us exactly what he'll do and we should believe him". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 15, 2024. Retrieved November 3, 2024.
Baker, Peter (December 1, 2022). "Trump Embraces Extremism as He Seeks to Reclaim Office". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 16, 2024. Retrieved July 13, 2024.
——— (December 9, 2023). "Talk of a Trump Dictatorship Charges the American Political Debate". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 9, 2023. Retrieved December 9, 2023.
——— (January 20, 2025). "Trump Says 'America's Decline Is Over' as He Returns to Office". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 28, 2025. Retrieved May 3, 2025.
——— (November 6, 2024). "Amid Talk of Fascism, Trump's Threats and Language Evoke a Grim Past". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 2, 2025.
Balk, Tim (October 25, 2024). "13 Ex-Trump Aides Back Kelly's 'Dictator' Warning, Saying Trump Seeks 'Absolute, Unchecked Power'". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 2, 2024. Retrieved October 25, 2024.
Bartov, Omer; Bergen, Doris; Orzoff, Andrea; Snyder, Timothy; Walke, Anika (July 1, 2019). "An Open Letter to the Director of the US Holocaust Memorial Museum". The New York Review of Books. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved April 4, 2022.
Basu, Zachary (November 13, 2023). "Trump campaign defends "vermin" speech amid fascist comparisons". Axios. Archived from the original on December 9, 2023. Retrieved December 8, 2023.
"'Racist', 'fascist', 'utterly repellent': What the world said about Donald Trump". BBC News. December 9, 2015. Archived from the original on January 9, 2018. Retrieved December 30, 2017.
Bedigan, Mike (September 28, 2023). "Retired US general likens Trump's attacks on military to Nazi Germany". The Independent. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025.
Bellware, Kim (March 6, 2016). "Even Glenn Beck Is Comparing Donald Trump To Hitler". HuffPost. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
Bender, Michael C.; Gold, Michael (November 14, 2023). "When Trump tells you he's an authoritarian, believe him". Vox. Archived from the original on December 8, 2023. Retrieved December 8, 2023.
———; Gold, Michael (November 20, 2023). "Trump's Dire Words Raise New Fears About His Authoritarian Bent". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 21, 2024. Retrieved December 19, 2023.(subscription required)
Benen, Steve (September 13, 2024). "Trump's Bedminster club reportedly hosted an alleged Nazi sympathizer". MSNBC. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
Ben-Ghiat, Ruth (August 2024). "Mussolini, Trump and What Assassination Attempts Really Do". Politico. Archived from the original on September 23, 2024. Retrieved November 19, 2024.
Benjamin, Rich (September 27, 2020). "Democrats Need to Wake Up: The Trump Movement Is Shot Through With Fascism". The Intercept. Archived from the original on January 31, 2021. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Berkowitz, Ben (March 21, 2025). "Trump suggests sending Tesla vandals to El Salvador prisons". Axios. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved March 28, 2025.
Bernard, Marie-Violette (January 20, 2025). ""Le fil rouge, c'est la remise en cause de la démocratie" : pourquoi historiens et politologues sont de plus en plus nombreux à qualifier Donald Trump de "fasciste"" ["The common thread is the questioning of democracy": why more and more historians and political scientists are calling Donald Trump a "fascist"]. Franceinfo (in French). Archived from the original on March 12, 2025. Retrieved April 26, 2025.
Blackburn, Simon (2016). "fascism". A Dictionary of Philosophy (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-873530-4. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Blake, Aaron (September 24, 2024). "Trump keeps talking about criminalizing dissent". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on September 27, 2024. Retrieved October 1, 2024.
Bone, Jeffrey (2022). "The Pathology of Corporate Power". In Faldetta, Guglielmo; Mollona, Edoardo; Pellegrini, Massimiliano Matteo (eds.). Philosophy and Business Ethics: Organizations, CSR and Moral Practice. Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp. 435–453. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-97106-9_17. ISBN 978-3-030-97106-9.
Boucher, Geoff M. (October 28, 2024). "Is Donald Trump a fascist? No – he's a new brand of authoritarian". The Conversation. Archived from the original on November 9, 2024. Retrieved November 12, 2024.
Brennan, David (April 10, 2019). "Donald Trump was 'livid' Kirstjen Nielsen was in London while the southern border is 'out of control': Report". Newsweek. Archived from the original on November 20, 2023. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Brenner, Marie (September 1990). "After the Gold Rush". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on January 26, 2024. Retrieved October 28, 2024.
Brooks, Emily (October 25, 2024). "Johnson and McConnell: Harris calling Trump 'fascist' could invite assassination attempt". The Hill. Archived from the original on November 9, 2024. Retrieved October 25, 2024.
Browning, Christopher R. (October 8, 2022). "How Hitler's Enablers Undid Democracy in Germany". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on November 18, 2024. Retrieved November 12, 2024.
——— (July 25, 2023). "A New Kind of Fascism". The Atlantic. Washington, D.C.: Laurene Powell Jobs. Archived from the original on September 26, 2024. Retrieved December 8, 2023.
Bump, Phillip (October 28, 2024a). "Another night at the Garden: How Trump's rally echoed one in 1939". The Washington Post.
——— (November 2024b). "For nearly half of Trump voters, overt appreciation of Hitler is acceptable". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 5, 2024. Retrieved November 20, 2024.
Bustillo, Ximena (October 23, 2024). "Trump's former chief of staff called him a 'fascist.' Harris is campaigning on that". NPR. Archived from the original on November 10, 2024. Retrieved October 24, 2024.
Camaiti Hostert, Anna; Cicchino, Enzo Antonio; Tamburri, Anthony Julian; Marciasini, Christine (2023). Trump and Mussolini: images, fake news, and mass media as weapons in the hands of two populists. The Fairleigh Dickinson University Press series in Italian studies. Vancouver; Madison: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. ISBN 978-1-68393-366-3.
Cambridge Union (February 16, 2025). Roger Griffin | This House Believes Trump is a 21st Century Fascist | Cambridge Union (Videotape). Retrieved March 11, 2025 – via YouTube.
Capehart, Jonathan (October 27, 2024). "Trump's MSG rally draws comparisons to 1939 pro-Nazi rally". MSNBC.com. Archived from the original on November 16, 2024. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Caputo, Marc (November 29, 2022). "The inside story of Trump's explosive dinner with Ye and Nick Fuentes". NBC News. Archived from the original on December 6, 2022. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
Cassidy, John (November 14, 2023). "Trump's Fascistic Rhetoric Only Emphasizes the Stakes in 2024". The New Yorker. New York City: Condé Nast. Archived from the original on October 9, 2024. Retrieved December 8, 2023.
Chait, Jonathan (November 5, 2018). "Trump Isn't Inciting Violence by Mistake, But on Purpose. He Just Told Us". Intelligencer. Archived from the original on July 27, 2024. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
——— (September 16, 2024). "Donald Trump Is a Threat to Democracy, and Saying So Is Not Incitement". Intelligencer. Archived from the original on September 21, 2024. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Chandrasekar, Aisvarya; Mehta, Dhrumil (June 10, 2024). "The F-Word". Columbia Journalism Review. Archived from the original on October 3, 2024. Retrieved October 30, 2024.
Cockburn, Patrick (November 4, 2020). "Trump's bid to stop the count risks turning America into an 'illiberal democracy' like Turkey". The Independent. Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Cole, Mike (October 10, 2018). Trump, the Alt-Right and Public Pedagogies of Hate and for Fascism. What is to be Done?. London: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780429467141. ISBN 9780429467141.
Coleburn, Christina (February 29, 2016). "Donald Trump: 'I Don't Know Anything About David Duke'". NBC News. Archived from the original on September 19, 2024. Retrieved November 6, 2024.
Colvin, Jill; Barrow, Bill (December 7, 2023). "Trump's vow to only be a dictator on 'day one' follows growing worry over his authoritarian rhetoric". Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 8, 2023. Retrieved December 8, 2023.
Colvin, Jill; Price, Michelle L. (October 27, 2024). "Trump's Madison Square Garden event features crude and racist insults". AP News. Archived from the original on April 1, 2025. Retrieved October 28, 2024.
Connolly, William E. (January 2017). "Trump, the Working Class, and Fascist Rhetoric". Theory and Event. 20 (1): 23–37.
——— (2017). Aspirational fascism: the struggle for multifaceted democracy under Trumpism. Forerunners. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-1-5179-0512-5.
Cramer, Ruby (October 12, 2024). "Trump is 'fascist to the core,' Milley says in Woodward book". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 20, 2025.
Cruz, Abby (October 4, 2023). "Cornel West claims there are 'crypto fascist elements' of Democratic Party and GOP is Trump-'hijacked' as he courts donors". ABC News. Archived from the original on September 21, 2024. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Date, S. V. (June 4, 2020). "Trump Went Full-On Fascist For A Photo-Op. What's He Willing To Do To Keep Power?". HuffPost. Archived from the original on May 14, 2024. Retrieved November 9, 2024.
Davis, Julie Hirschfeld; Shear, Michael D. (June 16, 2018). "How Trump Came to Enforce a Practice of Separating Migrant Families". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 18, 2018. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
De Genova, Nicholas (2020). ""Everything is Permitted": Trump, White Supremacy, Fascism". American Anthropologist. 122 (1). Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved October 30, 2024.
DeVega, Chauncey (July 14, 2023). "Be very afraid: Trump's "Agenda 47" is no joke. This is not a joke or funny: You should be very afraid of Trump's fascist Agenda 47 plan". Salon.com. Archived from the original on April 2, 2024. Retrieved November 3, 2024.
Diamond, Jeremy (January 23, 2016). "Trump: I could 'shoot somebody and I wouldn't lose voters'". CNN. Archived from the original on October 2, 2024. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
——— (July 4, 2016). "Donald Trump's 'Star of David' tweet controversy, explained". CNN. Archived from the original on November 8, 2024. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
DiMaggio, Anthony R. (November 30, 2021). Rising Fascism in America (1 ed.). New York: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781003198390-1. ISBN 978-1-003-19839-0. Retrieved November 6, 2024.
Dolsten, Josefin (June 24, 2019). "How Jews have reacted to Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's concentration camp comments". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Dorn, Sara (November 12, 2023). "Trump Compares Political Foes To 'Vermin' On Veterans Day—Echoing Nazi Propaganda". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 12, 2023. Retrieved November 12, 2023.
Dress, Brad (September 27, 2023). "Trump's threats to Milley fuel fears he'll seek vengeance in second term". The Hill. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved November 6, 2024.
Dreisbach, Tom (January 30, 2025). "Criminal records of Jan. 6 rioters pardoned by Trump include rape, domestic violence". NPR. Archived from the original on January 30, 2025. Retrieved March 20, 2025.
Dreisbach, Tom; Fadel, Leila (October 22, 2024). "Trump makes more than 100 threats to prosecute or punish perceived enemies". NPR. Archived from the original on November 15, 2024. Retrieved November 15, 2024.
Dreyfuss, Bob (September 5, 2024). "Is Trump Building an Army of Modern Blackshirts?". ISSN 0027-8378. Archived from the original on October 2, 2024. Retrieved November 7, 2024.
Duke, Amber; Konst, Nomiki (October 25, 2024). "DNC afraid of Jill Stein, guns for her in ad linking her to David Duke". The Hill. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Dyzenhaus, David (January 25, 2024). "What can we learn from the history of pre-war Germany to the atmosphere today in the U.S.?". The Conversation. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved November 12, 2024.
"Trump's world: The new nationalism". The Economist. November 19, 2016. Archived from the original on August 24, 2018. Retrieved January 20, 2024.
"The growing peril of national conservatism". The Economist. February 15, 2024. Archived from the original on February 15, 2024. Retrieved March 14, 2024.
"Is Kamala Harris right to call Donald Trump a fascist?". The Economist. October 24, 2024. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on May 3, 2025. Retrieved October 30, 2024.
Evans, Richard J. (July 19, 2018). "Fascism and The Road to Unfreedom review – the warning from the 1930s". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 7, 2025.
——— (January 13, 2021). "Why Trump isn't a fascist". New Statesman. Archived from the original on April 3, 2025. Retrieved January 3, 2024.
Fattal, Isabel (April 18, 2018). "Madeleine Albright: Trump Is 'The Least Democratic President of Modern History.' The modern world provides a "petri dish" for fascism, the former secretary of state argues". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved November 2, 2024.
Fields, Gary (November 27, 2023). "Trump hints at expanded role for the military within the US. A legacy law gives him few guardrails". Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 10, 2023. Retrieved December 10, 2023.
Finnegan, Michael; Bierman, Noah (March 13, 2016). "Trump's endorsement of violence reaches new level: He may pay legal fees for assault suspect". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 11, 2024. Retrieved November 11, 2024.
French, Howard W. (October 30, 2024). "So, Is Trump Really a Fascist?". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on November 17, 2024. Retrieved October 30, 2024.
Gabbatt, Adam; Pilkington, Ed (October 28, 2024). "Trump fills Madison Square Garden with anger, vitriol and racist threats". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved October 28, 2024.
Gabriel, Trip (October 6, 2023). "Trump Escalates Anti-Immigrant Rhetoric With 'Poisoning the Blood' Comment". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 17, 2024. Retrieved December 19, 2023.(subscription required)
Gibson, Brittany (November 21, 2021). "RFK Jr. previously compared Trump to Hitler". Politico. Archived from the original on November 25, 2024. Retrieved November 24, 2024.
Giroux, Henry A. (December 29, 2018). "Trump and the legacy of a menacing past". Cultural Studies. 33 (4): 711–739. doi:10.1080/09502386.2018.1557725. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved October 30, 2024.
Glasser, Susan B.; Baker, Peter (October 8, 2022). "Inside the War Between Trump and His Generals". The New Yorker. ISSN 0028-792X. Archived from the original on August 11, 2022. Retrieved November 9, 2024.
Gold, Michael (November 13, 2023). "After Calling Foes 'Vermin,' Trump Campaign Warns Its Critics Will Be 'Crushed'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 14, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2023.
Gold, Michael (December 6, 2023). "Trump Says He Wouldn't Be a Dictator, 'Except for Day 1'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 6, 2023. Retrieved December 6, 2023.
——— (October 1, 2024). "Trump's Consistent Message Online and Onstage: Be Afraid". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 1, 2024. Retrieved October 1, 2024.
Goldberg, Jeffrey (October 22, 2024). "Trump: 'I Need the Kind of Generals That Hitler Had'". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on November 4, 2024. Retrieved October 24, 2024.
Gonzalez Cedillo, Joel Ivan (March 31, 2021). "Ideological Consistency and Ideological War: American Fascism vs Antifascism – January 2021". Bulletin of Kemerovo State University. Series: Political, Sociological and Economic Sciences. 2021 (1): 10–18. doi:10.21603/2500-3372-2021-6-1-10-18. ISSN 2500-3372. Archived from the original on June 3, 2024. Retrieved November 14, 2024.
Gopnik, Adam (May 11, 2016). "Going There with Donald Trump". The New Yorker. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on January 1, 2018. Retrieved December 30, 2017.
Graham, David A. (December 6, 2023). "Trump Says He'll Be a Dictator on 'Day One'". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on December 6, 2023. Retrieved December 6, 2023.
Gray, Kathleen (January 9, 2021). "In Michigan, a Dress Rehearsal for the Chaos at the Capitol on Wednesday". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2024. Retrieved November 6, 2024.
Green, Lloyd (December 11, 2022). "'That's Hitler, Bannon thought': 2022 in books about Trump and US politics". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
Griffiths, Brent D. (October 18, 2018). "Trump on Gianforte: 'Any guy who can do a body slam is my kind of guy'". Politico. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved November 7, 2024.
Hajdenberg, Jackie (October 17, 2024). "Former KKK leader David Duke endorses Jill Stein in US presidential race". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on November 10, 2024. Retrieved November 10, 2024.
Haltiwanger, John (September 25, 2020). "Historians and election experts warn Trump is behaving like Mussolini and despots that the US usually condemns". Business Insider. Archived from the original on October 18, 2023. Retrieved October 4, 2023.
Harris, Lindsay Muir (November 14, 2018). "Learning in 'Baby Jail': Lessons from Law Student Engagement in Family Detention Centers". Clinical Law Review. SSRN 3120367.
Harris, Jerry; Davidson, Carl; Fletcher, Bill; Harris, Paul (December 14, 2017). "Trump and American Fascism". International Critical Thought. 7 (4): 476–492. doi:10.1080/21598282.2017.1357491. Archived from the original on March 30, 2024. Retrieved October 30, 2024.
Heer, Jeet (October 28, 2024). "Donald Trump's Billionaire Boys Club". The Nation. ISSN 0027-8378. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
Helmore, Edward; Beckett, Lois (August 13, 2017). "How Charlottesville became the symbolic prize of the far right". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved November 10, 2024.
Hodges, Dan (December 9, 2015). "Donald Trump is an outright fascist who should be banned from Britain today". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 1, 2018. Retrieved December 30, 2017.
Holland, Steve; Mason, Jeff; Oliphant, James (October 27, 2024). "Trump rally at Madison Square Garden begins with vulgar, racist remarks from allies". Reuters. Archived from the original on February 14, 2025. Retrieved October 27, 2024.
Hollinger, Andrew (June 24, 2019). "Statement Regarding the Museum's Position on Holocaust Analogies". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on June 24, 2019. Retrieved July 2, 2019.
Holmes, Jack (June 13, 2019). "An Expert on Concentration Camps Says That's Exactly What the U.S. Is Running at the Border". Esquire. Archived from the original on December 25, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Homans, Charles (April 27, 2024). "Donald Trump Has Never Sounded Like This". New York Magazine. Archived from the original on July 19, 2024. Retrieved April 27, 2024.
Hutzler, Alexandra (September 18, 2024). "Trump blames Democrats for heated environment despite his own inflammatory rhetoric". ABC News. Archived from the original on October 9, 2024. Retrieved October 26, 2024.
Hutzler, Alexandra (September 30, 2024). "Trump takes dark rhetoric to new level in final weeks of 2024 campaign: ANALYSIS". ABC News. Archived from the original on October 1, 2024. Retrieved October 1, 2024.
Huynh, Anjali; Gold, Michael (March 17, 2024). "Trump Says Some Migrants Are 'Not People' and Predicts a 'Blood Bath' if He Loses". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 23, 2024. Retrieved October 26, 2024.(subscription required)
Iati, Marisa (March 16, 2024). "Trump says some undocumented immigrants are 'not people'". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on March 16, 2024. Retrieved March 17, 2024.
Ibrahim, Nur (December 5, 2022). "Did Trump Say Election Fraud Allows for 'Termination' of US Constitution?". Snopes. Archived from the original on May 31, 2023. Retrieved December 9, 2023.
Iglesias, Elizabeth M. (2021). "Trump's Insurrection: Pandemic Violence, Presidential Incitement and the Republican Guarantee". University of Miami Race & Social Justice Law Review. 11 (7).
Illing, Sean (March 9, 2017). ""Post-truth is pre-fascism": a Holocaust historian on the Trump era". Vox. Archived from the original on November 10, 2024. Retrieved October 30, 2024.
——— (January 29, 2021). "American fascism isn't going away". Vox. Archived from the original on November 2, 2024. Retrieved October 30, 2024.
Jackson, David (December 6, 2023). "Donald Trump says he will be a 'dictator' only on 'day one.' Then he'll focus on drilling". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 6, 2023. Retrieved December 6, 2023.
Jackson, Paul Nicholas (2021). "Debate: Donald Trump and Fascism Studies". Fascism. 10 (1): 1–15. doi:10.1163/22116257-10010009. ISSN 2211-6257.
Jordan, Miriam (January 17, 2019). "Family Separation May Have Hit Thousands More Migrant Children Than Reported". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 18, 2024. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Kaczynski, Andrew (November 21, 2024). "RFK Jr. compared Trump to Hitler and praised descriptions of his supporters as 'Nazis'". CNN. Archived from the original on November 22, 2024. Retrieved November 24, 2024.
Kaczynski, Andrew; Steck, Em (July 15, 2024). "JD Vance, Trump's VP pick, once called him a 'moral disaster', and possibly 'America's Hitler'". CNN. Archived from the original on October 8, 2024. Retrieved October 24, 2024.
Kahn, Debra (April 22, 2025). "Al Gore compares Trump administration to Nazi Germany". Politico. Archived from the original on May 2, 2025. Retrieved April 23, 2025.
Kapur, Sahil (October 13, 2024). "'Totally illegal': Trump escalates rhetoric on outlawing political dissent and criticism". NBC News. Archived from the original on October 13, 2024. Retrieved October 13, 2024.
Karl, Jonathan (December 21, 2023). "Donald Trump's history with Adolf Hitler and his Nazi writings: ANALYSIS". ABC News. Archived from the original on December 22, 2023. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
Kates, Graham (June 20, 2018). "Immigration law, new policy and children and families separated at the border – the facts". CBS News. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved October 31, 2024.
Kerr, Anne; Wright, Edmund (2015). "Munich 'beer-hall' putsch". A Dictionary of World History (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-968569-1. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Kharakh, Ben; Primack, Dan (March 22, 2016). "A Look at Donald Trump's Social Media Ties to White Supremacy". TIME. Archived from the original on May 24, 2024. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
Kim, Soo Rin; Ibssa, Lalee (November 13, 2023). "Trump compares political opponents to 'vermin' who he will 'root out,' alarming historians". ABC News. Archived from the original on December 8, 2023. Retrieved December 8, 2023.
Kriel, Lomi; Begley, Dug (June 22, 2019). "Trump administration still separating hundreds of migrant children at the border through often questionable claims of danger". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on June 23, 2019. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Kriner, Matthew (February 3, 2025). "Musk's inauguration salute is not the only apparent fascist signal from Trump's administration". The Conversation. Archived from the original on March 30, 2025. Retrieved May 8, 2025.
Kube, Courtney; Lee, Carol E.; Ainsley, Julia; Gutierrez, Gabe (February 5, 2025). "Trump admin plans to use notorious Guantánamo detention facility and nearby tents to hold immigrants". NBC News. Archived from the original on March 30, 2025. Retrieved March 28, 2025.
Kunzelman, Michael; Whitehurst, Lindsay (March 24, 2025). "Trump administration invokes state secrets privilege in case over deportations under wartime law". AP News. Archived from the original on April 1, 2025. Retrieved March 28, 2025.
Lachmann, Richard (January 1, 2019). "Trump: authoritarian, just another neoliberal republican, or both?". Sociologia, Problemas e Práticas (89): 9–31. ISSN 0873-6529.
LaFrance, Adrienne (April 22, 2025). "A Ticking Clock on American Freedom". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on May 9, 2025. Retrieved May 8, 2025.
Langer, Gary; Sparks, Steven (October 25, 2024). "Half of Americans see Donald Trump as a fascist: POLL". ABC News. Archived from the original on November 5, 2024. Retrieved October 25, 2024.
Langfitt, Frank (April 22, 2025). "Hundreds of scholars say U.S. is swiftly heading toward authoritarianism". NPR. Archived from the original on May 1, 2025.
Layne, Nathan (December 16, 2023). "Trump repeats 'poisoning the blood' anti-immigrant remark". Reuters. Archived from the original on May 31, 2024.
Layne, Nathan; Slattery, Gram; Reid, Tim (April 3, 2024). "Trump calls migrants 'animals,' intensifying focus on illegal immigration". Reuters. Archived from the original on June 17, 2024. Retrieved April 3, 2024.
Lebowitz, Megan (October 25, 2024). "13 former Trump administration officials sign open letter backing up John Kelly's criticism of Trump". NBC News. Archived from the original on October 29, 2024. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Lee, M. J. (November 24, 2015). "Why some conservatives say Trump talk is fascist". CNN. Archived from the original on November 11, 2024. Retrieved November 11, 2024.
Lehmann, Chris (November 14, 2023). "The "Is Donald Trump a Fascist?" Debate Has Been Ended—by Donald Trump". The Nation. New York City: Katrina vanden Heuvel. Archived from the original on September 26, 2024. Retrieved December 8, 2023.
Leingang, Rachel (March 26, 2025). "Yale professor who studies fascism fleeing US to work in Canada". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on April 3, 2025. Retrieved March 28, 2025.
Leonhardt, David (March 17, 2019). "It Isn't Complicated: Trump Encourages Violence". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved November 7, 2024.
LeVine, Marianne (November 12, 2023). "Trump calls political enemies 'vermin,' echoing dictators Hitler, Mussolini". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 13, 2023. Retrieved November 12, 2023.
van der Linden, Harry; Philosophy Documentation Center (2017). "Trump, Populism, Fascism, and the Road Ahead". Radical Philosophy Review. 20 (2): 355–365. doi:10.5840/radphilrev201720278. ISSN 1388-4441.
Lutz, Eric (November 10, 2023). "Donald Trump Isn't Even Trying to Hide His Authoritarian Second-Term Plans". Vanity Fair. United States: Condé Nast. Archived from the original on September 26, 2024. Retrieved December 8, 2023.
MacDonald-Evoy, Jerod (September 22, 2020). "Arizona has deep QAnon ties, including its politicians". Arizona Mirror. Archived from the original on January 4, 2024. Retrieved July 19, 2023.
Macias, Amanda (September 25, 2023). "Trump and GOP Rep. Gosar suggest Joint Chiefs boss Mark Milley deserves death". CNBC. Archived from the original on April 1, 2025. Retrieved November 6, 2024.
Maharidge, Dale (January 8, 2021). "Trump will soon leave office. But the ingredients of homegrown fascism remain". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved November 12, 2024.
Maher, Henry (2023). "Neoliberal fascism? Fascist trends in early neoliberal thought and echoes in the present". Contemporary Political Theory. 23 (3): 392–410. doi:10.1057/s41296-023-00657-x. ISSN 1470-8914.
Mannoni, Olivier (March 6, 2025). ""La langue politique de Trump est devenue plus brutale, clanique et déliée du réel"" ["Trump's political language has become more brutal, clannish and detached from reality."]. Philosophie magazine (in French). Archived from the original on March 7, 2025. Retrieved April 26, 2025.
Marcus, Josh (November 21, 2024). "RFK Jr. once compared 'bully' Trump to Hitler and called him a 'threat to democracy'". The Independent. Archived from the original on November 22, 2024. Retrieved November 24, 2024.
Mason, Jeff; Ali, Idrees; Hesson, Ted (January 30, 2025). "Trump to prepare facility at Guantanamo for 30,000 migrants". Reuters. Archived from the original on February 24, 2025. Retrieved May 13, 2025.
Mathias, Christopher (September 20, 2024). "Trump Used An Alarming Word — And Most People Missed It". HuffPost. Archived from the original on November 7, 2024. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
Matthews, Dylan (May 19, 2016). "I asked 5 fascism experts whether Donald Trump is a fascist. Here's what they said". Vox. Archived from the original on November 2, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2016.
——— (October 23, 2020). "Is Trump a fascist? 8 experts weigh in". Vox. Archived from the original on January 4, 2022. Retrieved November 7, 2024.
Matthews, Karen (October 26, 2024). "Trump Rally at Madison Square Garden Follows Long Tradition". TIME. Associated Press. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
McDuffie, Will; Abdul-Hakim, Gabriella; Farrow, Fritz; Murphy, T. Michelle (October 23, 2024). "Harris slams Trump as 'fascist,' says John Kelly is 'putting out a 911 call' to Americans". ABC News. Archived from the original on November 5, 2024. Retrieved October 26, 2024.
McGaughey, Ewan (December 31, 2018). "Fascism-lite in America (or The Social Ideal of Donald Trump)". British Journal of American Legal Studies. 7 (2): 291–315. doi:10.2478/bjals-2018-0012. ISSN 2049-4092.. Originally published as a TLI Think! Working Paper Archived February 26, 2021, at the Wayback Machine in 2016.
McGeoghegan, Mark (November 1, 2024). "Trump's no fascist, but he is just as dangerous to democracy". The Herald. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved November 3, 2024.
McHugh, Calder (December 19, 2023). "'Trump Knows What He's Doing': The Creator of Godwin's Law Says the Hitler Comparison Is Apt". Politico. Archived from the original on November 16, 2024. Retrieved November 19, 2024.
Menezes, Cynara (January 9, 2025). "Biliocracia: Donald Trump enche seu gabinete de super-ricos; para quem irão governar?" [Billiocracy: Donald Trump fills his cabinet with the super-rich; who will he govern for]. revistaforum.com.br (in Spanish). Archived from the original on February 3, 2025. Retrieved March 7, 2025.
Merchant, Nomaan (December 19, 2018). "Texas detentions of migrant children have increased six-fold". Associated Press. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025.
Merica, Dan (October 23, 2024). "Trump said Hitler 'did some good things' and wanted generals like the Nazis, former chief of staff Kelly claims". PBS News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on October 31, 2024. Retrieved October 24, 2024.
Merica, Dan (October 23, 2024). "Harris decries Trump after John Kelly says he wanted generals like Hitler's". AP News. Archived from the original on November 8, 2024. Retrieved October 24, 2024.
Miller, Zeke; Long, Colleen; Eeggert, David (November 21, 2020). "Trump tries to leverage power of office to subvert Biden win". AP News. Archived from the original on November 28, 2020. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Miller-Idriss, Cynthia (2020). "Mainstreaming the Message". Hate in the Homeland: The New Global Far Right. Princeton University Press. pp. 45–68. doi:10.2307/j.ctv10tq6km.7. ISBN 978-0691222943. JSTOR j.ctv10tq6km.7. S2CID 242934392. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved January 21, 2025.
Mirrlees, Tanner (June 30, 2022). "Trump and the Alt Right: The Mainstreaming of White Nationalism". In Perry, Barbara; Gruenewald, Jeff; Scrivens, Ryan (eds.). Right-Wing Extremism in Canada and the United States. Palgrave Hate Studies. Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp. 67–96. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-99804-2_4. ISBN 978-3-030-99803-5. Retrieved November 7, 2024.
Morabia, Alfredo (2021). "The Fascist Threat". American Journal of Public Health. 111 (4): 538–539. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2021.306169. ISSN 0090-0036. PMC 7958011. PMID 33476241.
Morini, Marco (2020), "The Fascist Rhetor, the Incendiary Populist", Lessons from Trump's Political Communication, Political Campaigning and Communication, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 67–93, doi:10.1007/978-3-030-39010-5_4, ISBN 978-3-030-39009-9, retrieved November 13, 2024
Müller, Jan-Werner (October 29, 2024). "No, Trump is not a fascist. But that doesn't make him any less dangerous". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Muñoz, Boris (March 5, 2025). "Larry Diamond, sociólogo: "Trump busca que todos se arrodillen ante su voluntad imperial"" [Larry Diamond, sociologist: "Trump wants everyone to bow to his imperial will."]. El País US (in Spanish). Archived from the original on April 27, 2025. Retrieved May 8, 2025.
Naughtie, Andrew (July 9, 2020). "Former KKK leader endorses Trump for president again". The Independent. Archived from the original on February 18, 2021. Retrieved November 6, 2024.
Neuborne, Burt (2019). When at Times the Mob is Swayed: A Citizen's Guide to Defending Our Republic. New Press. ISBN 978-1-62097-358-5.
"Presidential Election Results Map: Trump Wins". The New York Times. November 5, 2024. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 5, 2024. Retrieved November 6, 2024.
Nichols, Bradley; Guettel, Jens-Uwe; Hake, Sabine; Kucik, Emanuela; Stern, Alexandra Minna; Wiesen, S. Jonathan (2022). "A Reusable Past: The Meaning of the Third Reich in Recent U.S. Discourse". Central European History. 55 (4): 551–575. doi:10.1017/S0008938922001364. ISSN 0008-9389.
Noah, Timothy (April 6, 2022). "Steve Bannon Said Trump Reminded Him of Hitler. He Meant It as a Compliment". The New Republic. ISSN 0028-6583. Archived from the original on November 17, 2024. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
Oliphant, James (October 4, 2024). "Trump's already harsh rhetoric on migrants is turning darker as Election Day nears". Reuters. Archived from the original on October 5, 2024. Retrieved October 5, 2024.
Oreskes, Benjamin (May 23, 2024). "Trump and GOP repeatedly echo Nazi and far-right ideology as they aim to retake White House". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Archived from the original on June 1, 2024. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
Orwell, George (1944). "What is Fascism?". Tribune. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Osnos, Evan (February 29, 2016). "Donald Trump and the Ku Klux Klan: A History". The New Yorker. ISSN 0028-792X. Archived from the original on September 21, 2024. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Owen, Tess (November 6, 2024). "Far-Right Donald Trump Supporters Celebrate His Victory with Violent Memes and Calls for Executions". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Archived from the original on March 22, 2025. Retrieved November 7, 2024.
Panton, Kenneth J. (August 23, 2022). "Trump, Donald John". Historical Dictionary of the United States. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-5381-2420-8.
Paxton, Robert O. (January 11, 2021). "I've Hesitated to Call Donald Trump a Fascist. Until Now". Newsweek. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved November 19, 2024.
Peice, Michelle L.; Gomez Licon, Adriana (May 6, 2024). "Donald Trump calls Joe Biden weak on antisemitism, ignoring his own rhetoric". Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 31, 2024. Retrieved June 2, 2024.
Pellish, Aaron (October 27, 2024). "Live updates: Trump to rally in New York as Harris campaigns in Philadelphia". CNN. Archived from the original on February 27, 2025. Retrieved October 27, 2024.
Pengelly, Martin (February 8, 2022). "Bannon compared Trump escalator ride to Leni Riefenstahl Nazi film, book says". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
Pengelly, Martin (July 16, 2024). "JD Vance once worried Trump was 'America's Hitler'. Now his own authoritarian leanings come into view". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on August 8, 2024. Retrieved October 24, 2024.
Pierson, Paul (2017). "American hybrid: Donald Trump and the strange merger of populism and plutocracy". The British Journal of Sociology. 68 (S1): S105 – S119. doi:10.1111/1468-4446.12323. ISSN 1468-4446. PMID 29114863.
Pitzer, Andrea (June 21, 2019). "'Some Suburb of Hell': America's New Concentration Camp System". The New York Review of Books. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Place, Nathan (April 9, 2021). "Tucker Carlson faces calls to resign after promoting white supremacist 'replacement' theory". The Independent. Archived from the original on January 9, 2025. Retrieved April 10, 2021.
Platoff, Emma; Ura, Alexa; McCullough, Jolie; Cameron, Darla (July 10, 2018). "While migrant families seek shelter from violence, Trump administration narrows path to asylum". Texas Tribune. Archived from the original on July 12, 2024. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Polychroniou, C. J. (December 8, 2022). "Noam Chomsky: "We're on the Road to a Form of Neofascism"". Truthout. Archived from the original on December 13, 2024. Retrieved March 13, 2025.
Polychroniou, C. J. (July 28, 2024). "With Project 2025 and Agenda 47, the USA's Coups Come Home to Roost". Common Dreams. Archived from the original on September 14, 2024. Retrieved November 3, 2024.
Ramirez, Fernando (June 14, 2018). "Movement to call migrant detention centers 'concentration camps' swells online". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 10, 2024. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Rawnsley, Andrew (July 8, 2018). "Madeleine Albright: 'The things that are happening are genuinely, seriously bad.' Interview". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 7, 2025. Retrieved November 2, 2024.
Reich, Robert (June 17, 2023). "Trump and the Republican party exemplify these five elements of fascism". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved November 3, 2024.
Reich, Greta (October 23, 2024). "Mark Esper: Trump 'has those inclinations' toward fascism". Politico. Archived from the original on October 26, 2024.
Reid, Tim (September 29, 2024). "Trump escalates harsh rhetoric against immigrants, Harris". Reuters. Archived from the original on October 5, 2024. Retrieved October 5, 2024.
Richards, Zoë (October 23, 2024). "Former White House chief of staff John Kelly says Trump praised Hitler while in office". NBC News. Archived from the original on April 1, 2025. Retrieved October 24, 2024.
Richer, Alanna Durkin; Kunzelman, Michael; Khalil, Ashraf (January 21, 2025). "Trump pardons upend massive Jan. 6 prosecution by freeing rioters and dismissing cases". AP News. Archived from the original on March 20, 2025. Retrieved March 20, 2025.
Robinson, Nathan J. (November 13, 2023). "Take Trump Seriously When He Vows To Build The Camps". Current Affairs. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved October 31, 2024.
Ronaldi, Olivia (December 6, 2023). "Trump says he would be a dictator only on 'Day One' if he wins a second term". CBS News. Archived from the original on December 6, 2023. Retrieved December 6, 2023.
Rosenfeld, Gavriel D. (December 4, 2019). "An American Führer? Nazi Analogies and the Struggle to Explain Donald Trump". Central European History. 52 (4): 554–587. doi:10.1017/S0008938919000840. ISSN 0008-9389.
Rosenfeld, Gavriel D.; Ward, Janet, eds. (2023). Fascism in America: past and present. Cambridge, United Kingdom; New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-009-33742-7.
Rosenfeld, Jean E. (May 4, 2017). "Fascism as Action through Time (Or How It Can Happen Here)". Terrorism and Political Violence. 29 (3): 394–410. doi:10.1080/09546553.2017.1304757. ISSN 0954-6553.
Rubin, April (October 11, 2024). "Trump's top general calls former president 'fascist' and 'dangerous' threat". Axios. Archived from the original on November 9, 2024. Retrieved October 19, 2024.
Runciman, David (September 21, 2024). "Is Donald Trump a fascist?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Ryback, Timothy W. (April 8, 2024). "Opinion: Trump turns his trials into a soapbox. Does he know he's channeling Hitler?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved November 12, 2024.
Ryback, Timothy (April 26, 2024). "How Hitler Used Democracy to Take Power". TIME. Archived from the original on November 11, 2024. Retrieved November 12, 2024.
Salmon, Christian (December 29, 2016). "Blog: Trump, fascism, and the construction of "the people": An interview with Judith Butler". Verso Books. Archived from the original on September 21, 2024. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Samuels, Brett (September 16, 2024). "Anti-Trump rhetoric comes under scrutiny after golf course threat". The Hill. Archived from the original on September 20, 2024. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Saramo, Samira (July 31, 2017). "The Meta-violence of Trumpism". European Journal of American Studies. 12 (2). doi:10.4000/ejas.12129. ISSN 1991-9336.
Scherer, Michael; Dawsey, Josh (June 15, 2018). "Trump cites as a negotiating tool his policy of separating immigrant children from their parents". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 18, 2018. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Schmidt, Michael S. (October 22, 2024). "As Election Nears, Kelly Warns Trump Would Rule Like a Dictator". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 22, 2024. Retrieved October 25, 2024.
Schneider, Elena (February 28, 2016). "Trump explains tweeting Mussolini quote". Politico. Archived from the original on October 7, 2024. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
Schreckinger, Ben (November 2, 2016). "White nationalists plot Election Day show of force". Politico. Archived from the original on September 21, 2024. Retrieved September 21, 2024.
Shabad, Rebecca (October 29, 2024). "Trump and his allies insist he's 'not a Nazi'". NBC News. Archived from the original on October 29, 2024. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Shabad, Rebecca (April 22, 2025). "Al Gore likens the Trump administration's 'attacks on liberty' to Nazi Germany". NBC News. Archived from the original on May 3, 2025. Retrieved April 23, 2025.
Smith, David (June 3, 2024). "The reich stuff – what does Trump really have in common with Hitler?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on April 6, 2025. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
Smith, Evan (June 6, 2020). "Today's Antifa-obsessed hard right politicians are rehashing the ideas of 1930s fascists". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 2, 2023. Retrieved November 14, 2024.
Steck, Em; Kaczynski, Andrew (September 19, 2024). "Mark Robinson, NC GOP nominee for governor, called himself a 'black NAZI!,' supported slavery in past comments made on porn forum". CNN. Archived from the original on September 19, 2024. Retrieved October 28, 2024.
Stone, Peter (November 22, 2023). "'Openly authoritarian campaign': Trump's threats of revenge fuel alarm". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 27, 2023. Retrieved December 9, 2023.
Sullivan, Kate (October 6, 2023). "Trump's anti-immigrant comments draw rebuke". CNN. Archived from the original on November 15, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2023.
Suter, Tara (October 27, 2024). "Tim Walz compares Donald Trump's Madison Square Garden rally to 1939 Nazi event". The Hill. Archived from the original on November 9, 2024. Retrieved October 27, 2024.
Svitek, Patrick (October 7, 2024). "Trump suggests 'bad genes' to blame for undocumented immigrants who commit murders". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on February 23, 2025. Retrieved October 7, 2024.
Swan, Jonathan; Savage, Charlie; Haberman, Maggie (June 15, 2023). "The Radical Strategy Behind Trump's Promise to 'Go After' Biden". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 9, 2023. Retrieved December 9, 2023.
Swenson, Ali; Kunzelman, Michael (November 18, 2023). "Fears of political violence are growing as the 2024 campaign heats up and conspiracy theories evolve". Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 11, 2024. Retrieved July 13, 2024.
Swift, Nathan (October 26, 2015). "Donald Trump's fascist tendencies". The Highlander. Archived from the original on January 1, 2018. Retrieved December 30, 2017.
Tennis, Maggie (September 11, 2018). "Madeleine Albright on fascism, democracy, and diplomacy". Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on July 29, 2024. Retrieved November 2, 2024.
Tensley, Brandon (September 22, 2020). "The dark subtext of Trump's 'good genes' compliment". CNN. Archived from the original on May 23, 2024. Retrieved November 10, 2024.
Tondo, Lorenzo (November 5, 2024). "Trump staffer fired from Republican party for being a white supremacist". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on April 1, 2025. Retrieved November 8, 2024.
Torres-Spelliscy, Ciara (November 5, 2024). Corporatocracy: How to Protect Democracy from Dark Money and Corrupt Politicians. NYU Press. ISBN 978-1-4798-2832-6.
Touchberry, Ramsey (June 15, 2018). "Almost 45 children a day are being taken from their families and placed in immigrant detention centers: Report". Newsweek. Archived from the original on May 5, 2024. Retrieved October 29, 2024.
Tourish, Dennis (2024). "It is time to use the F word about Trump: Fascism, populism and the rebirth of history". Leadership. 20 (1): 9–32. doi:10.1177/17427150231210732. ISSN 1742-7150. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved November 6, 2024.
Trouillard, Stéphanie (March 7, 2025). "What parallels do historians see between the Trump administration and the Nazi regime?". France 24. Archived from the original on April 30, 2025. Retrieved May 8, 2025.
Vazquez, Maegan (October 13, 2024). "Trump urges using military to handle 'radical left lunatics' on Election Day". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved October 13, 2024.
Vitali, Ali (December 22, 2015). "Donald Trump Launches Vulgar Attack on Hillary Clinton". NBC News. Archived from the original on November 9, 2024. Retrieved November 9, 2024.
Former top aides call Trump a fascist; Vance calls them 'disgruntled former employees'. Voice of America. October 27, 2024. Retrieved October 28, 2024 – via YouTube.
Wagner, John (July 2, 2018). "Madeleine Albright brands Trump 'the most undemocratic president in modern American history'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 9, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2024.
Waldenberg, Samantha; Williams, Michael (October 23, 2024). "Biden believes Trump is a fascist, White House says". CNN. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved October 24, 2024.
Walters, Joanna (July 1, 2020). "Who is Lauren Boebert, the QAnon sympathizer who won a Republican primary?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on June 29, 2024. Retrieved July 22, 2020.
Wang, Yolanda; Lopez, Ariela (March 27, 2025). "Three prominent Yale professors depart for Canadian university, citing Trump fears". Yale Daily News. Archived from the original on April 5, 2025. Retrieved March 28, 2025.
Ward, Myah (October 12, 2024). "We watched 20 Trump rallies. His racist, anti-immigrant messaging is getting darker". Politico. Archived from the original on October 14, 2024. Retrieved October 12, 2024.
"Congress counts, certifies Trump's electoral college victory over Harris". The Washington Post. January 6, 2025. Archived from the original on February 21, 2025. Retrieved January 20, 2025.
Weissert, Will; Kellman, Laurie (October 24, 2024). "What is fascism? And why does Harris say Trump is a fascist?". AP News. Archived from the original on October 29, 2024. Retrieved October 25, 2024.
Wren, Adam (December 6, 2023). "Trump's 'dictator' remark jolts the 2024 campaign – and tests his GOP rivals on debate day". Politico. Archived from the original on December 6, 2023. Retrieved December 6, 2023.
Wright, Robin (April 24, 2018). "Madeleine Albright Warns of a New Fascism—and Trump". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on September 18, 2024. Retrieved November 2, 2024.
Yang, Angela (February 19, 2025). "'Long live the king': Trump adds monarch rhetoric to actions". NBC News. Archived from the original on February 20, 2025. Retrieved February 20, 2025.
Yang, Maya (February 19, 2025). "Trump receives widespread backlash to social post calling himself 'king'". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on February 20, 2025. Retrieved February 20, 2025.
Zeitz, Joshua (October 29, 2024). "Trump and Fascism: A Pair of Historians Tackle the Big Question". Politico. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved November 12, 2024.
Zeitz, Joshua; Steinmetz-Jenkins, Daniel (October 29, 2024). "Trump and Fascism: A Pair of Historians Tackle the Big Question. The debate is more complicated than you think". Politico. Archived from the original on November 10, 2024. Retrieved November 4, 2024.
Zerofsky, Elisabeth (October 23, 2024). "Is It Fascism? A Leading Historian Changes His Mind". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 13, 2024. Retrieved October 25, 2024.
Zoellner, Tom (October 11, 2024). "Is Trump "America's Hitler"?". Los Angeles Review of Books. Archived from the original on March 31, 2025. Retrieved November 12, 2024.
Further reading
Edward, Lempinen (September 9, 2024). "Fascism shattered Europe a century ago — and historians hear echoes today in the U.S." UC Berkley News.
de Berg, Henk (2024). Trump and Hitler: A Comparative Study in Lying. London: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-3-031-51832-4.
Mednick, Zale: "Hitler and Trump: A Comparison" (podcast)
"Once Top Advisers to Trump, They Now Call Him 'Liar,' 'Fascist' and 'Unfit'" (October 30, 2024) by New York Times
"Harris called Trump a 'fascist.' Experts debate what fascism is — and isn't" (October 29, 2024) by NPR
Robinson, William I. (March 2019). "Global Capitalist Crisis and Twenty-First Century Fascism: Beyond the Trump Hype". Science & Society. 83 (2): 155–183. doi:10.1521/siso.2019.83.2.155. ABSTRACT: Global capitalism faces an organic crisis involving a structural dimension, that of overaccumulation and a political dimension of legitimacy or hegemony that is approaching a general crisis of capitalist rule. Fascism, whether in 20th-century or 21st-century forms, is a particular response to capitalist crisis. Trumpism in the US, BREXIT in the UK, Bolsonarism in Brazil, the increasing influence of neo-fascist and authoritarian parties and movements around the world, represent far-right responses to the crisis of global capitalism. There are similarities but also important differences between fascist projects of the 20th and 21st centuries. The former involved the fusion of reactionary political power with national capital, whereas the latter involves the fusion of transnational capital with reactionary and repressive political power — an expression of the dictatorship of transnational capital. A fightback against the global police state and 21st-century fascism must involve broad anti-fascist alliances led by popular and working-class forces.
Colasacco, Brett (2018). "Before Trump: On Comparing Fascism and Trumpism". Journal for the Study of Radicalism. 12 (1): 27–53. doi:10.14321/jstudradi.12.1.0027. JSTOR 10.14321/jstudradi.12.1.0027. I have been contemplating a photograph of Donald J. Trump - businessman, bestselling author, and reality television star – shaking hands with Barack Obama in the Oval Office of the While House, one day after being declared president-elect of the United States. I fully confess that I was one of those who thought this image, and this moment, would never come: that Trump would not, could not, win the presidency. (...)
Love, Nancy S. (April 14, 2017). "Back to the Future: Trendy Fascism, the Trump Effect, and the Alt-Right". New Political Science. 39 (2): 263–268. doi:10.1080/07393148.2017.1301321. I started writing Trendy Fascism: White Power Music and the Future of Democracy following the 2008 election of Barack Obama, the first African American President of the United States, and I finished it in 2015 shortly after Dylann Roof murdered nine Black parishioners at Emanuel AME Church in Charleston, South Carolina. In a police interview, Roof said that he wanted to start a race war and that the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) and racist skinheads were not doing enough. Fast forward to 2016. When Donald Trump was elected President of the United States, many pollsters and pundits expressed surprise and, in some cases, also dismay. Pre-election polling proved stunningly inaccurate, and it increasingly appears that the alt-right contributed significantly to Trump's victory. (...)
External links
 Media related to Comparison of Donald Trump with fascism at Wikimedia Commons
show
vte
Donald Trump


show
vte
January 6 United States Capitol attack


show
vte
Fascism


show
vte
Second presidency of Donald Trump (2025–present)


Categories: Political career of Donald TrumpNeo-fascism in the United StatesTrumpismNazi analogiesCriticism of Donald TrumpLinguistic controversies
This page was last edited on 21 October 2025, at 12:51 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view
