Title: 

URL Source: https://www.harvard.edu/research-funding/wp-content/uploads/sites/16/2025/05/Harvard-Visa-Complaint.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 23 May 2025 13:43:02 GMT

Markdown Content:
IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT 

FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS 

PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS OF 

HARVARD COLLEGE, 

Plaintiff, 

v. 

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND 

SECURITY; 

KRISTI NOEM, in her official capacity as Secretary of the United 

States Department of Homeland Security; 

UNITED STATES IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS 

ENFORCEMENT; 

TODD LYONS, in his official capacity as Acting Director of 

United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement; 

STUDENT AND EXCHANGE VISITOR PROGRAM; 

JOHN DOE, in their official capacity as Director of the Student 

and Exchange Visitor Program; 

JAMES HICKS, in his official capacity as Deputy Assistant 

Director of the Student and Exchange Visitor Program; 

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE; 

PAMELA BONDI, in her official capacity as Attorney General of 

the United States ;

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF STATE; 

MARCO RUBIO, in his official capacity as Secretary of the 

United States Department of State, 

Defendants. 

Case No. _______________ 

COMPLAINT 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 1 of 72 1

1.  For more than 70 years, Harvard University (“Harvard” or the “University”) has 

been certified by the federal government to enroll international students under the F -1 visa 

program , and it has long been designated as an exchange program sponsor to host J-1

nonimmigrants. Harvard has, over this time, developed programs and degrees tailored to its 

international students, invested millions to recruit the most talented such students, and integrated 

its international students into all aspects of the Harvard community. Yesterday , the government 

abruptly revoked that certification without process or cause, to immediate and devastating effect 

for Harvard and more than 7,000 visa holders .

2.  This revocation is a blatant violation of the First Amendment , the Due Process 

Clause, and the Administrative Procedure Act. It is the latest act by the government in clear 

retaliation for Harvard exercising its First Amendment rights to reject the government’s demands 

to control Harvard’s governance, curriculum, and the “ideology” of its faculty and students. The 

government’s actions are unlawful for other equally clear and pernicious reasons. They disregard 

the government’s own regulations —under which Har vard should remain certified to host F-1 and 

J-1 visa holders . They depart from decades of settled practice and come without rational 

explanation. And they were carried out abruptly without any of the robust procedures the 

government has established to prevent just this type of upheaval to thousands of students’ lives. 

3.  With the stroke of a pen, the government has sought to erase a quarter of Harvard’s 

student body, international students who contribute significantly to the University and its mission. 

Harvard’s certification is essential for each of Harvard’s thousands of international students to 

lawfully remain in this country while they complete coursework, obtain degrees, and continue 

critical research. Effective immediately, most of Harvard’s thousands of enrolled F -1 and J -1 visa 

students (and their more than 300 dependents) will have little choice but to secure transfer to 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 2 of 72 2

another school or risk be ing rendered without lawful status in the United States . Effective 

immediately, Harvard can no longer sponsor F -1 and J -1 visa holders for its upcoming summer 

and fall terms, despite having admitted thousands. Effective immediately, countless academic 

programs, research laboratories, clinics, and courses supported by Harvard’s international students 

have been thrown into disarray. The government’s actions come just days before graduation. 

Without its international students, Harvard is not Harvard. 

4.  Harvard therefore bring s this action under the United States Constitution, the 

Administrative Procedure Act (APA), and the equitable authority of this Court to vacate, set aside, 

and enjoin the government’s unlawful acts .

INTRODUCTION 

5.  For more than 70 years , Harvard has continuously hosted international students 

with so -called F -1 visas on its campus in coordination with the government under a program 

currently called the Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) and overseen by the U.S. 

Department of Homeland Security (DHS) . Harvard has also long been designated as an exchange 

program sponsor to host J -1 nonimmigrants. The se visa program s, which allow international 

students to enter the United States on nonimmigrant visas to enroll at Harvard and thousands of 

other schools ,1 ha ve boosted America’s academic , scientific, and economic success and its global 

standing. 

6.  Tens of thousands of international students have studied at Harvard under the F-1

visa program . Additional international students and scholars have come to Harvard under the J -1

visa program. These students have contributed to the University’s research advancements in  

> 1

U.S. Immigr. & Customs Enfor., SEVP Certified Schools (updated Apr. 28, 2021) ,

https://studyinthestates.dhs.gov/ assets/ certified -school -list -04 -28 -21.pdf .

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 3 of 72 3

immeasurable ways . They do so by (among other things) publishing pioneering scholarship, 

supporting scientific research, inventing groundbreaking technologies, and starting thriving 

businesses here in America. 

7.  Building the international program that sponsor s these students did not happen 

overnight. It has been a painstaking , decades -long project to cultivate the programs, opportunities, 

personnel, and reputation that allow Harvard to attract the most qualified international students, 

vet those students in partnership with the government to ensure they can obtain and maintain the 

necessary visas to complete their course of study, and integrate them into the Harvard community. 

Harvard’s robust and thriving visa program s ha ve inured to the benefit of Harvard’s entire 

population and the United States. 

8.  Since the inception of the F -1 visa program more than 70 years ago, Harvard and 

the government have worked cooperatively to advance these goals. Harvard has been continuously 

certified to host F -1 visa holders sinc e 1954 . Under the modern program established in 2003 ,

certified schools must comply with specified recordkeeping, retention, and reporting requirements 

and renew their F -1 certification every two year s. And, since then, Harvard has complied with all 

applicable reporting requirements and renewed its certification without incident. For more than 70 

years , the government has never threatened Harvard’s certification. 

9.  All of that changed on April 16 , 2025, when the Secretary of Homeland Security, 

Kristi Noem, sent Harvard ’s International Office (HIO) a letter (the “ Records Request ”) criticizing 

Harvard for “fail [ing] to condemn antisemitism.” The Records Request demanded that H IO 

produce wide -ranging information for “each student visa holder” across Harvard’s 13 schools 

within ten business day s and further stated that failure to do so “within the timeframe provided” —

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 4 of 72 4

that is, by April 30, 2025 —would be “treated as a voluntary withdrawal” from the F -1 program 

and “not … subject to appeal .”

10.  Despite the unprecedented nature of this demand, HIO immediately began 

collecting responsive records from the information it maintain s or keeps “accessible,” 8 C.F.R. 

§ 214.3(g)(1), and , on April 30 , Harvard produced that information to DHS. On May 14, Harvard 

also produced additional information in response to a follow -up request from DHS. Yet, on 

May 22, 2025, DHS deemed Harvard’s responses “insufficient” —without explaining why or 

citing any regulation with which Harvard failed to comply —and revoked Harva rd’s SEVP 

certification “effective immediately.” 

11.  The government’s termination of Harvard’s SEVP certification is the culmination 

of its unprecedented and retaliatory attack on academic freedom at Harvard :

a.  In recent weeks and months , through a multi -agency Task Force to Combat 

Anti -Semitism (“ Federal Task Force”) , the government has conditioned Harvard’s continued 

receipt of numerous federal benefits, including billions of dollars of federal funding , on accepting 

sweeping changes to Harvard’s governance, admissions, hiring, and academic programs .

b.  The government enumerated these demands in extensive detail in a n

April 11, 2025 , letter to Harvard’s President. The government demanded (among other things) that 

Harvard hire a third -party to “audit” the viewpoints of its students , faculty, and staff; depending 

on the results of the audit, hire and admit a “critical mass” of people to achieve the government’s 

preferred level of “viewpoint diversity” in “each department, field, or teaching unit” ; refuse 

admission to international students “hostile to [] American values”; “exclusively” “empower” 

faculty supportive of the government’s action and “reduce[] the power” of those opposed ; allow 

the government to review its faculty hires; expel or suspend specific sets of students; disband 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 5 of 72 5

disfavored student clubs; and establish mechanisms for Harvard community members to report on 

one another and send those reports to the government. 

c.  When, on April 14, 2025, Harvard refused to accede to these demands, the 

government’s retribution was swift. Hours later, the government froze more than $2.2 billion in 

federal funding critical to the support of ongoing cutting -edge research at Harvard —research with 

the potential to improve the health and safety of millions of Americans through better cancer 

treatments, model and manage the spread of infectious disease outbreaks, produce vital 

innovations in quantum computing and artificial intelligence, and reduc e the short - and long -term 

consequences of battlefield -related injuries, among myriad other developments and discoveries. 2

d.  The next day, on April 15, 2025, President Trump posted on Truth Social 

suggesting that “Harvard should lose its Tax -Exempt Status” as a not -for -profit educational 

institution under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, “if it keeps pushing polit ical, 

ideological, and terrorist inspired/supporting ‘Sickness.’” But Harvard is not a commercial 

business and does not seek investors to fund its activities and then share in their proceeds. So, 

maintaining Section 501(c)(3) status —which permits the Unive rsity to receive tax -deductible 

gifts, raise capital from investors on affordable terms, and provide access to federal student aid 

programs —is vital to Harvard’s existence as a modern research university dedicated to serving the 

public. 

e.  The following day, the President doubled down, asserting in a post on Truth 

Social that “Harvard has been hiring almost all woke, Radical Left, idiots and ‘birdbrains’ who are 

only capable of teaching FAILURE to students” and that “Harvard can no longer be considered  

> 2

Harvard has challenged the government’s freeze order and subsequent terminations of billions of 

dollars in multi -year grants to Harvard in President and Fellows of Harvard College v. U.S. Dep’t 

of Health and Human Services et al. , No. 25 -cv -11048 (D. Mass. Apr. 21, 2025) (the “Funding 

Case”). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 6 of 72 6

even a decent place of learning, and should not be considered on any list of the World’s Great 

Universities or Colleges.” On April 16, Secretary Noem sent her letter to HIO , seeking eight broad 

categories of information on every international student studying at Harvard under an F-1 visa ,

threaten ing that failure to comply would be deemed a “voluntary withdrawal” of Harvard’s SEVP 

certification , and warn ing that “[t]he withdrawal will not be subject to appeal.” This demand was 

unprecedented, seeking information far beyond what DHS’s regulations require Harvard to 

maintain and report , and far beyond any request Harvard has received in its more than 70 years 

hosting foreign students under the F -1 visa program. 

f.  Just hours later, DHS issued a press release announcing both its cancellation 

of “two DHS grants totaling over $2.7 million to Harvard” as well as the Secretary’s “scathing 

letter demanding detailed records on Harvard’s foreign student visa holders’ illegal and violent 

acts.” The press release asserted that Har vard has allowed “anti -American, pro -Hamas ideology 

[to] poison[] its campus and classrooms” and “undermine America’s values.” It added that DHS’s 

demand for records encompassing thousands of student visa holders “follows President Donald J. 

Trump’s decision to freeze $2.2 billion in federal funding to Harvard University, proposing the 

revocation of its tax -exempt status over its radical ideology.” And it concluded by stating that “if 

Harvard cannot verify it is in full compliance with its reporting requirements, the university will 

lose the privilege of enrolling foreign students.” 

g.  Despite the unprecedent ed nature and scope of the April 16 demand, and 

the lack of any clear authority for most of the requests, Harvard worked diligently to collect and 

produce the information it is required to maintain and report under the SEVP program . On 

April 30, 2025 , Harvard produced responsive information falling within 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1) .

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 7 of 72 7

Specifically, Harvard produced to DHS thousands of data points concerning its entire F -1 visa 

student population. 

h.  Then, on May 7, 2025, DHS notified Harvard that DHS believed Harvard’s 

initial production was incomplete and —now invoking all of its authority under 8 C.F.R. Part 2 14 —

asked for four of the eight categories of information referenced in the initial request. This request 

continued to be both unprecedented and well beyond the scope of the authority invoked by DHS. 

But i n response, Harvard again conducted a search and again produced additional responsive 

information. 

i.  In the wake of Harvard’s production s, DHS summarily revoked Harvard’s 

SEVP certification on th e basis that Harvard’s responses were “insufficient.” But it did not explain 

why that was so, let alone identify any actual noncompliance with the governing regulations or 

follow any of the detailed processes required under the regulations prior to revoking a school’s 

certification .

j.  DHS’s revocation letter leaves no doubt that the revocation is part of DHS’s 

campaign to coerce Harvard into surrendering its First Amendment rights. The letter declares: 

“Consequences must follow to send a clear signal to Harvard and all universities that want to enjoy 

the privilege of enrolling foreign students, that the Trump Administration will enforce the law and 

root out the evils of anti -Americanism and antisemitism in society and campuses. ” Or put another 

way: because the Administration perceives th at members of Harvard’s community have the wrong 

viewpoints, Harvard will be punished until it alters its viewpoints to satisfy the Administration’s 

demands. 

12.  The surrounding events, and Defendants’ express statements, make clear that DHS 

took these actions not for any valid reason , but purely as punish ment for Harvard’s speech, its 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 8 of 72 8

perceived viewpoint, and its refusal to surrender its academic independence or relinquish its 

constitutional rights. A central tenet of our constitutional system is that the government cannot 

“invok[e] legal sanctions and other means of coercion” to micromanage private speech. Nat’l Rifle 

Ass’n of Am. v. Vullo , 602 U.S. 175, 189 (2024) (quoting Bantam Books, Inc. v. Sullivan , 372 U.S. 

58, 67 (1963)). And it is bedrock law that the viewpoint -based justifications the government has 

repeatedly and publicly invoked as a basis for its campaign against Harvard are a particularly 

“egregious form of content discrimination,” subject to the strictest scrutiny. Reed v. Town of 

Gilbert , 576 U.S. 155, 168 -69 (2015) (quotation marks omitted). Those First Amendment concerns 

are heightened here, as “academic freedom” is “a special concern of the First Amendment,” 

Keyishian v. Bd. of Regents o f Univ. of N.Y. , 385 U.S. 589, 603 (1967). The government’s actions 

violate Harvard’s rights under the First Amendment several times over. 

13.  Compounding the se First Amendment infirmities , the government’s retaliat ory 

revocation of Harvard’s certification is the very definition of arbitrary and capricious agency action 

proscribed by the APA . DHS provided no coherent reason for taking these actions, and it s

revocation fully bypassed the detailed statutory and regulatory framework governing the F-1 and 

J-1 visa program s, which specif y procedures and standards for revoking a school’s certification —

all of which the government ignored. And the government’s actions run roughshod over the 

procedural due process protections of fair notice and an opportunity to respond owed to Harvard 

under the U.S. Constitution and the APA as the holder, for more than 70 years, of a government 

license to participa te in the F-1 visa program .

14.  There is no lawful justification for the government’s unprecedented revocation of 

Harvard’s SEVP certification, and the government has not offered any. DHS’s actions go well 

beyond terminating the visa of any individual student —or even a category of students —for 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 9 of 72 9

noncompliance with immigration laws. They target Harvard itself, and for no remotely cognizable 

purpose. Harvard is fully committed to ensuring the integrity of its SEVP certification. Indeed, the 

government has continuously certified Harvard to host F -1 visa students for more than seven 

decades across 14 presidential administrations. 

15.  The government has casually discarded core First Amendment protections , the 

protections of procedural due process , and DHS’s own regulations to immediate and devastating 

effect for Harvard and its community. Harvard’s more than 7,000 F-1 and J-1 visa holders —and 

their dependents —have become pawns in the government’s escalating campaign of retaliation. 

Effective immediately, Harvard may no longer sponsor or host F -1 or J -1 visa students. It cannot 

issue Form I -20s to new students, including those who have been admitted for the upcoming 

summer and fall terms. The thousands of international students who are scheduled to come to 

campus for the summer and fall terms will no longer be able to enter the country. And the several 

thousand international students currently present in the United States —wh o constitute more than 

a quarter of Harvard’s student populati on —are subject to immediate removal from the United 

States just days before many are to graduate with degrees .

16.  Immediate relief is necessary to restore Harvard’s SEVP certification and to stop 

the government’s arbitrary, capricious, unlawful, and unconstitutional action. 

JURISDICTION AND VENUE 

17.  This action arises under the Administrative Procedure Act (AP A) , 5 U.S.C § 551 et 

seq. ; the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), 8 U.S.C. § 1101 et seq. , and its implementing 

regulations ; and the United States Constitution .

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 10 of 72 10 

18.  This Court has subject -matter jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331. Because 

this suit seeks relief other than money damages and instead challenges Defendants’ unlawful 

actions, the United States has waived sovereign immunity from this suit. 5 U.S.C. § 702. 

19.  The Court is authorized to award the requested declaratory and injunctive relief 

under 5 U.S.C. §§ 702, 703, 705, and 706 ; 28 U.S.C. §§ 2201 and 2202 ; 42 U.S.C. § 1988 ; and 

through the equitable powers of this Court. 

20.  Venue is proper in this District under 28 U.S.C. § 1391(e)(1), because Defendants 

are agencies of the United States and officers of the United States acting in their official capacity, 

and a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to the claims occurred in this District ,

and Harvard reside s in this District .

21.  Harvard has standing to bring this case. Defendants’ actions —unless halted by this 

Court —will cause an imminent, concrete, and irreparable injury to Harvard , its students and 

faculty, and its ability to achieve its educational mission. 

PARTIES 

22.  Plaintiff President and Fellows of Harvard College is a non -profit corporation that 

is the senior governing board of the organization known as Harvard University. Harvard is a private 

research university and the oldest institution of higher learning in the United States. Harvard’s 

13 schools provide undergraduate and graduate instruction and degree programs to more than 

24,000 enrolled students annually, including more than 5, 000 international students who study in 

the United States on F -1 visas . Additional ly, Harvard sponsors approximately 2,000 recent 

graduates who are working in jobs across the country on F -1 visas as part of the Optional Practical 

Training (OPT) and STEM OPT program s. And Harvard also hosts several hundred individuals 

who hold J -1 visas. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 11 of 72 11 

23.  Defendant United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is a cabinet -

level Department of the federal government. DHS is responsible for overseeing enforcement and 

implementation of certain provisions of the Nation’s immigration laws by all DHS subagencies 

and personnel. 

24.  Defendant Kristi Noem is the Secretary of DHS. Defendant Noem is sued in her 

official capacity. 

25.  Defendant United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) is a 

component of DHS. ICE is responsible for administering SEVP and overseeing proceedings to 

grant, recertify, and withdraw an institution’s SEVP certification. 

26.  Defendant Todd Lyons is the Acting Director of ICE. Defendant Lyons is sued in 

his official capacity .

27.  Defendant Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) is a component of ICE. 

SE VP is responsible for administering the F-1 visa program and proceedings to grant, recertify, 

and withdraw an institution’s SEVP certification. 

28.  Defendant John Doe is the Director of SEVP. Director Doe is sued in his official 

capacity. 

29.  Defendant J ames Hicks is the Deputy Assistant Director of SE VP. Defendant Hicks 

is sued in his official capacity. 

30.  Defendant United States Department of Justice is a cabinet -level Department of the 

federal government. The Department of Justice is charged with overseeing domestic enforcement 

of federal laws. 

31.  Defendant Pamela Bondi is the Attorney General of the United States. Defendant 

Bondi is sued in her official capacity. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 12 of 72 12 

32.  Defendant United States Department of State is a cabinet -level Department of the 

federal government. The State Department is responsible for conducting American foreign policy 

and diplomacy, and relevant here, for administering the J -1 Exchange Visitor Program. 

33.  Defendant Marco Rubio is the Secretary of State. Defendant Rubio is sued in his 

official capacity. 

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 

A.  The F-1 Visa Program and SEVP Certification 

34.  SEVP is a federally regulated program that recognizes the inherent value in 

bringing the best and brightest students —wherever they are found —to the United States , to study 

and contribute to American academic institutions .

35.  Under the INA, certain international students are permitted to attend American 

universities on nonimmigrant F -1 visas. An F -1 visa permits international student s to enter and be 

lawfully present in the United States to complete their course s of study, among other things. 

36.  Eligibility to maintain F -1 status is governed by 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(15)(F)(i) and 

8 C.F.R. § 214.2(f). 

37.  As relevant here, i n order to qualify for an F -1 visa, a noncitizen must : (1) “hav[e] 

a residence in a foreign country which he has no intention of abandoning”; (2) be “a bona fide 

student qualified to pursue a full course of study”; and (3) “seek[] to enter the United States 

temporarily and solely for the purpose of pursuing such a course of study … at an established 

college, university, … or other academic instituti on … particularly designated by him and 

approved by the Attorney General .” 8 U.S.C. § 1101( a)(15)(F)(i) (emphasis added). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 13 of 72 13 

38.  The statutorily mandated process by which schools are “approved by the Attorney 

General” to host students who hold F -1 visas is administered by SEVP, a subcomponent of ICE 

(within DHS) .3

39.  The process for seeking the required approval is known as “SEVP certification,” 

see, e.g. , 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(f), and a school that receives that approval is said to be “SEVP -

certified,” see, e.g. , id. § 214.2 (f)(4). 

40.  The requirements for obtaining SEVP certification are set out in 8 C.F.R. § 214.3. 

41.  To begin the SEVP certification process, a school must “file a petition for 

certification” with DHS using an online portal known as “the Student and Exchange Visitor 

Information System,” or SEVIS , and pay a filing fee . Id. §§ 214.3(a)(1) , 103.7(d)(2)(i) .

42.  The requirements for obtaining initial SEVP certification (the “Initial Certification 

Criteria”) are enumerated in the governing regulation . The school “must establish at the time of 

filing” that it: (A) “[i]s a bona fide school”; (B) “[i]s an established institution of learning or other 

recognized place of study”; (C) “[p]ossesses the necessary facilities, personnel, and finances to 

conduct instruction in recognized courses ”; and (D) “[i]s, in fact, engaged in instruction in those 

courses.” Id. § 214.3(a)(3)(i)(A) -(D ). 

43.  After receiving its initial certification, a school must petition to renew that 

certification every two years , see id. § 214.3(h)(2) ; 8 U.S.C. § 1762(a) .

44.  To “be eligible for recertification,” the school must establish that: (A) it “[r]emains 

eligible for [initial] certification in accordance with paragraph (a)(3)(i) of this section” (that is, it  

> 3

For ease of reference , Harvard refer s to Defendants collectively as “DHS” from this point 

forward. References in the INA to the Attorney General are generally understood also to refer to 

the DHS Secretary. See 6 U.S.C. § 236(b) (transferring many functions relating to federal 

immigration law to the Secretary of Homeland Security) .

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 14 of 72 14 

continues to satisfy the four Initial Certification Criteria ); and (B) the school and its Designated 

School Officials ( DSO s) have “complied during its previous period of certification … with 

recordkeeping, retention, and reporting requirements and all other requirements of paragraphs (g), 

(j), (k), and (l) of this section” (the “Compliance Criteria”). 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(a)(3)(ii)(A) -(B) ; see 

also id. § 214.3(h)(2)(iii)(B) (stating that individual DSO compliance may be considered). 

45.  Section 214.3(g) of the regulations enumerates the Compliance Criteria relating to 

a school’s recordkeeping , retention, and reporting obligations . It requires schools to “keep records 

containing certain specific information and documents relating to each F -1 … student” and to 

“furnish the[se records] to DHS representatives upon request.” Id. § 214.3(g)(1). 

46.  DHS defined and limited this “specific information” by regulation. The information 

includes the student’s name, “date and place of birth, [and] country of citizenship”; the “[c]urrent 

address where the student and his or her dependents physically reside”; the student’s “[r]ecord of 

coursework”; his “[a]cademic status,” including “the effective d ate or period if suspended, 

dismissed, placed on probation, or withdrawn”; and, if applicable, a “[t]ermination date and 

reason.” Id. § 214.3(g)(1)(ii) -(iv), (vi), ( ix). These categories largely track the information that the 

school is required to maintain by statute. See 8 U.S.C. § 1372(c)(1). 

47.  Sections 214.3(j) -(l) of the regulations set forth the additional Compliance Criteria 

a school seeking recertification must satisfy . Section 214.3(j) limits schools to certain specified 

language when discussing their SEVP certification in advertising or promotional materials. See 8

C.F.R. § 214.3(j). Section 214.3(k) provides that the school may only issue a Form I -20 —a critical 

document in the noncitizen’s F -1 visa application —to foreign students who have applied to the 

school in writing and have been accepted on the merits. See id. § 214.3(k). And Section 214.3( l)

requires schools to designate one Principal Designated School Official (PDSO) and any num ber 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 15 of 72 15 

of additional DSOs , “whose compensation does not come from commissions for recruitment of 

foreign students,” to advise F -1 students “regarding maintenance of nonimmigrant status and to 

support timely and complete recordkeeping and reporting to DHS .” Id. § 214.3( l)(1)(ii) -(iii). These 

are the only recertification eligibility requirements specified in DHS’s regulations. 

B.  Withdrawal of SEVP Certification 

48.  In addition to the ordinary biennial recertification process described above , the 

regulations provide that DHS may review and (if warranted) withdraw a school’s certification “in 

accordance with the provisions of [8 C.F.R. § 214.4] ,” id. § 214.3(f)(1) . The regulations refer to 

this alternative means of withdrawing a school’s certification as an “out -of -cycle review” leading 

to “[w]ithdrawal on notice.” Id. § 214.4(b). 

49.  SEVP may initiate an out -of -cycle review of a school’s certification “to verify the 

school’s compliance with the recordkeeping, retention, reporting and other requirements of 

paragraphs (f), (g), (j), (k), and (l) of this section to verify the school’s con tinued eligibility for 

SEVP certification pursuant to paragraph (a)(3) of this section.” Id. § 214.3(h)(3)(iii). 

50.  As part of this out -of -cycle review process, “SEVP may request a school to 

electronically update all Form I -17 fields[ 4] in SEVIS and provide “documentation supporting the 

update” and “[t]he school must complete such updates in SEVIS and submit the supporting 

documentation to SEVP within 10 business days of the request from SEVP.” Id. § 214.3(h)(3)(ii). 

51.  If DHS identifies any non -compliance during the out -of -cycle review process, the 

regulations give the agency only two options for taking adverse action against the school: it may 

(1) “initiate remedial action with the school, as appropriate,” or (2) “initiate withdrawal  

> 4

The Form I -17 is a form the school fills out in connection with its petition for certification, 

providing information such as the school’s address and disciplines taught. See, e.g. , 8 C.F.R. 

§ 214.3(h)(3)(i)(A) -(T). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 16 of 72 16 

proceedings against the school pursuant to [8 C.F.R. § 214.4.(b)] if noncompliance or ineligibility 

of a school is identified.” Id. § 214.3(h)(3)(iii); see also id. § 214.3(h)(3)(vi) (providing that 

“SEVP will institute withdrawal proceedings in accordance with [8 C.F.R. § 214.4(b)] if, upon 

completion of an out -of -cycle review, SEVP determines that a school or its programs are no longer 

eligible for certification”). 

52.  The regulations do not create any mechanism for summary withdrawal of a school’s 

certification after an out -of -cycle review has been conducted. Instead, DHS’s authority to revoke 

a certification is limited both substantively and procedurally. 

53.  Substantively, DHS may seek to withdraw a school’s certification if (after 

conducting this out -of -cycle review process) it determines that the school “has failed to sustain 

eligibility or has failed to comply with the recordkeeping, retention, reporting and other 

requirements of paragraphs (f), (g), (j), (k), and (l) of this section,” id. § 214.3(e)(4)(ii) & (f)(1) —

in other words, if it fails to satisfy either the Initial Certification Criteria or the Compliance Criteria .

54.  Section 214.4 likewise provides that SEVP certification may be withdrawn under 

this out -of -cycle review mechanism only “if the school … is determined to no longer be entitled 

to certification for any valid and substantive reason.” Id. § 214.4(a)(2) ; see 8 U.S.C. § 1762(c) 

(stating that “[m]aterial failure … to comply with the [specified] recordkeeping and reporting 

requirements to receive nonimmigrant students” is grounds for withdrawal of certification) .

55.  The regulation lists 19 “valid and substantive reason[s]” for withdrawing 

certification . One such reason is “[f]ailure to comply with [8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1)] without a 

subpoena.” 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(a)(2) (i) . Others include failure to adhere to the Initial Certification 

Criteria , id. § 214.4(a)(2)(xii) -(xiii), (xv) -(xvii); failure to comply with the Compliance Criteria ,

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 17 of 72 17 

see id. § 214.4(a)(2)(i) -(iv), (viii) -(x), (xiv), (xviii) -(xix); and misconduct by or lack of 

qualification of the school’s DSOs, see id. § 214.4(a)(2)(v) -(vii). 

56.  Procedurally, e ven where DHS identifies a “valid and substantive reason” for 

withdrawing a school’s certification, the regulations do not permit DHS to summarily decertify a 

school as DHS did here . Instead, Section 214.4 establishes a detailed set of procedures that DHS 

must follow if it wishes to withdraw certification pursuant to out -of -cycle review (i.e., outside the 

biennial recertification process ).

57.  The process for withdrawal of certification following out -of -cycle review is 

governed by 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(b), which is entitled “Withdrawal on notice.” As the name reflects ,

DHS may initiate withdrawal -on -notice proceedings only by serving the school with a notice 

known as a “Notice of Intent to Withdraw” or NOIW . I d. § 214.3(e)(4) . The NOIW must “inform 

the school” of “[t]he grounds for withdrawing SEVP certification .” Id. § 214.4(b) (1) .

58.  The issuance of a NOIW is the first step in what the regulation s elsewhere refer to 

as “withdrawal proceedings.” Id. § 214.3(h)(3)(iii). Those proceedings involve detailed procedural 

protections —including administrative appeals —prior to effectuating a withdrawal of certification .

59.  Upon receipt of a NOIW , the school has 30 days to submit an answer either 

admitting or denying the allegations in the NOIW and supporting its position with “sworn 

statements, and documentary or other evidence, to rebut the grounds for withdrawal of 

certification.” Id. § 214.4(b)(2); see id. § 214.4(d) -(e). The school may also submit “a written 

request … for a telephonic interview in support of its response to the NOIW.” Id. § 214.4(b)(3). 

And the school is permitted to be represented by counsel during these proceedings. See id. 

§ 214.4(c). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 18 of 72 18 

60.  If DHS wishes to proceed with withdrawing the school’s certification following 

this period of review , it must issue a written decision explaining “the specific reasons for” its 

decision. Id. § 103.3(a)(1)(i); see id. § 214.4(g). 

61.  The regulations also provide that “[a] school can voluntarily withdraw from SEVP 

… in lieu of complying with an out -of -cycle review or request.” Id. § 214.3(h)(3)(vii). To do so, 

the school generally must “ initiate voluntary withdrawal by sending a request for withdrawal on 

official school letterhead to SEVP.” Id. (emphasis added). The regulations also state that “[f]ailure 

of a school to comply with an out -of -cycle review or request by SEVP will be treated as a voluntary 

withdrawal .” Id. This voluntary withdrawal procedure can only be read as appl ying in cases where 

no out -of -cycle review in fact occurs, despite the agency’s desire to conduct such a review, because 

of the school’s decision to withdraw from the progr am in lieu of compliance. 

62.  In sum, the regulations provide DHS with only two means of terminating a school’s 

existing F -1 visa program outside of the normal biennial recertification process : First , DHS can 

withdraw a certification only by issuing a NOIW and initiating “withdrawal proceedings” pursuant 

to 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(b). Second , if DHS initiates an out -of -cycle review and the school wishes to 

acquiesce in the withdrawal of its certification, it can “voluntarily withdraw” its certification either 

by submitting a letter to that effect or simply by declining to engage with the out -of -cycle review 

process. 

63.  Upon information and belief, prior to the decertification decision in this case, no 

school had ever had its SEVP certification revoked for any reason other than failure to meet the 

eligibility criteria for certification or failure to comply with the record keeping, retention, reporting, 

and other requirements set out in the federal regulations governing certification. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 19 of 72 19 

C.  The Administrative Appeals Process for Challenging Revocation of SEVP 

Certification 

64.  The regulatory scheme also entitles a school whose certification is withdrawn to 

file an administrative appeal of that decision . Specifically , the regulations authorize the school to 

“file an [administrative] appeal of a … withdrawal [of certification] no later than 1 5 days after the 

service of the decision by ICE.” Id. § 214.4(h). 

65.  Publicly available g uidance documents promulgated by DHS and ICE describe the 

multi -step appeal process. 5

66.  In the first instance, an administrative appeal is assigned to the same “adjudicator 

who originally adjudicated the case to determine whether to uphold or overturn the original 

decision.” Ex. 2.

67.  If the original adjudicator affirms his earlier decision, the case proceeds to the 

Administrative Appeals Team, or AAT, which “reviews the case and all the evidence relating to 

the petition” and “draft[s] a preliminary appeal decision.” Id. 

68.  That preliminary decision is then subject to “[l]egal and [r]egulatory [r]eview” to 

“ensure regulatory compliance and legal sufficiency .” Id. 

69.  From there, a different body known as the Final Appeals Authority, or FAA, 

“reviews the entire case proceedings to ensure understanding of [the] case, including both 

comments from the AAT adjudicator and from the legal entity” that performed the legal and 

regulatory review. Ex. 1. 

> 5

See DHS, General Appeals Process Information (attached as Exhibit 1) (describing 

administrative appeals process); ICE , Appeal Processing Steps (attached as Exhibit 2) (same) . The 

processes outlined in these two documents are substantively identical. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 20 of 72 20 

70.  The AAT adjudicator then reviews the FAA’s comments and makes any necessary 

changes . See id. 

71.  Afterward, the decision is returned to the FAA for approval of a final, signed 

appellate decision. See id. That “final decision is then issued to the petitioner and [its] attorney, if 

applicable, via email.” Ex. 2.

72.  This administrative appeals process “takes roughly 60 business days.” Ex. 1.

D.  Consequences of Withdrawing SEVP Certification 

73.  The consequences of withdrawing SEVP certification are drastic —for the school 

that loses certification , for its students, and for its broader community. 

74.  Effective immediately upon DHS’s decision, the school may no longer issue new 

Forms I -20 to foreign students as needed to allow them to obtain F-1 visa s and therefore admission 

into the United States . 8 C.F.R. § 214.4( i)(1). The effect is to preclude the school from accepting 

any new foreign students to its programs. 

75.  With respect to current students with F -1 status, students whose school is 

decertified are, necessarily, no longer “pursuing a full course of study at an educational institution 

certified by SEVP for attendance by foreign students,” id. § 214.2(f)(5)(i), and thus are at 

immediate risk of losing their F -1 status. 

76.  A student who remains in the United States after his or her F -1 status is terminated 

is unlawfully present and may be placed in removal proceedings. See 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(1)(C)(i). 

A noncitizen who remains unlawfully present for more than 180 days is thereafter rendered 

inadmissible for a period of three years. See id. § 1182(a)(9)(B)(i)(I), (ii). 

77.  As a practical matter, the regulations and publicly available guidance indicate that 

loss of a student’s F -1 status is triggered not on the date of the school’s decertification, but rather 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 21 of 72 21 

on the later date when the school’s access to the online SEVIS portal is terminated —known as its 

“SEVIS access termination date .” 8 C.F.R. § 214.4( i)(2). On this date, DHS “will automatically 

terminate any remaining Active SEVIS records for that school.” Id .6

78.  Termination of SEVIS records presents student visa holder s whose school loses its 

certification with two bad choices: (a) attempt the uncertain path of securing immediate “[t]ransfer 

to another SEVP -certified school,” which typically will not be feasible —much less guaranteed —

in the middle of an academic year (particularly when thousands of students are seeking transfers 

en masse ), or (b) “[d]epart the United States.” Ex. 3 at 2. 

79.  Although termination of SEVIS access eventually follows from withdrawal of 

certification, DHS must make an independent determination as to when it occurs —and thus when 

to terminate the status of its F -1 visa students . “In most situations,” and unless the school is 

“suspected of criminal activity or poses a potential national security threat,” DHS “will not 

determine a SEVIS access termination date for that school until the [administrative] appeals 

process has concluded and the … withdrawal has been upheld.” 8 C.F.R. § 214.4( i)(2). In

determin ing the SEVIS access termination date, DHS “will consider the impact that such date will 

have upon SEVP, the school, and the school’s nonimmigrant students.” Id. 

80.  A school whose certification is withdrawn is in eligible to petition again for SEVP 

certification until one year after withdrawal, and even then, “[e]ligibility to re -petition will be at 

the discretion of the Director of SEVP.” Id. § 214.4(a)(2).  

> 6

See U.S. Dep’t of Homeland Sec. , Loss of SEVP Certification (Dec. 19, 2024) (attached as 

Ex hibit 3). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 22 of 72 22 

E.  The J Visa Program 

81.  The J visa is the nonimmigrant visa class for foreign citizens who are approved to 

participate in an exchange visitor program in the United States, 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(15)(J), 

including as students, professors, and research scholars. 22 C.F.R. § 62.4. 

82.  To host individuals on J -1 visas, an institution must be designated as a n “Exchange 

Visitor Program sponsor” by the Department of State. 22 C.F.R. § 62.3, 62.5. 

83.  Revocation of a sponsor’s Exchange Visitor Program designation is governed by 

22 C.F.R. § 62.50(d). The provision authorizes the Department of State’s Office of Exchange 

Coordination and Designation (the “Office”) to serve a sponsor with written notice of its intent to 

revoke the sponsor’s Exchange Visitor Program designation “[u]pon a finding of any act or 

omission set forth in [ paragraph (a) of the regulation ].” 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(d). Paragraph (a), in 

turn, provides notice of intent to revoke may be issue d upon a finding that the sponsor has violated 

one or more provisions of 22 C.F.R. Part 62; evidenced a pattern of failure to comply with one or 

more provisions of 22 C.F.R. Part 62; committed an act of omission or commission, which has or 

could have the e ffect of endangering the health, safety, or welfare of an exchange visitor; or 

otherwise conducted its program in such a way as to undermine the foreign policy objectives of 

the United States, compr om ise the national security interests of the United States , or bring the 

Department or the Exchange Visitor Program into notoriety or disrepute. 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(a). 

84.  Upon such a finding, the regulations afford sponsors notice and an opportunity to 

be heard before the revocation takes effect: 

a.  The Office must provide at least 30 days’ written notice of its intent to 

revoke. 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(d)(1). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 23 of 72 23 

b.  That notice must “specify the grounds for the proposed sanction and its 

effective date, advise the sponsor of its right to oppose the proposed sanction, and identify the 

procedures for submitting a statement of opposition thereto.” Id. 

c.  The sponsor is then afforded the opportunity to submit a statement in 

opposition to or mitigation of the proposed sanction, the submission of which serves to stay the 

effective date of the proposed sanction pending decision of the Principal Deputy Assistant 

Secretary for Educational and Cultural Affairs. 22 C.F. R. § 62.50(d)(2)(i) -(ii). The Principal 

Deputy Assistant Secretary is then responsible for reviewing the submissions of both the sponsor 

and the Office and either modifying, withdrawing, or confirming the proposed sanction by serving 

the sponsor a written decision that specifies the grounds for the sanction, identifies its effective 

date, advises the sponsor of its right to request a review, and identifies the procedures for 

requesting such review. 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(d)(2)(v). 

85.  The effect of an order of revocation is outlined in 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(i). A sponsor 

against which an order of revocation “has become effective may not thereafter issue any Certificate 

of Eligibility for Exchange Visitor (J -1) Status (Form DS -2019) or adver tise, recruit for, or 

otherwise promote its program.” 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(i). And even where the sponsor has already 

issued a Form DS -2019, the sponsor may not under any circumstances “facilitate the entry of an 

exchange visitor into the United States” after revocation. Id. The regulation also expressly states 

that an order of revocation “will not in any way diminish or restrict the sponsor ’s legal or financial 

responsibilities to existing program applicants or participants.” Id .

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 24 of 72 24 

FACTUAL BACKGROUND 

A.  Harvard’s Participation in the F -1 Visa Program 

86.  Harvard first became certified to host students with F -1 visas in 1954 and has 

continuously maintained its certification for the 70 -plus years since. Throughout that period, all 

of Harvard’s required biennial petitions for recertification have been approved without issue. 

87.  The seamless recertification across this period —spanning more than 14 presidential 

administrations —reflect s a determination by DHS and SEVP (and their predecessor agencies) that 

the University has remained eligible for certification . In other words, Harvard is a bona fide and 

established institution of learning; possesses the necessary facilities, personnel, and finances to 

conduct instruction in recognized courses and is in fact engaged in instruction in those courses; 

and has continuously complied with applicable recordkeeping, retention, and reporting 

requirements and all other requirements of the governing regulations. 

88.  International students who hold F -1 visas , as well as students and scholars visiting 

on J -1 visas, form a vital part of Harvard’s academic community. Over 5, 000 F -1 visa holders are 

currently enrolled at Harvard, representing approximately 26% of the total student body across 

Harvard’s 13 schools. These students hail from 143 different countries, contributing unique social, 

cultural, and intellectual perspectives that enrich classroom discussions, research endeavors, and 

campus life. Among other activities, they run labs, teach courses, assist faculty members, drive 

innovative research, and participate across a wide range of athletic programs and 42 varsity sports. 

89.  Harvard’s ability to enroll international students directly affects its global rankings 

and reputation as an institution of higher learning. Harvard fills its classes with the most qualified 

applicants from around the world. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 25 of 72 25 

90.  For some disciplines, this results in class es with large shares of international 

students. For example, a t the Harvard Kennedy School , the mission of which depends on providing 

students with the perspectives of current and future policymakers from around the world, 49% of 

students hold F -1 visas. One third of Harvard Business School students are F-1 visa holders . And 

nearly all —94% —of the students in Harvard Law School’s LL.M. program on comparative law 

are international students with F -1 visas .

91.  Leading scholars often consider a university’s international profile , the caliber of 

its students, and its research and teaching support resources in deciding where to teach and conduct 

research. 

92.  The many notable alumni who have enrolled at Harvard as student visa holders —

including Benazir Bhutto , the former Prime Minister of Pakistan , Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, the former 

President of Liberia, Empress Masako of Japan , and countless corporate executives, university 

professors, and high -ranking government officials across the world —amplify and enhance the 

profile that attracts top talent to the University. 

B.  Harvard’s Response to Antisemitism on its Campus 

93.  On October 7, 2023, the terrorist organization Hamas conducted a surprise attack 

on Israeli citizens. This began an ongoing war between Israel and Hamas . The escalating conflict 

in the Middle East dominated headlines around the globe. In the United States, protests erupted on 

university campuses across the country. Like other schools, Harvard experienced increased 

tensions among members of its campus commun ity, including students. Members of the Jewish 

and Israeli communities at Harvard reported treatment t hat was vicious and reprehensible. 

94.  In the aftermath of these events, Harvard made substantial changes aimed at 

ensuring its campus is safe, fair, and welcoming to Jewish and Israeli students. Harvard has 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 26 of 72 26 

adopted new accountability procedures and clarified policies; imposed meaningful discipline for 

those who have violate d applicable policies; enhanced programs designed to address bias and 

promote ideological diversity and civil discourse; hired staff to support these programs and 

impacted students; and enhanced safety and security measures. Harvard’s work is ongoing, and it 

continue s to update and enforce its policies and procedures to protect Jewish and Israeli members 

of the Harvard community while permit ting the free and open exchange of ideas. 

C.  The Government’s Attack on Harvard and Retaliatory Funding Freeze 

95.  Following President Trump’s inauguration, on February 3, 2025, the government 

announced the formation of its Federal Task Force , led by Senior Counsel to the Assistant Attorney 

General for Civil Rights, Leo Terrell. 7 On February 26, 2025, a news article reported Terrell as 

saying, “When you see universities start losing millions of dollars in federal funding, you’re going 

to see a change in their behavior.” 8

96.  A few days later, Terrell stated in a Fox Business clip he later shared on X, “I’ve 

targeted ten schools. Columbia, Harvard, Michigan, UCLA, USC. Let me tell you what we’re 

going to do. We’re going to take away your funding.” 9

97.  On February 28, 2025, the Federal Task Force issued a press release announcing its 

plans to visit ten university campuses, including Harvard, to gather information about allegations 

of antisemitic incidents. 10  

> 7

See Press Release, U.S. Dep’t of Just ., Off. of Pub. Affs. , Justice Department Announces 

Formation of Task Force to Combat Anti -Semitism (Feb. 3, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 4).  

> 8

Andrew Bernard, “Head of DOJ Antisemitism Task Force: We’ll Put Hamas Supporters in Jail 

‘for Years ’,” Jewish News Syndicate , at 2 (Feb. 26, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 5). 

> 9

@TheLeoTerrell, X (Feb.  28, 2025, 11:48  AM  ET) , https://x.com/TheLeoTerrell/ status/ 

1895516455392985171 . 

> 10

Press Release, U .S. Dep’t of Just. , Federal Task Force to Combat Antisemitism Announces Visits 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 27 of 72 27 

98.  On March 31, 2025, the Federal Task Force sent Harvard a memorandum 

announcing its intent to conduct a review of more than $8.7 billion in federal research grants to 

Harvard and “its affiliates .”11  This memorandum stated that Harvard was “being investigated for 

potential infractions and dereliction of duties to curb or combat anti -Semitic harassment.” Id. 

99.  On April 3, 2025, the government sent Harvard a letter (the “April 3 Letter”) 

conveying a list of “broad, non -exhaustive areas of reform that the government views as necessary 

for Harvard to implement to remain a responsible recipient of federal taxpayer dollars ,” which 

went far beyond concerns regarding antisemitism .12 

100.  On April 11, 2025, the government sent another letter to Harvard that went even 

further (the “Demand Letter”) .13  The Demand L etter superseded the April 3 Letter, enumerating 

detailed conditions for “maintain [ing] Harvard’s financial relationship with the federal 

government .” Id. at 1. These conditions sought to regulate or put under direct government control 

a slate of core university functions, including regulation of the viewpoints of Harvard’s students 

and faculty. Among the conditions we re the following (emphases added): 

• Viewpoint Diversity in Admissions and Hiring . … [T]he University shall commission 

an external party … to audit the student body, faculty, staff, and leadership for viewpoint 

diversity , such that each department, field, or teaching unit must be individually viewpoint 

to 10 College Campuses that Experienced Incidents of Antisemitism (Feb. 28, 2025) (attached as 

Exhibit 6).  

> 11

Memorandum from Josh Gruenbaum , U.S. Gen. Servs. Admin., to Alan M. Garber , Harvard 

Univ., and Penny Pritzker , Lead Member, Harvard Corp. , Re: Review of Federal Government 

Contracts , at 1 (Mar. 31, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 7).  

> 12

Letter from Josh Gruenbaum, U.S. Gen. Servs. Admin., Sean R. Keveney, U.S. Dep’t of Health 

& Hum. Servs., and Thomas E. Wheeler , U.S. Dep’t of Educ., to Alan M. Garber , Harvard Univ., 

and Penny Pritzker , Lead Member, Harvard Corp., at 1 -2 (Apr. 3, 2025) (the “April 3 Letter”) 

(attached as Exhibit 8).  

> 13

Letter from Josh Gruenbaum, U.S. Gen. Servs. Admin., Sean R. Keveney, U.S. Dep’t of Health 

& Hum. Servs., and Thomas E. Wheeler , U.S. Dep’t of Educ., to Alan M. Garber , Harvard Univ., 

and Penny Pritzker , Lead Member, Harvard Corp. (Apr. 11, 2025) (the “Demand Letter”) (attached 

as Exhibit 9). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 28 of 72 28 

diverse . … Harvard must abolish all criteria, preferences, and practices, whether 

mandatory or optional, throughout its admissions and hiring practices , that function as 

ideological litmus tests. Every department or field found to lack viewpoint diversity must 

be reformed by hiring a critical mass of new faculty within that department or field who 

will provide viewpoint diversity; every teaching unit found to lack viewpoint diversity 

must be reformed by admitting a critical mass of students who will provide viewpoint 

diversity. 

• Governance and leadership reforms. … Harvard must make meaningful governance 

reform and restructuring … [including] empowering tenured professors and senior 

leadership, and, from among the tenured professoriate and senior leadership, exclusively 

those most devoted to the scholarly mission of the University and committed to the 

changes indicated in this letter; reducing the power held by students and untenured 

faculty ; [and] reducing the power held by faculty (whether tenured or untenured) and 

administrators more committed to activism than s cholarship .

• International Admissions Reform. … [T]he University must reform its recruitment, 

screening, and admissions of international students to prevent admitting students hostile 

to the American values and institutions inscribed in the U.S. Constitution and Declaration 

of Independence, including students supportive of terrorism or anti -Semitism. Harvard 

will immediately report to federal authorities, including [DHS] and [t he] State 

Department, any foreign student, including those on visas and with green cards, who 

commits a conduct violation. … [T]hese reforms must be durable and demonstrated 

through structural and personnel changes .

• Student Discipline Reform and Accountability. … In the future, funding decisions for 

student groups or clubs must be made exclusively by a body of University faculty 

accountable to senior University leadership . In particular, Harvard must end support and 

recognition of those student groups or clubs that engaged in anti -Semitic activity since 

October 7th, 2023, including the Harvard Palestine Solidarity Committee, Harvard 

Graduates Students 4 Palestine, Law Stud ents 4 Palestine, Students for Justice in 

Pales tine, and the National Lawyers Guild, and discipline and render ineligible the 

officers and active members of those student organizations. 

• Transparency and Monitoring. … The University shall … , [n]o later than June 30, 

2025, and every quarter thereafter … at least until the end of 2028, … submit to the federal 

government a report —certified for accuracy —that documents its progress on the 

implementation of the reforms det ailed in this letter …. [and] must also, to the satisfaction 

of the federal government, disclose the source and purpose of all foreign funds; cooperate 

with the federal government in a forensic audit of foreign funding sources and uses, 

including how that money was used by Harvard, its agents, and … third parties acting on 

Harvard’s campus. 

Id. at 1-5. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 29 of 72 29 

101.  The Demand Letter reiterated the government’s expectation of “immediate 

cooperation in implementing these critical reforms.” Id. at 5 . It cited no authority for that demand 

or any other. 

102.  On April 14, 2025, Harvard declined to accept the government’s demands .

President Garber, in a letter to the Harvard Community , wrot e: “Although some of the demands 

outlined by the government are aimed at combating antisemitism, the majority represent direct 

governmental regulation of the ‘intellectual conditions’ at Harvard.” 14  President Garber added that 

“[n]o government —regardless of which party is in power —should dictate what private universities 

can teach, whom they can admit and hire, and which areas of study and inquiry they can pursue. ”

Id. at 2. 

103.  In a separate April 14, 2025 letter to the government, attorneys for Harvard stated 

that “[n] either Harvard nor any other private university can allow itself to be taken over by the 

federal government .”15 

104.  The government’s response was swift and punishing. The same day, the Federal 

Task Force responded by “announcing a freeze on $2.2 billion in multi -year grants and $60M in 

multi -year contract value to Harvard University” (the “Freeze Order”). 16  The Freeze Order cited 

“[t]he harassment of Jewish students” and “the troubling entitlement mindset that is endemic in 

our nation ’s most prestigious universities and colleges.” Id . 

> 14

Alan M. Garber, The Promise of American Higher Education , Harvard Univ., Office of the 

President (Apr. 14, 2025) (the “Garber Letter”) (attached as Exhibit 10 ).  

> 15

Letter from William A. Burck & Robert K. Hur , Counsel for Harvard Univ., to Josh Gruenbaum, 

U.S. Gen. Servs. Admin., Sean R. Keveney, U.S. Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs., and Thomas E. 

Wheeler , U.S. Dep’t of Educ., at 2 (Apr. 14, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 1 1).  

> 16

Press Release, U .S. Dep’t of Educ. , Joint Task Force to Combat Anti -Semitism Statement 

Regarding Harvard University (Apr. 14, 2025) (the “Freeze Order”) (attached as Exhibit 12). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 30 of 72 30 

105.  The government immediately began implementing the Freeze Order. Within hours 

of the Freeze Order, Harvard began receiving stop work orders. 

106.  The next morning, on April 15 , 2025, President Trump published the following post 

on his social media website , Truth Social: 17 

107.  The following day —April 16, 2025 —President Trump again target ed Harvard in a 

Truth Social post :18  

> 17

President Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), Truth Social (Apr . 15, 2025, 10:09 AM) 

(attached as Exhibit 13); see also Tyler Pager et al., Trump Threatens Harvard’s Tax Status, 

Escalating Billion -Dollar Pressure Campaign , N.Y. Times (Apr. 15, 2025) (attached as 

Ex hibit 14).  

> 18

President Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), Truth Social (Apr. 16, 2025, 7:05 AM) 

(attached as Exhibit 15).

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 31 of 72 31 

D.  The April 16, 2025 Records Request 

108.  Within hours of the President’s April 16 Truth Social post, Secretary Noem sent 

HIO a letter entitled “Student and Exchange Visitor Program Records Request .”19  The Records 

Request demanded voluminous documents, including those not contemplated by any of the 

applicable statutes or regulations , and threatened to withdraw Harvard’s certification in the event 

of noncompliance: 

a.  The Records Request began by stating that Harvard’s foreign student 

program “is a privilege [,] … not a guarantee ” and that “[t] he United States Government 

understands that Harvard University relies heavily on foreign student funding from over 10,000 

foreign students to build and maintain their substantial endowment.” Id. at 1 . The Request offered 

no basis for this claim , though its reference to “foreign student funding ,” id. , echoes language in 

the April 11 Demand Letter seeking to require Harvard to permit the government to inspect all 

“foreign funding sources and uses ,” Ex. 9 at 5. 

b.  The Records Request continued: “At the same time, your institution has 

created a hostile learning environment for Jewish students due to Harvard’s failure to condemn 

antisemitism .” Ex. 16 at 1. Quoting Executive Order 14188 , the letter stated that it is “the policy 

of the United States to combat anti -Semitism vigorously, using all available and appropriate legal 

tools, to prosecute, remove, or otherwise hold to account the perpetrators of unlawful anti -Semitic 

harassment and violence.’” Id. Again, the Request offered no basis for the claim that Harvard 

“created a hostile learning environment for Jewish students ,” id. , which paralleled claims made in 

the government’s March 31, April 3, and April 11 communications to Harvard. See Ex. 7 at 1  

> 19

Letter from Kristi Noem, U.S. Dep’t of Homeland Sec. , to Maureen Martin, Harvard Univ., 

Student and Exchange Visitor Program Records Request (Apr. 16, 2025) (the “ Records Request ”) 

(attached as Exhibit 16). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 32 of 72 32 

(asserting that Harvard has neglected its “dut[y] to curb or combat anti -Semitic harassment”); Ex. 8

at 1 (asserting that Harvard operates “biased programs that fuel antisemitism”); Ex. 9 at 3 

(asserting that some Harvard programs have “[e]gregious [r]ecords of [a]ntisemitism”). 

c.  The Records Request then shifted gears, stating that the SEVP “regularly 

monitors SEVP -approved schools to determine their compliance with governing regulations, ” and 

the “accuracy of information in ” SEVIS. Id. It went on: “Your continued SEVP certification is 

contingent upon meeting the requirements of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), 

set out in Title 8 Code of Federal Regulations (8 CFR) .” Ex. 16 at 1. 

d.  Pointing to one of the provisions contained in the referenced regulations, 

the Records Request then stated that “SEVP may request information regarding nonimmigrant 

students from certified schools under 8 CFR § 214.3(g)(1) .” Id. Invoking the government’s 

authority under that provision, the Records Request stated that Harvard ’s PDSO “must submit the 

following information to our office on or before April 30, 2025 ,” id. at 1 -2:

1.  Provide relevant information regarding each student visa holder’s known illegal 

activity, and whether the activity occurred on campus. 

2.  Provide relevant information regarding each student visa holder’s known 

dangerous or violent activity, and whether the activity occurred on campus. 

3.  Provide relevant information regarding each student visa holder’s known 

threats to other students or university personnel, and whether the activity 

occurred on campus. 

4.  Provide relevant information regarding each student visa holder’s known 

deprivation of rights of other classmates or university personnel, and whether 

the activity occurred on campus. 

5.  Provide relevant information on whether any student visa holders have left 

Harvard University due to dangerous or violent activity or deprivation of rights, 

and whether the activity occurred on campus. 

6.  Provide relevant information on whether any student visa holders have had 

disciplinary actions taken as a result of making threats to other students or 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 33 of 72 33 

populations or participating in protests, which impacted their nonimmigrant 

student status. 

7.  Provide relevant information regarding each student visa holder’s obstruction 

of the school’s learning environment. 

8.  Provide relevant information regarding each student visa holder’s maintenance 

of at least the minimum required coursework to maintain nonimmigrant student 

status. 

109.  Despite the letter’s invocation of Section 214.3(g)(1), much of the information 

listed above is not information that HIO is required to maintain or report to DHS under that 

provision. 

110.  The Records Request did not define any terms in these requests —such as “known,” 

“illegal,” “dangerous or violent,” “deprivation of rights,” “threats,” or “obstruction of the school’s 

learning environment” —and did not specify a time period for which the specified information was 

requested . Y et it threatened serious consequences for noncompliance , for both the PDSO who 

would be responsible for submitting the responsive documents and Harvard itself :

a.  As to the PDSO , attached to the Records Request was an “Evidence 

Attestation Statement” to be completed and signed by the PDSO and submitted in connect ion with 

the production of documents . This Attestation asked the PDSO to personally attest to her 

understanding that “willful misstatements may constitute perjury (18 USC § 1621)” ; that 

“providing materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent information may subject me to criminal 

prosecution under 18 USC § 1001 ”; and that “[o] ther possible criminal and civil v iolations may 

also be applicable[.]” Ex. 16 at 3 ; see also id. at 2 (also invoking 8 U.S.C. § 1001 and “[o]ther 

possible criminal and civil violations”). 

b.  The Evidence Attestation Statement also asked the PDSO to attest to her 

understanding that “SEVP may review my institution’s certification at any time and may request 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 34 of 72 34 

documentation to establish my institution’s eligibility for certification as well as review evidence 

and records for compliance with the regulations.” Id. at 3 .

c.  Finally, t he Records Request warned Harvard that “[f] ailure to comply with 

this Records Request will be treated as a voluntary withdrawal, per 8 CFR § 214.3(h)(3)(vii) .” Id. 

at 2. It concluded: “ Therefore, in the event the school fails to respond to this request [by April 30, 

2025] , SEVP will automatically withdraw the school’s certification. The withdrawal will not be 

subject to appeal.” Id. 

111.  Shortly after DHS sent HIO the Records Request , it publicized the Request —as 

well as DHS’s cancellation of “two DHS grants totaling over $2.7 million to Harvard” —in a press 

release (the “Press Release”) .20  Th e Press Release referred to the Records Request as a “scathing 

letter demanding detailed records on Harvard’s foreign student visa holders’ illegal and violent 

acts.” Id. The Press Release asserted that Harvard has “ben[t] the knee to antisemitism ,” adopted 

a “radical ideology,” and allowed “anti -American, pro -Hamas ideology [to] poison[] its campus 

and classrooms ,” such that “Harvard’s position as a top institution of higher learning is a distant 

memory.” Id. It concluded by stating that “if Harvard cannot verify it is in full compliance with its 

reporting requirements, the university will lose the privilege of enrolling foreign students.” Id. 

112.  Over the last twelve years, HIO has received only a handful of requests for 

information about its F -1 visa students . These requests have generally sought straightforward 

information plainly contemplated by the applicable regulations, such as the student’s email ,

physical addresses , and phone number , about a single student at a time . No prior request has asked 

for information as broad or open -ended —or covering as many students —as the Records Request . 

> 20

Press Release, U .S. Dep’t of Homeland Sec. , Secretary Noem Terminates $2.7 Million in DHS 

Grants; Orders Harvard to Prove Compliance with Foreign Student Requirements (Apr. 16, 2025) 

(the “Press Release”) (attached as Exhibit 17). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 35 of 72 35 

No prior request , moreover, has ever come directly from the Secretary of Homeland Security. Nor 

has any prior request ever been accompanied by a Press Release calling the request “scathing” or 

citing Harvard’s so -called “radical ideology” ; included an “Evidence Attestation Statement” 

suggest ing that any misstatement may subject Harvard’s PDSO or anyone else to criminal liability ;

or threatened Harvard with “voluntary withdrawal” for less -than -perfect compliance .

E.  Subsequent Developments Prior to April 30 

113.  In the run -up to the April 30 deadline for Harvard’s response to the Records 

Request , the Administration continued its public attack on Harvard. 

114.  On April 17, 2025, Secretary of Education Linda McMahon sent Harvard a letter 

accusing the University of “incomplete and inaccurate disclosures” of foreign gifts and contracts 

pursuant to Section 117 of the Higher Education Act of 1965. Secretary McMahon demanded that 

Harvard release a list of gifts, grants, and contracts from foreign sources, communications betwee n

Harvard and foreign governments, and internal correspondence about expelled foreign students 

and faculty affiliated with foreign countries. 

115.  On April 20, 2025, the Administration threatened to pull an additional $1 billion 

in Harvard’s federal funding that had been allocated for health research .

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 36 of 72 36 

116.  On April 24, 2025, President Trump posted the following message on Truth 

Social: 21 

117.  On April 25, 2025, the Acting Chair of the Equal Employment Opportunity 

Commission, Andrea Lucas, filed a charge that launched an investigation in Harvard’s 

employment practices. 22 

118.  On April 30, 2025, President Trump , Secretary Noem , and Secretary McMahon 

discussed Harvard at a public Cabinet meeting. 23  At the conclusion of Secretary McMahon’s 

remarks, President Trump offered his view that Harvard was “scamming the public and hiring 

people like [former New York City Mayor Bill] DeBlasio and [former Chicago Mayor] Lori 

Lightfoot who are certainly two of t he worst mayors in the history of our country, paying them a 

fortune on salary, and having them teach our children how to manage cities and how to manage  

> 21

President Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), Truth Social (Apr. 24 , 2025, 9:33 AM) 

(attached as Exhibit 18 ).  

> 22

In addition, o n May 13, 2025, the Department of Justice issued a civil investigative demand to 

the University, purporting to investigate False Claims Act violations related to Harvard’s 

compliance with the U.S. Supreme Court’s 2023 decision in Students for Fair Admissions v. 

President and Fellows of Harvard College.  

> 23

The White House, President Trump Participates in a Cabinet Meeting, Apr. 30, 2025 , YouTube 

(Apr. 30, 2025), available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wn2XtufOAHc. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 37 of 72 37 

government.” Id. at 1:21:50 -1:22:20. President Trump then asked Secretary McMahon for an 

update on Harvard specifically, which led to the following colloquy: 

Secretary McMahon : We’re negotiating with them. When we went back to them 

to say we’d welcome them back to the negotiating table, their response was a 

lawsuit. So [Attorney General] Pam [Bondi] and her team are helping work with 

that. … We’re staying tough with them. The other thing we’re looking at also are 

the [Section] 117 [24 ] violations of these big universities, like Harvard and others, 

who are not reporting, as they’re required to do by law, foreign money that comes 

in and how much that is and where it comes from. 

President Trump: And students, where are these people coming from? 

Secretary Noem: So , we’ve pulled back their grants because Harvard isn’t 

responding to us [about] criminal activity by their students. And until they give us 

that list they’re not getting any more grants from Homeland Security. 

President Trump: Good, I think we should pull it back. The students they have, 

the professors they have, the attitude they have, is not American and I think you 

should —a grant is a grant, we don’t have to give grants. 

Secretary Noem: Exactly right. 

President Trump: So we’ll pull back the grant. 

Id. at 1:22:21 -1:23:33 (emphasis added) .

F.  Harvard’s Compliance With the Records Request 

119.  Despite the scope and context of the Records Request , HIO worked diligently to 

compl y and produce responsive information that it maintain s under the governing statute and 

regulations .

120.  To that end, within the 10 working days DHS allotted for compliance, HIO 

collected and produced thousands of pages of records responsive to the Records Request 

maintained by or accessible to HIO as required by 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1).  

> 24

Secretary McMahon’s reference was likely to Section 117 of the Higher Education Act of 1965, 

20 U.S.C. § 1011f. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 38 of 72 38 

121.  The production was accompanied by a cover letter (the “ First Production Letter”) 

explaining the scope of Harvard’s responsive production and responding to the allegations in the 

Demand Letter. 25 

122.  The First P roduction Letter noted that “portions of the [ Records Request ] seek 

categories of information using terms not defined in the regulation.” Id. at 1. But it explained that, 

because “Harvard is committed to good faith compliance,” it was “producing responsive materials 

that [it] believe[s] are reasonably required by 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1).” Id. 

123.  Accordingly, the First Production Letter explained that Harvard had produced the 

following categories of “information relevant to F -1 status” in response to the Records Request :

(1) “[r]ecords that reflect student enrollment information, by SEVIS ID Number, for each F -1 visa 

holder enrolled at Harvard throughout the duration of the program in which that student is presently 

enrolled ”; and (2) “SEVIS termination and cancellation data that include SEVIS ID Number, 

SEVIS Status, Education Level, Major/Academic Program, Date of Termination or Cancellation, 

Termination or Cancellation Reason, and Program Start and End Date.” Id. at 2. This lat ter 

category of data, the First Production Letter explained, “reflect[s] changes to nonimmigrant status 

for a range of reasons, including but not limited to disciplinary action,” though “[t]he basis for any 

such disciplinary action is not covered by 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1).” Id. 

124.  Since the Records Request did not specify a time period, Harvard produced this 

information for “academic year 2023 -2024 and academic year 2024 -2025 (through and including 

April 30, 2025),” though the student enrollment records produced as to some students cover shorter 

or longer periods, depending o n the duration of the student’s academic program. Id. at 1.  

> 25

Letter from Steve Bunnell, Counsel for Harvard Univ., to SEVP, Re: Harvard University –

BOS214F0016200 0 (April 30, 2025) (the “ First Production Letter”) (attached as Exhibit 19 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 39 of 72 39 

125.  The First Production Letter noted that “Harvard’s production reflects its best effort 

to meet [the Records Request ’s April 30] deadline notwithstanding the scope of the requests in the 

[Records Request ], which cover more than 5,200 students.” Id. And it explained that “[i]f Harvard 

discovers additional information falling into the categories listed above, it will promptly produce 

that information as a supplement.” Id. 

126.  The First Production Letter emphasized, in bold and underlined font, that “ Harvard 

is complying with the [ Records Request ’s] lawful requests in lieu of voluntary withdrawal 

from SEVP certification. Harvard does not seek to withdraw from SEVP. Any withdrawal 

of Harvard’s certification would be involuntary and would cause immediate harm and 

disruption to Harvard, its mission, and its thousands of international students who hail from 

over 140 countries and enrich the University community immeasurably with thei r presence 

and contributions. ” Id. 

127.  The First Production Letter went on to state, also in bold and underline d font , that 

“[i]f any aspect of this production raises questions or is deemed incomplete or insufficient in 

any respect, and before DHS takes any steps adverse to Harvard due to any perceived 

deficiency in Harvard’s response, Harvard respectfully requests that DHS notify Harvard’s 

counsel in writing and provide an opportunity to discuss, to be heard, and to cure. ” Id. at 2 -3. 

128.  Finally, the First Production Letter addressed the Records Request ’s allegations 

“that Harvard has ‘created a hostile learning environment for Jewish students ’ due to a purported 

‘failure to condemn antisemitism,’ and that Harvard ‘relies heavily on foreign student funding … 

to build and maintain [its] substantial endowment.’” Id. at 3. The Production Letter explained that 

“[t]hese assertions have no basis in fact, and [the Records Request ] suggests none.” Id. And it 

affirmed that, “[t]o the contrary, Harvard has strongly and repeatedly condemned antisemitism and 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 40 of 72 40 

has undertaken substantial efforts to ensure that its campus is safe, fair, and welcoming to Jewish 

and Israeli students —including those who attend Harvard on F -1 visas.” Id. 

129.  The First Production Letter concluded: “In short, Harvard denies the [ Records 

Request ’s] assertions and any suggestion that they justify actions by DHS in contravention of the 

statutes and regulations governing SEVP.” Id. 

G.  Developments from April 30 to May 7

130.  In the days after Harvard responded to the Records Request, Harvard received no 

outreach from DHS. But the Administration continued to target Harvard in other ways. 

131.  On May 2, 2025, the President posted the following on Truth Social: 26 

132.  Then, on May 5, 2025, Secretary of Education Linda McMahon sent Harvard a 

letter (the “McMahon Letter”) informing the University that “Harvard should no longer seek 

GRANTS from the federal government, since none will be provided.” 27  The McMahon Letter 

stated that Harvard has “invited foreign students” who “show contempt for the United States of 

America[] to its campus.” Id. at 1. And it asked: “Where do many of these ‘students’ come from, 

who are they, how do they get into Harvard, or even into our country —and why is there so much 

HATE?” Id. at 1. The McMahon Letter also criticized Harvard’s hiring decisions and its  

> 26

President Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump), Truth Social (May 2, 2025, 7:25 AM) 

(attached as Exhibit 20 ).  

> 27

Letter from Linda E. McMahon, Sec. of Educ., to Dr. Alan Garber, Harvard Univ., at 2 (May 5, 

2025) (the “McMahon Letter”) (attached as Exhibit 21 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 41 of 72 41 

“management” and asserted that Harvard “teach[es] [its] students to despise” the “free -market 

system.” Id. at 1 -2. 

133.  In a May 7, 2025 television interview, Secretary McMahon reiterated these 

statements, stating about Harvard: “[A]re they vetting students who are coming in from outside 

of the country to make sure they’re not activists? Are they vetting professors that the y’re hiring 

to make sure that they’re not teaching ideologies, but that they’re teaching subject matter? …. 

They’ve taken a very hard line, so we took a hard line back.” 28 

H.  DHS’s Second Information Request and Harvard’s Second Document Production 

134.  On May 7, 2025, Acting General Counsel of the Department of Homeland 

Security, Joseph Mazzara, sent an email to Harvard’s counsel (the “Mazzara Email”) indicating 

that DHS had reviewed Harvard’s initial document production and “concluded that it does not 

completely address the Secretary’s request .”29 

135.  The Mazzara Email reiterated DHS’s request for four of the eight categories of 

information referenced in the Records Request —those relating to student visa holders’ “known 

illegal activity,” “known dangerous or violent activity,” “known threats to other students or 

university personnel,” and “known deprivation of rights of other classmates or university 

personnel” —and indicated that Harvard’s response should “likely include the disciplinary 

records for student visa holders.” Id. 

136.  The Mazzara Email gave Harvard until the close of business on May 14, 2025, to 

respond.  

> 28

CNBC Television, Education Secretary Linda McMahon to Harvard: Obey the law and you can 

be eligible for funding , YouTube, at 1:04 -31 (May 7, 2025), available at 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bb6YJUHMqc4 . 

> 29

Email from Joseph Mazzara, DHS, to Steve Bunnell, Counsel for Harvard Univ. (May 7, 2025) 

(the “Mazzara Email ”) (attached as Exhibit 22 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 42 of 72 42 

137.  On May 12, 2025, Harvard’s counsel sent Acting General Counsel Mazzara an 

email observing that the Mazzara Email , like the Records Request before it, “ask[ed] for 

information outside of 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1), which was cited in the [Records Request].” 30  The 

email asked if Harvard should construe the Mazzara Email “as requesting information under 8 

C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(2).” Id. On May 13, 2025, Harvard had not yet heard back from Mr. Mazzara, 

so its counsel sent Mr. Mazzara a follow -up email again asking whether Harvard should construe 

the request as one under § 214.3(g)(2). See id. 

138.  On the morning of May 14, 2025, Mr. Mazzara wrote back, stating: “While many 

of the records we are seeking and have received may be required to be kept by Harvard pursuant 

to 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1), our authority to request information is broader. We are requesting 

records pursuant to all our authorities contained in 8 C.F.R.§ 214 (many of which are also 

refenced in the letter).” Id. 

139.  On May 14 , 2025, Harvard sent DHS a letter (the “Second Production Letter”) 

responding to the additional requests made in the Mazzara Email .31  As the Second Production 

Letter explained, Harvard identified three F-1 visa students who were subject to discipline that 

resulted in a change of academic status as defined in 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1)(vi) where the 

discipline was based on one of the four categories of conduct identified in the Mazzara Email . Id. 

at 1. For each of these three students, Harvard provided information about the conduct that led to 

discipline. Id. The Second Production Letter explained that, as to the request for conduct that 

involved “known deprivation of rights,” H arvard interpreted the phr ase in line with federal  

> 30

Email Exchange between Joseph Mazzara, DHS, and Steve Bunnell, Counsel for Harvard Univ., 

at 1 (May 7 to May 14, 2025) (attached as Exhibit 23 ).  

> 31

Letter from Steve Bunnell, Counsel for Harvard Univ., to SEVP, Re: Harvard University –

BOS214F00162000 (April 30, 2025) (the “Second Production Letter”) (attached as Exhibit 24 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 43 of 72 43 

statutes that “use[d] similar formulations [to] refer to rights secured by the Constitution or statute” 

and found no students who received discipline on the basis of having “deprived a classmate or 

university personnel of such rights.” Id. at 2. But the Second Production Letter stated that, if DHS 

meant “something else” by this phrase, DHS should “let [Harvard] know, and, upon receipt of 

clarification, [Harvard] will promptly reply in accordance with applicable law.” Id. 

140.  The Second Production Letter reiterated that Harvard did not wish to voluntarily 

withdraw its SEVP certification, and asked for notice and an opportunity to be heard before DHS 

took any adverse action stemming from perceived noncompliance. Id. 

I.  DHS’s Revocation of Harvard’s Certification 

141.  After submitting the Second Production Letter, Harvard did not hear from DHS for 

more than a week. 

142.  Then, o n May 22 , 2025 , Secretary Noem sent Harvard a letter entitled “Harvard’s 

Student and Exchange Visitor Program Decertification” (the “Revocation Notice” ) stating that, 

“effective immediately, Harvard University’s Student and Exchange Visitor Program certification 

is revoked .” 32 

143.  The Revocation Notice , like the Records Request before it, stated that “it is a 

privilege to enroll foreign students .” The Notice added that “it is also a privilege to employ aliens 

on campus.” Id. at 1. It asserted that, as a result of Harvard’s “refusal to comply with multiple 

requests to provide [DHS] pertinent information while perpetuating an unsafe campus environment 

that is hostile to Jewish students, promotes pro -Hamas sympathies, and employs racist ‘diversity, 

equity, and inclusion’ policies, [Harv ard] ha[s] lost this privilege.” Id.  

> 32

Letter from Kristi Noem, U.S. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., to Maureen Martin, Harvard Univ., 

Harvard’s Student and Exchange Visitor Program Decertification (May 22, 2025) (the 

“Revocation Notice”) (attached as Exhibit 25 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 44 of 72 44 

144.  The Revocation Notice acknowledged the profound consequences of 

decertification. It stated that, effective immediately, “Har vard is prohibited from having any aliens 

on F - or J - nonimmigrant status for the 2025 -2026 academic school year.” Id. It also stated that 

“[t]his decertification also means that existing aliens on F - or J - nonimmigrant status must transfer 

to another university in order to maintain their nonimmigrant status.” Id. 

145.  The Revocation Notice state d that this action was “the unfortunate result of 

Harvard’s failure to comply with simple reporting requirements.” Id. But the Revocation Notice 

did not identify any specific “reporting requirements” with which Harvard had failed to comply ,

and did not cite any of the regulatory provisions governing an SEVP -certified school’s reporting 

requirements . Id. Instead, the Revocation Notice stated that Harvard had failed to comply with the 

demands in the Records Request and the Mazzara E mail for “information regarding misconduct 

and other offenses that would render foreign students inadmissible or removable .” Id. But, as 

explained above, the regulations governing schools’ eligibility for SEVP certification do not 

require Harvard to maintain records on such information or report it to DHS. 

146.  The Revocation Notice stated that DHS had revoked Harvard’s certification “to 

send a clear signal to Harvard and all universities that want to enjoy the privilege of enrolling 

foreign students, that the Trump Administration will enforce the law and root out the evils of anti -

Americanism and antisemitism in society and campuses.” Id. 

147.  The Revocation Notice offered Harvard no opportunity to defend itself against the 

withdrawal of its certification, including to present evidence or be heard on its argument that it has 

complied with the law. See 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(b) -(f). Nor did the Revocation Notice offer Harvard 

any opportunity to cure the supposed noncompliance prior to revocation of its certification. See 5

U.S.C. § 558(c). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 45 of 72 45 

148.  The Revocation Notice also provided Harvard no avenue for seeking administrative 

review of the withdrawal of its certification. See 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(h). 

149.  Having summarily revoked Harvard’s SEVP certification, the Revocation Notice 

went on to state that “[i]f Harvard would like the opportunity of regaining [SEVP] certification 

before the upcoming academic school year, [it] must provide all of the information requested 

below within 72 hours ”: 

1.  Any and all records, whether official or informal, in the possession of Harvard 

University, including electronic records and audio or video footage, regarding 

illegal activity whether on or off campus, by a nonimmigrant student enrolled 

in Harvard University in the l ast five years. 

2.  Any and all records, whether official or informal, in the possession of Harvard 

University, including electronic records and audio or video footage, regarding 

dangerous or violent activity whether on or off campus, by a nonimmigrant 

student enrolled in Har vard University in the last five years. 

3.  Any and all records, whether official or informal, in the possession of Harvard 

University, including electronic records and audio or video footage, regarding 

threats to other students or university personnel whether on or off campus, by a 

nonimmigrant stu dent enrolled in Harvard University in the last five years. 

4.  Any and all records, whether official or informal, in the possession of Harvard 

University, including electronic records and audio or video footage, regarding 

deprivation of rights of other classmates or university personnel whether on or 

off campus, by a nonimmigrant student enrolled in Harvard University in the 

last five years. 

5.  Any and all disciplinary records of all nonimmigrant students enrolled in 

Harvard University in the last five years. 

6.  Any and all audio or video footage, in the possession of Harvard University, of 

any protest activity involving a nonimmigrant student on a Harvard University 

campus in the last five years. 

150.  These demands seek different —and a broader set of —information than what the 

Records Request sought. And the Revocation Notice cited no statutory or regulatory authority for 

these additional demands. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 46 of 72 46 

151.  Shortly after she sent Harvard the Revocation Notice, Secretary Noem posted an 

image of the Revocation Notice on X (the “Noem Post”) , along with a message stating that “[t]his 

Administration is holding Harvard accountable for fostering violence, antisemitism, and 

coordinating with the Chinese Communist Party on its campus.” 33 

152.  DHS also issued a press release (the “Revocation Press Release”) proclaiming: 

“Harvard University Loses Student and Exchange Visitor Program Certification for Pro -Terrorist 

Conduct.” 34  The Revocation Press Release began by asserting: “Harvard’s leadership has created 

an unsafe campus environment by permitting anti -American, pro -terrorist agitators to harass and 

physically assault individuals, including many Jewish students, and otherwis e obstruct its once -

venerable learning environment. Many of these agitators are foreign students. Harvard’s leadership 

further facilitated, and engaged in coordinated activity with the CCP, including hosting and 

training members of a CCP paramilitary group complicit in the Uyghur genocide.” Id. at 1. The 

Revocation Press Release then quoted the Noem Post in its entirety, adding boldfaced emphasis to 

the Noem Post’s reference to “the Chinese Communist Party .” Id. 

153.  The Revocation Press Release stated that, “[o]n April 16, 2025, Secretary Noem 

demanded Harvard provide information about the criminality and misconduct of foreign students 

on its campus.” Id. And it asserted that “Harvard University brazenly refused to provide the 

required information requested and ignored a follow up request from the Department’s Office of 

General Council. [sic] Secretary Noem is following through on her promise to protect students and 

prohibit terrorist sympathizers from receiving benefi ts from the U.S. government.” Id. The  

> 33

@Sec_Noem, X (May 22, 2025, 2:01 PM ET) (the “Noem Post“) (attached as Exhibit 26 ).  

> 34

Press Release, U.S. Dep’t of Homeland Sec., Harvard University Loses Student and Exchange 

Visitor Program Certification for Pro -Terrorist Conduct (May 22, 2025) (the “Revocation Press 

Release”) (attached as Exhibit 27 ). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 47 of 72 47 

Revocation Press Release also did not identify any specific reporting requirements with which 

Harvard allegedly failed to comply. 

154.  The Revocation Press Release stated that “[t]his action comes after DHS terminated 

$2.7 million in DHS grants for Harvard last month.” Id. 

155.  The Revocation Press Release then went on to list a number of purported “[f]acts 

about Harvard’s toxic campus climate,” including allegations of “pervasive race discrimination 

and anti -Semitic harassment plaguing [Harvard’s] campus .” Id. The Revocation Press Release also 

stated that, “[i]nstead of protecting its students, Harvard has let crime rates skyrocket, enacted 

racist DEI practices, and accepted boatloads of cash from foreign governments and donors.” Id. at 

2. 

156.  None of the factual allegations levied against Harvard in the Revocation Notice, 

Noem Post, and Revocation Press Release have been subjected to the opportunity for rebuttal 

required under DHS’s process for withdrawal of SEVP certification. 

J.  The Immediate and Irreparable Harm to Harvard 

157.  The government’s unlawful revocation of Harvard’s longstanding SEVP status is 

already causing the University immediate and irreparable harm and will lead to a cascade of 

negative consequences affecting Harvard and its community. 

158.  First, the government’s actions seriously and immediately disrupt the University’s 

ongoing, day -to -day operations. International students play vital roles on campus, including as 

instructors, academic and residential advisors, lab managers, and medical providers. Eliminating 

the population of F -1 and J -1 students fulfilling these functions will halt important research, 

hamper the educational experience for students left without teachers or advisors, and deprive the 

community of medical care. This is particu larly true in the STEM fields , where international 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 48 of 72 48 

students contribute significantly to Harvard’s critical research enterprise . The sudden inability to 

maintain these students’ enrollment jeopardizes ongoing research projects, damages Harvard’s 

reputation as a world -class research institution, and deprives our nation of the benefits of these 

vital research projects. 

159.  Second, t he loss of certification irreparably harms Harvard’s ability to compete 

with other institutions for the most qualified applicants at home and abroad. In our interconnected 

global economy, a university that cannot welcome students from all corners of the world is at a 

competitive disadvantage. Harv ard’s F -1 and J -1 visa program s are therefore a key factor in 

maintaining its standing in academia . If DHS’s action is permitted to stand, Harvard will not be 

able to offer admission to any new visa holder students for at least the next two class years, see 8

C.F.R. § 214.4( i)(1) -(2), and perhaps longer, since once DHS takes the drastic action of 

withdrawing certification, it forever retains discretion whether to allow Harvard ever to petition 

for renewed certification, id. § 214.4(a)(2). Even if Harvard were ever to regain certification, future 

applicants may shy away from applying out of fear of further reprisals from the government. 

160.  Third, the abrupt revocation of certification impairs the educational experience of 

all Harvard students by diminishing the global character and overall strength of the institution. 

This is particularly true for specific programs that offer richer experiences when they feature 

dialogue between students from different backgrounds. For instance, the Harvard Kennedy School 

curriculum focuses on global politics, international systems of governance, and similar topics on 

which F -1 and J -1 visa holders can provid e unique and direct commentary. Similarly, Harvard 

Law School’s LL.M. program is enhanced by the participation of F -1 and J -1 visa holders, who 

help deepen the community’s understanding of comparative law and foreign legal systems. The 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 49 of 72 49 

loss of these international students materially diminishes the breadth of discussion and debate 

across the entire Harvard community and further irreparably damages Harvard and its reputation. 

161.  Fourth, the government’s actions irreparably damage HIO as an institution. G iven 

the importance of the F -1 and J -1 visa program s to Harvard’s educational mission, Harvard has 

invested substantial resources in HIO programs and personnel to attract and enroll top -tier 

international students , integrate them into the broader Harvard community , and comply with SEVP 

requirements . HIO employs 25 professionals with specific expertise in support ing these processes, 

and many are likely to go elsewhere if DHS’s actions are sustained . That office has an annual 

budget of $3.44 million, a substantial portion of which is devoted to facilitating the admission of 

international students and success of Harvard’s visa program s. The revocation of SEVP 

certification renders much of Harvard’s investment in that office and the visa program s effectively 

worthless, undermining years of careful institution al planning and resource allocation. 

CLAIMS FOR RELIEF 

COUNT I 

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT 

FIRST AMENDMENT RETALIATION 

162.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

163.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice and 

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification. See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

164.  Under the APA , a court shall “hold unlawful and set aside agency action … found 

to be … contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity.” Id . § 706(2)(B). 

165.  The First Amendment provides that the federal government “shall make no law … 

abridging the freedom of speech.” U.S. Const. amend. I. The First Amendment also “prohibits 

government officials from relying on the threat of invoking legal sanctions and other means of 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 50 of 72 50 

coercion … to achieve the suppression of disfavored speech.” Nat’l Rifle Ass’n of Am. v. Vullo ,

602 U.S. 175, 189 (2024) (ellipses in original) (internal quotation marks omitted). 

166.  Academic freedom is “a special concern of the First Amendment.” Keyishian v. Bd. 

of Regents of Univ. of N.Y. , 385 U.S. 589, 603 (1967). Colleges and universities have a 

constitutionally protected right to manage an academic community and evaluate teaching and 

scholarship free from governmental interference . This right protects “not only students and 

teachers, but their host institutions as well.”  Asociaci ón de Educaci ón Privada de Puerto Rico, 

Inc. v. Garcia -Padilla , 490 F.3d 1, 8 (1st Cir. 2007) (quotation marks omitted). 

167. Harvard has long exercised its academic freedom by “determin[ing] for itself on 

academic grounds who may teach” and what they teach. Weinstock v. Columbia Univ. , 224 F.3d 

33, 47 (2d Cir. 2000) (quotation marks omitted). 

168.  “As a general matter the First Amendment prohibits government officials from 

subjecting an [entity] to retaliatory actions for engaging in protected speech.” Nieves v. Bartlett ,

587 U.S. 391, 398 (2019) (internal quotation marks omitted). To succeed on a First Amendment 

retaliation claim, a plaintiff must prove that: (1) it “engaged in constitutionally protected conduct”; 

(2) it “was subjected to an adverse action by the defenda nt”; and (3) “the protected conduct was a 

substantial or motivating factor in th e adverse action.” D.B. ex rel. Elizabeth B. v. Esposito , 675 

F.3d 26, 43 (1st Cir. 2012). 

169.  Each of these elements is satisfied here. 

170.  The demands in the April 11 Demand Letter go to the core of Harvard’s 

constitutionally protected academic freedom by seeking to assert governmental control over 

Harvard’s teaching, community, and governance. Accepting these demands would restrict 

Harvard’s academic “programs,” Ex. 9 at 3, thereby constraining the content Harvard’s faculty 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 51 of 72 51 

may teach students. The demands also require that Harvard modify its hiring and admissions 

practices to achieve the government’s preferred balance of viewpoints in every “department,” 

“field,” and “teaching unit.” Id. And they seek to restrict Harvard’s ability to manage its own 

internal “governance” and “leadership,” requiring Harvard to engage in a “governance reform and 

restructuring” that “exclusively” “empower[s]” those faculty members who are “most …

committed to the changes” outlined in the Demand Le tter and “reduc[es] the power held by faculty 

… and administrators” who are “committed to activism.” Id. at 1. 

171.  Adhering to the demands would amount to relinquishing control over Harvard’s 

core academic functions, thereby ceding Harvard’s constitutionally protected academic freedom. 

Harvard’s refusal to do so, as stated by President Garber in his April 14 Letter to the Harvard 

Community, is protected by the First Amendment. See Ex. 10. 

172.  Defendants then subjected Harvard to an adverse action by issuing the Revocation 

Notice and revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification. That action was adverse: it deprive s Harvard 

of its constitutionally protected property interest in continued certification; prevent s Harvard from 

continuing its robust F -1 and J -1 visa program s, which ha ve long inured to the benefit of the 

broader Harvard community; damage s Harvard’s reputation as a global research institution by 

preventing the university from attracting top students and faculty from around the world; render s

meaningless years of careful institutional planning and resource allocation with respect to its F -1

and J -1 program s; and cause s immediate chaos by potentially rendering over a quarter of Harvard’s 

student body unlawfully present in the United States just days before the end of the spring term 

and the start of the summer term, without regard to the vital role these students play on campus. 

173.  Harvard’s protected conduct —the exercise of its academic prerogatives and the 

refusal to relinquish that freedom —was a substantial or motivating factor for this adverse action. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 52 of 72 52 

The causal link is clear from the broader context in which the decertification occurred —a series 

of unprecedented adverse actions, each in contravention of governing statutes and regulations, that 

began mere hours after Harvard announced it would not compl y with the demands. 

174.  The link between Harvard’s protected conduct and the government’s adverse 

actions is also clear from the government’s own statements. In the April 16 Press Release, DHS 

explained that it had issued a “scathing letter” —the Records Request —to Harvard demandi ng 

“detailed records on Harvard’s foreign student visa holders’ illegal and violent activities,” because 

of what the government views as Harvard’s tolerance for “anti -American, pro -Hamas ideology 

poisoning its campus and classrooms.” The May 22 Revocation Notice makes similar statements, 

accusing Harvard of “ perpetuating an unsafe campus environment that is hostile to Jewish 

students, promotes pro -Hama s sympathies, and employs racist “‘ diversity, equity, and inclusion ’

policie s” and stating that the Administration will “ root out the evils of anti -Americanism and 

antisemitism in society and campuses .” And in the May 22 Revocation Press Release, DHS stated 

that Harvard had lost its SEVP certification “for Pro -Terrorist Conduct” and its “toxic campus 

climate,” not for any regulatory violations , and further stated that the revocation of Harvard’s 

certification “comes after DHS terminated $2.7 million in DHS grants for Harvard last month,” 

Ex. 27, at 1 —all demonstrating that the revocation of Harvard’s certification is simply one part of 

the government’s larger scheme of retaliation against Harvard. 

175.  The surrounding circumstances also make plain that Defendants have withdrawn 

Harvard’s SEVP certification not for any valid reason, but because they seek to punish the 

University for its courage in refusing to surrender its independence or relinquish its c onstitutional 

rights under the First Amendment. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 53 of 72 53 

COUNT II 

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT 

FIRST AMENDMENT VIEWPOINT DISCRIMINATION 

176.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

177.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice and 

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification. See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

178.  Under the APA, a court shall “hold unlawful and set aside agency action … found 

to be … contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity.” Id . § 706(2)(B). 

179.  The First Amendment prohibits the regulation or censure of speech based on “the 

specific motivating ideology or the opinion or perspective of the speaker.” Reed v. Town of Gilbert ,

576 U.S. 155, 168 -69 (2015) (quoting Rosenberger v. Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va. , 515 U.S. 

819, 829 (1995)). Such government action is a “‘blatant’ and ‘egregious form of content 

discrimination’” and is subject to strict scrutiny. Id. at 168, 171 (citation omitted). A finding that 

the government has discriminated based on vi ewpoint is “all but dispositive” in a First Amendment 

challenge. Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc. , 564 U.S. 552, 571 (2011). 

180.  The series of retaliatory actions against Harvard impermissibly seeks to employ 

viewpoint -based distinctions as a means of correcting the University’s perceived “ideological 

capture.” Ex. 9 at 1. The Demand Letter expressly classifies Harvard’s community members on 

the basis of their actual or perceived viewpoints, requiring differential treatment along ideological 

lines. Defendants’ actions designed to coerce Harvard’s compliance with these demands, including 

the summary decertification, similarly aim to b ring Harvard’s expressive activity (and the 

expression of Harvard’s community members) more closely in line with the government’s 

preferred viewpoints. “[T]he concept that government may restrict the speech of some elements of 

our society in order to enhan ce the relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 54 of 72 54 

Amendment.” Buckley v. Valeo , 424 U.S. 1, 48 -49 (1976), superseded by statute as stated in 

McConnell v. Fed. Election Comm’n , 540 U.S. 93 (2003). 

181.  Defendants’ campaign of retribution against Harvard is expressly viewpoint -based, 

both in its motivation and its demanded effects. The Demand Letter itself makes plain that its 

demands are premised on the administration’s perception of Harvard as an instit ution in the grips 

of “ideological capture,” whose leadership, faculty, and students lack sufficient “viewpoint 

diversity.” Ex. 9 at 1 -2. And the Press Release, which links those demands to what it touts as a 

“scathing letter” threatening Harvard’s SEVP ce rtification, doubles down —citing Harvard’s “anti -

American … ideology,” its research that supposedly “brand[s] conservatives as far -right 

dissidents,” and its “public health propaganda.” Ex. 1 7. And the Revocation Notice and the 

Revocation Press Release make many of the same points, while failing to identify any failure by 

Harvard to comply with the regulations governing SEVP certification. In other words, Defendants 

expressly attribute perceived viewpoints to Harvard and have targeted the University (includ ing 

its SEVP certification) on that basis. 

182.  Viewpoint discrimination that is retaliatory cannot be justified by any government 

interest. After all, the “bare ... desire to harm a politically unpopular group” is not a “ legitimate 

state interest[],” much less a compelling one. City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Ctr. , 473 U.S. 

432, 446 -47 (1985) (ellipsis in original) (internal quotation marks omitted) (emphasis added). 

183.  In any event, even supposing the revocation of Harvard’s certification served some 

compelling governmental interest, Defendants cannot reasonably argue that summary withdrawal 

is the “least restrictive means of achieving” it. Ams. for Prosperity Found. v. Bonta , 594 U.S. 595, 

607 (2021) (quotation marks omitted). Defendants’ own regulations supply, and indeed require , a 

less restrictive means of ensuring compliance by SEVP -certified institutions: namely, by following 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 55 of 72 55 

a detailed set of procedures for resolving alleged noncompliance that present opportunities for the 

institution to cure prior to withdrawal. Defendants failed to follow those procedures and instead 

summarily revoked Harvard’s certification. 

184.  These constitutional violations cause immediate, ongoing, and irreparable harm to 

Harvard. 

COUNT III 

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT 

UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITION 

185.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

186.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice and 

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification. See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

187.  Under the APA, a court shall “hold unlawful and set aside agency action … found 

to be … contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity.” Id . § 706(2)(B). 

188.  Although the government generally may “impose limits on the use of [government] 

funds to ensure they are used in the manner Congress intends,” the government cannot “leverage 

funding to regulate speech” or other protected conduct “outside the contours of t he [government] 

program itself.” Agency for Int’l Dev. v. All. for Open Soc’y Int’l, Inc. , 570 U.S. 205, 213 -15 

(2013). 

189.  The First Amendment forbids the government from conditioning access to 

government benefits on the relinquishing of constitutional rights or adherence to the government’s 

viewpoint. That is true even where the speaker “has no entitlement to that benefit.” Rumsfeld v. 

Forum for Acad. & Institutional Rts., Inc. , 547 U.S. 47, 59 (2006) (quotation marks omitted). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 56 of 72 56 

190.  SEVP certification is a government benefit and thus cannot be conditioned on an 

institution’s relinquishing its academic freedom or adopting the government’s preferred 

viewpoints. 

191.  Here, the government made clear that Harvard would face significant consequences 

unless it agreed to conform the content of its teaching, the composition of its community, and the 

structure of its governance to align with the government’s agenda —that is, if it conformed its own 

speech to the government’s preferred message. Those conditions are plainly unconstitutional. 

192.  Harvard complied with the lawful inquiries in the Records Request and the Mazzara 

Email by producing requested documents that fell within the scope of the University’s 

recordkeeping obligations as a SEVP -certified institution. Yet DHS summarily deemed these 

responses “insufficient,” Ex. 25 at 1, without identifying any actual regulatory requirement with 

which Harvard had failed to comply, and revoked Harvard’s certification “effective immediately,” 

id. , without providing Harvard an opportunity to cure any p urported noncompliance or otherwise 

following the usual , required procedures. 

193.  By threatening to revoke Harvard’s SEVP certification in retaliation for 

constitutionally protected conduct , and then following through on that threat without any 

legitimate regulatory basis for doing so, Defendants effectively conditioned Harvard’s SEVP 

certification on the University’s relinquishing of its constitutional rights. Put otherwise, Harvard’s 

SEVP certification was effectively conditioned not on Harvard’s compliance with its obligations 

as a SEVP -certified institution, but instead on its compli ance with the administration’s 

impermissible ideological demands. That condition violates the First Amendment. 

194.  This constitutional violation causes immediate, ongoing, and irreparable harm to 

Harvard. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 57 of 72 57 

COUNT IV 

VIOLATION OF THE FIRST AMENDMENT 

(EQUITABLE CAUSE OF ACTION – ULTRA VIRES )

195.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

196.  Even if the prerequisites for review under the Administrative Procedure Act were 

not satisfied, federal courts have the “equitable power[]” to “enjoin unconstitutional actions by 

state and federal officers.” Armstrong v. Exceptional Child Ctr., Inc. , 575 U.S. 320, 327 -28 (2015); 

see also R.I. Dep’t of Env tl. . Mgmt. v. United States , 304 F.3d 31, 42 -43 (1st Cir. 2002) ( stating 

that “[ d]istrict court[s]” retain the “nonstatutory” power “to review agency action that is ultra 

vires” and provide equitable relief unless Congress precludes that review). 

197.  As alleged in Counts I, II, and III, Defendants’ action to revoke Harvard’s SEVP 

certification constitute s impermissible First Amendment retaliation and viewpoint discrimination 

and involved the imposition of unconstitutional conditions. The Constitution forecloses any lawful 

authority for Defendants’ actions. 

198.  Because Defendants’ actions are unconstitutional and ultra vires , this Court should 

enjoin Defendants in their official capacities from withdrawing Harvard’s SEVP certification. 

199.  If Defendants’ actions are not declared unlawful, set aside, and enjoined as 

unconstitutional and ultra vires , Harvard will suffer substantial injury, including irreparable injury. 

COUNT V

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO LAW 

VIOLATION OF 8 C.F.R. § 214.4 (b) -(h) 

200.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

201.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice and 

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification. See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 58 of 72 58 

202.  The APA directs courts to hold unlawful and set aside agency action that is not in 

accordance with law, id . § 706(2)(A), or that fails to observe “procedure required by law,” id. 

§ 706(2)(D). 

203.  Under applicable regulations, if DHS wishes to withdraw a school’s certification 

out -of -cycle, it must provide the school with a NOIW stating “[t]he grounds for withdrawing SEVP 

certification.” 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(b)(1). After receiving a NOIW , the school has 30 days to submit 

an answer either admitting or denying the allegations in the NOIW and supporting its position with 

“sworn statements, and documentary or other evidence, to rebut the grounds for withdrawal of 

certification.” Id. § 214.4(b)(2); see id § 214.4(d) -(e). The school must be given the opportunity to 

request “a telephonic interview in support of its response to the NOIW,” id. § 214.4(b)(3), and it 

must be permitted to be “represented by counsel of its choice” during these proceedings, id. 

§ 214.4(c). 

204.  If DHS intends to proceed with withdrawing a school’s certification, it must 

consider the school’s evidentiary submissions and issue a decision “explain[ing] in writing the 

specific reasons for” withdrawing the certification. Id. § 103.3(a)(1)(i); see id. § 214.4(g). It must 

also provide the school with the opportunity to take an administrative appeal of the decertification 

decision. See id. § 214.4(h). 

205.  In addition, under 22 C.F.R. § 62.50(d)(1), only the Department of State can revoke 

a school’s designation to sponsor J -1 students and only then with 30 days’ notice. That notice must 

“specify the grounds for the proposed sanction and its effective date, advise the sponsor of its right 

to oppose the proposed sanction, and identify the procedures for submitting a statement of 

opposition thereto.” Id. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 59 of 72 59 

206.  The government did not provide Harvard with any of these procedural protections 

prior to summarily revoking Harvard’s certification to host F -1 students and designation to sponsor 

J-1 students. That is unlawful: “An agency may not … simply disregard rules that are still on the 

books.” FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc. , 556 U.S. 502, 515 (2009). 

207.  Because Defendants failed to withdraw Harvard’s certification “in accordance 

with” 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(b), id. , the revocation of Harvard’s certification must be set aside. 

208.  The summary revocation of Harvard’s SEVP certification, without the benefit of 

codified procedural protections, causes immediate, ongoing, and irreparable harm to Harvard. 

COUNT VI 

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO LAW 

VIOLATION OF 5 U.S.C. § 558 

209.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

210.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice and 

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification. See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

211.  The APA directs courts to hold unlawful and set aside agency action that is not in 

accordance with law, id . § 706(2)(A), or which fails to observe “procedure required by law,” id. 

§ 706(2)(D). 

212.  The APA defines “licenses” to include “the whole or part of an agency permit, 

certificate, approval, registration, charter, membership, statutory exemption or other form of 

permission.” Id . § 551(8). 

213.  SEVP certification is a “license” within the meaning of the APA. See Blackwell 

Coll. of Bus. , 454 F.2d at 933 -35. Thus, in order to revoke that license, the government was 

required to comply with the strictures of Section 558(c)(1) -(2). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 60 of 72 60 

214.  Section 558 provides that “[e]xcept in cases of willfulness or those in which public 

health, interest, or safety requires otherwise, the withdrawal, suspension, revocation, or annulment 

of a license is lawful only if, before the institution of agency proceedings therefore, th e licensee 

has been given” both (1) “notice by the agency in writing of the facts or conduct which may warrant 

the action” and (2) “opportunity to demonstrate or achieve compliance with all lawful 

requirements.” 5 U.S.C. § 558(c)(1) -(2) .

215.  DHS violated Section 558(c) because it failed to “institut[e] … agency 

proceedings” for the revocation of Harvard’s SEVP certification, id. § 558(c), instead purporting 

to summarily revok e Harvard’s certification by issuing the Revocation Notice. 

216.  DHS also violated Section 558 (c)(1) because the Revocation Notice failed to 

provide the required “notice … in writing of the facts or conduct which may warrant the action.” 

Id. § 558(c)(1). The Revocation Notice does not identify any regulatory provision with which 

Harvard failed to comply, instead purporting to revoke Harvard’s certification based on its failure 

to comply with demands that exceeded the scope of its reporting requ irements. Failure to comply 

with such demands is not conduct that “may warrant ” revocation of Harvard’s certification. 

217.  Relatedly, DHS also violated Section 558(c)(2). That provision requires DHS, 

“before the institution of [revocation] proceedings,” to give schools an “opportunity to demonstrate 

or achieve compliance with all lawful requirements” of licensure. Id. § 558(c)(2) (emphases 

added). The “lawful requirements” of continued SEVP certification, id. , are those specified by the 

regulations . DHS has not identified any such lawful requirements with which Harvard has failed 

to comply . Nor has it given Harvard the required chance to “demonstrate or achieve compliance 

with” any such requirements. Id. § 558(c)(2). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 61 of 72 61 

218.  These violations of Section 558 cause immediate, ongoing, and irreparable harm to 

Harvard by depriving the University of its property interest without required procedure. 

COUNT VII 

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT 

PROCEDURAL DUE PROCESS 

219.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

220.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice and 

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification. See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

221.  Under the APA, a court shall “hold unlawful and set aside agency action … found 

to be … contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity.” Id . § 706(2)(B). 

222.  As a license, SEVP certification is a protected property interest subject to the 

procedural due process requirements of the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. See 

Blackwell Coll. of Bus. v. Att’y Gen. , 454 F.2d 928, 933 (D.C. Cir. 1971) (holding that “withdrawal 

of [certification]” is permitted “only in accordance with procedural due process”). 

223.  Due process requires the government to provide “fair notice of conduct that is 

forbidden or required” before depriving private parties of their property. FCC v. Fox Television 

Stations, Inc. , 567 U.S. 239, 253 (2012); see Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville , 405 U.S. 156, 

162 (1972). “This requirement of clarity in regulation is essential to the protections provided by 

the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment,” and “[i]t requires the invalidation of laws [and 

regulations] that are impermissibly vague. ” Fox Television Stations , 567 U.S. at 253. 

224.  Due process also requires notice and an opportunity to be heard “at a meaningful 

time and in a meaningful manner” before the government may deprive a person of a protected 

interest. Mathews v. Eldridge , 424 U.S. 319, 333 (1976) (quotation marks omitted). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 62 of 72 62 

225.  Defendants violated Harvard’s right to procedural due process by (a) failing to 

provide adequate notice of the grounds for withdrawal of Harvard’s SEVP certification and 

opportunity to avoid those grounds; (b) failing to disclose the evidence upon which SEVP relied 

in making its decision; and (c) denying Harvard a meaningful opportunity to respond to the 

allegations and evidence before the adverse action was taken, including but not limited to a pre -

deprivation hearing. 

226.  The revocation also violated due process because the Records Request and the 

Mazzara Email both “fail[ed] to provide a person of ordinary intelligence fair notice of what [was 

required]” and was “so standardless that it authorize[d] or encourage[d] serious ly discriminatory 

enforcement.” United States v. Williams , 553 U.S. 285, 304 (2008). DHS demanded information 

that HIO is not required to maintain under the applicable regulations, did not specify the time 

period for which it sought information, and employ ed hopelessly vague descriptions of the 

information sought. DHS did not define what it considers to be “dangerous” conduct, or 

“obstruction of the school’s learning environment,” within the meaning of the Records Request, 

and those terms are not defined in the regulations. DHS then summarily stated that Harvard’s 

responses were “insufficient .” Ex. 25 at 1. 

227.  Subjecting Harvard to deprivation of its protected property based on failure to 

comply with this “impermissibly vague” request, Fox Television Stations , 567 U.S. at 253, plainly 

designed to authorize “seriously discriminatory enforcement,” Williams , 553 U.S. at 304, violated 

Harvard’s rights under the Due Process Clause. 

228.  Defendants’ actions deprive Harvard of its constitutionally protected property 

interest in continued certification; prevent Harvard from continuing its robust F -1 visa program, 

which has long inured to the benefit of the broader Harvard community; damage Harvard’s 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 63 of 72 63 

reputation as a global research institution; and disrupt years of careful institutional planning and 

resource allocation with respect to its F -1 program. 

229.  The harm caused by the improper revocation of Harvard’s SEVP certification is 

immediate and severe, while the additional burden on the government of providing constitutionally 

adequate procedures would be minimal. 

COUNT VIII 

PROCEDURAL DUE PROCESS 

(EQUITABLE CAUSE OF ACTION – ULTRA VIRES )

230.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

231.  Even if the prerequisites of review under the Administrative Procedure Act were 

not satisfied, federal courts have the “equitable power[]” to “enjoin unconstitutional actions by 

state and federal officers.” Armstrong , 575 U.S. at 327 -28. 

232.  As alleged in Count V II , Defendants’ revocation of Harvard’s SEVP certification 

deprived Harvard of protected property interests without due process. 

233.  The Constitution forecloses any lawful authority for Defendants’ actions, and this 

Court should declare them unconstitutional and ultra vires .

COUNT IX 

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

CONTRARY TO LAW 

8 C.F.R. §§ 214.3( e)(4)(ii ) & 214.4(a)(2) 

234.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

235.  Defendants have taken final agency action by issuing the Revocation Notice and 

summarily revoking Harvard’s SEVP certification. See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

236.  The APA directs courts to hold unlawful and set aside agency action that is arbitrary 

and capricious and not in accordance with law. Id . § 706(2)(A). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 64 of 72 64 

237.  8 C.F.R. § 214.4(a)(2) permits DHS to withdraw certification but only for a “valid 

and substantive reason.” A “valid and substantive reason” must be understood in context to mean 

a violation of the regulations governing SEVP -certified institutions, for two reasons. 

238.  First, to withdraw a school’s certification out of cycle, the government must issue 

a NOIW . But it can only issue a NOIW under the narrow circumstances specified in 

Section 214.3(e)(4)(ii) of the regulation: if the university “has failed to sustain eligibility” under 

Section 214.3(a)(3)(i) (which requires that the school is “bona fide,” an “established institution of 

learning or other recognized place of study,” possesses “the necessary facilities, personnel, and 

finances to conduct instruction in recognize d courses,” and “engage[s] in instruction in those 

courses”), or if it “has failed to comply with the recordkeeping, retention, reporting and other 

requirements of paragraphs (f), (g), (j), (k), and (l).” 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(a)(3)(i), (e)(4)(ii). If the 

alleg ed violation is something other than ineligibility or the specified regulatory requirements, the 

government cannot issue a NOIW , and therefore cannot withdraw a school’s certification. 

239.  Second, and confirming the point, all examples of “valid and substantive reason[s]” 

for withdrawing a certification enumerated in 8 C.F.R. § 214.4(a)(2) are regulatory violations. 

Under those examples, decertification must be tied either to failure to maintain eligibility or failure 

to comply with regulations governing the program. 

240.  Indeed, the Evidence Attestation Statement attached to the Records Request 

confirmed this understanding of the permissible reasons for decertification. That document stated 

that “SEVP may review [a school’s] certification at any time and may request documentation to 

establish [the school’s] eligibility for certification as well as review evidence and records for 

compliance with the regulation .” Ex. 16 at 3 (emphasis added). 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 65 of 72 65 

241.  Here, DHS’s revocation of Harvard’s certification was not based on a determination 

that Harvard was no longer eligible for certification, and it was not based on a determination that 

Harvard had failed to comply with the regulations. While the Revocation Notice asserts that 

Harvard’s responses to the Records Request and the Mazzara Email were “insufficient,” Ex. 25 at 

1, DHS has not identified any actual regulatory requirement with which Harvard has failed to 

comply. 

242.  The Records Request exceeded the scope of 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1). That provision 

specifies nine categories of information that a school “must keep on each [F -1] student” and 

“furnish … to DHS representatives upon request.” 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(g)(1). Not among the listed 

categor ies of information: conduct of F -1 students that constitutes “illegal,” “dangerous,” or 

“violent” conduct; “deprivation of rights”; “threats”; or “obstruction of the school’s learning 

environment,” Ex. 16 at 1 -2, particularly where such conduct did not result in disciplinary action 

that altered the student’s academic status. 

243.  To the extent Defendants have revoked Harvard’s SEVP certification for failure to 

comply with a request made pursuant to Section s 214.3(g)(1) and 214.3(g)(2) for information not 

required to be maintained or produced to DHS under those provision s, Defendants have failed to 

base the revocation of Harvard’s certification on a “valid and substantive reason,” 8 C.F.R. 

§ 214.4(a)(2), and the revocation must be set aside. 

244.  The improper revocation of Harvard’s certification causes immediate, ongoing, and 

irreparable harm to Harvard. 

COUNT X

VIOLATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT, 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) 

ARBITRARY AND CAPRICIOUS 

245.  Harvard incorporates by reference the allegations of the preceding paragraphs. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 66 of 72 66 

246.  Defendants have taken final agency action by revoking Harvard’s SEVP 

certification. See 5 U.S.C. § 704. 

247.  The APA directs courts to hold unlawful and set aside final agency actions that are 

arbitrary and capricious or an abuse of discretion. Id . § 706(2)(A). 

248.  Under the APA, an agency must “examine the relevant data and articulate a

satisfactory explanation for its action including a rational connection between the facts found and 

the choice made,” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of U.S., Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co ., 463 

U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quotation marks omitted), consider all “important aspect[s] of the problem” 

when setting forth that explanation, DHS v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal. , 591 U.S. 1, 30 (2020) 

(quoting State Farm , 463 U.S. at 43), and, if the agency’s action represents a change in positions, 

“be cognizant that longstanding policies may have engendered serious reliance interests” and 

ensures that those reliance interests are “taken into account.” Id. (quotation marks omitted). 

249.  Defendants ’ decision to revoke Harvard’s SEVP certification failed each of these 

requirements. That action was therefore arbitrary and capricious and an abuse of discretion. 

250.  The Revocation Notice asserts that DHS is revoking Harvard’s certification 

because of “Harvard’s failure to comply with simple reporting requirements.” Ex. 25 at 1. But 

Defendants have not identified any actual “reporting requirements” with which Harvard has failed 

to comply. 

251.  Defendants’ decision to revoke Harvard’s SEVP certification on those grounds was 

arbitrary and capricious because it reflects an unacknowledged and unexplained change in the 

agency’s policy. See Am. Wild Horse Pres. Campaign v. Perdue , 873 F.3d 914, 923 (D.C. Cir. 

2017) (stating that agencies must both “acknowledge” and “offer a reasoned explanation for” 

deviations from past agency practice). Upon information and belief, prior to the decertification 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 67 of 72 67 

decision in this case, no school had ever had its SEVP certification revoked for any reason other 

than failure to meet the eligibility criteria for certification or failure to comply with the 

recordkeeping, retention, reporting, and other requirements set out in the federal regulations 

governing certification. In revoking Harvard’s certification, Defendants did not acknowledge, 

much less provide a reasoned explanation for, that change in policy. 

252.  Defendants also have not articulated any rational explanation for revoking 

Harvard’s certification. Harvard complied with the lawful requests within the Records Request 

and the Mazzara Email . In response, Defendants summarily deemed Harvard’s document 

production noncompliant without providing a cogent reason for that determination, and without 

explaining why the noncompliance —if any —warranted revocation of Harvard’s certification. 

Indeed, the revocation letter was wholly irrational. It states that Harvard f ailed to comply with 

reporting requirements, without explaining what those reporting requirements were and why 

Harvard did not comply with them. It states that Harvard failed to provide a sufficient response to 

DHS’s records request, without articulating w hy the response was insufficient, why DHS’s records 

request complied with DHS’s regulations, or why Harvard’s purportedly insufficient response was 

a basis to revoke Harvard’s statements. And it makes generalized statements about campus 

environment and “an ti -Americanism,” again without articulating any rational link between those 

statements and the decision to retaliate against international students. Accordingly, Defendants 

failed to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation for its action including 

a rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.” State Farm , 463 U.S. at 43. 

253.  The decertification decision was arbitrary and capricious because it was not 

supported by any evidence. The revocation letter stated that Harvard violated “reporting 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 68 of 72 68 

requirements” and that its response to DHS’s record requests were “insufficient.” It failed to 

substantiate these statements. 

254.  The decertification decision was also arbitrary and capricious because it fails to 

explain why wholesale decertification —rather than some lesser “remedial action” to cure any 

noncompliance, 8 C.F.R. § 214.3(h)(3)(iii) —was the appropriate remedy here. 

255.  The decertification decision was also arbitrary and capricious because the penalty 

imposed —wholesale decertification of a program that has been continuously certified for over 

70 years —was entirely disproportionate to the alleged noncompliance identified: failure to supply 

information that the regulations do not require Harvard to maintain or report as a condition of its 

continued SEVP certification. 

256.  The decertification decision was also arbitrary and capricious because it ignores 

Harvard’s and its students’ reliance interests and does not provide an explanation that accounts for 

those reliance interests. Decertification directly impacts both Harvard and its many international 

students. The decision thus lacks a rational connection between the facts found and the choice 

made. 

a.  Harvard invests in recruitment, housing, support services, and specialized 

programs designed specifically for its international student populations. The Harvard International 

Office, with its 25 full -time staff members and annual budget of $3.44 million, i s the hub of this 

investment. It represents decades of accumulated expertise and systems for recruiting and enrolling 

students through the F -1 visa program. 

b.  Harvard relies on its ability to enroll international students to enrich its 

student population and to attract other students and faculty. Harvard’s dual mission of teaching 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 69 of 72 69 

and research relies on its global character and its ability to attract students wishing to participate 

in an intellectual community populated by the brightest minds it can recruit to Massachusetts. 

c.  Harvard relies on its SEVP certification in admitting its incoming summer 

students and its incoming fall class. Reconfiguring these admitted classes in both the 

undergraduate and graduate schools is not practically possible given that the admissions cycle is 

nearly concluded. 

d.  Students, likewise, rely on Harvard’s SEVP certification to legally enter and 

remain in the United States. Students make significant financial and time commitments based on 

a school’s certification. Students build academic and career plans around specific programs at 

certified institutions. Interruptions in academic plans can derail degree completion. Students make 

major life and professional decisions ba sed on their educational plans, including to pursue a 

program on the understanding that they will be able to access pre - and post -graduate pathways to 

employment like the Optional Practical Training and Curricular Practical Training Visas . They 

transplant themselves, and often their families, too, to come to Cambridge and Boston to study. 

e.  Students also make practical decisions in reliance on Harvard’s SEVP 

certification . Students do not prepare for the costly travel and moving arrangements needed to 

return home abruptly upon revocation of an F -1 visa, nor do they prepare for facing return to a 

home country where they may face violent or dangerous circumstances.  

> 257.

Defendants’ arbitrary decertification decision causes immediate, ongoing, and 

irreparable harm to Harvard. 

REQUEST FOR RELIEF 

WHEREFORE, Harvard respectfully requests the following relief: 

A.  Declare that Defendants’ actions to revoke Harvard’s SEVP certification through 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 70 of 72 70 

the Revocation Notice are unconstitutional and/or unlawful because they violate 

the First Amendment, the Due Process Clause, and the APA ;

B.  Preliminarily and permanently enjoin Defendants, their agents, and anyone acting 

in concert or participation with Defendants from implementing, instituting, 

maintaining, or giving effect to the unlawful revocation of Harvard’s SEVP 

certification ;

C.  Preliminarily and permanently enjoin Defendants, their agents, and anyone acting 

in concert or participation with Defendants from giving any force or effect to the 

Department of Homeland Security’s May 22, 2025 Revocation Notice; 

D.  Permanently enjoin Defendants, their agents, and anyone acting in concert or 

participation with Defendants from issuing a NOIW or otherwise initiating 

proceedings to withdraw Harvard’s SEVP certification in retaliation for Harvard’s 

exercise of its rights under the First Amendment, or because of the viewpoint of 

Harvard’s First Amendment protected speech, or because of Harvard’s refusal to 

comply with the April 11 Demand Letter. 

E.  Award Harvard its reasonable fees, costs, and expenses, including attorneys’ fees, 

pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2412; and 

F.  Grant other such relief as this Court may deem equitable, just, and proper. 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 71 of 72 71 

Dated: May 2 3, 2025 

JENNER & BLOCK LLP 

Ishan Bhabha* 

Ian Heath Gershengorn* 

Lauren J. Hartz* 

1099 New York Avenue, NW 

Suite 900 

Washington, DC 20001 

Tel: (202) 639 -6000 

IBhabha@jenner.com 

IGershengorn@jenner.com 

LHartz@jenner.com 

Andrianna Kastanek* 

353 N Clark Street 

Chicago, IL 60654 

Tel: (312) 222 -9350 

AKastanek@jenner.com 

William A. Burck* 

QUINN EMANUEL URQUHART & 

SULLIVAN, LLP 

1300 I Street NW, Suite 900 

Washington, DC 20005 

williamburck@quinnemanuel.com 

Robert K. Hur* 

KING & SPALDING LLP 

1700 Pennsylvania Ave. NW, Suite 900 

Washington, DC 20006 

rhur@kslaw.com 

Respectfully submitted, 

LEHOTSKY KELLER COHN LLP 

By: /s/ Steven P. Lehotsky 

Steven P. Lehotsky (BBO # 655908) 

Scott A. Keller* 

Serena M. Orloff* 

Shannon G. Denmark* 

Jacob B. Richards (BBO # 712103) 

200 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Suite 700 

Washington, DC 20001 

T: (512) 693 -8350 

F: (512) 727 -4755 

steve@lkcfirm.com 

scott@lkcfirm.com 

serena@lkcfirm.com 

shannon@lkcfirm.com 

jacob@lkcfirm.com 

Katherine C. Yarger* 

700 Colorado Blvd., #407 

Denver, CO 80206 

katie@lkcfirm.com 

Joshua P. Morrow* 

408 W. 11th Street, 5th Floor 

Austin, TX 78701 

josh@lkcfirm.com 

Danielle K. Goldstein* 

3280 Peachtree Road NE 

Atlanta, GA 30305 

danielle@lkcfirm.com 

*Pro Hac Vice Applications Forthcoming 

Case 1:25-cv-11472 Document 1 Filed 05/23/25 Page 72 of 72
