Title: 2023063001173.pdf

URL Source: https://www1.hkexnews.hk/listedco/listconews/sehk/2023/0630/10793353/2023063001173.pdf

Published Time: Fri, 30 Jun 2023 09:38:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 343

Markdown Content:
# Cover Photo: Pilot project for ecological protection and restoration of mountains, rivers, forests, farmlands, lakes, grasses and sand in the Wuliangsuhai basin 

# ANNUAL REPORT 

# Stock Code: 601668.SH To be the most internationally competitive investment and construction group 

# CORPORATE VISION 

# Quality assurance and value creation 

# CORE VALUES 

# Expanding a happy living environment 

# CORPORATE MISSION CONTENTS 

# 1 CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT 4 AT A GLANCE 6 IMPORTANT NOTES 7 SECTION I  DEFINITIONS 8 SECTION II  COMPANY PROFILE AND KEY FINANCIAL INDICATORS 13 SECTION III  MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 55 SECTION IV  CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 82 SECTION V  ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY 88 SECTION VI  IMPORTANT MATTERS 111 SECTION VII  CHANGES IN SHARES AND SHAREHOLDERS 119 SECTION VIII  INFORMATION ON PREFERENCE SHARES 120 SECTION IX  INFORMATION ON BONDS 130 SECTION X  FINANCIAL REPORT Index of documents available for inspection Financial statements signed and sealed by the legal representative (Chairman), person-in-charge of accounting (chief financial officer) and person-in-charge of the accounting department (head of the accounting department) The original audit report with the seal of the accounting firm and signatures and seals of the certified public accountants The originals of all Company documents and manuscripts of announcements publicly disclosed during the Reporting Period 

The Company prepared its 2022 Annual Report in accordance with relevant regulations and guidelines set forth by the China Securities Regulatory Commission and the Shanghai Stock Exchange, including the Guidelines for the Content and Format of Information Disclosure by Companies Offering Securities to the Public No. 2 – Content and Format of Annual Reports – the Shanghai Stock Exchange Listing Rules. This is a free translation into English of a report issued in China, solely for the convenience of English-speaking readers. This report should be read in conjunction with, and is construed in accordance with, Chinese law and professional auditing standards applicable in China. In the event of any inconsistency between the Chinese version and the English version, the Chinese version shall prevail. Investors can access the Company’s 2022 Annual Report on the website of the Shanghai Stock Exchange (www.sse.com.cn). 

CHINA SECURITIES REGULATORY COMMISSION 

> SHANGHAI STOCK EXCHANGE

1CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT 

# CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT 

# Dear Shareholders and Investors, 

On behalf of the Board of Directors of CSCEC, I hereby present to you the 2022 Annual Report of CSCEC and extend my heartfelt gratitude to you for your long-term support for the reform and development of our Company. The year 2022 was an extraordinary year. The 20th CPC National Congress was successfully concluded and a blueprint was drawn up for advancing the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation on all fronts through Chinese-style modernization. Guided by the Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, CSCEC earnestly executed the decisions and arrangements made by the Central Committee of the CPC and the State Council and thoroughly implemented the new development concept and served for the creation of a new development pattern to drive high quality development of enterprises. We worked with stakeholders concerned to effectively cope with the impact of factors beyond expectations, exerted all efforts to stabilize growth, and maintained a steady momentum of development. The value of newly signed contracts for the year amounted to RMB3.9 trillion, and the revenue exceeded RMB2 trillion, setting a new record high. Our major indicators maintained among the top of central enterprises. Our capacity for independent innovation has steadily improved, with new accomplishments and progress in corporate reform and in building a world-class enterprise. We climbed to 9th place in the Fortune Global 500. We maintained our industry’s top credit rating worldwide, and delivered satisfactory results to shareholders and investors. 

Focusing on creating value, we are dedicated to our fundamental pursuit for a “value-creating CSCEC”. We are committed to serving the national economic and social development. We have invested RMB362.3 billion in key strategic regions including the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region, the Yangtze River Delta, and Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area (GBA). We have successfully accomplished the construction, operation and maintenance of 28 Winter Olympic venues and supporting facilities, and completed and delivered a large number of key constructions. We actively implemented the “Belt and Road” Initiative (BRI), and formulated an overseas high-quality development strategy of “one direction, six goals and five pathways” to maintain healthy development of our overseas business. We shifted our focus from scale to quality and efficiency, and from short-term performance to long-term value. We recorded net profit attributable to shareholders of the Company of RMB50.95 billion, positive cash inflow of operations and weighted average net return on asset of 13.94%, placing us at the forefront of the industry. We have fulfilled our responsibilities under the three-year action plan for reform of state-owned enterprises in all aspects and further improved our governance effectiveness. We strive to create desirable and long-term value for our shareholders and investors and share our development results. Our cash distribution ratio maintained above 20%, and we maintained growth in dividend per share, ranking first among all listed peer companies in terms of total dividends distributed. 2CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENT 

We are committed to accumulating the development momentum of a “technology-powered CSCEC” through scientific and technological innovation. We are systematically advancing the construction of a scientific and technological innovation platform. We built the National Center of Technology Innovation for Digital Construction jointly with colleges and universities, filling a gap in this field. We have established CSCEC Technology Innovation to support technological innovation and new business development, and cultivated 26 “Specialized, Refinement, Differential and Innovation (SRDI) enterprises ( 专精特新企业 )”. Focusing on commercialization and industrialization, we have identified two main directions: green and low-carbon development and digital transformation. We have led the formation of numerous national standards such as green building, zero-carbon building and zero-carbon communities, implemented hundreds of efficient carbon peak projects and a batch of pumped storage and photovoltaic power generation projects; accomplished the annual construction goal set for “CSCEC 136 Project”, and established CSCEC Digital Technology and an intelligent construction blockchain technology innovation institute to guide green and intelligent transformation of the construction industry. We keep tackling key core technologies in infrastructure, intelligent construction, building industrialization and other fields and enhancing investment in research and development. We achieved fruitful results in infrastructure operation and three other strategic research programs and was recognized as an “Enterprise with Outstanding Contributions to Scientific and Technological Innovation” by the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission (SASAC). 

We stay true to our original intention to expand a happy living environment and share our results. We adopt a people-oriented development philosophy and endeavor to expand a happy living environment for the masses leveraging the advantages of the entire industry chain. We involve in novel urbanization construction in all round and carry out urban renewal, old residential areas renovation and affordable housing construction based on local conditions, and meticulously build high quality construction products, and promote the consolidation of poverty alleviation results of poverty stricken areas and facilitated rural revitalization with actual actions. Bravely taking on the responsibility as a “chain leader”, we led upstream and downstream enterprises to overcome difficulties for common development and endeavored efforts in ESG work at strategic level to incorporate its ideology into corporate reform and development at all aspects and guided transformation of development concept and value pursuits. We offered employment opportunities for 2.3 million migrant workers and a variety of long-term skills training, fully paid workers wages in a timely manner and recruited 32,000 fresh graduates, which contributed greatly to stabilizing employment. The year 2022 marked the 40th anniversary of CSCEC. Over the past four decades, we have gained profound understanding that to grow bigger, stronger, and better, we must promote our high-quality development with a strong will, enhance development momentum conversion and accelerate business structure adjustment and stick to the development path driven by innovation and featured by win-win collaboration. We must make best use of marketization, always maintain competitive awareness and stay at the forefront of market and improve appraisal incentive system guided by performance. We must constantly deepen reform and innovation, accelerate green and low-carbon development and digital transformation, and strive to become a source of origin of technologies in the construction industry and take a leading role in improving industry chain and supply chain standards. Currently, the international environment remains turbulent and the global trade situation is pessimistic. However, the fundamentals of the domestic economy maintain its long-term upward momentum, with a broader vision for opening up, transformation and upgrading trend of green and high-end construction and stable confidence in the healthy development of the real estate industry. New pattern and new change will bring new opportunities for our development. In 2023, we will, guided by Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, study thoroughly the spirit of the 20th CPC National Congress and work together with shareholders and investors to accomplish our primary task of pursuing high quality development and the strategic goal of “one creation and five aspects of strength”. We will strive to achieve newly signed contract value of over RMB4.2 trillion and revenue of over RMB2.2 trillion, form more competitive edges and consolidate long-term value. 3CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

We will strive for a higher level of “quality and efficiency improvement” in the pursuit of a “value-creating CSCEC”. 

We will take advantage of the national policy to maintain economic stability and implement the indicator requirements for “one interest and five rates”. We will strengthen our competitive advantages in the housing construction industry, enhance infrastructure business strength, actively adapt to new development model of the real estate industry, deeply implement the strategy for high quality development of overseas business, and strive to achieve effective improvement in quality and reasonable growth in quantity. We will adhere to market-oriented reform, optimize strategic management and control, enhance the overall development of our subsidiaries, further improve the modern corporate governance system of state-owned enterprises with Chinese characteristics, and strive to create more considerable returns for shareholders. 

We will intensify our efforts to implement “innovative transformation” empowered by a “technological CSCEC”. We will enhance management of innovation platform under the direction of commercialization and industrialization, constantly improve yield ratio of research and development (R&D) expenses and concentrate on tackling more key core technologies to improve new momentum for high quality development. We will focus on green and low-carbon development and digital transformation, seek for green construction, intelligent construction, industrial construction and other new constructions and accelerate the research and application of advanced technologies including blockchain, construction robots and artificial intelligence. 

We will take stronger initiatives for “safe development”, continuing to fulfill our responsibility in creating a “happy CSCEC”. We will coordinate development and safety and value more on cash flows and debts to effectively prevent operational risks. We will guide all levels within the Company to shift our development concept and value pursuits based on ESG targets. Taking the opportunity for establishing a valuation system with Chinese characteristics, we will enhance information disclosure and provide more thoughtful protections for investors, stabilize cash dividend and promote value enhancement. We will demonstrate our due market value and keep shaping our image as a responsible listed company. In 2023, CSCEC will continue to deliver tangible results, striving to expand a happy living environment and build a world-class enterprise with global competitiveness to live up to the expectations of all shareholders, investors and communities. Chairman: Zheng Xuexuan April 17, 2023 4AT A GLANCE 

# Major operating indicators 

Net profit attributable to shareholders of the Company 

# RMB50.95 billion a year-on-year decrease of 1.2 %Newly signed contract value 

# RMB3,903.1 

billion a year-on-year increase of 

# 10.6 %Weighted average net return on assets 

# 13.94 %maintaining its industry-leading position Net assets per share attributable to ordinary shareholders 

# RMB8.93 /share a year-on-year increase of 

# 11.6 %Net cash flows from operating activities 

# RMB3.83 billion remaining positive cash inflow Revenue 

# RMB2,055.1 billion a year-on-year increase of 

# 8.6 %

# About CSCEC 

# The world’s largest investment and construction conglomerate 

# 9th in Fortune Global 500 

# 3rd in Fortune China 500 

# 1st in ENR Top 250 Global Contractors in blue color and bold, and bigger size A rating for 17 times by the SASAC of the State Council Continued to maintain the industry’s top credit rating worldwide A Top 10 “National Pillar ” brand in the “China Brand Power Ceremony” 

# AT A GLANCE 5CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Newly signed contract value amounted to 

# RMB2,472.8 billion a year-on-year increase of 9.9 %Housing construction engineering Revenue was 

# RMB1,265.1 billion a year-on-year increase of 10.3 %

# Survey and design Newly signed contract value amounted to 

# RMB13.6 billion a year-on-year increase of 5.6 %Revenue was RMB10.8 billion a year-on-year decrease of 0.4 %

# Infrastructure construction and investment Newly signed contract value amounted to 

# RMB1,015.1 billion a year-on-year increase of 20.3 %Revenue was 

# RMB493.5 billion a year-on-year increase of 20.0 %

# Overseas business Newly signed contract value amounted to 

# RMB165.6 billion a year-on-year increase of 1.3 %Revenue was RMB108.0 billion a year-on-year increase of 20.9 %Real estate development and investment 

Contract sales amounted to 

# RMB401.6 billion a year-on-year decrease of 4.9 %Contracted sales area was 

# 17.22 million square meters a year-on-year decrease of 19.7 %Revenue was RMB282.0 billion a year-on-year decrease of 14.8 %New land reserve amounted to 

# 14.89 million square meters Land reserve amounted to 93.03 million square meters at the end of the Reporting Period 6IMPORTANT NOTES 

# IMPORTANT NOTES I.  The Company’s Board of Directors, Board of Supervisors and Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management guarantee that the information in this Annual Report is true, accurate and complete and does not contain any false representations, misleading statements or material omissions, and severally and jointly accept liability thereof. II.  This Report was passed at the 33rd meeting of the third session of the Board of the Company, at which all the Directors of the Company had attended. III.  Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP (Special General Partnership) issued a standard unqualified audit report to the Company. IV.  Zheng Xuexuan, Head of the Company (Chairman); Wang Yunlin, Head of Accounting (Chief Financial Officer); and Xie Song, Head of the Accounting Office (Chief Accounting Officer) guarantee that the financial report set out in this Annual Report is true, accurate and complete. V.  Profit distribution plan and the conversion plan of reserves to share capital for the Reporting Period as resolved and passed by the Board of Directors 

The Company intends to distribute a cash dividend of RMB2.527 (tax inclusive) for every 10 shares to all ordinary shareholders, totaling approximately RMB10.6 billion (tax inclusive) based on total share capital of 41,934,432,844 shares as of the date of this Report. The proportion of cash dividends attributable to net profit of the Company’s shareholders in the consolidated statements was 20.80% for the year. In case of any change in its total share capital prior to the record date of distribution, the Company proposes to maintain the distribution ratio per share unchanged, and to adjust the total cash dividend accordingly. An announcement containing details of the adjustments will be made separately. The aforesaid profit distribution plan has been considered and approved at the 33rd meeting of the third session of the Board, on which the Company’s independent Directors have expressed their independent opinions, pending to be presented at the 2022 Annual General Meeting of the Company for approval. 

VI.  Risk statement with respect to forward-looking statements 

√ Applicable □ N/A This Report contains certain forward-looking statements made on subjective assumptions and judgments on future policies and economic trends, which may differ from the actual results or trends due to a range of variables. The forward-looking statements regarding future plans, development strategies, etc. contained in this Report do not constitute a material commitment by the Company to investors, and investors are advised to exercise attention. 

VII.  Whether there is any misappropriation of funds of the Company for non-operating purposes by the controlling shareholder and other related parties 

No 

VIII.  Whether the Company has provided guarantee in favor of external parties in violation of the prescribed decision-making procedures 

No 

IX.  Whether more than half of the Directors are unable to guarantee the truthfulness, accuracy and completeness of this Annual Report disclosed by the Company 

No 

X.  Warning on major risks 

During the Reporting Period, the Company was not exposed to major risks. The Company has described possible related risks in detail in this Report. Please refer to relevant information set out in “VI. Discussion and Analysis of the Future Development of the Company” under SECTION III “MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS”. 

XI.  Miscellaneous 

√ Applicable □ N/A In addition to the audited financial data, the business data used in this Report comes from the management of the Company. 7SECTION IDEFINITIONS 

# SECTION I  DEFINITIONS 

In this Report, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the following meanings: Definitions 

CSCEC/the Company China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited ( 中国建筑股份有限公司 )

China State Construction/the Group China State Construction Engineering Corporation ( 中国建筑集团有限公司 )

China Construction First Group Corporation to Eighth Engineering Division 

China Construction First Group Corporation Limited to China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. ( 中国建筑一局 (集团 )有限公司至中国建筑第八工程局有限公司 )

Xinjiang Construction & Engineering CSCEC Xinjiang Construction & Engineering (Group) Co., Ltd. ( 中建新疆建工 (集团 )有限公司 )

COHL China Overseas Holdings Limited ( 中国海外集团有限公司 )

CSCEC International CSCEC International Construction Co., Ltd. (中建国际建设有限公司 ) (formerly known as China State Construction Engineering Corporation International Operations ( 中国建筑国际工程公司 )) 

China Overseas The real estate development brand and business owned by China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. ( 中国海外发展有限公司 ) (00688.HK), a subsidiary of COHL 

CSC Land The real estate brand and business other than those under “China Overseas ” that CSCEC is engaged in 

China Construction Engineering Design Group China Construction Engineering Design Group Corporation Limited ( 中国中建设计集团有限公司 )

China Overseas Land & Investment China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. ( 中国海外发展有限公司 ) (00688.HK) 

CSCI China State Construction International Holdings Limited ( 中国建筑国际集团有限公司 ) (03311.HK) 

China Overseas Grand Oceans China Overseas Grand Oceans Group Limited ( 中国海外宏洋集团有限公司 ) (00081.HK) 

CSC Development China State Construction Development Holdings Limited ( 中国建筑兴业集团有限公司 ) (00830.HK) 

China Overseas Property China Overseas Property Holdings Limited ( 中海物业集团有限公司 ) (02669.HK) 

West Construction China West Construction Group Co., Ltd. ( 中建西部建设股份有限公司 ) (002302.SZ) 

CSC Finance China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. ( 中建财务有限公司 )

China Construction Fangcheng China Construction Fangcheng Investment & Development Group Co., Ltd. ( 中建方程投资发展集团 有限公司 )

China Construction Capital China Construction Capital Holdings Limited ( 中建资本控股有限公司 )

China State Decoration China State Decoration Group Co., Ltd. ( 中国建筑装饰集团有限公司 )

China Construction Infrastructure China Construction Infrastructure Co., Ltd. ( 中国建设基础设施有限公司 )

CSCDC China State Construction Development Co., Ltd. ( 中国建筑发展有限公司 )

CSCEC Technology Innovation China CSCEC Technology Innovation Group Co. Ltd. ( 中国中建科创集团有限公司 )

China Construction Science and Industry China Construction Science and Industry Corporation Ltd. ( 中建科工集团有限公司 )

China Construction Communications China Construction Communications Engineering Group Co., Ltd. ( 中建交通建设集团有限公司 )

China Construction Science & Technology 

China Construction Science & Technology Group Co., Ltd. ( 中建科技集团有限公司 ) (formerly known as China Construction Science & Technology Co., Ltd. ( 中建科技有限公司 )) 

CSCEC Digital Technology CSCEC Digital Technology Company Limited ( 中建数字科技有限公司 )

China Construction Harbour and Channel Engineering Bureau 

China Construction Harbour and Channel Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. ( 中建港航局集团有 限公司 )

CCIEE China Construction Industrial & Energy Engineering Group Co., Ltd. ( 中建安装集团有限公司 )

Articles of Association Articles of Association of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 

Reporting Period From January 1, 2022 to December 31, 2022 8SECTION IICOMPANY PROFILE AND KEY FINANCIAL INDICATORS 

# SECTION II  COMPANY PROFILE AND KEY FINANCIAL INDICATORS I.  Corporate Information 

Chinese name 中国建筑股份有限公司 

Chinese abbreviation 中国建筑 

English name China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited English abbreviation CSCEC Legal representative Zheng Xuexuan 

II.  Contact Details 

Secretary to the Board of Directors Name Xue Keqing Address CSC Fortune International Center, Building 3, Courtyard 5, Anding Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing Telephone 010-86498888 Fax 010-86498170 Email ir@cscec.com 

III.  Overview of Basic Information 

Registered address No.15, Sanlihe Road, Haidian District, Beijing Postal code of the registered address 100037 Office address CSC Fortune International Center, Building 3, Courtyard 5, Anding Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing Postal code of the office address 100029 Website www.cscec.com Email ir@cscec.com 

IV.  Information Disclosure and Place for Inspection of Annual Report 

Media names and website on which the Annual Report of the Company is disclosed China Securities Journal: http://www.cs.com.cn Shanghai Securities News: http://www.cnstock.com Securities Times: http://www.stcn.com Securities Daily: http://www.zqrb.cn Website of the stock exchange on which the Annual Report of the Company is disclosed www.sse.com.cn Place for inspection of this Annual Report CSCEC Board Office CSC Fortune International Center, Building 3, Courtyard 5, Anding Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 

V.  Overview of Stocks Overview of Stocks Class of shares Stock exchange of listing Abbreviation Stock code Abbreviation before change 

A share Shanghai Stock Exchange CSCEC 601668 N/A 9CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

VI.  Other Relevant Information 

Accounting firm engaged by the Company (domestic) Name Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP (Special General Partnership) Office address Level 17, Ernst & Young Tower, Oriental Plaza, No. 1 East Chang An Avenue, Dongcheng District, Beijing, PRC Names of signatories Zhou Ying, Yang Shujuan, Shen Yan 

VII.  Key Accounting Data and Financial Indicators for the Last Three Years 

(I) Key accounting data 

Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Key accounting data 2022 2021 Change YoY (%) 2020 After adjustment Before adjustment 

Revenue 2,055,052,070 1,892,706,307 1,891,338,970 8.6 1,615,050,549 Profit before income taxes 88,835,435 101,038,185 100,886,235 -12.1 94,272,194 Net profit attributable to shareholders of the Company 50,950,301 51,548,576 51,407,661 -1.2 44,924,929 Net profit attributable to shareholders of the Company after deducting non-recurring profit or loss 45,233,864 49,521,361 49,490,347 -8.7 42,666,265 Net cash flows from operating activities 3,828,927 13,989,638 14,361,321 -72.6 20,273,615 

At the end of 2022 At the end of 2021 Change YoY (%) At the end of 2020 After adjustment Before adjustment 

Net assets attributable to shareholders of the Company 384,322,141 345,627,781 343,900,090 11.2 300,463,053 Total assets 2,652,903,306 2,395,321,862 2,388,249,126 10.8 2,192,379,494 Total share capital at the end of the Reporting Period 41,934,433 41,948,168 41,948,168 -0.03 41,965,072 (II) Key financial indicators 

Key financial indicators 2022 2021 Change YoY (%) 2020 After adjustment Before adjustment 

Basic earnings per share (RMB/share) 1.23 1.25 1.25 -1.6 1.07 Diluted earnings per share (RMB/share) 1.23 1.25 1.25 -1.6 1.07 Basic earnings per share (RMB/share) after deducting non-recurring profit or loss 1.07 1.17 1.17 -8.5 0.99 Weighted average return on net assets (%) 13.94 15.90 15.93 Decrease by 1.96 percentage points 15.53 Weighted average return on net assets after deducting non-recurring profit or loss (%) 12.42 15.34 15.33 Decrease by 2.92 percentage points 14.75 Net assets per share attributable to ordinary shareholders (RMB/share) 8.93 8.00 7.96 11.6 6.92 Dividend per 10 shares (RMB) 2.527 2.50 2.50 1.08 2.147 

Explanation on the Company’s key accounting data and financial indicators for the three years preceding the end of the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A 10 SECTION IICOMPANY PROFILE AND KEY FINANCIAL INDICATORS 

① When calculating earnings per share, the restricted shares that have not yet met the unlocking conditions and that have become invalid are deducted from the weighted average number of ordinary shares issued by the Company. 

② According to relevant accounting standards, when calculating earnings per share, the dividends or interests on other equity instruments such as preference shares and perpetual bonds and restricted shares are excluded from the net profit attributable to shareholders of the Company. 

③ The net assets per share attributable to ordinary shareholders are net assets attributable to shareholders of the Company deducting other equity instruments, and then divided by the total number of issued shares as at the end of the Reporting Period. 

④ Dividends distributed are tax inclusive. 

⑤ The Company has retroactively adjusted the data for last year and at the end of last year in accordance with the relevant requirements under accounting standards due to business combination under common control. For details, please refer to Note XI “Share-based payment”, Note V. 67 “Earnings per share” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”, and Supplementary Information Provided by Management 2. “Return on net assets and earnings per share”, Note VI “Changes of consolidation scope” and other relevant information. 

VIII.  Differences in Accounting Data under Domestic and Foreign Accounting Standards 

(I) Differences of net profit and net assets attributable to shareholders of the Company in the financial report disclosed in accordance with the IFRS Standards and Chinese accounting standards 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

(II) Differences of net profit and net assets attributable to shareholders of the Company in the financial report disclosed in accordance with the foreign accounting standards and Chinese accounting standards 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

(III) Explanation on differences between domestic and foreign accounting standards: 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

IX.  Key Financial Data in 2022 by Quarter 

Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Q1 (Jan. – Mar.) Q2 (Apr. – Jun.) Q3 (Jul. – Sep.) Q4 (Oct. – Dec.) 

Revenue 485,438,959 575,332,128 474,502,662 519,778,321 Net profit attributable to shareholders of the Company 12,922,672 15,580,666 15,010,222 7,436,741 Net profit attributable to shareholders of the Company after deducting non-recurring profit or loss 11,423,819 13,447,942 14,828,172 5,533,931 Net cash flows from operating activities -122,480,702 53,608,682 16,378,755 56,322,192 

Explanation on differences between the quarterly data and data contained in regular reports disclosed 

□ Applicable √ N/A 11 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

X.  Statement of Non-Recurring Profit or Loss 

√ Applicable □ N/A Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Non-recurring items Amount of 2022 Note (if applicable) Amount of 2021 (After adjustment) Amount of 2020 

Gains from disposal of non-current assets 432,388 / 332,740 143,538 Government grants recognised into the current profits and losses 1,049,139 Non-operating income/other income 504,011 110,094 Income from step-realized business combination 1,251,160 Investment income 172,276 133,746 Profits or losses from changes in fair value of financial assets held for trading and financial liabilities held for trading and investment income from disposal of financial assets held for trading, financial liabilities held for trading, and other debt investments -84,935 / -170,587 247,893 Interest income from loans to non-financial corporations 469,261 / 111,009 58,784 Reversal of the provision on receivables and contract assets for impairment on an individual basis 3,326,302 / 1,414,761 1,288,041 Income from disposal of long-term equity investments 141,065 / 7,743 7,016 Investment income from disposal of subsidiaries -32,150 / 4,407 136,721 Income/losses from non-operating activities or occasional matters 1,173,635 / 318,529 1,213,044 Other non-operating income and expenses than the above items 746,481 / 161,932 -278,862 Impact on income tax -1,253,512 / -563,870 -559,756 Impact on non-controlling interests (after tax) -1,502,397 / -265,736 -241,595 

Total 5,716,437 / 2,027,215 2,258,664 

Explanation on the reasons for defining the non-recurring profit or loss items set out in the Explanatory Announcement No. 1 on Information Disclosure for Companies Offering Their Securities to the Public – Non-recurring Profit or Loss Items ( 《公开发行证券的公司信息披露解释性公告第 1号—— 非经常性损益》 ) as recurring profit and loss items 

□ Applicable √ N/A 12 SECTION IICOMPANY PROFILE AND KEY FINANCIAL INDICATORS 

XI.  Items Measured at Fair Value 

√ Applicable □ N/A Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Items Opening balance Closing balance Current changes Effect on current profits 

Exchangeable bonds 4,488,392 4,967,342 478,950 -95,670 Financial assets held for trading 71,597 20,153 -51,444 25,760 Investments in other equity instruments 5,062,186 4,610,471 -451,715 106,433 Other non-current financial assets 1,559,354 1,565,153 5,799 -15,025 Account receivables financing 3,773,078 4,658,182 885,104 /Current portion of non-current assets 142,945 / -142,945 /Other debt investments 264,083 272,924 8,841 16,594 Other current assets 2,218,083 1,730,559 -487,524 56,422 

Total 17,579,718 17,824,784 245,066 94,514 XII.  Miscellaneous 

□ Applicable √ N/A 13 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

# SECTION III  MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS I.  The Company’s Principal Business and Business Model during the Reporting Period 

As one of the most integrated and largest investment and development conglomerates worldwide bestowed with the longest history of specialized development, market-oriented operation, CSCEC is a market leader in housing construction engineering, infrastructure construction and investment, real estate development and investment, survey and design, etc. CSCEC ranked 9th in Fortune Global 500 (2022) and 3rd on the list of Fortune China 500, and continued to top the list of the Top 250 Global Contractors published by Engineering News-Record (ENR). CSCEC has been rated as Grade A by the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission (SASAC) of the State Council for 17 times. The three leading global rating agencies, i.e., S&P Global Ratings, Moody’s Investors Service and Fitch Ratings, affirmed CSCEC’s ratings as A/A2/A (respectively) with a “Stable” outlook, the highest credit rating among the global industry peers. CSCEC stands as one of the most competitive investment companies in China, specializing in real estate development, financing and investment in construction projects and integrated urban construction. Featuring a “four in one” business model integrating planning and design, investment and development, infrastructure construction and housing construction engineering, it provides a turnkey solution covering all aspects, processes, and elements for urban development projects, with a priority given to the synergy between internal resource integration and business development. Tapping into more than 100 countries and regions, CSCEC, as the largest engineering contractor in the world, specializes in a broad range of business covering all aspects related to urban development and each stage throughout construction projects. The Company is well equipped with the capabilities of comprehensive design, construction and land development, and has a complete industry chain of construction products ranging from R&D on products and technologies, survey and design, real estate development, construction contracting, equipment manufacturing and asset operation to property management. Among most super-high-rise buildings (300 meters or above) in China, many technically sophisticated and structurally complicated ones were built by CSCEC. 

> Housing construction engineering

CSCEC has an absolute advantage in this field. It adhered to the marketing strategy of “premium market, customers, and projects” and the business strategy of “high-quality and low-cost solutions”. By continuously tapping its potential and pursuing high-quality projects, the Company is committed to providing global customers with one-stop integrated services for high, large, precise, advanced, complicated and special construction projects. The Company has built a large number of landmark buildings in niche segments such as super high-rises, large venues, industrial plants, office buildings, hotels, hospitals, and schools, leading China and even the world in housing construction. Placing equal emphasis on infrastructure construction and project investment, CSCEC has achieved rapid development in infrastructure construction in China and the world covering urban rail transit, high-speed rail, extra-large bridges, expressways, municipal roads, urban integrated pipe corridors, ports and waterways, electric power, mining, metallurgy, petrochemicals, airports, and nuclear power plants and has completed many classic projects by relying on its strengths in technology, management and talents. Meanwhile, building on its strong capital strength, CSCEC has become a first-class infrastructure investor and developer in China. It has successively invested in and constructed a large number of national and local key projects in China, and is highly trusted in the fields of BT, BOT, PPP and other financing and investment construction models. The Company has established a long-term strategic partnership for infrastructure investment and construction with several provinces (regions) and municipalities and dozens of key cities in China. The Company’s infrastructure construction business covers dozens of countries and regions in North America, Central America, Hong Kong and Macao SARs, Southeast Asia, North Africa, Central and West Africa, South Africa, the Middle East, and Central Asia. 

> Infrastructure construction and investment

14 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

CSCEC owns two real estate brands, China Overseas and CSC Land. China Overseas encompasses all real estate business of COHL, and has always ranked among the most valuable property brands in China. With strong real estate business in dozens of economically dynamic cities in the GBA, the Yangtze River Delta, the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region and other national strategic development areas, China Overseas maintains a well-established and balanced nationwide strategic business network. China Overseas will also be committed to becoming an outstanding international real estate development and operation group. China Overseas will speed up transformation and upgrading to accelerate the formation of business layout that focuses on housing development, with quality commercial property development and operations as well as healthcare and other emerging business playing an important supportive and complementary role. CSC Land is the brand used by the real estate business of the Company’s divisions and design institutes, focusing on real estate development, urban renewal, asset operation and integrated services in first-and second-tier cities. CSCEC is committed to achieving vertical integration of a wide variety of operations ranging from investment, property development, design and construction to property operation and services. By enhancing internal resources integration and coordinated business development and leveraging extraordinary construction technology, advanced real estate development philosophy and first-class property service quality, it has established a sophisticated investment operation and risk management system in the real estate business area, and formed a unique competitive advantage in the industry chain. 

> Real estate development and investment

CSCEC is the largest architectural design comprehensive conglomerate in China. Its survey and design business arm mainly consists of seven top-rated major survey and design service providers, specializing in architectural design, urban planning, engineering survey, public utility design, and many other fields. The Company has established itself as a market leader in China in the fields such as airports, hotels, sports facilities, exhibition venues, ancient architecture and super-high-rise buildings, and has made outstanding contributions to the sector in terms of design originality, technology innovation, and industry standards development. 

> Survey and design

CSCEC is a pioneer in the domestic market that conducted international engineering contracting business. Taking use of its edge in the entire industry chain, the Company engages in foreign engineering contracting business, which covers housing construction, manufacturing, energy, transportation, water conservancy, industry, petrochemical, hazardous substance treatment, telecommunications and sewage/waste treatment projects, and successfully explored and completed overseas real estate projects. In terms of project operation, apart from the traditional general contracting model, the Company actively explored other project operating models, such as financing and investment channels to give an impetus to such project business models as general contracting, DB (Design-Build), EPC (Engineering-Procurement-Construct), BOT and PPP. Meanwhile, CSCEC made an active attempt in respect of capital operations such as cross-border mergers and acquisitions to enhance the quality and efficiency of overseas business development. Following the “internationalization” business philosophy, the Company has seized the development opportunities of the BRI, and served the BRI countries to improve the level of infrastructure, enhance the well-being of local people, and promote the brand influence of the Company. 

> Overseas operations

15 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

II.  Analysis of Core Competitiveness during the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A During the Reporting Period, there were no significant changes in the core competitiveness of the Company, specifically: 

CSCEC is one of the first state-owned enterprises adopting a market-oriented operation mechanism, to which the Company has been adhering. In light of the intense market competition, the Company continuously delivers high-quality products and value-added services to retain and attract clients. It has always been pursuing scaled growth supported by profitability, efficient resources application and operation and a higher asset turnover ratio, and achieving value creation capability higher than the average of the industry. The Company always highly values cash flow and takes multiple initiatives to enhance operational cash flow management, guarantee market-oriented operation vitality and ensure sustainable and healthy development of the Company. 

(I) Market-oriented operating mechanism 

Adhering to the international business philosophy and taking advantage of domestic and foreign markets and resources, the Company is committed to becoming a multinational company that allocates resources globally and operates efficiently. The Company keeps creating new pattern for overseas business’s high-quality development, formulating overseas market system with reasonable structure, consolidating advantageous markets, focusing on key markets and extensively developing potential markets and cautiously expanding new markets. The Company insists on advocating localized operation, actively satisfies development needs and deeply involves in urban construction of the countries where it operates. The Company competes and cooperates with world-class enterprises to achieve common prosperity and takes part in globalization at a higher level and to deeper extent. 

(II) Direction of globalization 

Producing or offering products and services that continue to secure, serve and satisfy clients is an important guarantee for the long-term development of the Company. In terms of selecting products or services, CSCEC actively expands in infrastructure investment and construction, green and low-carbon development, digital transformation and other fields and keeps adjusting and optimizing its business structure while maintaining its traditional advantages in survey and design, housing construction and real estate development based on its existing technology and market advantages. CSCEC is committed to the vertically integrated expansion of investment, design, construction, operation and services, and strives to establish a unique market position in the domain of its business, creating competitive advantages that are difficult for its competitors to follow suit. 

(III) R e l a t e d d i v e r s i f i e d a n d v e r t i c a l l y integrated expansion 16 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

Providing the public with high-quality and low-cost products and services has always been the goal of CSCEC. High quality comes from the Company’s technological, human resources and organizational advantages; while the advantage of low costs stems from the Company’s integrated business model, benefits of scale as well as the economy of speed. As an enterprise in a perfectly competitive industry, the Company has always taken “making appropriate and correct decisions and doing right things” as the basic direction for production, operation and business development. Focusing on implementing the marketing strategy of “premium markets, customers, and projects”, the Company continues to carry out “differentiation-oriented” market operations and competition. Through implementing the “differentiation” strategy, subsidiaries within the Company focus on their respective market segments, their corresponding professions (specialization), or their corresponding regions (regionalization), to develop their own “core products, unique services” to reduce internal disorderly competition and strengthen the overall advantage in external competition. 

(IV) Competition strategy featuring high quality, low cost and differentiation 

The Company respects its development history as a corporation comprising of multiple coroprate entities, and has formed, after its active exploration, a competitive group management and control model. The Company has positioned its headquarters as one that exercises strategic management and control, fulfilling the responsibilities and duties of “leadership, service and supervision”, and insists on the delegation and management of the second-level subsidiaries. The second-level subsidiaries operate under the authorization of the Company and enjoy the corresponding authorities in proportion to responsibility. For labor-intensive and mature business, the Company grants larger authorization and expands market contact to speed up market response and improve service quality. For capital-intensive and less mature business, the Company concentrates management and control to effectively avoid risks and rapidly occupy and break through target markets through resources concentration. 

(V) A management model with balanced authorization and concentration 

Various management efforts of the Company have always been for the realization of the Company’s mission, vision and goals. The fundamental purpose of management is to improve our work efficiency, while making our employees more fulfilled and the Company more prosperous. The Company established a vital, scientific, reasonable, concise and efficient system by way of the organic integration of its management in various functional areas of the Company to achieve the unification of responsibilities and rights. In order to improve the quality of products and services, the Company is committed to achieving the standardization of management, technology and work. With the help of information technologies and through the “integration” of standardization and informatization, the Company has improved its work efficiency and implemented the “bottom line management” approach to enhance product quality and reduce operating costs. 

(VI) Results-oriented and accountability-based management system 

The Company adheres to the talent development strategy of “specialization, professionalization and internationalization” and has a large group of talents loyal to the Company and dedicated to their careers. They have a conviction that group interests should take precedence over individual interests, having a good knowledge of technology, management and marketing with merits such as self-discipline, self-motivation and self-betterment. The Company always follows the basic human resources management concept of “retaining talents with career development opportunities, emotional connection and rewards” and “caring for individuals”. By offering occupational planning, education training and performance assessment for all employees, the Company intends to establish a compensation incentive mechanism that combines individual value creation and personal capabilities to share the results of the Company’s development with its employees and implement diverse medium and long-term incentive mechanisms, while strengthening its attrativeness to talents and allowing talents to give full play to their abilities, so as to provide stronger talent support for its development. 

(VII) “People-oriented ”human resource management 17 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

The Company proactively gives play to the role of industrial finance and exploits potentials of its internal financial service institutions to provide financial services for its principal businesses and form a development model with CSCEC characteristics, being “industry enhancement with financing”. Leveraging on internal professional financial platforms such as CSC Finance and China Construction Capital, the Company has carried out domestic and overseas capital pooling, loan pooling, structured financing, accounts receivable factoring, asset securitization, supply chain financing, finance leasing, insurance pooling and other business to provide timely and differentiated financial services that meet the characteristics of the industry in which the Company operates. The Company has increased finance asset reserves and connect closely with financial institutions and continuously expanded cooperation in green finance and finance technology to effectively improve the credit line of the Company and provide adequate financial resources reserve for high quality development of the Company. It has also promoted construction of a fiscal system and enhanced concentrated and refined management and penetrating monitoring on capital and other financial resources to avoid and mitigate capital risks. 

(VIII) A development pattern featuring “industry enhancement with financing ”

The Company’s continuous technological innovation has transformed its production and organization models. Relying on the business layout throughout the industry chain, the Company has formed a technology system covering construction research and development, design leadership, professional manufacturing, technological construction, intelligent operation and maintenance with an international leading edge in high-rise buildings and large-span space structure construction technology. It has built a source of original technologies for green construction and intelligent construction, boasting core R&D institutions including “2+6” and “CSCEC Innovation Platform”. The Company has undertaken 4 national key R&D projects under the 14th Five-Year Plan. During the Reporting Period, the Company was recognized as the “Enterprise with Outstanding Contribution to Scientific and Technological Innovation” by the SASAC for the term of 2019-2021. The Company has established 1 National Center of Technology Innovation for Digital Construction, 5 national-level enterprise technology centers (including sub-centers), 75 enterprise technology centers at the provincial and ministerial level, and 48 scientific and technological innovation platforms at the provincial and ministerial level, 155 high-tech enterprises, and 19 post-doctoral workstations; and has 2 academicians from Chinese Academy of Engineering, 1 winner of the highest science and technology award for engineering construction and 14 masters in national engineering survey and design. 

(IX) Development momentum driven by innovation in science and technology 

CSCEC is an enterprise with a glorious history. The Company is innovating in the course of inheritance. In the process of fulfilling the mission and realizing the vision, the core values of “quality assurance, value creation” and the entrepreneurial spirit of “loyalty, responsibility, and mission attainment” will be integrated into the rules and management practices and become part of the soft power of the Company. Resources can be exhausted, only culture lasts. Adhering to its creed which is formed against the backdrop of the market economy, and combining the trend of the times, the Company has seen a constant integration with its subsidiaries in culture development, which provides ongoing internal support for the Company’s ever-growing business. 

(X) Corporate culture in mind and action 18 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

III.  Brand, Competency and Honor during the Reporting Period 

Based on CSCEC’s good performance in brand building, operation and development, the brand reputation and industry influence of the Company have been further strengthened during the Reporting Period. 

Brand value: CSCEC jumped up to the 9th place in the Fortune Global 500 (2022) ranking, and the 3rd place in the Fortune China 500 list. It ranked first in the UK Brand Finance “2022 Global Brand Value Top 500”, the first place among Top 250 Global Contractors published by Engineering News-Record (ENR) for year 2022, and the 7th place among Top 250 Global Contractors for year 2022. The Company topped the industry in the evaluation of Chinese brand value organized by China Council for Brand Development with a brand strength of 952 and a brand value of RMB193.530 billion. It ranked first in the construction industry list of “International Image of Chinese Enterprises” for four consecutive years, and relevant case was selected into the “Top Ten Excellent Cases of International Image Construction for Chinese Enterprises”. China Overseas won the title of “China’s Real Estate Industry Leading Company Brand” for 19th times with a brand value of RMB149.3 billion, ranking top in the industry. 

Industry creditability: The three leading global rating agencies, i.e. S&P Global Ratings, Moody’s Investors Service and Fitch Ratings affirmed CSCEC’s ratings as A/A2/A with a “Stable” outlook. CSCEC has maintained the industry’s highest credit ratings for eight consecutive years. 

Quality and safety: The Company was granted 39 Luban Prizes and 77 National Quality Project Awards throughout the year. The Company obtained 16 “Safety Science and Technology Progress Awards” issued by the China Association of Work Safety. 176 of its projects were recognized as “Exchange Programs on Standardization in Construction Safety and Production of National Construction Projects”. It also obtained 133 “ISA International Security Awards”. 

Scientific and technological innovation: During the Reporting Period, the Company was granted 8,291 patents, including 857 invention patents, and yielded great performance in both number and quality of the annual high-level scientific and technological achievements. As of the end of the Reporting Period, the Company obtained 80 national science and technology awards in total, 105 awards of Tien-yow Jeme Civil Engineering Prize, played a leading role in developing 99 national and industry standards and held 53,580 patents (including 5,195 invention patents). 

Social responsibility: The Company was included in the “Central Enterprise ESG•Pioneer 50 Index” of the SASAC of the State Council. Three cases were selected in the “Research Report on Corporate Social Responsibility of Central Enterprises (2022)”, “Research Report on Overseas Social Responsibility of Central Enterprises (2022)” and “Research Report on ESG of Listed Central Enterprises (2022)”. The Company was awarded the 2023 CAIJING Evergreen Award for Sustainable Development – “Sustainability All-inclusive Award” and has been rated as the “Excellence” in the development of corporate social responsibility in China by the Research Center on Corporate Social Responsibility of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences for ten consecutive years. 19 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

IV.  Discussion and Analysis of Business Operation 

China achieved steady operation in its economy, stable improvement in development quality and stable social condition against the severe and complex domestic and international environment in 2022. China’s GDP reached RMB121 trillion in 2022, representing a year-on-year increase of 3.0%; investment in fixed assets (excluding rural household) amounted to RMB57.21 trillion, representing a year-on-year increase of 5.1%; investment in real estate development amounted to RMB13.29 trillion, representing a year-on-year decrease of 10.0%; sales of commercial houses amounted to RMB13.33 trillion, representing a year-on-year decrease of 26.7%; and sales areas of commercial houses amounted to 1.358 billion square meters, representing a year-on-year decrease of 24.3%. In 2022, the Company thoroughly implemented the decision and arrangement of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council as well as the requirements of the SASAC, with a focus on the strategic goals of “one creation and five aspects of strength”. Prioritizing progress while maintaining stability, the Company overcame difficulties and endeavored to achieve stable growth, accelerated reform and innovation for coordinating development and security, achieved new results in high quality development and made new progress in constructing a first-class enterprise in the world. In general, the Company demonstrated the following operational characteristics: 

1. Achieving progress while maintaining stability in corporate operation and development. During the Reporting Period, the Company’s newly signed contract value amounted to RMB3.90 trillion, representing a year-on-year increase of 10.6%; revenue amounted to RMB2.06 trillion, representing a year-on-year increase of 8.6%; net profit attributable to shareholders of the Company amounted to RMB50.95 billion, representing a year-on-year decrease of 1.2%; net asset attributable to shareholders of the Company was RMB384.32 billion, representing a year-on-year increase of 11.2%, and weighted average net return on assets was 13.94%, maintaining its leading level in the industry. Operational cash flow was positive for three years in a row. The Company pays close attention to investor returns. The proportion of cash dividend has increased for three years in a row and the annual dividend has exceeded RMB10 billion once again. The Company jumped to the 9th place in the Fortune Global 500 ranking, and maintained the highest credit rating in the industry and consolidated its position as the world’s largest investment and construction group. 

2. Seizing market opportunities by serving the overall situation of the country. The Company concentrated optimal resources and built new patterns and models of cooperation between central enterprises and local enterprises capitalizing on its advantages in the entire industry chain to actively integrate into regional development strategy and involve in investment and construction in key national areas such as the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region, the Yangtze River Economic Belt, and the GBA. Its investments and newly signed contract value in these areas amounted to RMB362.3 billion and RMB3.45 trillion, accounting for 89.5% and 88.4% of the Company’s investment and newly signed contract value, respectively. The Company extensively participated in the BRI and expanded its business operation to 73 countries and regions, which cover 20 overseas markets with turnover exceeding USD100 million in Hong Kong and Macao SARs, Singapore, Egypt and the United Arab Emirates. The Company actively promoted “going abroad” of Chinese standard and led the preparation of international standards for industrial construction, which enhanced recognition and organic integration of rules and standards and improved international influence of “Built by China”. 20 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

In 2023, the Company will deepen reform and innovation focusing on the strategic goal of “one creation and five aspects of strength”, deepen reform and innovation, prioritize the major tasks of “stabilizing growth, seeking for innovation, promoting governance, preventing risks and consolidating party building”, strive for accomplishing the 

annual goal and making greater contributions to building a modern socialist country in all respects. 

3. Yielding breakthroughs in corporate reform. The Company has accomplished all major tasks under the three-year action plan for reform of state-owned enterprises. With the optimization of the corporate governance system, the Company set up a regulated operation mechanism for the board of directors of subsidiaries and a management mechanism for external directors, which provided guarantee for quality and efficiency of decision-making. Three subsidiaries were listed in Corporate Governance Demonstration Enterprises by the SASAC. The Company further optimized the market-oriented operation mechanism, applied tenure system and contractual management into subsidiaries with substantive operations in all aspects, implemented professional manager system in 65 units, and adopted equity incentives to the effect of the medium – and long-term incentive mechanism. The coordinated development of subsidiaries has made solid progress, for example, the strategic synergy between China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Corp., Ltd. and China State Construction Silkroad Construction Investment Group Co., Ltd. has achieved initial results, and China Northeast Architectural Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd. and China Construction North Investment Co., Ltd. have launched strategic restructuring. The Company organized special action on “pursuing conservation and running enterprises economically”, and recorded general and administrative expenses of RMB1.65 per RMB100, representing a year-on-year decrease of 9.6%. 

5. Practicing social responsibility and assuming new responsibilities. Giving play to the advantage of the entire industry chain, the Company involved in novel urbanization construction and carried out urban renewal, old residential areas renovation and affordable housing construction and high quality structures construction based on local conditions; promoted the consolidation of poverty alleviation results of poverty stricken area and rural revitalization with actions, promoted targeted poverty alleviation of three counties in Gansu and pair assistance to Changting in Fujian province and implemented comprehensive renovation and improvement of the living environment in the urban area of Zhuoni County and village planning for rural revitalization of Kangle county and other projects. Bravely taking on the responsibility as a “chain leader”, the Company led upstream and downstream enterprises to overcome difficulties for common development and endeavored efforts in ESG work at strategic level to incorporate its ideology into corporate reform and development at all aspects and guided transformation of development concept and value pursuits. The Company offered employment opportunities for 2.3 million migrant workers and a variety of long-term skills training, fully paid them in a timely manner and recruited 32,000 fresh graduates, which contributed greatly to stabilizing employment. 

4. Realizing achievement in independent scientific and technological innovation. The Company systematically advanced the construction of a scientific and technological innovation platform and built the National Center of Technology Innovation for Digital Construction jointly with colleges and universities, filling the vacancy in this aspect. We have established CSCEC Technology Innovation, which acts as a platform providing support for technology innovation and new business development, and cultivated 26 “Specialized, Refinement, Differential and Innovation Enterprises”. Focusing on commercialization and industrialization, the Company identified two main directions: green and low-carbon development and digital transformation. We have the formation of numerous national standards such as green structures, zero-carbon building and zero-carbon communities, implemented hundreds of efficient carbon peak projects and a batch of pumped storage and photovoltaic power generation projects; accomplished the annual construction goal set for “CSCEC 136 Project”, and established CSCEC Digital Technology and an intelligent construction blockchain technology innovation institute to guide green and intelligent transformation of the construction industry. The Company keeps tackling key core technologies in infrastructure, intelligent construction, structures industrialization and other fields and enhancing investment in research and development. It achieved fruitful results in infrastructure operation and three other strategic research programs and was recognized as an “Enterprise with Outstanding Contributions to Scientific and Technological Innovation” by the SASAC. 21 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

• Key Business Data Items Unit 2022 2021 Growth YoY (%) 

Total value of new contracts RMB100 million 39,031 35,295 10.6 

I.  Construction business 

(I) Accumulative value of new contracts during the Reporting Period RMB100 million 35,015 31,074 12.7 By industry 1. Housing construction 24,728 22,506 9.9 2. Infrastructure 10,151 8,439 20.3 3. Survey and design 136 129 5.6 By region 1. Domestic 33,495 29,557 13.3 2. Overseas 1,520 1,517 0.2 (II) Quantity of housing construction works Ten thousand square meters / / /1. Accumulative area under construction 168,265 169,283 -0.6 2. Accumulative area of new construction projects 37,155 38,479 -3.4 3. Accumulative area of completed construction 25,441 24,176 5.2 (III) Quantity of infrastructure works / / / /1. Road (newly signed in China) Kilometers 4,623 4,502 2.7 2. Area (newly signed in China) Ten thousand square meters 4,765 4,407 8.1 

II.  Real estate business 

(I) Contract sales during the Reporting Period RMB100 million 4,016 4,221 -4.9 Of which: China Overseas ① 2,544 2,983 -14.7 (II) Contract sales area during the Reporting Period Ten thousand square meters 1,722 2,143 -19.7 Of which: China Overseas 1,015 1,322 -23.3 (III) Subscription sales at the end of the Reporting Period RMB100 million 47 97 -51.8 (IV) Average selling price during the Reporting Period RMB/square meter 23,326 19,693 18.4 (V) Land reserve at the end of the Reporting Period ② (Full amount) Ten thousand square meters 9,303 10,395 -10.5 Of which: China Overseas 4,389 5,100 -13.9 (VI) Purchase of land reserve (Full amount) Ten thousand square meters 1,489 1,842 -19.2 Of which: China Overseas 739 1,165 -36.6 Notes: ① China Overseas refers to the real estate business that China Overseas Land & Investment and its subsidiaries are engaged in, but does not include that of China Overseas Grand Oceans;  

> ②Land reserve at the end of the Reporting Period = land reserve at the end of the previous year + newly acquired land reserve -area completed in the current Reporting Period + (or -) adjusted area of projects.

22 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

• Key Business Data 

> 012,000 6,000 18,000 24,000 30,000 36,000

2022 2020 2018 2021 2019 

31,074 27,721 23,285 24,863 35,015 

> 06,000 12,000 18,000 24,000

14,198 16,151 18,927 11,993 20,551 

2022 2020 2018 2021 2019 0100 200 300 400 500 

418.8 449.2 515.5 382.4 509.5 

2022 2020 2018 2021 2019 

> 01,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000

3,826 4,287 4,221 2,986 4,016 

2022 2020 2018 2021 2019 

Unit: 100 million yuan Currency: RMB 

Value of new contracts for construction business Contract sales of real estate business Revenue Net profit attributable to shareholders of the Company 23 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT  

> Note: The denominator of the segment business is the direct summation of data from the four business segments of the Company (housing construction, infrastructure, real estate and design).

Unit: 100 million yuan Currency: RMB 

1.1% 25.7% 48.4% 24.8% 63.4% 26.0% 10.3% 0.3% 

61.7% 24.1% 13.7% 0.5% 

Housing construction Infrastructure Real estate Design 

8.0% 10.5% 19.0% 20.8% 

> 0.0% 5.0% 10.0% 15.0% 20.0% 25.0%

Housing construction Housing construction Real estate Real estate Infrastructure Infrastructure Design Design 

Proportion of new contract value Proportion of segment revenue Note Proportion of gross profit by segment Note Gross profit margin by segment Note Housing construction Real estate Infrastructure Design 24 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

V.  Main Operation Results for the Reporting Period 

(I) Analysis of principal business 1. Analysis of changes in related items in the income statement and cash flow statement 

Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Items Amount of the current Reporting Period Amount of the same period last year Change (%) 

Revenue 2,055,052,070 1,892,706,307 8.6 Cost of sales 1,840,182,381 1,677,967,644 9.7 Selling and distribution expenses 6,543,630 6,176,686 5.9 General and administrative expenses 33,996,779 34,641,264 -1.9 Finance expenses 19,673,762 11,294,318 74.2 Research and development expenses 49,753,236 40,019,753 24.3 Net cash flows from operating activities 3,828,927 13,989,638 -72.6 Net cash flows from investing activities -11,477,252 -32,632,456 /Net cash flows from financing activities 16,520,628 52,970,087 -68.8 

Reason for changes in revenue: The Company gave full play to the advantages of the whole industry chain layout, served the national strategy to continuously cultivate new market growth points and continuously manage marketing and project performance. The overall income maintained steady growth. 

Reason for changes in cost of sales: The expansion of business scale led to the increase in the cost of sales accordingly. 

Reason for changes in selling and distribution expenses: The Company’s real estate business increased advertising investment during the pre-sale period, and the corresponding advertising fees and business promotion fees, business fees and sales commissions grew to certain degree. 

Reason for changes in general and administrative expenses: Office expenditure and travel expenses decreased due to cost reduction and efficiency improvement and stricter control over expenses for the year of the Company. 

Reason for changes in finance expenses: It was primarily due to the increase in exchange losses as compared with that of last year due to larger changes in exchange rates of the USD and HKD against RMB this year. 

Reason for changes in research and development expenses: It was primarily due to the enhanced investment in scientific and technological research and development arising from the Company’s in-depth implementation of its innovation-driven development strategy. 

Reason for changes in net cash flows from operating activities: It was due to the increase in payments for construction, real estate development and purchases in the current Reporting Period. 

Reason for changes in net cash flows from investing activities: It was primarily due to the increase in cash receipts from other investment activities, as well as the decrease in cash payments for purchase of fixed assets, intangible assets and other long-term assets in the current Reporting Period. 

Reason for changes in net cash flows from financing activities: It was primarily due to the decrease in cash receipts from investments, as well as the increase in cash payments for debts repayment in the current Reporting Period. Detailed explanation on major changes in the Company’s types of business, profit composition or source of profit during the current Reporting Period 

□ Applicable √ N/A 25 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

2. Analysis of revenue and cost 

√ Applicable □ N/A In 2022, the Company delivered revenue of RMB2,055.1 billion, a year-on-year increase of 8.6%; with cost of sales at RMB1,840.2 billion, a year-on-year increase of 9.7%. The Company recorded a gross profit of RMB214.9 billion, a year-on-year increase of 0.1%; a gross profit margin of 10.5%, a year-on-year decrease of 0.9 percentage point as compared to that of the same period of last year. For details related to income recognition methods, please refer to Note III. 25 “Revenue from contracts with customers” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”. 

(1). Principal business by industry, product and region 

Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Principal business by industry By industry Revenue Cost of sales Gross profit margin (%) Change YoY of revenue (%) Change YoY of cost of sales (%) Change YoY of gross profit margin (%) 

Housing construction engineering 1,265,081,519 1,164,411,378 8.0 10.3 10.1 Increase by 0.1 percentage point Infrastructure construction and investment 493,498,360 441,893,060 10.5 20.0 20.1 Flat Real estate development and investment 282,044,629 228,551,609 19.0 -14.8 -12.5 Decrease by 2.1 percentage points Survey and design 10,763,560 8,522,205 20.8 -0.4 -0.1 Decrease by 0.2 percentage point Others 38,694,144 30,475,497 21.2 36.6 57.9 Decrease by 10.6 percentage points Elimination -35,030,142 -33,671,368 / / / /

Total 2,055,052,070 1,840,182,381 10.5 8.6 9.7 Decrease by 0.9 percentage point Principal business by region By region Revenue Cost of sales Gross profit margin (%) Change YoY of revenue (%) Change YoY of cost of sales (%) Change YoY of gross profit margin (%) 

China ’s Mainland 1,947,083,949 1,737,767,862 10.8 8.0 8.8 Decrease by 0.6 percentage point Overseas Note 107,968,121 102,414,519 5.1 20.9 26.9 Decrease by 4.5 percentage points 

Total 2,055,052,070 1,840,182,381 10.5 8.6 9.7 Decrease by 0.9 percentage point 

> Note: “Overseas” refers to regions other than China’s Mainland.

Revenue and its proportion in the last three years By industry 2022 Proportion (%) 2021 (After adjustment) Proportion (%) 2020 Proportion (%) 

Housing construction engineering 1,265,081,519 61.6 1,147,085,908 60.6 1,001,101,590 62.0 Infrastructure construction and investment 493,498,360 24.0 411,117,889 21.7 348,435,361 21.6 Real estate development and investment 282,044,629 13.7 330,943,286 17.5 271,292,353 16.8 Survey and design 10,763,560 0.5 10,808,369 0.6 10,607,297 0.7 Others 38,694,144 1.9 28,319,627 1.5 21,348,292 1.3 Elimination -35,030,142 -1.7 -35,568,772 -1.9 -37,734,344 -2.4 

Total 2,055,052,070 100.0 1,892,706,307 100.0 1,615,050,549 100.0 

Explanation on principal business by industry, product and region 

√ Applicable □ N/A 26 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

• Housing construction engineering business 

During the Reporting Period, the Company’s housing construction business grew steadily and continued to lead the mid-to high-end markets. The total value of new contracts for the whole year was RMB2,472.8 billion, a year-on-year increase of 9.9% with revenue at RMB1,265.1 billion, a year-on-year increase of 10.3%; gross profit was RMB100.7 billion, a year-on-year increase of 12.2%. 

> Beijing Yizhuang Blue-collar Apartment Project

During the Reporting Period, the Company stuck to the marketing strategy featuring “premium market, customers, and projects”, which enhanced its competitive strength in the field of medium and high-end housing construction such as super high-rise buildings, high-tech industrial plants, educational facilities, medical and health facilities. The proportion of newly signed contract value for public buildings kept increasing and that of residential properties decreased. In terms of industrial plants, the newly signed contract value amounted to RMB391.3 billion, a year-on-year increase of 85.9%. In particular, the Company has undertaken the Standard Workshop Construction of Phase II Korean Power Battery project in Yancheng, Jiangsu. In terms of educational facilities, the newly signed contract value amounted to RMB169.2 billion, a year-on-year increase of 33.0%. The Company has won the bid for the general contracting project of Guangdong Experimental High School Baiyun Yongping Campus. In terms of medical facilities, the newly signed contract value amounted to RMB207.4 billion, a year-on-year increase of 1.5%. The Company has won the bid for the general contracting project of Shandong Jinan Tangye (Class III) hospital. In the field of super-high-rise buildings, the Company undertook 4 super high-rise projects each with a height of over 300 meters, and undertook the Haikou Tower project, the tallest building in Hainan with a height of 428 meters, continuing to build a new landmark. In terms of old city renovation and urban renewal construction, the Company has undertaken large number of projects involving people’s livelihood, including the general contracting project of Guangdong Dongguan Dongcheng Yangqikeng urban renewal and the general contracting of integrated development project in the northern urban area of Fu’an City, Fujian Province. During the Reporting Period, the Company continued to enhance its core competitiveness in such fields as super-high-rise buildings, large-span spatial structure, rapid construction, green construction and intelligent construction and further enhanced its absolute advantages in the field of housing construction. The intelligent integration platform for high-rise building (building machines) and the multi-functional residential building machines independently developed by the Company formed industrial promotion and expanded into application and implementation in prefabricated construction field. The successful application of original technologies such as the first-in-class single-tower multi-cage circulating operation construction elevator and tower crane 5G remote group control technology in numerous projects, has multiplied the transport capacity of vertical transportation. A number of digital intelligent steel structure processing production lines and digital prefabricated building module production lines have been put into full operation, while the point cloud scanning measurement and control robots, welding robots, and concrete pouring robots have gradually transformed from research and development to engineering practices. The popularization of cutting-edge technological achievements to conventional housing construction projects has provided strong support for project undertaking and quality performance of housing construction. 27 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

• Infrastructure construction and investment business 

During the Reporting Period, the Company continued optimization and transformation of its infrastructure construction business and achieved rapid growth in scale. The Company entered into new infrastructure contracts with a total value of RMB1,015.1 billion for the whole year, a year-on-year increase of 20.3%. It recorded revenue of RMB493.5 billion, a year-on-year increase of 20.0%; and the gross profit amounted to RMB51.6 billion, a year-on-year increase of 19.6%. During the Reporting Period, the Company captured the opportunity from the state’s policy of “moderately making infrastructure investment in advance”, with a focus on segmented markets and achieved numerous landmark results through strengthened leadership and coordination. In the field of highways, the newly signed contract value amounted to RMB123.1 billion, a year-on-year increase of 37.3%, and projects valuing over RMB10 billion, including Longsheng-Dongzhong Port Highway and Wuhan Metropolitan Area Ring Line series projects were undertaken. In the field of ecological and environmental protection, the newly signed contract value amounted to RMB113.4 billion, a year-on-year increase of 35.3%. The Company undertook Asia’s largest urban inland lake water environment management demonstration project – Wuhan Tangxunhu Lake Basin Comprehensive Management PPP Project, rain and sewage pipe network PPP project with the largest investment scale in mainland – PPP project involving pipeline renovation of mixture of rainwater and sewage in central urban area and urban waterlogging control in drainage zoning in Jinan, and Asia’s largest ground-buried intelligent water purification plant project – Hangzhou Chengbei Water Purification Plant Project. In the field of railways, the newly signed contract value amounted to RMB33.3 billion, a year-on-year increase of 30.4%, hitting a 

record high. Due to the improved work mechanism and marketing system, the Company has undertaken the construction of Hanchuan East to Yichang North Station of Wuhan-Yichang section of Shanghai-Chongqing-Chengdu High-speed Railway, and Guangxi Liuzhou-Wuzhou Railway. In the field of airports, the newly signed contract value amounted to RMB50.3 billion, a year-on-year increase of 9.5%. The Company has undertaken Phase III Expansion Project of Terminal 3 at Baiyun International Airport in Guangzhou, Xiamen New Airport Project – Airport Engineering – Terminal Area Engineering Project, Renovation and Expansion Project of Terminal 3 at Changsha Airport and other projects. The Company believes that innovation is the first driving force and insists on enhancing construction of scientific research platforms and key technology research, promoting the construction of collaborative project management system and mechanism, and has achieved high-quality performance. During the Reporting Period, the Company formed 2 infrastructure technology and equipment engineering research centers, which involve nuclear power engineering and urban rail transit engineering. The first domestic unmanned beam factory (UBF) independently developed by the Company, equipped with AI and other technologies, has achieved full-process automatic flow operation; and the “design optimization and key construction technology of straddle monorail bridge spans” reached international leading level as a whole. 

Chuzhou Olympic Center Project 

Entered into new contracts with a total value of RMB 1,015.1 billion for the whole year a year-on-year increase of 

# 20.3 %Recorded revenue of RMB 493.5 billion a year-on-year increase of 

# 20.0 %Gross profit amounted to RMB 51.6 billion a year-on-year increase of 

# 19.6 %28 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

• Real estate development and investment business 

During the Reporting Period, the Company firmly implemented the national regulation policies to ensure the sustainable and healthy development of its real estate business. The real estate business achieved contract sales of RMB401.6 billion throughout the year, a year-on-year decrease of 4.9%, and a contracted sales area of 17.22 million square meters, a year-on-year decrease of 19.7%; revenue amounted to RMB282.0 billion, a year-on-year decrease of 14.8%; and gross profit amounted to RMB53.5 billion, a year-on-year decrease of 23.3%. During the Reporting Period, the Company delivered a new construction area of 22.36 million square meters, a year-on-year decrease of 20.6%; a completed area of 25.71 million square meters, a year-on-year decrease of 19.7%; and an area under construction of 74.70 million square meters, a year-on-year decrease of 15.4%. The Company acquired 100 parcels of land throughout the year with land reserves reaching 93.03 million square meters at the end of the Reporting Period; new land reserve amounted to 14.89 million square meters with a total land purchase amount of RMB184.72 billion. More than 90% of the new land reserve this year located in tier one and tier two cities, in particular, new land reserve located in tier one cities including Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou and municipalities directly under the Central Government and provincial capitals exceeded 85%, reflecting a further optimized land reserve structure. After years of development, the Company currently owns 13.52 million square meters of self-held properties encompassing office buildings, hotels, apartments, commercial real estate and others, with a net book value of RMB147.7 billion, accounting for 5.6% of the Company’s total assets. During the Reporting Period, the Company accelerated the upgrading of industry, expanded business areas in commerce, elderly care and logistics, continuously enhancing the operation and management as well as the profitability of self-held properties. The revenue from self-held properties amounted to RMB6.07 billion. During the Reporting Period, China Overseas maintained steady operation with contracted sales of RMB254.4 billion. China Overseas adopted a rational and scientific approach to managing the investment pace and determining the investment sequence to acquire high-quality land with a low premium and maintain the trend of robust growth. It acquired 40 parcels of new land and had new land reserves of 7.39 million square meters at a land purchase amount of RMB110.72 billion. The newly-added saleable value in the four first-tier cities (being Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Shenzhen) accounted for 48.1%. Leveraging on the competitive edge in respect of compliance with the “three red lines” indicators, China Overseas adhered to lean construction to promote the development of commercial properties, elderly care and logistics while focusing on accelerating the principal business of residential development. CSC Land put more efforts in marketing in active response to market change. Academy Mansion in Beijing and Garden Mansion in Baoshan, Shanghai were sold out upon its launch and achieved contracted sales of RMB147.2 billion throughout the year. It acquired 60 parcels of new land and had new land reserves of 7.5 million square meters at a land purchase amount of RMB74.0 billion. CSC Dongfu, CSCEC Yipin, Xinhe Real Estate, CSCEC Jiuhe and C-LAND and other brands successively built by CSC Land ranked among the top 100 PRC real estate enterprises in 2022 in terms of equity sales performance. For details, please refer to “Properties under development” and “Completed properties for sale” under Note V. 8 “Inventories” and “Advances for sale of properties” under Note V. 31 “Contract liabilities” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”. 

> China Overseas • Shunchangjiuli Project

29 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

• Survey and design business 

During the Reporting Period, the Company’s survey and design business maintained sound development. During the year, the new contracts amounted to RMB13.6 billion, a year-on-year increase of 5.6%; revenue amounted to RMB10.8 billion, a year-on-year decrease of 0.4%; gross profit amounted to RMB2.2 billion, a year-on-year decrease of 1.5%. 

> Upgrading Project to Build Beijing (Tongzhou) Grand Canal Cultural Scenic Area as A National 5A-level Tourist Attraction

During the Reporting Period, the Company continued to focus on architectural design, urban planning, public utility design, survey and other conventional design business, enhanced research in basic technology and improved its professional advantages in such segments as landscape architecture, airports, medical care, cultural expositions, and underground spaces. During the Reporting Period, the Company continued to improve original design ability and consolidate traditional design business, and won the bid for numerous landmark projects such as Xiong’an International Trade Center Complex project, Guangyuan Museum project, and Huzhou Youth Olympic Cultural Center project. The construction of Sanxingdui Ancient Shu Cultural Site Museum and its ancillary facilities in Sichuan, which was designed and constructed by the Company, has been commenced. China National Archives of Publications and Culture Xi’an Branch (Wenji Pavilion) project, which was built in a design-led EPC mode by the Company, was completed, and China’s first archaeological themed museum designed by the Company – Shaanxi Archaeological Museum opened. The Company continued to strengthen the urban planning business and promote the integration of garden landscape and cultural tourism operation. The Company has undertaken the upgrading project to build Beijing (Tongzhou) Grand Canal Cultural Scenic Area as a national 5A-level tourist attraction, the project on preparation of master plans and guidance of consulting services throughout the 7th Hebei Tourism Industrial Development Conference, and the project on preparation of Hetian Control Detailed Planning and Urban Overall Design, and others. Focusing on green and low-carbon development, the Company actively expanded the design consulting business in the fields of urban renewal and ecological environmental protection, and secured the bids for Baoding Fuhe River System Comprehensive Management project, comprehensive development project of Gaolan Ecological Restoration and Industrial Development Demonstration Zone (Start-up Area) in Lanzhou Economic and Technological Development Zone, and Zhuhai Qianshan Water Purification Plant Phase II Construction project. During the Reporting Period, the Company continued to promote the transformation and upgrading of the survey and design business, accelerated the improvement in the design industry system with full-field coverage, full-process services, full-value chain, and full-element growth, enhanced cultivation of versatile talents in design and consolidated the differentiated advantages of featured business. It promoted the application of BIM digital technology and the standardized design of prefabricated buildings, deepened the whole-process engineering consulting and general contracting business, and continuously improved the brand influence of “CSCEC Design”. 30 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

• Overseas business 

During the Reporting Period, the Company maintained a high quality development strategy in respect of overseas business and was actively involved in the BRI. It struck deep roots in key markets to steadily promote its international development. During the Reporting Period, the new contracts for overseas business amounted to RMB165.6 billion, a year-on-year increase of 1.3%; revenue was RMB108.0 billion, a year-on-year increase of 20.9%. During the Reporting Period, the Company focused on driving transformation and upgrading and accelerating the construction of a diverse development pattern. Based on traditional areas with strength, the Company endeavored to develop businesses in tunnels, new energy, water conservancy and water affairs, and successfully secured Saudi Arabia NEOM New City Traffic Tunnel project, Singapore MRT Cross-Island Line Punggol Extension P103 project, Serbia ECOFUTURE Solar Photovoltaics project, Malawi Kalonga Water Supply Line and other projects. The Company actively sought for multiple business models and secured Republika Srpska Vukosavlje-Brcko Highway project leveraging the “financing+design and construction” model, and the Oriental Commercial Plaza Sports Hall, which was invested, constructed and operated in Algeria, was officially opened. During the Reporting Period, the Company continued to enhance its ability in global resources allocation and deepen international exchanges and cooperation. Taking full use of the resources of its global partners, the Company developed and deepened the markets of Saudi Arabia, Indonesia and other countries in cooperation with enterprises in Spain, Japan and other countries, and increased cooperation with leading enterprises in host countries and maintained close exchanges and interactions with Saudi SAJCO in terms of tunnel construction, and with Singapore JURONG Group in terms of industry and infrastructure construction, so as to consolidate long-term and mutual trust relationship. The Company has strengthened “headquarter vs headquarter” connections and exchanges with financial institutions such as the Export-Import Bank of China and China Export & Credit Insurance Corporation, and continuously deepened pragmatic cooperation in overseas business promotion and key project protection. During the Reporting Period, the Company continued to optimize the market layout and promote new breakthroughs in key markets. Taking into full consideration of factors such as market capacity, operating base and resource allocation, the Company classifies and manages overseas markets to ensure accurate resource placement. During the Reporting Period, the Company secured Anaba-Oued Zied 13.5KM Railway Double Line and Modernization Facility Renovation project in Algeria, setting foot in the field of railway construction in Algeria for the first time; won the bids for South Africa’s N3 National Expressway Reconstruction and Expansion project and EB Overpass project, finally securing open tendering projects of the local government. During the Reporting Period, the Company advanced its quality performance of overseas projects, and a number of projects have successfully entered a new stage. The 20 main buildings of the CBD project in the new capital of Egypt were topped out, the Long Island Railroad Reconstruction and Expansion Project in New York, USA, was fully opened to traffic, Ethiopian Commercial Bank’s new headquarters building, the tallest building in East Africa, was officially completed, and the Etihad Railway Phase II A project in the United Arab Emirates was granted a completion certificate by the owner for recognition of its excellent performance. 

Bangladesh-China Friendship Exhibition Center Project Constructed by CSCEC 

Newly signed contract value amounted to RMB 165.6 billion a year-on-year increase of 

# 1.3 %Recorded revenue of RMB 108.0 billion a year-on-year increase of 

# 20.9 %31 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

• Other business 

Other business of the Company mainly includes primary land development, lease of machinery equipment and engineering supervision and management. During the Reporting Period, revenue was RMB38.7 billion, a year-on-year increase of 36.6%; gross profit amounted to RMB8.2 billion, with a gross profit margin of 21.2%, a year-on-year decrease of 10.6 percentage points. For details, please refer to Note V. 52 “Revenue and cost of sales”, Note V. 65 “Expenses by nature” and Note XIV. 1 “Segment reporting” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”. 32 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

(2). Analytical statement on production and sales 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

(3). Performance of significant procurement contract and significant sales contract 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

(4). Analytical statement on costs 

Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

By industry By industry Components of operating cost Amount of the current Reporting Period Percentage of total cost in the current Reporting Period (%) Amount of the same period of last year Percentage of total cost in the same period of last year (%) Changes in the amount of the current Reporting Period over the same period of last year (%) 

Housing construction engineering 

Raw materials, subcontract costs, labor costs, etc. 

1,164,411,378 63.3 1,057,399,772 63.0 10.1 Infrastructure construction and investment 

Raw materials, subcontract costs, labor costs, etc. 

441,893,060 24.0 367,959,096 21.9 20.1 Real estate development and investment 

Construction and installation costs, land costs, labor costs, etc. 

228,551,609 12.4 261,228,798 15.6 -12.5 Survey and design Labor costs, rental of equipment 8,522,205 0.5 8,532,540 0.5 -0.1 Others Labor costs, rental of equipment 30,475,497 1.7 19,302,698 1.2 57.9 Elimination / -33,671,368 -1.9 -36,455,260 -2.2 /

Total / 1,840,182,381 100.0 1,677,967,644 100.0 9.7 

Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Main cost components By industry Components of operating costs 2022 Proportion (%) 2021 (After adjustment) Proportion (%) 2020 Proportion (%) 

Housing construction engineering 

Cost of sales of products 21,812,934 1.2 23,319,044 1.4 21,545,271 1.5 

Subcontracting cost 398,178,917 21.6 351,983,820 21.0 300,907,652 20.9 

Raw materials 347,342,497 18.9 321,016,567 19.1 286,112,366 19.9 

Employee benefits 37,501,570 2.0 34,025,491 2.0 31,128,794 2.2 

Other expenses 359,575,460 19.6 327,054,850 19.5 294,093,938 20.3 

Sub-total 1,164,411,378 63.3 1,057,399,772 63.0 933,788,021 64.8 

Infrastructure construction and investment 

Subcontracting cost 224,249,598 12.2 185,781,252 11.1 115,931,326 8.0 

Raw materials 105,384,913 5.7 87,071,828 5.2 84,942,618 5.9 

Staff cost 62,440,426 3.4 51,690,903 3.1 46,293,060 3.2 

Other expenses 49,818,123 2.7 43,415,113 2.5 71,764,131 5.0 

Sub-total 441,893,060 24.0 367,959,096 21.9 318,931,135 22.1 

Real estate development and investment 

Carry-over of real estate development products 

217,259,901 11.8 250,144,727 14.9 190,935,051 13.3 

Other expenses 11,291,708 0.6 11,084,071 0.7 9,227,245 0.6 

Sub-total 228,551,609 12.4 261,228,798 15.6 200,162,296 13.9 

Survey and design Sub-total 8,522,205 0.5 8,532,540 0.5 8,039,404 0.6 

Others Sub-total 30,475,497 1.7 19,302,698 1.2 15,519,969 1.1 

Elimination / -33,671,368 -1.9 -36,455,260 -2.2 -36,274,375 -2.5 

Total 1,840,182,381 100.0 1,677,967,644 100.0 1,440,166,450 100.0 33 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Explanation on other information of cost analysis 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

(5). Changes in the scope of consolidation for the Reporting Period as a result of changes in equity interests of major subsidiaries 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

(6). Significant changes in or adjustments of businesses, products or services of the Company during the Reporting Period 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

(7). Sales to major customers and major suppliers A. Sales to major customers of the Company 

√ Applicable □ N/A In 2022, the revenue generated from/sales to the top 5 customers of the Company was RMB36.8 billion, accounting for 1.8% of the total revenue/sales of the year. Among the sales to the top 5 customers, the sales to related parties amounted to nil, accounting for nil of the total sales for the year. Circumstances where the proportion of sales to a single customer exceeds 50% of the total or there are new customers among the top 5 customers or the Company heavily depends on a few customers during the Reporting Period 

□Applicable √ N/A 

B. Major suppliers of the Company 

√ Applicable □ N/A During the Reporting Period, the amount of procurement from the top 5 suppliers was RMB25.403 billion, accounting for 2.0% of total procurement amount of the year. Among the amount of procurement from the top 5 suppliers, the amount of procurement from related parties amounted to nil, accounting for nil of the total amount of procurement for the year. Circumstances where the proportion of purchases from a single supplier exceeds 50% of the total or there are new suppliers among the top 5 suppliers or the Company heavily depends on a few suppliers during the Reporting Period 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

Other explanations 

√ Applicable □ N/A The Company’s business scale and its diversified business structure mean that the Company’s suppliers are extensive and the level of concentration is low. Public bidding with minimum restrictions is used for the procurement of bulk materials, which ensures the supply of resources and avoids reliance on a single supplier. 34 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

3. Expenses 

√ Applicable □ N/A In 2022, the Company’s selling and distribution expenses, general and administrative expenses, finance expenses, and research and development expenses totaled RMB110.0 billion, a year-on-year increase of 19.4%. The four items of expenses accounted for 5.4% of revenue, a year-on-year increase of 0.5 percentage point. For details, please refer to the relevant information as set out in Note V. 54 “Selling and distribution expenses”, Note V. 55 “General and administrative expenses”, Note V. 56 “Research and development expenses” and Note V. 57 “Finance expenses” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”. 

4. R&D expenditures (1). R&D expenditures 

√ Applicable □ N/A Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Expensed R&D expenditure in the current Reporting Period 49,753,236 Capitalized R&D expenditure in the current Reporting Period /Total R&D expenditure 49,753,236 Percentage of total R&D expenditure to total revenue (%) 2.4 Proportion of capitalization of R&D investment (%) /(2). R&D staff 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

Number of the Company’s R&D staff 35,095 Percentage of R&D staff number to the Company’s total number of employees (%) 9.1 R&D staff by educational background By educational background Number PhD 499 Postgraduate 5,278 Undergraduate 24,798 College 4,333 High school and below 187 R&D staff by age By age Number Aged below 30 (exclusive) 14,227 Aged 30 (inclusive) to 40 (exclusive) 15,380 Aged 40 (inclusive) to 50 (exclusive) 4,143 Aged 50 (inclusive) to 60 (exclusive) 1,279 Aged 60 and above 66              

> Note: R&D staff refers to personnel engaged in basic research, applied research and experimental development activities in the R&D institution during the Reporting Period. (Research and Experimental Development (R&D) Input Statistical Specifications (Trial) (Guotongzi [2019] No. 47))

35 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

(3). Explanation 

√ Applicable □ N/A In recent years, the Company has been extensively implementing innovation-driven development strategy to accelerate innovation in construction technology and made certain achievements in improving scientific and technological innovation platform system, achieving breakthroughs in core technologies in the construction industry, developing green and low-carbon construction technologies and exploring digital technologies for building industrialization, which vigorously enhanced its core competitiveness. 

Improving scientific and technological innovation platform system. During the Reporting Period, the Company reinforced the construction of a R&D institution system centered on the scientific and technological innovation platform system, took part in the construction of the National Center of Technology Innovation for Digital Construction, the only national-level center in the digital construction field, established two key laboratories for structural test analysis and safety control and civil engineering materials, as well as 6 engineering research centers for intelligent construction, green construction, ecological environment, urban renewal and intelligent operation and maintenance, extreme human settlement conditions, and infrastructure technology and equipment. The Company focused on rejuvenation and specialization of the R&D team, increased efforts on the cultivation and introduction of highly educated and high-quality R&D personnel, and promoted the formation of systematic strategic scientific research strength of the Company. 

Achieving breakthroughs in key industry technologies. During the Reporting Period, the Company continued to focus on key technology breakthroughs and complete sets of technology integration, constantly expanding its technology leadership in construction. The Company has possessed the world’s leading construction technologies such as single building translation, large roof slip, complex steel structure production and construction. The Company also independently developed “Aerial building machine”, large diameter vertical tunnel boring machines, 10,000-ton construction structure experimental system, monorail multi-cage circulation elevator and other major construction equipment. The independently developed underlying graphics platform technology of engineering construction software (AECMate) has realized market-oriented application. 

Developing green and low-carbon construction technologies. The Company adhered to the concept of “ecological priority and green development” and integrated itself into the whole process of investment, planning, design, construction and operation. The Company led the preparation of over 10 national and industrial standards for green construction and participated in formulation of numerous policy documents, created ultra-low energy consumption and zero-carbon innovative products upon research, promoted more than 100 green construction technologies in the industry and vigorously facilitated construction waste emission reduction and resource utilization, and basically formed a technical research system covering the entire process of construction and application service capabilities of the entire industry chain. During the Reporting Period, China Southwest Architecture developed novel thermal insulation and sound insulation wall material products, and energy conservation and noise reduction product system which empowered green construction technology. The world’s first “PEDF (Photovoltaic, Energy storage, Direct current and Flexibility)” building in CSCEC’s green industrial park that built by China Construction Science & Technology was listed as a low-carbon pilot demonstration case by the Ministry of Ecology and Environment. 

Exploring digital technologies for building industrialization. The Company insisted on digital-empowered transformation and development, used its best efforts to build an internet in the construction industry and sought for integration and innovation of big data, artificial intelligence, 3D printing and other technologies in the construction field, achieved the physical application of building information modeling (BIM), intelligent factory MES system and intelligent construction site platform, and established the world’s first building curtain wall digital production line and the first heavy steel structure intelligent manufacturing production line. It vigorously promoted industrial digitalization, arranged for such field as construction industrial robots, intelligent parking and intelligent venues and actively explored the applications of 5G and blockchain technology into the construction industry. During the Reporting Period, CSCI undertook Shenzhen Longhua Zhangkeng Path Plot Affordable Housing project, the first domestic MIC prefabricated 100-meter super high-rise building, and achieved industrial construction and digital management of the whole process from factory prefabrication, overall transportation and lifting for the first time. 

(4). Reasons for material changes in the composition of R&D staff and their impact on the Company’s development in future 

□ Applicable √ N/A 36 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

5. Cash flows 

√ Applicable □ N/A During the Reporting Period, the Company’s net cash inflow amounted to RMB10.93 billion, representing a year-on-year increase in net inflow of RMB22.691 billion. The Company’s net cash inflow from operating activities was RMB3.829 billion, representing a year-on-year decrease in net inflow of RMB10.161 billion, mainly due to the increase in project payments and costs for property development and purchases during the Reporting Period. The Company’s net cash outflow from investing activities was RMB11.477 billion, representing a year-on-year decrease in net outflow of RMB21.155 billion, mainly due to the increase in cash receipts from other investment activities and the decrease in cash payments for purchase of fixed assets, intangible assets and other long-term assets during the Reporting Period. The Company’s net cash inflow from financing activities was RMB16.521 billion, representing a year-on-year decrease in net inflow of RMB36.449 billion, mainly due to the decrease in cash receipts from investments and the increase in cash payments for debt repayment during the Reporting Period. For details, please refer to the relevant information as set out in Note V. 68 “Notes to the consolidated cash flow statement” and Note V. 69 “Supplementary information to the consolidated cash flow statement” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”. 

6. Financing 

The Company seized the opportunity of the low interest rate during the Reporting Period when both the interest rates of new bank borrowings and newly issued bonds decreased. As of the end of the Reporting Period, the Company’s total interest-bearing liabilities amounted to RMB695.4 billion, representing an increase over that of the beginning of the year. This was mainly due to the increase in the Company’s business volume, and accordingly in borrowings. The scale of interest-bearing liabilities was in line with the Company’s business scale, the structure of interest-bearing liabilities matched with the Company’s business structure, and the overall liquidity risk was low and effectively controlled. As of the end of the Reporting Period, the Company recorded a net increase of approximately RMB15.9 billion in the face value of publicly issued ordinary bonds, which well satisfied the capital need from rapid business development as well as industrial restructuring. The Company’s financing structure was further optimized due to increase in direct financing. 

(II) Operating investment business 

During the Reporting Period, the Company completed an investment of RMB404.9 billion, a year-on-year decrease of 8.7%. In light of changing market conditions, the Company maintained a prudent investment strategy by prioritizing investment returns and investment in quality projects to ensure sustainable and stable business development. Unit: 100 million yuan Currency: RMB 

Classification of projects Amount of investment during the Reporting Period Proportion (%) YoY increase (%) By categories of projects 

Real estate development 3,112 76.9 -5.8 Investment in infrastructure 455 11.2 -22.9 Investment in housing construction 357 8.8 -7.9 Comprehensive urban construction 104 2.6 -19.4 Fixed assets and other investments 21 0.5 -19.2 

By continuity of projects 

Continued investment projects 2,519 62.2 -4.1 New projects 1,530 37.8 -15.4 

Total 4,049 100 -8.7 

> Note: The above classification of projects is designed in accordance with industry practices and the Company’s internal management needs. The classification attributes of some projects will be adjusted according to the actual circumstances of the project. The year-on-year growth rate in the table will be adjusted retrospectively to the changed projects accordingly.

37 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

1. Real estate development 

During the Reporting Period, the Company’s investment in the real estate development business reached RMB311.2 billion, a year-on-year decrease of 5.8%; the payback of investment return was RMB310.2 billion, a year-on-year decrease of 10%; and the income to expenses ratio of investment was 99.7%, a year-on-year decrease of 4.7 percentage points. 

2. Investment in infrastructure 

During the Reporting Period, the Company’s investment in infrastructure reached RMB45.5 billion, a year-on-year decrease of 22.9%; the payback of investment return was RMB22.1 billion, a year-on-year decrease of 17.5%; and the income to expenses ratio of investment was 48.6%, a year-on-year increase of 3.2 percentage points. 

3. Investment in housing construction 

During the Reporting Period, the Company’s investment in housing construction reached RMB35.7 billion, a year-on-year decrease of 7.9%; the payback of investment return was RMB34.2 billion, a year-on-year increase of 49.3%; and the income to expenses ratio of investment was 95.9%, a year-on-year increase of 36.8 percentage points. 

4. Comprehensive urban construction business 

During the Reporting Period, the Company’s investment in comprehensive urban construction reached RMB10.4 billion, a year-on-year decrease of 19.4%; the payback of investment return was RMB15.4 billion, a year-on-year decrease of 27.4%; and the income to expenses ratio of investment was 148.4%, a year-on-year decrease of 15.6 percentage points. 

5. Investment and construction in key regions 

The Company resolutely implemented the major decision-making and deployment of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, and actively practiced regional and coordinated development strategies under the guidance of major national strategic planning and arrangement, and deeply involved in the investment and construction in key national areas including the coordinated development of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region, the development of the Yangtze River Economic Belt, the construction of the GBA, the integrated development of the Yangtze River Delta, and the ecological protection and high-quality development of the Yellow River Basin. During the Reporting Period, the investment of the Company in the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region, the Yangtze River Economic Belt, the GBA, the Yangtze River Delta and the Yellow River Basin reached RMB362.3 billion, representing 89.5% of the Company’s overall investment. 

6. PPP business 

In accordance with the relevant national requirements on the regulated development of PPP business, and under the guidance of national policy, the Company steadily carried out PPP business to control PPP scale rationally. In 2022, the Company had 445 PPP projects under construction, with equity investment amount of RMB659.82 billion, including 131 projects in construction and 251 in operation. In particular, during the Reporting Period, the Company secured 26 new PPP projects with equity investment amount of RMB64.78 billion, covering municipal engineering, traffic and transportation, public buildings, ecology and environmental protection. 38 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

As at December 31, 2022, the Company had 251 PPP projects in operation with an equity investment amount of approximately RMB348.78 billion, accounting for 52.9%. Classified by type, projects in operation at present concentrate mainly on municipal roads, comprehensive pipeline networks, cultural and sports venues, affordable housing projects and eco-environmental protection. In 2022, the Company continued to strengthen the operation and management of PPP projects and its ability in operation and management was further improved. On the one hand, the Company supervises the subsidiaries to complete the planning, preparation and filing of operation plans before a project is put into operation. On the other hand, for projects in operation, the Company monitors the assessment results of their operation and the monetization of user payment and government payment, so as to effectively protect the investment income. In 2022, PPP projects in operation delivered satisfactory results in the operation performance assessment, in particular, 98.6% of the projects passed the annual operation performance assessment and the payback of equity return was RMB73.92 billion, consolidated the two responsibilities of performance assessment and investment return. 

(III) Operating status of the professional sectors 

The Company further implemented the “specialization” strategy, and fostered and developed a number of professional companies with sophisticated management mechanisms, innovative capabilities and core competencies in their respective specialized fields. The Company engaged in 11 professional sub-sectors. Its newly signed contract value amounted to RMB675.3 billion for the whole year, a year-on-year increase of 14.9%; revenue was RMB442.11 billion, a year-on-year increase of 9.5%; gross profit was RMB34.49 billion, a year-on-year increase of 27.7%; and operating profit was RMB17.99 billion, a year-on-year increase of 37.0%. During the Reporting Period, the Company’s specialized division and layout became more rational, the synergetic and coordination mechanism was more sophisticated, and the overall competitive edge became more prominent, providing strong support for the Company’s development in the full business area, full life cycle, and whole industry chain capabilities. China Construction Industrial & Energy Engineering Group Co., Ltd. put more efforts to energy and chemical business and undertook such key projects as Shandong Yulongdao Refining and Chemical Integration project. West Construction continued to maintain a leading position in the industry in terms of the concrete output for commercial use. China Construction Science and Industry reinforced its advantages in the steel structure business, and China Construction Steel Structure Co., Ltd. ( 中建钢构 ), a subsidiary thereunder, was recognized as a “National Individual Champion Demonstration Enterprise in Manufacturing”. China State Decoration valued the formation of synergies with internal units and completed the decoration of key projects such as the Beijing Winter Olympics project and the Second Historical Archives of China. China Construction Harbour and Channel Engineering Bureau made new breakthroughs in the water conservancy engineering market and successfully won the bid for such key constructions as the Container Terminals in North Operation Zone of Shanghai Xiaoyangshan; China Construction Science & Technology built model project in prefabrication, such as Beijing Yizhuang Blue-collar Apartment and Zhejiang Jiaxing Zhuxiaohui Zero-carbon Science and Technology Innovation Village. 39 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Unit: 100 million yuan Currency: RMB 

Items Names of sectors Value of new contracts Revenue for 2022 YoY increase (%) Gross profit for 2022 YoY increase (%) Operating profit for 2022 YoY increase (%) Cross-sector 

Installation 512 657.3 2.8 41.0 5.1 25.6 5.5 Steel structure 151 221.7 0.3 15.5 14.2 8.0 -3.6 Commercial concrete 572 248.6 -7.7 26.1 -7.0 8.6 -25.1 

Housing construction 

Decoration 377 438.7 12.9 32.3 48.0 8.5 /Gardening 51 80.4 2.8 7.3 20.1 4.8 0.3 

Infrastructure 

Municipal projects 1,838 886.0 7.3 106.8 8.0 63.2 12.4 Railways 328 154.7 40.3 0.4 107.1 -1.5 /Rail transit 937 648.5 37.5 32.2 203.7 19.6 655.7 Road and bridges 1,653 933.3 5.6 72.5 51.0 39.2 31.2 Electricity 189 68.7 4.0 4.1 31.4 2.2 66.7 Port engineering 144 83.1 -2.2 6.7 -0.9 1.7 -2.3 

Total 6,753 4,421.1 9.5 344.9 27.7 179.9 37.0 Items Names of sector Gross profit margin (%) Operating profit margin (%) 2022 2021 YoY change (percentage points) 2022 2021 YoY change (percentage points) Cross-sector 

Installation 6.2 6.1 0.1 3.9 3.8 0.1 Steel structure 7.0 6.1 0.9 3.6 3.8 -0.1 Commercial concrete 10.5 10.4 0.1 3.5 4.3 -0.8 

Housing construction 

Decoration 7.4 5.6 1.7 1.9 -0.7 2.6 Gardening 9.1 7.9 1.2 6.0 6.1 -0.1 

Infrastructure 

Municipal projects 12.1 12.0 0.1 7.1 6.8 0.3 Railways 0.3 -5.2 5.4 -1.0 -6.1 5.1 Rail transit 5.0 2.2 2.7 3.0 0.6 2.5 Road and bridges 7.8 5.4 2.3 4.2 3.4 0.8 Electricity 5.9 4.6 1.2 3.2 2.0 1.2 Port engineering 8.1 8.0 0.1 2.0 2.0 0.0 

Total 7.8 6.7 1.1 4.1 3.3 0.8 40 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

> (IV)  Explanation on significant changes in profit arising from non-principal business
> □ Applicable  √ N/A
> (V)  Analysis of assets and liabilities
> √ Applicable  □ N/A
> 1.  Assets and liabilities
> Unit: ’000 yuan  Currency: RMB
> Items  Amount as of the end of the current Reporting Period Percentage of amount as of the end of the current Reporting Period to total assets (%) Amount as of the end of the last Reporting Period Percentage of amount as of the end of last Reporting Period to total assets (%) Change of amount as of the end of the current Reporting Period compared to the last Reporting Period (%) Remarks Total assets  2,652,903,306  100.00  2,395,321,862  100.00  10.75 Total assets increased by RMB257.6 billion during the year, mainly due to the increases in inventories by  RMB68.1  billion,  contract  assets  by  RMB46.9 billion,  other  non-current  assets  by  RMB42.3 billion, accounts receivable by RMB29.8 billion and investment property by RMB25 billion.
> Cash and bank balances  335,254,102  12.64  328,008,557  13.69  2.21  Cash and bank balances increased by RMB7.2 billion during the year, mainly due to the increase in capital deposits arising from enhanced capital planning. Financial assets held for trading  20,153  0.00  71,597  0.00  -71.85  Financial assets held for trading decreased by RMB50 million  during  the  year,  mainly  due  to  disposal  of investment in shares. Notes receivable  6,390,924  0.24  17,745,605  0.74  -63.99 Notes  receivable  decreased  by  RMB11.4  billion during  the  year,  mainly  due  to  the  decrease  in p a y m e n t  v i a  c o m m e r c i a l  a c c e p t a n c e  b i l l s  b y customers. Accounts receivable  210,431,620  7.93  180,598,582  7.54  16.52 Accounts  receivable  increased  by  RMB29.8  billion during  the  year,  mainly  due  to  expansion  in  scale of overall business resulting in increase in accounts receivable. Accounts receivables financing  4,658,182  0.18  3,773,078  0.16  23.46 Accounts receivables financing increased by RMB900 million during the year, mainly due to the increase in bank  acceptance  bills  arising  from  the  increase  in business scale. Prepayments  37,223,161  1.40  49,413,205  2.06  -24.67  Prepayments  decreased  by  RMB12.2  billion  during the year, mainly due to the transform of prepaid land premium to inventories. Other receivables  73,584,067  2.77  60,981,694  2.55  20.67 Other  receivables  increased  by  RMB12.6  billion during  the  year,  mainly  due  to  the  increases  in advance receivables incurred for maintaining day-to-day operation and deposits receivable and reserves arising from increase in business volume. Inventories  771,548,600  29.08  703,452,109  29.37  9.68 Inventories  increased  by  RMB68.1  billion  during the  year,  mainly  due  to  the  increase  in  cost  of development  and  products  developed  arising  from the increase in investment in real estate development business.

41 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

> Items  Amount as of the end of the current Reporting Period Percentage of amount as of the end of the current Reporting Period to total assets (%) Amount as of the end of the last Reporting Period Percentage of amount as of the end of last Reporting Period to total assets (%) Change of amount as of the end of the current Reporting Period compared to the last Reporting Period (%) Remarks
> Contract assets  262,511,324  9.90  215,633,918  9.00  21.74 Contract assets increased by RMB46.9 billion during the year, mainly due to the increase in completed but unsettled balance generated from the acceleration of construction progress of partial housing construction and infrastructure projects. Current portion of non-current assets  49,254,042  1.86  44,020,921  1.84  11.89 Current  portion  of  non-current  assets  increased  by RMB5.2  billion  during  the  year,  mainly  due  to  the increase in long-term receivables due within one year as investment projects, such as shantytown renovation receivables, were about to enter the payback period. Other current assets  123,911,880  4.67  111,409,836  4.65  11.22 Other  current  assets  increased  by  RMB12.5  billion during  the  year,  mainly  due  to  increase  in  prepaid taxes and input taxes to be deducted arising from the increase in business volume. Long-term receivables  109,091,602  4.11  103,423,119  4.32  5.48  Long-term  receivables  increased  by  RMB5.7  billion in  the  year,  mainly  due  to  the  increase  in  owner’s confirmation of rights of PPP and BT projects. Long-term equity investments  111,102,151  4.19  100,854,386  4.21  10.16  Long-term equity investments increased by RMB10.2 billion during the year, mainly due to the increase in external investment. Investment in other equity instruments  4,610,471  0.17  5,062,186  0.21  -8.92 Investment  in  other  equity  instruments  decreased by  RMB500  million  during  the  year,  mainly  due to  disposal  of  partial  investment  in  listed  equity instruments. Investment properties  147,675,206  5.57  122,696,798  5.12  20.36 Investment properties increased by RMB25.0 billion during the year, mainly due to the increase in the purchase of new investment properties as a result of enhanced capacity of operating properties held in the year. Other non-current assets  269,804,869  10.17  227,496,324  9.50  18.60 Other  non-current  assets  increased  by  RMB42.3 billion  during  the  year,  mainly  due  to  the  increase in  unrecognized  investment  project  payment  in  the year as a result of further increase in output value with  advancement  of  construction  progress  of  PPP projects.
> Total liabilities  1,972,516,396  74.35  1,753,642,804  73.21  12.48 Total liabilities increased by RMB218.9 billion year on year, mainly due to the increases in long-term borrowings, short-term borrowings, contract liabilities and current portion of non-current liabilities.
> Short-term borrowings  78,154,159  2.95  59,945,832  2.50  30.37 Short-term borrowings increased by RMB18.2 billion during the year, mainly due to increased short-term borrowings to replenish working capital and alleviate capital pressure arising from the increase in business volume of each segment this year. Notes payable  10,303,981  0.39  7,707,393  0.32  33.69  Notes payable increased by RMB2.6 billion during the year, mainly due to the increase in settlement by way of notes. Contract liabilities  337,693,219  12.73  324,053,883  13.53  4.21 Contract  liabilities  increased  by  RMB13.6  billion during  the  year,  mainly  due  to  the  increase  in advances for sale of properties as a result of more new properties opened for pre-sale.

42 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

> Items  Amount as of the end of the current Reporting Period Percentage of amount as of the end of the current Reporting Period to total assets (%) Amount as of the end of the last Reporting Period Percentage of amount as of the end of last Reporting Period to total assets (%) Change of amount as of the end of the current Reporting Period compared to the last Reporting Period (%) Remarks
> Employee benefits payable  10,329,539  0.39  8,556,196  0.36  20.73 Employee  benefits  payable  increased  by  RMB1.8 billion  during  the  year,  mainly  due  to  expansion  of business scale in each bureau, which led to increases in  business  volume,  labor  cost,  and  provision  of benefits at the year-end. Current portion of non-current liabilities  118,183,943  4.45  81,455,928  3.40  45.09 Current portion of non-current liabilities increased by RMB36.7  billion  during  the  year,  mainly  due  to  the increase in the part of long-term liabilities (including bonds payable and long-term borrowings) to become due in 2023. Long-term borrowings  398,970,893  15.04  338,776,755  14.14  17.77 Long-term borrowings increased by RMB60.2 billion during  the  year,  mainly  due  to  the  increase  in borrowings to satisfy the capital needs of real estate development projects and PPP project companies. Lease liabilities  4,840,508  0.18  3,692,806  0.15  31.08 Lease liabilities increased by RMB1.1 billion during the  year,  mainly  due  to  the  expansion  of  business scale  of  bureaus  and  the  increase  in  leases  for buildings and structures and other equipment. Deferred tax liabilities  9,537,504  0.36  5,398,797  0.23  76.66 Deferred  tax  liabilities  increased  by  RMB4.1  billion during the year, mainly due to appreciation of asset appraisal of business combination not under common control. Other non-current liabilities  4,672,981  0.18  7,459,201  0.31  -37.35 Other  non-current  liabilities  decreased  by  RMB2.8 billion during the year, mainly due to reclassification of exchangeable bonds to be due in 2023 to current portion of non-current liabilities. Other explanation Nil

43 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

2. Overseas assets 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

(1) Asset scale 

Of which: As at the end of the Reporting Period, the overseas assets of the Company amounted to RMB184.6 billion, accounting for 7.0% of its total assets. 

(2) Relevant explanation on a higher proportion of overseas assets 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

(3) Description of overseas assets 

√ Applicable □ N/A During the Reporting Period, there were no material changes in major assets of the Company. The above data on overseas assets has not been audited. 

3. Restriction on major assets as at the end of the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A For details, please refer to Note V. 70 “Assets with restricted ownership or right to use” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”. 

4. Other explanation 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

(VI) Analysis of operating information in the industry 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

Analysis of operating information in the construction industry 

1. Projects completed and accepted after verification during the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A Unit: 100 million yuan Currency: RMB   

> Segment of industry Housing construction Infrastructure construction Specialized engineering Construction and decoration Others Total

Number of projects 9,704 1,738 / / / 11,442 

Total amount 18,385 5,687 / / / 24,072 

√ Applicable □ N/A 44 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

Unit: 100 million yuan Currency: RMB 

Locations of projects Number of projects Total amount 

China ’s Mainland 11,187 23,059 Overseas 255 1,013 Of which: Hong Kong and Macao SARs 55 538 Southeast Asia 79 160 Middle East 43 218 North Africa 11 14 Central and Southern Africa 18 17 Americas 9 11 Europe 7 7Other regions 33 48 

Total 11,442 24,072 

Other explanation 

√ Applicable □ N/A With reference to the relevant national standards, combined with its operating characteristics and structural development needs, the Company’s housing construction projects include engineering general contracting and specialized contracting projects (foundation, steel structure, construction and installation, renovation and decoration, etc.); infrastructure projects include transportation engineering (roads, municipal roads, railways, urban rail transit, airports, ports and docks, parking lots, tunnels, bridges, waterways, etc.), energy engineering, petrochemical engineering, water supply and treatment engineering, environmental protection engineering, post and telecommunications engineering, disaster prevention engineering, hydraulic engineering and other projects (outdoor stadiums, outdoor recreational facilities, reclamation, artificial islands, underground comprehensive pipe corridors, pipe networks, etc.), which is also applicable to the items below. 

2. Projects under construction during the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A Unit: 100 million yuan Currency: RMB 

Segment of industry Housing construction Infrastructure construction Specialized engineering Construction and decoration Others Total 

Number of projects 18,982 5,868 / / / 24,850 

Total amount 68,635 27,864 / / / 96,499 

√ Applicable □ N/A 45 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Unit: 100 million yuan Currency: RMB 

Locations of projects Number of projects Total amount 

China ’s Mainland 24,170 91,114 Overseas 680 5,385 Of which: Hong Kong and Macao SARs 165 1,848 Southeast Asia 240 1,773 Middle East 63 531 North Africa 42 350 Central and Southern Africa 27 156 Americas 27 163 Europe 16 52 Other regions 100 512 

Total 24,850 96,499 

Other explanation 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

3. Material projects under construction 

□ Applicable √ N/A Other explanation 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

4. Overseas projects during the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A Unit: 100 million yuan Currency: RMB 

Locations of projects Number of projects Total amount 

Hong Kong and Macao SARs 221 2,386 Southeast Asia 411 2,313 Middle East 146 1,115 North Africa 82 556 Central and Southern Africa 79 307 Americas 36 174 Europe 24 59 Other regions 176 734 

Total 1,175 7,644 

Other explanation 

√ Applicable □ N/A 46 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

The status of the above projects includes completed and settled, completed and unsettled, under construction and others. The amount of contracts for overseas projects was calculated based on the exchange rate of foreign currencies against RMB as agreed in the contract or the spot exchange rate at the time of signing the contract. 

5. Total number of new projects signed during the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A The total number of new projects signed during the Reporting Period was 6,431 with an amount of RMB3,501.5 billion (amount of construction contracts). 

6. Orders in hand as of the end of the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A The total amount of orders in hand as of the end of the Reporting Period was RMB7,050.7 billion. Among them, the amount of the contracts that have been signed but the projects have not yet started was RMB2,689.8 billion, and the amount of the unfinished part of the projects under construction was RMB4,360.9 billion. Other explanation 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

7. Other explanation 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

• The Company’s qualifications in the construction industry 

As of the end of the Reporting Period, the Company had a total of 42 enterprises with special-grade qualifications, 1 enterprise with engineering design integrated Class-A qualification, and 69 special and integrated Class-A qualifications, namely 35 special-grade qualifications in general contracting of construction projects, 19 special-grade qualifications in general contracting of municipal utilities works, and 11 special-grade qualifications in general contracting of highway projects, 2 special-grade qualifications in general contracting of petrochemical projects, 1 special-grade qualification in general contracting of port and waterway projects, and 1 design integrated Class-A qualification. 

• The Company’s quality control system, implementation standards, control measures and overall evaluation 

Based on the ISO9001 quality system, the Company continuously improved the multi-level and comprehensive quality management system such as quality organization system, regimes and supervision system, and maintained effective operation. The Company issued the Handbook for the Prevention and Treatment of Common Issues in Residential Works ( 《住宅工程常见问题防治手册》 ), Quality Management (QC Team) Action Guide ( 《质量管理 (QC 小组)活动指南》 ), Quality Management Measures for Construction Enterprises ( 《施工企业质量管理办法》 ), Evaluation Measures for High-quality Works ( 《优质工程评价办法》 ) and a series of other standards and requirements for quality management, to provide standards and systematic safeguards for project quality. The Company strengthened the implementation of Measures for Graded Management and Control of Quality Risks of Works ( 《工程质量风险分级管 控办法》 ) to enhance the risk management and control capacity of institutions at all levels, and reinforced quality liability by implementing written notification of quality responsibility and works quality issue interview and enhanced punishment for enterprises with serious quality untrustworthiness. The Company attached great importance to quality assurance services, established customer files, and conducted regular and irregular quality review visits. The pass rate of the completed projects was 100%, and there was no quality accident above the general level. 47 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

• Operation of the Company’s safe production system 

The year 2022 is the last year of the “Three-year Action of Special Rectification for National Work Safety”, a year for the SASAC to “improve safety production of central enterprises”, and a year for the Company to perform “safety production responsibility”. The Company consistently implemented the State Council’s “15 mandating measures” for safety production. Starting from “paying close attention to the special action of safety production”, the safety production inspection management systems of enterprises at all levels operated effectively and successfully accomplished the staged goal set by “Work Safety Special Plan during the 14th Five-Year Plan period” and the established targets by “Three-year Action of Special Rectification for National Work Safety”, and no major or above production safety accidents occurred. The Company revised to improve the Management Measures for Safety Production ( 《安全生产管理办法》 ), prepared and issued the Comprehensive Emergency Plan for Production Safety Accidents and the Occupational Health Management Measures, issued the CSCEC’s Seven-Step Method for Safety Behavior ( 《中国建筑行为安全 “七步法 ”》), prepared 25 episodes of “Line of Defense” ( 《防线》 ) season 4 safety production warning film and issued the First Aid Handbook for Personnel at Construction Site ( 《施工现场人员急救口 袋书》 ), which further improved the safety production system. 

(VII) Analysis of investment General analysis of external equity investment 

√ Applicable □ N/A The Company’s external equity investment mainly includes stocks purchased from the secondary market for trading purposes, and equities held in other listed or unlisted companies for non-trading purposes. Accounting items include financial assets held for trading, investment in other equity instruments and long-term equity investments. 

1. Major equity investment 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

2. Major non-equity investment 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

3. Financial assets measured at fair value 

√ Applicable □ N/A Investment in securities 

√ Applicable □ N/A 48 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Securities type Stock code Abbreviation Initial investment cost Source of capital Carrying value at the beginning of the Reporting Period Gains or losses from change in fair value in current Reporting Period Accumulated changes in fair value included in equity Purchase amount of current Reporting Period Disposal amount of current Reporting Period Gains or losses on investment in current Reporting Period Carrying value at the end of the Reporting Period Accounting items 

Investment in stocks 601838.SH BANK OF CHENGDU 255 Self-owned funds 4,637 1,078 0 0 6,238 523 0 Financial assets held for trading Investment in stocks 601328.SH BANKCOMM 2,660 Self-owned funds 11,624 731 0 0 12,924 569 0 Financial assets held for trading Investment in stocks 600515.SH HAINAN AIRPORT 20,153 Share converted from debts 0 0 0 20,153 0 0 20,153 Financial assets held for trading Investment in stocks 600015.SH HUAXIA BANK 675 Self-owned funds 7,472 -600 0 0 6,895 474 0 Financial assets held for trading Investment in stocks 600015.SH HUAXIA BANK 29,325 Self-owned funds 324,635 0 59,388 0 0 19,594 300,867 Investment in other equity instruments Investment in stocks 601328.SH BANKCOMM 2,005 Self-owned funds 6,609 0 0 0 7,139 509 0 Investment in other equity instruments Investment in stocks 601288.SH AGRICULTURAL BANK OF CHINA 41,012 Self-owned funds 873,736 0 0 0 864,744 39,602 0 Investment in other equity instruments Investment in stocks 000617.SZ CNPCCCL 1,900,000 Self-owned funds 1,274,635 0 -320,463 0 749,865 32,481 829,672 Other current assets Investment in stocks 600390.SH MINMETALS CAPITAL 1,500,000 Self-owned funds 943,448 0 -599,113 0 0 23,941 900,887 Other current assets Corporate bonds Other investment in securities 18,000 Self-owned funds 47,864 3,044 0 0 50,908 2,517 0 Financial assets held for trading 

Total / 3,514,085 / 3,494,660 4,253 -860,188 20,153 1,698,713 120,210 2,051,579 /

Notes: 

① This table sets out the Company ’s investments in stock securities including financial assets held for trading, other current assets, and investment in other equity instruments. 

② Gains or losses for the Reporting Period, with respect to financial assets held for trading, include the investment income and changes in fair value during the holding period and investment gains from disposals during the Reporting Period; with respect to investment in other equity instruments and other current assets, include investment gains during the holding period. 

③ Other securities investment refers to investment in stock securities accounted for as financial assets held for trading, investment in other equity instruments other than those listed above. 

④ In addition to the table above, for other items included in financial assets held for trading and investment in other equity instruments, please refer to the relevant information as set out in Note V. 2. “Financial assets held for trading ”and Note V. 15. “Investment in other equity instruments ”to the financial statements under SECTION X 

“FINANCIAL REPORT ”.

Investment in private funds 

□ Applicable √ N/A Investment in derivatives 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

4. Specific progress of material asset restructuring during the Reporting Period 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

(VIII) Major disposal of assets and equity interests 

□ Applicable √ N/A 49 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

(IX) Analysis of major controlling companies or companies with shareholding 

√ Applicable □N/A 

1. Major subsidiaries acquired through incorporation or investment 

Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Name Nature of business Registered capital Shareholding ratio (%) Total assets Net asset Net profit 

COHL Investment holding 31,032,258 100.00 1,038,550,401 343,299,555 26,410,816 China Overseas Land & Investment Real estate development and operation HKD1,095,000,000 56.09 826,960,237 306,880,390 18,460,185 CSCI Construction and installation HKD1,500,000,000 64.81 197,161,534 56,966,278 7,550,380 China Overseas Property Property management HKD30,000,000 61.18 9,041,139 3,272,033 1,096,776 China Construction First Group Corporation Limited Construction and installation 10,000,000 100.00 104,059,363 25,307,019 3,941,578 China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. Construction and installation 10,000,000 100.00 164,692,431 33,140,826 3,931,422 China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. Construction and installation 5,087,865 100.00 278,516,314 69,658,750 11,415,427 China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. Construction and installation 8,000,000 100.00 149,249,520 21,282,653 755,122 China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd. Construction and installation 10,000,000 100.00 173,539,546 38,022,675 3,734,484 China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Corp., Ltd. Construction and installation 4,277,946 100.00 62,091,637 10,946,833 398,643 China Construction Seventh Engineering Corp., Ltd. Construction and installation 6,000,000 100.00 166,518,496 20,645,788 404,819 China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd. Construction and installation 15,218,000 100.00 285,964,013 76,206,400 12,253,831 China Southwest Architecture Engineering survey and design 383,310 100.00 8,588,286 2,608,238 422,059 China State Decoration Industrial renovation and decoration 1,000,000 100.00 18,835,305 1,878,250 87,050 China Construction Fangcheng Infrastructure construction 5,000,000 100.00 51,061,729 17,857,996 1,344,626 2. Major subsidiaries acquired through business combination under common control 

Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Name Nature of business Registered capital Shareholding ratio (%) Total assets Net asset Net profit 

CSCEC Xinjiang Construction & Engineering Construction and installation 3,500,000 85.00 61,278,673 15,039,703 1,699,727 West Construction Construction materials 1,262,354 57.79 33,303,844 10,431,485 715,148 CSC Finance Finance 15,000,000 80.00 97,797,751 18,693,387 1,031,350 3. Major subsidiaries acquired through business combination not under common control 

Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Name Nature of business Registered capital Shareholding ratio (%) Total assets Net asset Net profit 

CSC Development Construction and installation HKD100,000,000 45.87 9,200,558 1,780,899 351,091 China Construction Harbour and Channel Engineering Bureau Infrastructure construction business 1,333,333 70.00 9,523,233 2,355,096 239,868 

For details, please refer to relevant information as set out in “1. Interests in subsidiaries” under Note VII “Interest in other entities” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”. 50 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

(X) Structured entities under the control of the Company 

√ Applicable □ N/A For details, please refer to the relevant information as set out in “3. Interests in consolidated structured entities” under Note VII “Interest in other entities” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”. 

VI.  Discussion and Analysis of the Future Development of the Company 

(I) Industrial development and trends 

√ Applicable □ N/A The construction industry and the real estate industry are important pillars of the national economy and have contributed a lot to the economic development of the whole country, urban and rural construction and the improvement of people’s lives. In 2022, the total output value of the national construction industry was RMB31.2 trillion, a year-on-year increase of 6.5%; and the investment in real estate development was RMB13.29 trillion, a year-on-year decrease of 10.0%. The year 2023 is an important year for the 14th Five Year Plan. The Central Economic Work Conference stressed that it is necessary to seek progress while maintaining stability and continue to adopt a proactive fiscal policy and a prudent monetary policy, and the construction and real estate industries will play an important supporting role in the state’s steady growth. 

New-type urbanization construction is under accelerated advancement, providing the housing construction market with greater development potential. Each percentage point increase in China’s urbanization rate means more than 10 million people migrating to work and live in urban areas, which drives a huge demand for investment and construction in public service facilities and housing. According to data released by National Bureau of Statistics, at the end of 2022, the urbanization rate of the permanent population of China was 65.52%, far lower than that of developed countries, and there remains strong development momentum and huge development space in China’s housing construction market. China is extensively implementing the people-oriented urbanization strategy and continuously optimizing the spatial layout and form of urbanization. China is vigorously promoting the integrated development of urban agglomerations such as the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region, the Yangtze River Delta, the GBA, and the Chengdu-Chongqing Region, developing modern metropolitan circles, strengthening the global resource allocation, scientific and technological innovation strategy, and high-end industry leading functions of megacities, improving the livable and business-friendly functions of large and medium-sized cities, and promoting urbanization construction with county towns as an important carrier, which will bring new development opportunities for construction enterprises. 

The “stabilizing growth” policy is taking effect, driving rapid growth in infrastructure investment significantly. The state and local governments stay focusing on the investment and construction of “two novels and one major” (i.e. novel infrastructure construction, novel urbanization construction, and the construction of transportation and water conservancy and other major projects) and areas of weakness. China has accelerated the building of its strength in transportation to improve comprehensive transportation channels, comprehensive transportation hubs and logistics networks, and actively promoted the construction of key urban agglomerations, inter-city railways in metropolitan areas, city-suburban railways and high-grade highways and sped up the construction of 5G, industrial Internet, and big data centers. The pace is accelerated to improve municipal engineering, agriculture and rural areas, public safety, scientific research facilities, ecological environmental protection, public health, material reserves, disaster prevention and mitigation, and people’s livelihood facilities. In 2022, national infrastructure investment (excluding electricity, heat, gas and water production and supply) increased by 9.4% on a year-on-year basis. With the construction of China’s strength in manufacturing, product quality, aerospace, transportation, cyberspace, and the building of a digital China, China has implemented the 102 major engineering projects and special planning key projects under the 14th Five-Year Plan. Moderately advanced infrastructure investment will drive an accelerated investment in and construction of conventional and new infrastructure projects. It is expected that the entire highway and railway market volume will remain at a high level, while rail transit, water conservancy engineering, ecological environmental protection and telecommunications facilities are expected to become the fastest growing areas. 

Real estate is shifting to the inventory model, boosting an exploration of new development patterns. 

The central government continues to maintain the positioning of “housing for living in and not for speculative investment”, strengthens guidance on expectations, and explores new development models such as encouraging both housing renting and purchase. China has moved faster to develop the long-term rental market, promoted the construction of, supported the commercial housing market to better satisfy homebuyers’ reasonable housing demand, and promoted a virtuous circle and healthy development of the real estate industry based on specific conditions of cities. In the future, the incremental real estate market is expected to stabilize, and the industry will enter a high-quality development stage from scale expansion, which will put forward higher requirements on the development, asset operation and urban service capabilities of property developers, and industry concentration will be further improved. 51 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

The survey and design industry is undergoing faster transformation, driven by digitalization and green and low-carbon development. Positive factors such as the “dual carbon” goal, urban renewal and rural revitalization have vigorously promoted the development of the survey and design industry, and new market opportunities have been brought to urban planning, airport transportation design, municipal infrastructure design, cultural venue design and other segments. Meanwhile, the application of BIM (Building Information Modeling) digital technology, the rapid advancement of novel building industrialization and intelligent construction technology represented by prefabricated buildings, as well as the continuous promotion of the general contracting model, will further promote industry transformation and innovation. 

(II) Development strategies 

√ Applicable □ N/A During the 14th Five-Year Plan period, the Company will, under the guidance of the strategic goal of “one creation and five aspects of strength”, focus on main duties and principal business, and solidly promote the continuous high-quality, innovative, green, digital development and security development and transformation. The Company will moderately expand emerging business in close relation to its principal business to further enhance its core competitiveness and create a world-class investment and construction group. 

1.  Housing construction. The Company will keep consolidating its absolute dominant position in the housing construction market. In accordance with the principle of steady development with efficiency enhancement, the Company will focus on expanding projects in the public investment and high-quality real estate developers’ residential and commercial office projects, and continue to improve its competitiveness in high-end housing construction business such as super high-rise and large span projects. The Company aims to set an industry benchmark in supply chain management, informatization, construction quality, energy conservation and environmental protection and safety production, deliver scientific research results reaching domestic and international leading levels, and continuously improve its market competitiveness and development quality. The Company will continue to deepen the reforms and innovations in the professional construction business, optimize the internal coordination mechanism of the system to become the industry leader in terms of scale, technology and quality, as well as the first choice for high-end customers. 

2.  Infrastructure construction and investment. The Company will continue to take infrastructure as the focus of its transformation and upgrading, and develop such business into a pillar to stabilize its operational concepts and strategies. The Company will improve its capabilities throughout the entire life cycle from front end of the market, construction performance, operation and management, consolidate its leading position in the construction areas such as urban rail transits, airports and comprehensive transportation hubs, accelerate the improvement of comprehensive competitiveness and market share in the fields of highway, railway and water conservancy construction, and become an outstanding representative of emerging infrastructure markets such as new energy, intelligent transportation and general aviation. Infrastructure investment and operation is a key part for the Company to optimize its business structure and achieve transformation and upgrading. During the 14th Five-Year Plan period, the Company will attach great importance to investment management and safe and stable operation of projects, and strive to enhance “three key aspects of capabilities”, i.e., operation management, professional implementation and risk mitigation. 

3.  Real estate investment and development. Committed to becoming an outstanding international real estate development and operation group, the Company will continue to take “transformation and upgrading” as the keynote, accelerate the formation of a pattern that focuses on residential product development, supplemented by high-quality commercial development and operation as well as by emerging business such as education and healthcare. With regard to novel urbanization business, the Company will proactively implement the national strategic deployment of urban renewal, coordinate regional distribution, concentrate relevant resources, and give full play to its “four-in-one” advantages. The Company will focus on the zoning development and large-scale urban renewal, station-city integration, urban operation, etc., coordinate urban planning, construction, and operation management to continuously improve the quality of the urban living environment and people’s life, dedicated to becoming a leading domestic urban service operator. 

4.  Survey and design. The Company aims to enhance its brand influence with its survey and design business, cultivate high-end talents, strengthen scientific and technological innovation, and provide strong support for the Company’s general engineering contracting business. The Company will also expand its survey and design business, build the core competence of the brand, focus on key professional directions, achieve distinctive and differentiated development, and enhance the original ability of product solutions. The Company will create a highland of talents in survey and design, and prepare high-end talent reserves, strengthen business synergy and linkage, and innovate business cooperation models. Taking advantage of development opportunities such as the BRI, the Company will actively cooperate with entities within and outside the system to expand its overseas survey and design business. 52 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

5.  New business. Based on its advantages in developing its main responsibilities and business, the Company will grasp the new trend of industry development, keenly grasp the new opportunities of derivative formats, cultivate new growth points, and increase new momentum for development. Giving full play to the Company’s advantages, it will continue to explore new business formats and cultivate new momentum to tap into new materials, new equipment, new energy, new infrastructure, digitalization, ecological environmental protection and other business fields, striving to make business an important business segment by the end of the 14th Five-Year Plan period. 

6.  International business. The Company strives to achieve improvement in both quantity and quality of overseas operations by adhering to the overseas high-quality development strategy and taking advantage of the business opportunities brought by the BRI. The Company will build a coordinated and efficient organizational system, consolidate advantageous markets and key markets, identify potential markets, prudently tap into new markets, and create a market system with a reasonable structure. Meanwhile, the Company will draw on advanced management practices and business philosophy from leading international enterprises to improve its overall management. During the 14th Five-Year Plan period, the Company will, based on the needs of the new development stage, implement the new development concept and accelerate the construction of a new development pattern. With promoting high-quality development as the theme and deepening the supply-side structural reform as the main line, the Company will seize the new opportunities brought by demand-side reform, and following the country’s 14th Five-Year Plan and the Long-range Objectives through the Year 2035, proactively adapt to the new situation and meet new challenges. The Company will fully explore new opportunities in crises and changes. Bearing in mind the overall strategy of the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation as well as the profound changes unseen in the world in a century, the Company will maintain strategic focus and remain committed to development, amplify its advantages and complement areas of weakness, coordinate development and safety, and take full advantage of the domestic and international markets and resources for more quality, efficient, sustainable and secure development, realizing its vision of “building a worldclass comprehensive investment and construction conglomerate with global competitiveness”. 

(III) Operation plan 

√ Applicable □ N/A In 2023, the Company plans to achieve more than RMB4.2 trillion in the amount of newly signed contracts, and a revenue of more than RMB2.2 trillion. Adhering to the general work guideline of making progress while maintaining stability and the new development concept, the Company will focus on high-quality development, the strategic goal of “one creation and five aspects of strength”, strive to solve the issue of unbalanced and insufficient development, and promote reform in terms of quality, efficiency and driving force. The Company will adhere to scientific research and judgment, accurately respond to the external situation and national policies, take the initiative to study new situations, solve new problems, and creatively promote the work throughout the year. The Company will also make persistent efforts in the implementation of the Company’s reform and development tasks. The operation plan does not constitute a commitment to investors in terms of the Company’s performance. Investors are advised to maintain sufficient risk awareness, and to understand the difference between the operation plan and performance commitments. 

(IV) Potential risks 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

1. Safety, environmental protection and quality risks 

In recent years, the Company has substantially maintained stable safety production conditions, violations of ecological and environmental protection have further decreased, and the level of project quality control has been steadily improved. However, due to the large number and wide range of construction projects, safety, environmental protection and quality risks may exist for a long time. The Company has comprehensively arranged the “Year of Strengthening Safety Management” action in 2023, further standardize the risk management and control of enterprises at all levels in ecological environmental protection and construction quality management, and required that development must not be at the expense of safety, environmental protection and quality. It has effectively put safety, environmental protection and quality management in a more important and prominent position, ensured consistent prevention of safety, environmental protection and quality risk, and resolutely curbed various production safety, environmental protection and quality accidents. 53 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

2. Macro-economic risks 

At present, profound changes unseen in a century are evolving rapidly in the world, and the world has entered a new period of turbulence and change. There remain many profound contradictions in China’s reform, development and stability. Pressures from demand contraction, supply shock and weakening expectation remain, the foundation for economic recovery has yet to be consolidated, and various factors beyond expectations may occur at any time. The Company will strengthen macroeconomic research, catch close up with the national and local investment and construction hot spots, keenly respond to changes in the market environment, and go all out to serve the stable growth of the economy. The Company will search and revise its strategic plan in light of the actual situation to ensure that the plan plays a guiding role and the corporate goals can be fully implemented. It will organize operation analysis meetings on a regular basis to analyze the macroeconomic situation in a timely manner and analyze and solve existing problems and difficulties. 

3. Cash flow risks 

Due to the macroeconomic environment, intensifying cash flow cyclical fluctuations made it more difficult to manage operating cash flows. On the one hand, non-cash collection of the upstream industrial chain increased, and the scale of asset credit expanded rapidly. On the other hand, the pressure of downstream rigid payments, including private enterprises’ settlement of arrears and migrant workers’ wages, has increased. The Company will put more efforts on such aspects as strengthening cash flow management, focusing on loss-making subsidiaries and negative cash flow projects, enhancing cash flow control over investment and construction projects, and improving the cash flow incentive and constraint mechanisms, to further optimize the cash flow control index system. The Company will keep a close eye on business source planning and take measures by category and sector to promote the implementation of incentive and constraint mechanisms at lower levels, so as to ensure that the operating indicators are in line with the annual budget target. 

4. Customer credit ricks 

Due to the economic downturn and industry regulation, some individual domestic real estate enterprises’ material default risks spilled over. The Company has issued a number of management measures to strictly control customer credit risks, improve the early warning mechanism for high-risk customers, strengthen the supervision measures of public opinion of risk customers, and actively reduce real estate customers’ willingness to cooperate. The Company will ensure that the growth rate of accounts receivable is lower than the increase in revenue by strengthening the collection management of commercial notes and accounts receivable. It will take multiple measures such as suspending or delaying construction in a timely manner to stop losses and promote debt recovery, and focus on major risk investigation reports and normal resolution, in particular the risk resolution of key real estate enterprises. 

5. Operational performance risks 

Due to the continuous downturn of the real estate industry, on the one hand, owners of projects under construction have exerted more stringent control over cost, while the prices of raw materials and machinery keep rising, squeezing the profit margin of contracting; on the other hand, the pressure on sales collection of real estate projects under investment has increased sharply, and the profit of real estate business, which is one of the main sources of profit, has declined. The Company will improve the organizational system of “full life cycle business management”, strengthen lean management, optimize the coordination mechanism, and systematically improve project profitability. Taking sales collection as the core and cash flow control as the starting point, it will dynamically monitor the benefits of real estate projects to ensure the stable and healthy development of investment, and supervise subsidiaries’ performance in operation planning to improve their operation management capabilities, strengthen operation and maintenance performance appraisal, and effectively ensure investment returns. 54 SECTION IIIMANAGEMENT DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS 

6. International business risks 

There are political turmoil, armed conflicts, debt defaults, and currency devaluations in some countries (regions) where the Company operates due to the impact of international political and economic factors, which increased the difficulty in expanding new overseas projects and led to increased risks of prolonged construction duration and rising cost and personal safety of overseas employees of projects under construction. The Company will optimize and adjust its layout of overseas markets, strengthen preliminary risk assessment of projects, dynamically monitor the progress of project performance, take special actions to improve the safety and security of overseas employees, and implement special plans for overseas compliance management, to build a solid line of defense for market source risk control, improve overseas public safety and legal compliance management, and promote the high-quality development of overseas business. The financial risks faced by the Company in its operating activities include market risks (mainly exchange rate, interest rate and other price risks), credit risks and liquidity risks. With a focus on the unpredictability of the financial market, the overall risk management plan of the Company seeks to reduce the potential adverse impact of such risks on the financial performance. For details, please refer to the relevant information as set out in Note VIII “Financial instruments and related risks” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”. For details of the Company’s goodwill and impairment, please refer to the relevant information as set out in Note V. 22 “Goodwill” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”. 

(V) Miscellaneous 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

VII.  Details of and Reasons for the Company’s Non-disclosure due to Inapplicability of Rules or Other Special Reasons such as Involvement of State or Trade Secrets 

□ Applicable √ N/A 55 SECTION IV CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

# SECTION IV  CORPORATE GOVERNANCE I.  Information on Corporate Governance 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

(I) Standardized operation of corporate governance entities 

During the Reporting Period, the Company operated strictly in accordance with the laws and regulations of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) such as the Company Law and the Securities Law, as well as the administrative regulations issued by the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) and the relevant requirements of various rules formulated by the Shanghai Stock Exchange. It established and improved a standardized and comprehensive corporate governance structure, and effectively constructed a set of systematic and complete corporate governance systems. The Company continued to track legislative developments, extensively implemented the country’s latest corporate governance requirements, and further revised the corporate governance system to maintain the scientific nature, rationality and effectiveness of the system. The Company has been a sample stock of the SSE Corporate Governance Index for twelve years in a row, and was awarded as a Demonstration State-owned Enterprise for Corporate Governance by the SASAC of the State Council. In 2022, the Company won the capital market awards such as “ESG Best Practice Case”, “Best Practice Case of Board of Supervisors”, “Best Practice Case of Performance Briefings” and “Best Practices Case of Board Office” granted by China Association for Public Companies. 

Corporate Governance Structure 

> Shareholders’ General Meeting Board of Directors Board of Supervisors Strategy and Investment Committee Nomination Committee Remuneration and Appraisal Committee Audit and Risk Committee Supervisory Committee Management

56 SECTION IVCORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

1. Shareholders’ general meeting 

The Company convenes and holds general meetings in strict accordance with the Articles of Association and the Rules of Procedure of the Shareholders’ General Meeting to ensure that all shareholders, especially minority shareholders, enjoy equal rights to fully exercise their voting rights. For major matters that may affect the interests of minority investors, the Company separately counts and announces the voting results of minority investors at the general meeting to fully protect the legitimate rights and interests of minority investors. The Company provides on-site and online voting methods for shareholders to participate in the general meetings to ensure that all shareholders have equal rights to express their opinions and demands. Besides, the Company engages lawyers to attend the general meetings to confirm and witness the convening procedures, matters to be considered, and the identities of the attendees to ensure the legality and validity of the general meetings. 

2. Board of Directors 

The Board currently comprises 6 directors, including 4 independent directors. There are five special committees under the Board, including Strategy and Investment Committee, Nomination Committee, Remuneration and Appraisal Committee, Audit and Risk Committee and Supervisory Committee. The Company keeps enhancing the construction of the Board, implements the functions and powers of the Board, and promotes the standardized operation of the Board. During the Reporting Period, taking “creating a world-class excellent board” as the general direction of work, the Company has strengthened top-level design and revised the Articles of Association, the Rules of Procedure of the Audit and Risk Committee of the Board, and the Management Measures for the Proposals of the Board, etc.. The Company has improved its institutional setup for the Board by setting up the Supervisory Committee to further exert the Board’s role of supervision. The working mechanism of the Board has been optimized to consolidate the pre-communication mechanism of major investment projects, enhance the full-cycle management of the Board’s proposals, and continuously strengthen the performance service guarantee mechanism for independent directors. 

3. Board of Supervisors 

The Board of Supervisors currently comprises 5 supervisors, including 2 employee representative supervisors. The structure and composition of the Board of Supervisors comply with the requirements of laws and regulations. The Board of Supervisors held meetings under the Articles of Association, the Rules of Procedure of the Board of Supervisors and laws and regulations, and conscientiously performed their duties, supervised and inspected the performance of directors and senior management personnel and the legality and compliance of the Company’s financial affairs, and fully safeguarded the legitimate rights and interests of the Company and shareholders. The office under the Company’s Board of Supervisors assists in performing duties of the Board of Supervisors. 

(II) Information disclosure 

The Company has always adhered to the bottom line of legality and compliance, persisted in conveying the Company’s value with high quality and standards, and improved the level of standardized operation. During the Reporting Period, 143 announcements and documents were completed to demonstrate the effectiveness of the Company’s business development from multiple perspectives and in an all-round way through regular reports and temporary announcements, and to timely remind the Company of the risks it may face. Taking investors’ needs as the guide, the Company adheres to the combination of statutory and voluntary disclosure and issued the Measures for the Management of Voluntary Information Disclosure (《自愿性信息披露管理办法》 ) to build a “mandatory + voluntary” information disclosure management system, highlighting information on strategic planning, scientific research achievements, PPP business and ESG, and enhancing investors’ expectations. In the integration of business and finance information, the Company expands the scope of financial analysis, and enriches business statistics to provide more detailed information for investors’ decision-making. In terms of overseas dissemination promotion, the English version of the annual report won the International ARC Gold Award again. Due to the satisfactory information disclosure performance, the Company was awarded the best rating (Grade A) for the 2021– 2022 Information Disclosure Work Evaluation by the Shanghai Stock Exchange. 57 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

(III) Investor relations management 

The Company attaches great importance to maintaining and shaping good investor relationship management to enrich investor communication channels, and communicates with investors through general meetings, performance briefings, strategy meetings, and investor open days. Throughout the year, the Company held 3 performance briefings for global investors in the form of “on-site + calls + announcement solicitation of issues + live text + live audio and video”, attracting over 130,000 online participants. The Company adhered to holding a special promotion session for annuity institutions and analyst groups to enhance business linkage among various types of investors. The Company held a special promotion event for specific categories of international investors for the first time, communicated and had exchanges with Singaporean investors with a focus on such topics as ESG and domestic market situation, so that more international investors and partners could know more about and pay a closer eye on CSCEC. To maintain investors, the Company received 70 institutional research and telephone communication with over 300 persons, and held management meetings with important investors and securities analysts to conduct in-depth exchanges. The Company has built an exclusive communication and promotion platform with investors and officially launched the WeChat public account platform of “CSCEC Investor Relations”, setting an example for new media applications among central construction enterprises, and promoting the development of a digital and intelligent investment relations. During the Reporting Period, the Company strictly complied with the Administrative Measures for Information Disclosure and Internal Reports of Material Information, the Administrative Measures for Accountability Regarding Major Errors in the Annual Report Information Disclosure, the Regulations on the Management of Funds from Related Party Transactions, the Measures on the Management of Shares and Changes in Shareholdings of the Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management in the Company, and the Administrative Measures on Insider Registration and other systems. There was no major violation of relevant rules or non-compliance with the relevant CSRC regulations and requirements in terms of corporate governance. The Company was not subject to administrative punishment or notice of criticism by the CSRC, nor was it punished by other regulatory agencies or condemned by the stock exchange. 

Whether the corporate governance is seriously non-compliant with laws, administrative regulations and the requirements of the CSRC on governance of listed companies; if yes, please provide the reasons 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

II.  Specific Measures of the Controlling Shareholder and De Facto Controller of the Company for Ensuring the Independence of the Company in Terms of Assets, Personnel, Finance, Organization and Business; and Solutions, Work Progress and Subsequent Work Plan for Addressing the Impact on the Company’s Independence 

□ Applicable √ N/A Information on the business of the controlling shareholder, de facto controller and other entities under their respective control that are engaged in the same or similar business as the Company, as well as the impact of horizontal competition or major changes in horizontal competition on the Company, the measures taken, the progress of the solution and the follow-up solution. 

□ Applicable √ N/A The controlling shareholder of the Company is China State Construction (formerly known as China State Construction Engineering (中国建筑工程总公司 )). In December 2007, China State Construction Engineering restructured its affiliates and all assets as a whole, initiated and established China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, and injected all its principal business and assets, liabilities, qualifications and brands into CSCEC which was listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange in July 2009 as a whole. After the listing, China State Construction, as the substantial shareholder, mainly conducts operation and management activities on the platform of CSCEC. As of December 31, 2022, the latest audited total assets, operating income and net profit of CSCEC accounted for more than 99% of the corresponding indicators of China State Construction. During the Reporting Period, the controlling shareholder of the Company strictly regulated their own behavior, exercised their rights and performed their obligations in accordance with the law. The Company strictly guarded against risks such as capital occupation and illegal guarantees by the controlling shareholder, and urged the controlling shareholder to fulfill its commitments and maintained independence from the controlling shareholder in terms of assets, personnel, finance, organization, and business. 58 SECTION IVCORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

III.  Overview on the General Meeting of Shareholders Meeting Date Search index of the designated website for publishing resolutions Date of disclosure of resolutions Resolutions 

2021 annual general meeting May 13, 2022 www.sse.com.cn May 14, 2022 Considered and approved the 2021 Work Report of the Board of Directors of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, the 2021 Work Report of Independent Directors of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, the 2021 Work Report of the Board of Supervisors of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, the Proposal on 2021 Annual Final Accounts Report of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, the Proposal on 2021 Profit Distribution Plan of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, the Proposal on Dividend Distribution Plan for the Next Three Years (2021-2023) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, the Proposal on the 2021 Annual Report of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, the Proposal on the Implementation of the 2021 Investment Budget and the 2022 Proposed Investment Budget Plan of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, the Proposal on 2022 Financial Budget Report of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, the Proposal on Guarantee Quota in 2022 of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, the Proposal on Re-appointment of Internal Control Auditor in 2022 of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, the Proposal on Re-appointment of Financial Report Auditor in 2022 of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, the Proposal on Amending the Regulations on Management of Related Party Transactions of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited and the Proposal on Repurchase of Certain Participants’ Shares under Phases III and IV Restricted A Share Incentive Schemes of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 2022 first extraordinary general meeting December 28, 2022 www.sse.com.cn December 29, 2022 Considered and approved the Proposal on Amending the Articles of Association of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, the Proposal on the Renewal of the Financial Service Framework Agreement between China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. and China State Construction Engineering Corporation and the Proposal on the Renewal of the Comprehensive Service Framework Agreement between China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited and China State Construction Engineering Corporation 

Preference shareholders with voting rights recovered request convening extraordinary general meetings 

□ Applicable √ N/A Description of general meetings 

√ Applicable □ N/A During the Reporting Period, a total of 14 proposals were considered at the 2021 annual general meeting of the Company, and all were approved by voting. A total of 3 proposals were considered at the 2022 first extraordinary general meeting of the Company, and all were approved by voting. The resolutions were disclosed on the website of the Shanghai Stock Exchange, the China Securities Journal, the Shanghai Securities News, the Securities Times and the Securities Daily. 59 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

> IV.  Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management
> (I)  Changes  in  shareholding  and  remuneration  of  incumbent  and  resigned  directors,  supervisors  and  senior  management  during  the Reporting Period
> √ Applicable  □ N/A Unit: 0,000 shares
> Name  Position  Gender  Age Commencement date of the term of office Expiry date of the term of office Number of shares held at the beginning of the year Number of shares held at the end of the year Share changes during the year Reason for changes Total pre-tax remuneration received from the Company during the Reporting Period (0’000 yuan) Whether receiving remuneration from related parties of the Company Incumbent directors, supervisors and senior management
> Zheng Xuexuan Chairman Male  56 November 26, 2021  May 12, 2024 50.4  50.4  0 / / Yes Director  May 7, 2019  May 12, 2024 President  March 4, 2020  February 25, 2022 Zhang Zhaoxiang Director Male  59 December 7, 2020  May 12, 2024 0 0 0 / / Yes President  February 25, 2022 Upon a new appointment/dismissal by the Board of Directors Xu Wenrong  Independent director  Male  61  May 13, 2021  May 12, 2024  0 0 0 / / No Jia Chen  Independent director  Male  67  January 9, 2018  May 12, 2024  0 0 0 / 8 No Sun Chengming  Independent director  Male  63  May 13, 2021  May 12, 2024  0 0 0 / 7.33  No Li Ping  Independent director  Male  69  May 13, 2021  May 12, 2024  0 0 0 / 7.33  No Shi Zhiping  Chairman of the Board of Supervisors  Male  59  August 24, 2020  May 12, 2024  23.8  23.8  0 / 165.94  No Li Jianbo  Supervisor  Male  65  January 9, 2018  May 12, 2024  44.8  44.8  0 / 6 No Tian Shifang  Supervisor  Male  65  January 9, 2018  May 12, 2024  15.4  15.4  0 / 6 No Lv Xiaogang  Employee representative supervisor  Male  61  May 13, 2021  May 12, 2024  16.7  16.7  0 / 6 No Qu Hongguang  Employee representative supervisor  Male  61  May 13, 2021  May 12, 2024  0 0 0 / 6 No Wang Yunlin Vice president, chief financial officer Male  59 January 15, 2019 Upon a new appointment/dismissal by the Board of Directors  0 0 0 / / Yes General Counsel  September 20, 2022 Upon a new appointment/dismissal by the Board of Directors Zhao Xiaojiang  Vice president  Male  57  January 19, 2016 Upon a new appointment/dismissal by the Board of Directors 0 0 0 / / Yes

60 SECTION IVCORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

> Name  Position  Gender  Age Commencement date of the term of office Expiry date of the term of office Number of shares held at the beginning of the year Number of shares held at the end of the year Share changes during the year Reason for changes Total pre-tax remuneration received from the Company during the Reporting Period (0’000 yuan) Whether receiving remuneration from related parties of the Company
> Ma Zeping  Vice president  Male  60  December 1, 2010 Upon a new appointment/dismissal by the Board of Directors 50.4  50.4  0 / / Yes Zhou Yong  Vice president  Male  52  January 28, 2019 Upon a new appointment/dismissal by the Board of Directors 83.7  83.7  0 / / Yes Shan Guangxiu  Vice president  Female  52  September 11, 2020 Upon a new appointment/dismissal by the Board of Directors 122.046  122.046  0 / / Yes Xue Keqing  Secretary to the Board  Male  59  June 15, 2018 Upon a new appointment/dismissal by the Board of Directors 201.9  201.9  0 / 239.77  Note 1  No
> Resigned directors, supervisors and senior management
> Huang Kesi  Former vice president  Male  62  October 27, 2017  February 7, 2023  134.716  134.716  0 / 223.00  No
> Total  / / / / / 743.862  743.862  0 / 675.37  /Note 1: Including incentive income for the term of office in 2019-2021. Note 2: Considering the appointment and dismissal of the leadership of China State Construction by the Organization Department of the CPC Central Committee and the SASAC of the State Council, remuneration of the leaders of China State Construction will be paid by China State Construction and disclosed on the Company’s official website. The restriction on part-time occupations for senior management personnel who hold current positions in China State Construction has been exempted and approved by the CSRC.

61 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Mr. Zheng Xuexuan Directors Mr. Zhang Zhaoxiang Mr. Xu Wenrong Mr. Jia Chen 

Secretary of the Leading Party Members (LPM) Group and Chairman of China State Construction Engineering Corporation, Chairman of CSCEC, professor-level senior engineer and PhD holder. Mr. Zheng was general manager, Party Committee secretary and Chairman of CSCEC Algeria; general manager of the human resources department, assistant general manager, vice president, director and president of CSCEC; and LPM Group member, deputy general manager, director, LPM Group deputy secretary, chairman of labor union, Party Committee secretary and general manager of China State Construction Engineering Corporation. He has been LPM Group secretary and Chairman of China State Construction Engineering Corporation as well as Chairman of CSCEC since November 2021. He was an alternate member of the 20th CPC Central Committee, a representative of the 17th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, arepresentative of the 20th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, and is also a National Model Worker. LPM Group deputy secretary, director, general manager, chairman of labor union, Party Committee secretary of China State Construction Engineering Corporation; director and president of CSCEC; senior engineer and Master’s degree holder. Mr. Zhang successively served as principal and Party Committee secretary of China Nonferrous Engineering and Research Institute ( 中国有色工程设计研究总院 ); chairman of the Board and general manager of China ENFI Engineering Corporation (中国恩菲工程技术有限 公司 ); Standing Committee member of the Party Committee, deputy general manager, director, general manager and Party Committee deputy secretary of Metallurgical Corporation of China Ltd.; Standing Committee member of the Party Committee, Party Committee deputy secretary, general manager, Party Committee secretary and director of China Metallurgical Group Corporation; LPM Group member and deputy general manager of China Minmetals Corporation. He has been LPM Group deputy secretary of China State Construction Engineering Corporation since July 2020, director of China State Construction Engineering Corporation since August 2020, Party Committee secretary of China State Construction Engineering Corporation since September 2020, chairman of the labor union of China State Construction Engineering Corporation and director of CSCEC since December 2020, general manager of China State Construction Engineering Corporation and president of CSCEC since February 2022. An independent director of CSCEC, professor-level senior engineer, PhD holder. Mr. Xu served as the vice director, general manager of international exploration department, director and Party Committee deputy secretary of Petroleum Geophysical Exploration Bureau; vice chairman, general manager and Party Committee deputy secretary of Bureau of Geophysical Prospecting INC., China National Petroleum Corporation; assistant to the general manager and chief of the development and research department of China National Petroleum Corporation; chairman of CNPC Services & Engineering Ltd.; director, deputy general manager, LPM Group member and head of the discipline inspection group of China Shipping (Group) Company; deputy general manager and LPM Group member of China National Petroleum Corporation; deputy general manager, LPM Group deputy secretary of China National Petroleum Corporation and chairman of the Board of Supervisors of PetroChina Company Limited; a full-time external director of central enterprises; an external director of China FAW Group Co., Ltd.; an external director of China National Building Material Group Co., Ltd., and, since May 2021, an external director of CSCEC. An independent director of CSCEC, researcher-level senior engineer and bachelor’s degree holder. Mr. Jia successively served as Deputy Director-General of the Accounting Regulatory Department, Deputy Director-General of the Comprehensive Department, Director General of the Department of Treaty and Law, Director General of the Enterprises Department and Director General of the Department of Tax Policy of the Ministry of Finance; LPM Group member and deputy general manager of China North Industries Group Corporation Limited. He was appointed as an external director of China Mobile Communications Group Co., Ltd. in March 2017, and as an independent director of CSCEC in January 2018. 62 SECTION IVCORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

Mr. Sun Chengming 

An independent director of CSCEC, senior engineer and master’s degree holder. Mr. Sun was deputy general manager and Party Committee member of China Merchants Group; chairman, general manager and Party Committee secretary of China Merchants Shekou Industrial Zone Holdings Co., Ltd.; general manager and party branch secretary of China Merchants Industry Holdings Co., Ltd. He has been an external director of State Development & Investment Corp., Ltd. since December 2020, and an external director of CSCEC since May 2021. He is also a member of Guangdong Provincial Committee of Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference. 

Mr. Li Ping 

An independent director of CSCEC, senior engineer and master’s degree holder. Mr. Li was formerly the Deputy Director-General of the Directorate General of Telecommunications, P&T, China; vice chairman and executive deputy general manager of China Telecom (Hong Kong) Group Limited; deputy general manager and LPM Group member of China Telecommunications Corporation; external director of China Aerospace Science &Technology Corporation, external director of China Reform Holdings Corporation Ltd., among others. He has served as an independent supervisor and chairman of the Board of Supervisors of Yangtze Optical Fibre and Cable Joint Stock Limited Company since January 2020 and an independent director of CSCEC since May 2021. 

Mr. Shi Zhiping 

Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and chief information officer of CSCEC, researcher-level senior engineer and a bachelor’s degree holder. Mr. Shi was a Standing Committee member of the Party Committee and deputy chief of China Machinery Industry Information Institute, director of the Information Center of the SASAC under the State Council, and assistant president of CSCEC. He has been chief information officer of CSCEC since July 2014 and chairman of the Board of Supervisors of CSCEC since August 2020. 

Mr. Li Jianbo 

A supervisor of CSCEC, professor-level senior engineer and bachelor’s degree holder. Mr. Li was successively the chief of human resources department, deputy general manager and general manager of China State Construction Engineering Corporation; and an executive director, Party Committee secretary and vice chairman of China Overseas Holdings Limited. He was appointed as a supervisor of CSCEC in January 2018. 

Supervisors 63 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Mr. Tian Shifang 

A supervisor of CSCEC, senior accountant. Mr. Tian was the deputy chief of the audit department of China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd.; director, chief accountant and Party Committee member of The Second Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau; director, chief accountant and Party Committee member of China Construction Port Engineering Group Co., Ltd.; and director, chief financial officer and Party Committee member of China Construction Harbour and Channel Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. He was appointed as asupervisor of CSCEC in January 2018. 

Mr. Lv Xiaogang 

A supervisor of CSCEC, senior political engineer, senior engineer and master’s degree holder. Mr. Lv was a secretary of the Youth League Committee and a Party Committee member of China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Corp. Ltd.; manager of Quanzhou Branch of China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Corp. Ltd.; and deputy chief, director, Standing Committee member of the Party Committee, chairman of the labor union and executive of China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Corp. Ltd. He was appointed as a supervisor of CSCEC in May 2021. 

Mr. Qu Hongguang 

A supervisor of CSCEC, senior engineer and bachelor’s degree holder. Mr. Qu was the deputy head of No.1 Branch, deputy dean and dean of Shanghai Branch, principal of East China Branch of China Northwest Architectural Design and Research Institute Co., Ltd.; Party Committee member, deputy general manager and executive of China Northwest Architectural Design and Research Institute Co., Ltd. He was appointed as a supervisor of CSCEC in May 2021. 

Mr. Wang Yunlin 

A LPM Group member and chief accountant of China State Construction Engineering Corporation; vice president, chief financial officer, general counsel and chief compliance officer of CSCEC, researcher-level senior accountant and master’s degree holder. Mr. Wang served as chief accountant of Second Research Institute of China Aerospace Science and Industry Corporation Limited (CASIC); deputy director and director of the Finance Department of CASIC, director and chairman of Aerospace Securities Co., Ltd.; director of Aerospace Information Co., Ltd.; deputy chief accountant, LPM Group member and chief accountant of CASIC. He has been a LPM Group member of China State Construction Engineering Corporation since November 2018, chief accountant of China State Construction Engineering Corporation since December 2018, vice chairman and chief financial officer of CSCEC since January 2019, general counsel of CSCEC since September 2022 and chief compliance officer of CSCEC since November 2022. 

Senior Management 64 SECTION IVCORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

Mr. Ma Zeping Mr. Zhou Yong 

The vice president of CSCEC, professor-level senior engineer, doctor’s degree holder. Mr. Ma served as deputy director of China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd.; general manager of Infrastructure Business Department and Secretary of Party Work Committee of China State Construction Engineering Corporation; executive director and deputy general manager of CSCEC International Construction Co., Ltd.; assistant general manager of China State Construction Engineering Corporation; general manager and executive director of China Construction Infrastructure Co., Ltd.; assistant general manager of CSCEC; chairman of China State Construction Railway Investment & Engineering Group Co., LTD ( 中建铁路建设有限公司 ), chairman of China State Construction Port Engineering Group Corporation Limited and chairman of China Construction South Investment Co., Ltd., a LPM Group member and deputy general manager of China State Construction Engineering Corporation, and the vice president of CSCEC since December 2010. A LPM Group member and deputy general manager of China State Construction Engineering Corporation, vice president of CSCEC, professor-level senior engineer, bachelor ’s degree. Mr. Zhou served as a director, deputy general manager, Party Committee member, executive director, vice chairman, Party Committee secretary and chairman of China Overseas Holdings Limited. He has been a LPM Group member of China State Construction Engineering Corporation since December 2018, deputy general manager of China State Construction Engineering Corporation and vice president of CSCEC since January 2019 and a member of the 13th Chinese People’s Political Consultative Committee. 

Mr. Zhao Xiaojiang 

A LPM Group member and deputy general manager of China State Construction Engineering Corporation and vice president of CSCEC, senior engineer, and Ph.D. holder. Mr. Zhao served as a secretary in the General Office of the State Council (at both deputy bureau level and bureau level); Deputy Mayor of Nanjing (temporary position); a Standing Committee member of the Party Committee and Deputy Mayor (temporary position) of Nanjing; Deputy Secretary of Yangzhou Municipal Committee (at the municipal level); Party Committee Deputy Secretary of Lianyungang, Acting Mayor, Mayor and LPM Group Secretary of the Municipal Government of Lianyungang. He has been a LPM Group member of China State Construction Engineering Corporation since November 2015, vice president of CSCEC since January 2016, and vice general manager of China State Construction Engineering Corporation since January 2017. 

Ms. Shan Guangxiu 

A LPM Group member and deputy general manager of China State Construction Engineering Corporation, vice president of CSCEC, senior economist, master’s degree holder. Ms. Shan was deputy general manager and general manager of the human resources department (cadre affairs department) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation; Party Committee deputy secretary, director and deputy general manager of China Construction First Group Corporation Limited. She was appointed as a LPM Group member and deputy general manager of China State Construction Engineering Corporation in June 2020 and as vice president of CSCEC in September 2020. 65 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Other explanation 

√ Applicable □ N/A 1. On February 25, 2022, the Company held the 13th meeting of the third session of the Board, at which, Mr. Zhang Zhaoxiang was elected as president of the Company and a member of the Strategy and Investment Committee under the third session of the Board. 2. On September 20, 2022, the Company held the 25th meeting of the third session of the Board, at which, Mr. Wang Yunlin was elected as general counsel of the Company. 3. On February 7, 2023, the Company held the 31st meeting of the third session of the Board, at which, Mr. Huang Kesi would step down from vice president of the Company due to age reasons. 

Mr. Xue Keqing 

Secretary to the Board of CSCEC, senior accountant, bachelor’s degree holder. Mr. Xue served as deputy manager of financial and capital department, general manager of investment department, general manager of capital department, general manager of financing and investment department and general manager of finance department of China State Construction Engineering Corporation; director, general manager and vice president of China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd.; executive director of China Overseas Holdings Limited; deputy chief accountant and chief financial officer of CSCEC. He was appointed as Secretary to the Board of CSCEC in June 2018. 

(II) Incumbent and resigned directors, supervisors and senior management during the Reporting Period 1. Positions in the Company’s shareholder 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

Name Name of the Company’s shareholder Positions in the Company’s shareholder Commencement date of the term of office Expiry date of the term of office 

Zheng Xuexuan China State Construction Engineering Corporation LPM Group secretary, Chairman November 2021 /Zhang Zhaoxiang China State Construction Engineering Corporation LPM Group deputy secretary, director, general manager July 2020, August 2020, February 2022 /Wang Yunlin China State Construction Engineering Corporation LPM Group member, chief accountant November 2018, December 2018 /Zhao Xiaojiang China State Construction Engineering Corporation LPM Group member, deputy general manager November 2015, January 2017 /Ma Zeping China State Construction Engineering Corporation LPM Group member, deputy general manager November 2015, January 2017 February 2023, February 2023 Zhou Yong China State Construction Engineering Corporation LPM Group member, deputy general manager December 2018, January 2019 /Shan Guangxiu China State Construction Engineering Corporation LPM Group member, deputy general manager June 2020, June 2020 /Explanation on positions in the Company’s shareholder Nil 66 SECTION IVCORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

2. Positions in other entities 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

Name Entity Name Positions Commencement date of the term of office Expiry date of the term of office 

Xu Wenrong China FAW Group Co., Ltd. External director December 2020 December 2022 Xu Wenrong China National Building Material Group Co., Ltd. External director January 2021 December 2022 Jia Chen China Mobile Communications Group Co., Ltd. External director March 2017 /Sun Chengming State Development & Investment Corp., Ltd. External director December 2020 /Li Ping Yangtze Optical Fibre and Cable Joint Stock Limited Company Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, independent director January 2020 /Explanation on positions in other entities /(III) Remunerations of directors, supervisors and senior management 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

Decision-making procedures for remunerations of the directors, supervisors and senior management The business performance evaluation and personal performance evaluation are carried out by SASAC of the State Council and the Board of Directors, and the remuneration is subject to approval by SASAC of the State Council and the Board of Directors. Basis for determining the remunerations of the directors, supervisors and senior management Remunerations are determined based on the relevant policies of SASAC of the State Council on the remuneration management of heads and external directors of central enterprises, and the remuneration management measures of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited. Actual payments of remunerations of the directors, supervisors and senior management The total remuneration (including basic salary, performance bonus, insurance benefits and allowances) received by the current directors (excluding independent directors), supervisors and senior management of the Company for the year was RMB6,527,100. The total allowances of the independent directors were RMB226,600. Remunerations received in aggregate by all the directors, supervisors and senior management at the end of the Reporting Period RMB6,753,700 (IV) Changes in directors, supervisors and senior management 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

Name Positions held Change Reason for change 

Zhang Zhaoxiang President Appointment Due to work requirements Wang Yunlin General counsel Appointment Due to work requirements Huang Kesi Vice president Resignation Age (V) Explanation on punishment imposed by securities regulatory authorities in the past three years 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

(VI) Miscellaneous 

□ Applicable √ N/A 67 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

V.  Details of Board Meetings during the Reporting Period Meeting Date Resolutions 

12th meeting of the third session of the Board January 14, 2022 Considered and approved 2 proposals, including the Proposal on the PPP Project of Guangxi Longsheng-Dongzhong Port Highway (Shanglin to Nanning Section) 13th meeting of the third session of the Board February 25, 2022 Considered and approved 2 proposals, including the Proposal on Appointment of Zhang Zhaoxiang as the President of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 14th meeting of the third session of the Board March 7, 2022 Considered, approved and listened to 8 proposals and reports, including the Proposal on Investment in the Establishment of Shandong CSCEC Urban Development Co., Ltd. (山东中建城市发展有限公司 )15th meeting of the third session of the Board April 15, 2022 Considered, approved and listened to 26 proposals and reports, including the 2021 Work Report of the Board of Directors of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 16th meeting of the third session of the Board April 29, 2022 Considered, approved and listened to 6 proposals and reports, including the Proposal on 2022 Q1 Financial Analysis Report of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 17th meeting of the third session of the Board May 6, 2022 Considered and approved the Proposal on the Real Estate Development Project in Shengfu Area, Lixia District, Jinan Province 18th meeting of the third session of the Board May 23, 2022 Considered and approved 6 proposals, including the Proposal on Increase in Registered Capital of CSCEC Jiuhe Development Group Co., LTD. 19th meeting of the third session of the Board June 15, 2022 Considered and approved 3 proposals, including the Proposal on the Change of Investment in the PPP Project of Zheng’an-Xishui Expressway in Guizhou Province 20th meeting of the third session of the Board June 23, 2022 Considered and approved the Proposal on the Financing and Investment-driven General Contracting Project of Hannan Yangtze River Bridge and Connection Project of the Wuhan Metropolitan Area Ring Line 21st meeting of the third session of the Board July 7, 2022 Considered and approved the Proposal on the Cooperative Development Project of the Residential Site at Dunman Road in Singapore by China Construction (South Pacific) Development Co Pte Ltd. 22nd meeting of the third session of the Board August 17, 2022 Considered and approved 2 proposals, including the Proposal on the Establishment of Saudi Arabia Branch of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 23rd meeting of the third session of the Board August 29, 2022 Considered, approved and listened to 9 proposals and reports, including the 2022 Interim Work Report of the Board of Directors of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 24th meeting of the third session of the Board September 7, 2022 Considered and approved the Proposal on Emergency Donation for Earthquake Relief in Luding, Sichuan Province 25th meeting of the third session of the Board September 20, 2022 Considered and approved 5 proposals, including the Proposal on Appointment of Wang Yunlin as General Counsel of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 26th meeting of the third session of the Board October 28, 2022 Considered and approved 10 proposals, including the Proposal on the Cash Acquisition of 100% Equity of China Construction Eco-Environmental Group Co., Ltd. by China State Construction Development Co., Ltd. 27th meeting of the third session of the Board November 27, 2022 Considered and approved 6 proposals, including the Proposal on Amending the Rules of Procedure of the Audit and Risk Committee of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 28th meeting of the third session of the Board December 12, 2022 Considered, approved and listened to 9 proposals and reports, including the Proposal on the Renewal of Comprehensive Service Framework Agreement between China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited and China State Construction Engineering Corporation 29th meeting of the third session of the Board December 28, 2022 Considered, approved and listened to 12 proposals and reports, including the Proposal on Rules of Procedure of the Supervisory Committee of the Board of Directors of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 68 SECTION IVCORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

VI.  Directors’ Performance of Duties 

(I) Directors’ attendance at Board meetings and general meetings 

Name of director Independent director or not Attendance at Board meetings Attendance of general meetings Number of meetings attended Number of meetings attended during the year Attendance in person Attendance by means of communication Attendance by proxy Absence Absence in person for two consecutive times 

Zheng Xuexuan No 18 18 9 0 0 No 2Zhang Zhaoxiang No 18 18 9 0 0 No 2Xu Wenrong Yes 18 18 9 0 0 No 1Jia Chen Yes 18 17 9 1 0 No 1Sun Chengming Yes 18 18 9 0 0 No 1Li Ping Yes 18 17 9 1 0 No 1

Explanation on absence in person for two consecutive times 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

Number of Board meetings held during the year 18 Including: on-site Board meetings 9Number of Board meetings held by means of communication 9Number of Board meetings held in hybrid (onsite and remotely) 0(II) Objection of the directors on matters related to the Company 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

(III) Miscellaneous 

√ Applicable □ N/A The Company’s independent directors reviewed and supervised the performance of the management of the Company, who concurrently served as senior executives of the Company’s controlling shareholder, China State Construction Engineering Corporation, and expressed the following independent opinions: Mr. Zheng Xuexuan, Mr. Zhang Zhaoxiang, Mr. Wang Yunlin, Mr. Zhao Xiaojiang, Mr. Ma Zeping, Mr. Zhou Yong and Ms. Shan Guangxiu earnestly and diligently fulfilled their commitments, performed their duties as senior management of the Company as a priority, well handled the relation between the Company and the controlling shareholder, and maintained the interests of the Company and all shareholders in 2022; they did not do anything that would harm the interests of the shareholders of the Company, especially minority shareholders because of their part-time jobs. 69 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

VII.  Special Committees under the Board 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

(I) Special committees and members under the Board 

Special committee Members 

Strategy and Investment Committee Chairman: Zheng Xuexuan Members: Zhang Zhaoxiang, Xu Wenrong, Sun Chengming, Li Ping Nomination Committee Chairman: Zheng Xuexuan Members: Zhang Zhaoxiang, Xu Wenrong, Jia Chen, Sun Chengming Remuneration and Appraisal Committee Chairman: Xu Wenrong Members: Jia Chen, Li Ping Audit and Risk Committee Chairman: Jia Chen Members: Xu Wenrong, Sun Chengming, Li Ping Supervisory Committee Chairman: Jia Chen Members: Xu Wenrong, Sun Chengming, Li Ping (II) Special committee’s performance of duties 

The Strategy and Investment Committee, the Nomination Committee, the Remuneration and Appraisal Committee, the Audit and Risk Committee, and the Supervisory Committee operating under the Board of Directors have earnestly organized research and diligently deliberates professional issues, and effectively exerted their respective functions of deliberation and decision-making support. On November 27, 2022, the Proposal on the Establishment of Supervisory Committee of the Board of Directors was considered and approved at the 27th meeting of the third session of the Board of Directors. The Board of Directors established the Supervisory Committee. After the addition, the Board of Directors of the Company established 5 special committees, namely the Strategy and Investment Committee, the Nomination Committee, the Remuneration and Appraisal Committee, the Audit and Risk Committee and the Supervisory Committee, to carefully study and deliberate on issues related to investment, sustainable development, nomination and risk management, and effectively exert the decision-making support function of the special committees. In 2022, the special committees of the Board of Directors held 29 meetings in total and considered 84 proposals (including 7 reports). 

(III) Special committee meetings 1. The Audit and Risk Committee held 10 meetings during the Reporting Period 

Date Proposals/Reports Important opinions and recommendations Performance of other duties 

January 6, 2022 Listened to two reports including the Proposal on the Progress of the Final Accounts for 2021 1. The Audit Committee affirmed the pre-audit work of Ernst & Young Hua Ming. 2. It was suggested that the Company shall further organize the final accounts of the whole system, implement the requirements of the new standards and policies consistently, coordinate with the external audit work and complete the final accounts with quality and quantity. /March 7, 2022 Approved two proposals including the Proposal on Amending the Regulations on Management of Related Party Transactions of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 1. It was recommended that the Company shall ensure that the regulations are widely publicized and implemented, and accurately understand the regulatory requirements of different regulatory authorities on related party transactions, so as to ensure that the management of related party transactions of the Company is compliant with the law and that information disclosure is fully transparent. 2. The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. /70 SECTION IVCORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

Date Proposals/Reports Important opinions and recommendations Performance of other duties 

April 14, 2022 Considered, approved and listened to eleven proposals and reports including the Report on the Performance of Duties of the Audit and Risk Committee of the Third Session of the Board of Directors of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited for 2021 1. The truthfulness, completeness and accuracy of the Report on the Performance of Duties of the Audit and Risk Committee of the Board of Directors of the Company and the Financial Accounts Report of the Company for 2021 were recognized. 2. After full communication with the management, understanding and examination of the basic information of Ernst & Young Hua Ming, relevant certification documents of practicing qualifications, business scale, personnel information, professional competence, investor protection ability, independence and integrity status, etc., it was determined that Ernst & Young Hua Ming has the relevant business audit qualifications and can meet the needs of the Company’s audit work. The Audit Committee recommended to re-appoint Ernst & Young Hua Ming as the internal control auditor and the financial report auditor of the Company for 2022. 3. The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. /April 29, 2022 Considered and approved three proposals including the Proposal on 2022 Q1 Financial Analysis Report of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 1. The truthfulness, completeness and accuracy of the 2021 Summary Report on Rule of Law, 2022 Q1 Financial Analysis Report and 2022 Q1 Audit Report of the Company were recognized. 2. The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. /August 17, 2022 Considered and approved the Proposal for the Company and Its Controlling Shareholder to Jointly Increase Capital in China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. and Related Party Transaction 1. It was believed that the related party transaction was in line with the Company’s operation and development needs and was the Company's normal business practices. The transaction followed the principles of fairness, impartiality, voluntariness and integrity, and the transaction pricing was fair and reasonable. 2. The proposal was approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. /August 26, 2022 Considered, approved and listened to six proposals and reports including the 2022 Interim Financial Analysis Report of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 1. The truthfulness, completeness and accuracy of the 2022 Interim Financial Analysis Report and the Internal Audit Report for the First Half of 2022 of the Company were recognized. 2. The proposals were approved at the meeting were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. /October 28, 2022 Considered and approved six proposals including the Proposal on 2022 Q3 Financial Analysis Report of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 1. The truthfulness, completeness and accuracy of the 2022 Q3 Financial Analysis Report and the 2022 Q3 Audit Report were recognized. 2. The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. /71 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Date Proposals/Reports Important opinions and recommendations Performance of other duties 

November 15, 2022 Considered and approved two proposals including the Proposal on Amending the Rules of Procedure of the Audit and Risk Committee of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 1. The system revision and improvement made by the Company according to the latest regulatory requirements were recognized, which was believed that such adjustments were in line with the actual management of the Company and were helpful to promote corporate development. 2. The proposals were approved at the meeting were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. /December 9, 2022 Four proposals including the Proposal on the Summary Report on the Compliance Management in 2022 of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 1. The truthfulness, completeness and accuracy of the Summary Report on the Compliance Management in 2022 of the Company was recognized. 2. The proposals were approved at the meeting were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. /December 28, 2022 Considered, approved and listened to three proposals and reports including the Proposal on the Audit Department Adjustment Plan of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 1. It was recommended to further improve the staffing of the audit department, to promote the implementation of the audit function of the audit department and to realize the "separation of management and audit"; to strengthen training for the audit department, to strengthen the team building, to enhance the professional level, and to ensure the completion of the audit tasks assigned by the Company with high quality. 2. The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. /2. The Nomination Committee held 2 meetings during the Reporting Period 

Date Proposals/Reports Important opinions and recommendations Performance of other duties 

February 25, 2022 Considered and approved the Proposal on Appointment of Zhang Zhaoxiang as the President of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited The proposal was approved at the meeting and was submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. /September 19, 2022 Considered and approved the Proposal on Appointment of Wang Yunlin as the General Counsel of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited The proposal was approved at the meeting and was submitted the Board of Directors for consideration. /3. The Remuneration and Appraisal Committee held 2 meetings during the Reporting Period 

Date Proposals/Reports Important opinions and recommendations Performance of other duties 

April 4, 2022 Considered and approved two proposals including the Proposal on Appraisal and Remuneration Encashment Plan for Senior Management of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited for 2022 The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. /December 28, 2022 Considered and approved three proposals including the Proposal on the Third Tranche of Unlocking in 2022 in Respect of Phase III Restricted A Share Incentive Scheme of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 1. The implementation of equity incentive shall have a reasonably determined scope and order of participants with the focus on performance; further explore effective ways to enhance the Company’s performance and market value through the implementation of equity incentive, and give play to the role of "strong incentive and mandatory restraint" of equity incentive. 2. The proposals were approved at the meeting and was submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. 

／72 SECTION IVCORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

4. The Strategy and Investment Committee held 14 meetings during the Reporting Period 

Date Proposals/Reports Important opinions and recommendations Performance of other duties 

January 14, 2022 Considered and approved two proposals including the Proposal on the PPP Project of Guangxi Longsheng-Dongzhong Port Highway (Shanglin-Nanning Section) The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the proposals. March 7, 2022 Considered and approved four proposals including the Proposal on Investment in the Establishment of Shandong CSCEC Urban Development Co., Ltd. ( 山东中建城市发展有限公 司)The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the proposals. April 15, 2022 Considered and approved three proposals including the Proposal on the Implementation of the 2021 Investment Budget and the 2022 Proposed Investment Budget Plan of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited The proposals were approved at the meeting were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the proposals. April 29, 2022 Considered and approved the Report on the Progress of the Implementation of the Company’s Major Investment Projects and Major Investment Risk Projects 1. It was recommended that major investment projects and major investment risk projects shall be further sorted out and that the planning and layout of the Company’s long-term risk management shall be done from a macro and high viewpoint. 2. The proposal was approved at the meeting and was submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the report. May 6, 2022 Considered and approved the Proposal on the Real Estate Development Project in Shengfu Area, Lixia District, Jinan Province The proposal was approved at the meeting and was submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the proposal. May 23, 2022 Considered and approved four proposals including the Proposal on Increase in Registered Capital of CSCEC Jiuhe Development Group Co., LTD. The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the proposals. June 15, 2022 Considered and approved three proposals including the Proposal on the Change of Investment in the PPP Project of Zheng’an-Xishui Expressway in Guizhou Province The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the proposals. June 23, 2022 Considered and approved the Proposal on the Financing and Investment-driven General Contracting Project of Hannan Yangtze River Bridge and Connection Project of the Wuhan Metropolitan Area Ring Line The proposal was approved at the meeting and was submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the proposal. July 7, 2022 Considered and approved the Proposal on the Cooperative Development Project of the Residential Site at Dunman Road in Singapore by China Construction (South Pacific) Development Co Pte Ltd. The proposal was approved at the meeting and was submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the proposal. September 20, 2022 Considered and approved four proposals including the Proposal on the Real Estate Development Project of Future City Ideal Unit located in Jiading District, Shanghai by China Construction Second Engineering Bureau The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the proposals. October 28, 2022 Considered and approved three proposals including the Proposal on the Cash Acquisition of 100% Equity of China Construction Eco-Environmental Group Co., Ltd by China State Construction Development Co., Ltd. The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the proposals. 73 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Date Proposals/Reports Important opinions and recommendations Performance of other duties 

November 27, 2022 Considered and approved the Proposal on PPP Project for the Comprehensive Development of Xiamen Tongxiang Gaoxincheng Industrial Park by China Construction Infrastructure and Other Units The proposal was approved at the meeting and was submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the proposal. December 12, 2022 Considered and approved three proposals including the Proposal on PPP Project involving Pipeline Renovation of Mixture of Rainwater and Sewage in Central Urban Area and Urban Waterlogging Control in Drainage Zoning of Lashan River and Xingji River in Jinan, Shandong by China Construction Infrastructure and Other Units The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the proposals. December 28, 2022 Considered and approved two proposals including the Proposal on the Joint-stock Reform of China Construction Steel Structure Engineering Co., Ltd. The proposals were approved at the meeting and were submitted to the Board of Directors for consideration. The Committee held a special communication meeting for independent directors to listen to and discuss the proposals. 5. The Supervisory Committee held 1 meeting during the Reporting Period 

Date Proposals/Reports Important opinions and recommendations Performance of other duties 

December 22, 2022 Considered, approved and listened to four proposals and reports including the Proposal on Rules of Procedure of Supervisory Committee o f t h e B o a r d o f D i r e c t o r s o f C h i n a S t a t e Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 1. The Committee considered that the Rules of Procedure of Supervisory Committee were in line with the actual management of the Company and agreed to submit them to the Board of Directors for consideration. 2. T h e C o m m i t t e e b e l i e v e d t h a t t h e Company had a detailed and actual understanding of the implementation of the proposals of the Board and the major investment projects, and kept abreast of progress and supervised the prevention and mitigation of risks, which was of great guiding significance. /(IV) Specific explanation on objection 

□ Applicable √ N/A 

VIII.  Explanation of the Board of Supervisors on the Risks Identified 

□ Applicable √ N/A During the Reporting Period, the Board of Supervisors performed its duties conscientiously in accordance with the Company Law, the Code of Corporate Governance for Listed Companies, the Articles of Association, the Rules of Procedure of Board of Supervisors and other regulations. Focusing on risk prevention and control, the Board of Supervisors supervised the significant events in operation of the Company, financial conditions, internal controls and directors’ and senior management’s performance of duties, and has no objection to the supervised matters during the Reporting Period. 74 SECTION IVCORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

IX.  Employees of the Parent Company and Major Subsidiaries as at the end of the Reporting Period 

(I) Employees Number of existing staff of the parent company 414 Number of existing staff of major subsidiaries 382,078 Total number of existing staff 382,492 

Number of resigned or retired staff to whom the parent company and major subsidiaries are responsible for the expenses (total number of retirees at the end of 2022) 69,178 Expertise Category Number 

Operation and management 12,628 Project construction 208,852 Survey and design 22,717 Properties development 45,068 Professional management 93,227 

Total 382,492 Education background Level Number 

Master’s Degree or above 34,440 Undergraduate Degree 254,752 Associate Degree 48,312 Technical secondary school and below 44,988 

Total 382,492 

(II) Remuneration policy 

√ Applicable □ N/A The Company adheres to market and performance orientation, and strengthens remuneration evaluation and incentives. The Company closely associates remuneration distribution with corporate benefits and personal performance, and the remuneration is directly proportional to performance, which effectively mobilizes the enthusiasm, initiative and creativity of employees. Meanwhile, with a focus on value creation, the Company adheres to linkage of payroll growth and corporate financial performance growth, strengthens benchmarking management, improves performance-based salary management, and strengthens the pertinence, accuracy and effectiveness of remuneration distribution. The Company continuously improves the effective and constrained remuneration distribution system to promote corporate vitality, competitiveness and creativity. 

(III) Training program 

√ Applicable □ N/A Focusing closely on the 14th Five-Year Plan and key annual priorities, adhering to a clear-cut stand on politics to ensure the full and complete implementation of central government documents, and relying on leadership, professionalism and occupational capabilities, the Company further improved the key talent cultivation project, steadily promoted the training systems, and continuously improved education and training ability, to strengthen overall coordination and organization guidance, promote the smooth implementation of education and training, and provide internal drivers for the Company’s talent team building. 

(IV) Labor service outsourcing 

□ Applicable √ N/A 75 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

X.  Profit Distribution Plan or Proposed Reserves Capitalization Plan 

(I) Formulation, execution, or adjustment of cash dividend policy 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

1. Specific policy on profit distribution 

According to the Articles of Association, the Company may distribute dividends in cash, stock, a combination of both and other means permitted by laws and regulations; the Company shall give priority to profit distribution in the form of cash dividends. In the event that the Company is operating well and the Board of Directors determines that the Company’s share price does not match the size of its share capital, and the distribution of dividends in stock is in the interests of shareholders of the Company as a whole, the Company may propose stock dividend and other distribution proposals when the conditions for distribution in the form of cash dividends are satisfied. Except for special circumstances as determined by the Board of Directors of the Company, the Company shall distribute dividends in cash when the Company records a profit in current year and the accumulated undistributed profits are positive. The profits distributed in cash each year shall, in principle, be not less than 15% of the distributable profits of that year. According to the requirements of the Dividend Plan of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited for the Next Three Years (2021 to 2023), during the planning period, the Company may distribute profits to ordinary shareholders in cash, stock, a combination of both and other means permitted by laws and regulations; the Company shall give priority to profit distribution in the form of cash dividends where the conditions for cash dividends are satisfied; at the same time, based on the annual profit and cash flow situation, taking into account the size of the Company’s share capital and shareholding structure, the Company may consider adopting stock dividends and other means of profit distribution, provided that the conditions for cash dividend are satisfied. If there are profits available for distribution after making up losses, withdrawing reserve funds and paying agreed dividends to preferred shareholders in accordance with the law, and if the auditor issues a standard unqualified audit report on the Company’s financial report for that year, except for special circumstances determined by the Board, the Company may distribute profits to ordinary shareholders in cash. The profits distributed in cash each of the next three years shall, in principle, be not less than 16% of the distributable profits of that year and the cumulative profits distributed in cash in the last three years shall be not less than 30% of the average annual distributable profits achieved in the last three years. 

2. Execution of cash dividend policy during the Reporting Period 

On May 13, 2022, the Proposal on 2021 Profit Distribution Plan of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited was considered and approved at the 2021 Annual General Meeting of the Company through a combination of on-site open ballot and internet voting; on June 23, 2022, the Company released the Announcement on Implementing Rights and Interests Distribution for 2021 of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited; on June 30, 2022, the Company distributed cash dividends to all shareholders, marking the full implementation of the profit distribution plan in 2021. The Company distributed profits in strict compliance with relevant provisions of the Articles of Association and the resolutions passed at the general meetings. 

3. Proposed annual profit distribution plan 

In accordance with relevant provisions of the Company Law and the Articles of Association, the profit distribution plan for 2022 has been formulated on the basis of the 2022 Profit Distribution Plan of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited considered and approved at the 33rd meeting of the third session of the Board of Directors of the Company by taking into account shareholder returns, the Company’s capital demand for business development and other factors. 76 SECTION IVCORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

Proposed profit distribution plan for 2022: The net profit attributable to shareholders of the listed company under the consolidated statements amounted to RMB50.95 billion; retained earnings of the parent company was RMB51.47 billion, and the listed company proposed to distribute cash dividend of RMB2.527 (tax inclusive) per ten shares to all shareholders. As of the date of disclosure, the total share capital of the Company was 41,934,432,844 shares and cash dividend proposed to be distributed on this basis was approximately RMB10.6 billion (tax inclusive). Cash dividend of the Company in the year accounted for 20.80% of the net profit attributable to shareholders of the parent company under the consolidated statements. In case of any change in the total share capital of the Company prior to the record date of shareholders for profit distribution, the Company proposes to maintain the distribution ratio per share unchanged, and to adjust the total distribution amount accordingly. An announcement containing details of the adjustments will be made separately. Above proposed profit distribution plan was considered and approved at the 33rd meeting of the third session of the Board of Directors of the Company. The independent directors of the Company have expressed independent opinions of approval on this proposed plan, which is still subject to the consideration and approval by the 2022 Annual General Meeting of the Company. A combination of on-site open ballot and internet voting will be adopted at the 2022 Annual General Meeting of the Company so as to ensure that minority shareholders have adequate opportunities to express their opinions and appeals, thereby fully safeguarding their legal interests. Explanation on the cash dividend to be distributed by the Company for the current year is as follows: 

1. Industry where the Company operates and its characteristics 

The construction industry in which the Company operates faces fierce market competition. The projects undertaken are characterized by large volume and long production cycle, and the capital demand for maintaining daily operation is relatively large. The Company accurately seized the opportunities of national policies, enhanced the development of its main business, continued to deepen its project performance management, accelerated innovation, continuously strengthened bottom-line thinking and actively responded to the fierce industry competition. 

2. Development stage of the Company and its business model 

The Company has been actively involved in the national strategy to promote a more reasonable regional layout and accelerate reform, so as to highlight the high-quality development trend, adopt new development concepts and benchmark against world-class enterprises, and continuously enhance global competitiveness and brand influence. In 2022, the Company hit a new record high in terms of the value of new contracts and revenue. The advantages of the whole industry chain have been consolidated, and the development quality of each business segment has been continuously improved. 

3. Profitability and capital needs of the Company 

Since the listing of the Company, the return on net assets has remained at a high level in the industry, delivering stable investment returns to its shareholders. As the Company deepens its reform and innovation, it needs to increase its investment in innovative business and new technologies. In addition, in order to meet the needs of daily operation and the performance of projects, the Company needs to maintain a certain amount of retained earnings. 

4. Reasons for the Company to keep part of the undistributed profit 

Currently, the world economy is experiencing mounting downward pressure, and the international situations are changing rapidly. To enhance its resilience against risks, the Company needs to keep a certain amount of retained earnings. The retained earnings accumulated by the Company over the years are attributable to all investors. With the gradual improvement of the profitability, the Company will be able to offer better returns to investors in the future. 77 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

5. Purpose of the undistributed profit retained by the Company and its estimated income 

The retained undistributed profit will be used to support the Company in capturing strategic development opportunities and to deepen the Company’s strategy, increase structural adjustment and transformation and upgrading, and to seek new profit growth points. CSCEC has maintained a stable cash dividend policy for years, demonstrating the ability to maintain stable development and sustained dividend distribution. In 2023, the Company will strive to improve its value-creation capacity under the development goals of “one creation and five aspects of strength” and reward shareholders with excellent operating results. This proposed profit distribution plan complies with the relevant laws, regulations and the Articles of Association with compliant and transparent profit distribution procedures. CSCEC has maintained a stable cash dividend policy with an increase in the cash dividend to be distributed per share for the current year over last year. This demonstrates the ability of CSCEC to maintain stable development and sustained dividend distribution, as well as its determination to reward shareholders with excellent operating results. 

(II) Plans or proposed plans for profit distribution or reserve capitalization of the Company in the last five years (including the Reporting Period) 

Unit: ’000 Currency: RMB 

Year of dividend distribution Number of bonus shares per 10 shares Amount of dividends distributed per 10 shares (RMB) (tax inclusive) Number of shares capitalized per 10 shares Amount of cash dividends (tax inclusive) Net profit attributable to ordinary shareholders of the listed company in the consolidated financial statements for the year of dividend distribution Percentage of the net profit attributable to ordinary shareholders of the listed company in the consolidated financial statements (%) 

2022 0 2.527 0 10,596,831 50,950,301 20.80 2021 0 2.50 0 10,485,215 51,407,661 20.40 2020 0 2.147 0 9,006,272 44,924,929 20.05 2019 0 1.85 0 7,763,538 41,881,399 18.53 2018 0 1.68 0 7,052,853 38,241,324 18.44 (III) Specific explanation on cash dividend policy 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

Was it in compliance with the requirements of the Company’s Articles of Association and the resolutions of the general meeting √ Yes  □ No 

Were the dividend distribution criteria and proportion well-defined and clear √ Yes  □ No 

Were related decision-making processes and mechanisms complete √ Yes  □ No 

Did independent directors fulfil their duties and play their roles √ Yes  □ No 

Were the minority shareholders given adequate opportunities to voice their opinions and make requests and were their legal interests fully protected √ Yes  □ No 

(IV) If, during the Reporting Period, the Company records a profit and the profit distributable to the ordinary shareholders of the parent company is positive but there is no proposed plan for distribution in the form of cash dividends, the Company shall disclose in detail the reasons, and the purpose and utilization plan of the undistributed profits 

□ Applicable √ N/A 78 SECTION IVCORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

(V) Profits distribution and reserve capitalization during the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A Unit: ’000 Currency: RMB 

Number of bonus shares per 10 shares /Amount of dividends distributed per 10 shares (RMB) (tax inclusive) 2.527 Number of shares capitalized per 10 shares /Amount of cash dividends (tax inclusive) 10,596,831 Net profit attributable to ordinary shareholders of the listed company in the consolidated financial statements for the year of dividend distribution 50,950,301 Percentage of the net profit attributable to ordinary shareholders of the listed company in the consolidated financial statements (%) 20.80 Amount for cash repurchases of shares recorded as cash dividends /Total amount of dividends (tax inclusive) 10,596,831 Percentage of the total amount of dividends to the net profit attributable to ordinary shareholders of the listed company in the consolidated financial statements (%) 20.80 

XI.  Equity Incentive Scheme, Employee Stock Ownership Plan or Other Employee Incentive Schemes of the Company and Their Implications 

(I) Relevant incentive matters disclosed in provisional announcements without further progress or changes in subsequent implementation 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

Summary of matters Index for details 

190,784,000 shares were unlocked as the second tranche in 2021 under Phase III restricted A share incentive scheme, and the date of listing and trading was January 19, 2022. Announcement on the Second Tranche of Unlocking in 2021 in Respect of Phase III Restricted A Share Incentive Scheme and Listing of Shares published on January 12, 2022 The Company’s repurchase and cancellation of restricted shares involved a total of 35 participants of the Company’s Phases I, II, III and IV restricted A share incentive schemes (including simultaneous repurchase from 1 participant of Phases II and III restricted A shares and simultaneous repurchase from 5 participants of Phases III and IV restricted A shares). A total of 7,309,000 restricted shares were proposed to be repurchased and cancelled (210,000, 119,000, 5,060,000 and 1,920,000 restricted shares under Phases I, II, III and IV respectively). After the completion of the repurchase and cancellation, the registered capital and share capital of the Company will be reduced by RMB7,309,000 (shares) to RMB41,940,858,844 (shares). Announcement on Repurchase and Write-off of Partial Restricted Shares for Equity Incentives published on April 12, 2022. On May 13, 2022, the Proposal on Repurchase of Certain Participants’ Shares under Phases III and IV Restricted A Share Incentive Schemes of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited was considered and approved at the 2021 Annual General Meeting of CSCEC. A n n o u n c e m e n t o n R e s o l u t i o n s o f the 2021 Annual General Meeting of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited published on May 14, 2022. It was considered and approved by the Company to repurchase restricted shares subject to restriction on unlocking from 58 participants (61 repurchases in total) involved in Phases III and IV restricted A share incentive schemes. A total of 6,206,000 restricted shares were repurchased, of which, the number of restricted A shares under Phase III and phase IV were 4,316,000 shares and 1,890,000 shares, respectively. The repurchase of Phase III restricted A shares was based on RMB3.468 per share, and Phase IV based on the price of RMB3.06 per share. The total amount of funds for the repurchase was RMB20,802,764.41. After all the repurchased shares are cancelled, the registered capital of the Company will be reduced by RMB6,206,000. Announcement on the Partial Repurchase and Delisting of Phase III and Phase IV Restricted Shares to Reduce the C o m p a n y ' s R e g i s t e r e d C a p i t a l &Notification to Creditors published on May 14, 2022. 79 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Summary of matters Index for details 

The Company’s repurchase and cancellation of restricted shares involved a total of 60 participants of the Company’s Phases III and IV restricted A share incentive schemes (including simultaneous repurchase from 3 participants of the Phases III and IV restricted A shares). A total of 6,426,000 restricted shares were proposed to be repurchased and cancelled (4,536,000 and 1,890,000 restricted shares under Phases III and IV respectively). After the completion of the repurchase and cancellation, the registered capital and share capital of the Company will be reduced by RMB6,426,000 (shares) to RMB41,934,432,844 (shares). Announcement on Repurchase and Write-off of Partial Restricted Shares for Equity Incentives published on July 29, 2022. Pursuant to the Phase III Restricted A Share Incentive Scheme of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited and the Phase IV Restricted A Share Incentive Scheme of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, restricted shares held by a total of 148 participants (33 of which were involved simultaneously in the repurchase of Phases III and IV restricted share incentive schemes) shall be repurchased by the Company at the prescribed price. Among them, restricted shares held by 13 participants shall be repurchased by the Company at the grant price with interest payment. As considered and approved at the 29th meeting of the third session of the Board of Directors and the 18th meeting of the third session of the Board of Supervisors, the Company repurchased 5.874 million Phase III restricted shares from such participants, accounting for 0.98% of the granted 599.91 million Phase III restricted shares and 0.0140% of the total share capital of the Company. The number of Phase IV restricted shares repurchased was 9.0444 million shares, accounting for 0.99% of the granted 912.036 million Phase IV restricted shares and 0.0216% of the total share capital of the Company. The total amount used for the repurchase was RMB48,313,367.49 (interests inclusive). All such funds were the Company's own capital. Announcement on Partial Repurchase of Phase III and IV Restricted A Shares from Incentive Participants published on December 29, 2022. 300.0576 million shares were unlocked as the first tranche in 2022 under Phase IV restricted A share incentive scheme, and the date of listing and trading was January 16, 2023. Announcement on the First Tranche of Unlocking in 2022 in Respect of Phase IV Restricted A Share Incentive Scheme and Listing of Shares published on January 10, 2023. 184.966 million shares were unlocked as the third tranche in 2022 under Phase III restricted A share incentive scheme, and the date of listing and trading was January 19, 2023. Announcement on the Third Tranche of Unlocking in 2022 in Respect of Phase III Restricted A Share Incentive Scheme and Listing of Shares published on January 12, 2023. (II) Incentive not disclosed in provisional announcements or with subsequent progress 

Information of equity incentives 

□ Applicable √ N/A Other explanation 

√ Applicable □ N/A For implications of the restricted shares of the Company on its financial position and operating results, please refer to the relevant information of Note XI “Share-based payment” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”. Information on employee stock ownership plan 

□ Applicable √ N/A Other incentives 

□ Applicable √ N/A 80 SECTION IVCORPORATE GOVERNANCE 

(III) Stock options granted to directors and senior management during the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A Unit: 0,000 shares 

Name Position Number of restricted shares held at the beginning of the year Number of restricted shares newly granted during the Reporting Period Grant price of restricted shares (RMB/share) Unlocked shares Locked shares Number of restricted shares held at the end of the Reporting Period Market price at the end of the Reporting Period (RMB0’000) 

Zheng Xuexuan Chairman of the Board 0 0 / 0 0 0 0Zhang Zhaoxiang Director, president 0 0 / 0 0 0 0Xu Wenrong Independent director 0 0 / 0 0 0 0Jia Chen Independent director 0 0 / 0 0 0 0Sun Chengming Independent director 0 0 / 0 0 0 0Li Ping Independent director 0 0 / 0 0 0 0Wang Yunlin Vice president, chief financial officer, general counsel 0 0 / 0 0 0 0Zhao Xiaojiang Vice president 0 0 / 0 0 0 0Ma Zeping Vice president 0 0 / 0 0 0 0Zhou Yong Vice president 32 0 / 16 16 16 86.88 Shan Guangxiu Vice president 32 0 / 16 16 16 86.88 Xue Keqing Secretary to the Board 104 0 / 16 88 88 477.84 Huang Kesi Former vice president 32 0 / 16 16 16 86.88 

Total / 200 0 / 64 136 136 738.48 

(IV) Appraisal mechanism for senior management and the establishment and implementation of incentive mechanism during the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A For details, please refer to the relevant information under “IV. Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management” in this section. 

XII.  Establishment and Implementation of Internal Control System during the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A During the Reporting Period, the Company continued to optimize the internal control system, revised and improved the internal control rules, and ensured the effective implementation of various rules. It further streamlined and standardized various business processes to improve the Company’s operation management level and abilities at risk prevention and control. The Company has continuously improved its internal control process, covering all aspects including decision-making, execution, supervision, and feedback. The Company’s improved internal control are more comprehensive and effective. For details of the Company’s internal control evaluation report, please refer to the 2022 Internal Control Evaluation Report of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited reviewed and approved at the 33rd meeting of the third session of the Board of the Company and disclosed on the website of the Shanghai Stock Exchange. Description of material defects in internal control during the Reporting Period 

□ Applicable √ N/A 81 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

XIII.  Management and Control of Subsidiaries during the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A The Company has formulated various management systems for subsidiaries, including the Administrative Measures for Subsidiary Governance Structure, the Administrative Measures for the Organizational Structure of the Headquarters of Subsidiaries, the Administrative Measures for the Evaluation and Appraisal of the Operating Results of Subsidiaries, and the Management Regulations for Equity Participants. Relying on the above management systems, the Company has established an internal control system based on the Articles of Association. The internal control system primarily comprises investment, property rights, finance, corporate governance, performance appraisal, material information reporting, information disclosure and other management systems, and has been strictly and thoroughly implemented. The Company can effectively manage and control its subsidiaries by setting approval and authorization permissions in the internal control system. During the Reporting Period, the Company newly incorporated a number of companies into its statements through acquisition, including China Construction Eco-Environmental Group Co., Ltd. The relevant subsidiaries are all enterprises related to the construction industry chain and have been incorporated into the management system of the Company to strengthen control over their investment, property rights, finance and corporate governance in accordance with the relevant internal control system. 

XIV.  Information on Internal Control Audit Report 

√ Applicable □ N/A Upon approval by shareholders at the general meeting, the Company engaged Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP (Special General Partnership) to audit the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control related to the financial report as of December 31, 2022. The auditor has issued a standard unqualified internal control audit report. For details of the internal control audit report, please refer to the 2022 Internal Control Audit Report of CSCEC disclosed on the website of the Shanghai Stock Exchange. Whether the Internal Control Audit Report is disclosed: Yes Type of opinion on the Internal Control Audit Report: Standard unqualified opinion 

XV.  Self-inspection and Rectification in the Special Governance Action of Listed Companies 

The Company thoroughly implemented the spirit and requirements of the Opinions on Further Improving the Quality of Listed Companies issued by the State Council and the Announcement on Launching Special Actions on Governance of Listed Companies issued by the CSRC to actively promote self-inspection and rectification under special corporate governance actions. The self-inspection findings show the Company is in compliance with laws, regulations and requirements regarding corporate governance in all aspects. Specifically, the Company has established a relatively sound corporate governance system in accordance with the laws and regulations such as the Company Law, the Securities Law and the Code of Corporate Governance for Listed Companies. In addition, the shareholders’ general meetings, the Board of Directors, the Board of Supervisors and the management operate in a standardized manner. The directors, supervisors and senior management are diligent and conscientious. The internal control system of the Company is sound and effective. The information disclosure is open and transparent. No matter that may have a material adverse impact on the interests of investors is identified. The Company will continue to consolidate the achievements of corporate governance, improve corporate governance, and promote the sustainable, healthy and high-quality development of the Company. 

XVI.  Miscellaneous 

□ Applicable √ N/A 82 SECTION VENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY 

# SECTION V  ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY I.  Environmental Responsibility 

Whether to establish mechanisms related to environmental protection Yes Environmental protection funds invested during the Reporting Period (Unit: 100 million yuan) 6.8 (I) Explanation on environmental protection efforts of the highly polluting companies and their key subsidiaries as announced by the environmental protection authority 

□Applicable √ N/A 

(II) Explanation on environmental protection efforts of companies other than highly polluting companies 

√ Applicable □N/A 

1. Administrative penalties due to environmental issues 

√ Applicable □N/A During the Reporting Period, a total of 114 construction projects of the Company’s subsidiaries received administrative penalties due to environmental problems such as construction noise, dust, sewage and solid waste, involving a total fine of approximately RMB4.5986 million, with the quantity and amounts of penalties imposed continuing to decline year-on-year. As at the disclosure date of this Report, all of the issues involved in the aforementioned administrative penalties have been rectified. 

2. Disclosure of other environmental information with reference to highly polluting companies 

√ Applicable □N/A The Company attaches great importance to ecological environmental protection. During the Reporting Period, there were no emergency environmental incidents in the Company. The impact of the production and operation activities of the Company on the environment mainly included noise, dust and solid waste, most of which took place in the course of construction. To minimize the impact on the environment, prior to the commencement of a project, the Company identified the environmental factors and prepared preliminary planning and schemes for environmental protection and green construction. The Company was also equipped with and operated in a standardized manner various pollution prevention facilities such as automatic spraying, vehicle washing, sedimentation tanks and acoustic sheds, gave priority to new technologies and processes of energy conservation and environmental protection to reduce energy consumption and pollutant discharge, so as to minimize the impact of production on the environment. 

3. Reasons for not disclosing other environmental information 

□Applicable √ N/A 83 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

(III) Relevant information conducive to protecting ecology, preventing pollution, and fulfilling environmental responsibilities 

√ Applicable □N/A Guided by President Xi Jinping’s Thought on Ecological Civilization, the Company thoroughly implemented the decision and deployment on strengthening ecological environmental protection of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council to proactively accomplish its responsibilities for the environment and continuously implement environmental protection and pollution prevention measures. 

1.  Strengthening green investment. During the Reporting Period, the Company tracked and ventured into the hot investment areas of ecological and environmental protection in time, encouraged its subsidiaries to actively expand pumped storage power investment business in their respective advantageous layout areas in combination with the national strategic deployment, and successively won bids for 18 projects in the field of clean energy and water environmental protection, such as the Guanghanping pumped storage power plant in Zhuzhou, Hunan Province and the rainwater and sewage mixture pipeline in central urban area in Jinan, with a total investment of about RMB110.0 billion. 

2.  Strengthening green design. The Company puts significant emphasis on environmental protection, makes a full evaluation for the impact of planning and design plans on ecological environment, integrates green and environmental protection requirements into the design process, adopts standardized components and parts, and gives priority to renewable and low-pollution materials, to continuously reduce the impact on the environment. Xi’an Xianyang International Airport Phase III expansion project has become the first civil aviation airport project in China that exceeds one million square meters in area with a Three-star Green Building Pre-certification. 

3.  Strengthening green construction. As the first advocator of green construction in the industry, the Company integrates the green concept into the whole process of project construction, focuses on the synergy of pre-project design and construction, actively adopts industrialized and intelligent construction methods to vigorously promote information technology such as BIM, big data, cloud computing, Internet of Things, and strives to promote the reform of construction modes and reduce energy and resource consumption and pollutant emissions from the source. At the same time, the Company will actively cultivate and build green demonstration projects. In 2022, more than 180 projects were recognized as the national and industry green construction demonstration projects, effectively leading and promoting the green transformation and upgrading of the entire industry. 

4.  Strengthening green operation. The Company continues to strengthen the operation of water environmental protection. During the Reporting Period, the total volume of water supply and drainage treated accumulated to more than 70 million tons, with pollutant reduction of nearly 10,000 tons. The Company has independently developed and run a digitalized operation system for sewage treatment terminal facilities in rural areas, and invested in and put into operation a number of projects such as the comprehensive treatment of rural domestic sewage in Liyang City (including the diversion of rain and sewage in the town area), helping to build a livable and beautiful countryside. 

5.  Strengthening green technological R&D. The Company has put more R&D efforts on 7 major categories of key technologies and equipment for sewerage disposal, including magnetic-based efficiency water treatment equipment, as well as soil remediation technologies such as high-efficiency multi-metal synergistic stabilization agents and microbial high-permeability composite materials. Leveraging such methods as engineering material innovation, key structural innovation, design method innovation, manufacturing technology breakthroughs, the Company has promoted the innovation and industrialization application of equipment technology, which effectively improve the water ecological environment and soil remediation capabilities. 

(IV) Measures taken to reduce carbon emissions during the Reporting Period and the effects Whether to adopt carbon reduction measure Yes Emission reductions (Unit: tons CO 2 equivalent) /Types of carbon reduction measures (e.g., using clean energy to generate electricity, using carbon reduction technologies in the production process, and researching, developing and producing new products that contribute to carbon reduction) Using carbon reduction technologies in the production process (e.g., photovoltaic integrated technology for temporary facilities, solar photovoltaic power generation lighting technology for construction sites, low-carbon alternative material technologies such as solid waste conversion into recycled aggregates, tailings, and limestone powder, permanent and temporary road construction combination technology, assembled concrete component technology, photovoltaic, energy storage and diesel integration mobile energy supply technology, air to water heat pump hot water supply facilities, wind and solar complementary street lights and solar battery-powered lighting equipment, etc.). R&D and application of new technologies that help reduce carbon emission (e.g., assembled near – and net-zero-energy building design methods for hot summer and cold winter areas, key technologies for preparing assembled prefabricated structural components from industrial solid waste with large dosing, key technologies for low-carbon development and utilization of underground space complexes in the Xi’an XingFu Green Belt, key technologies for healthy renovation of existing communities, key technologies for intelligent-based green construction). 84 SECTION VENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY 

wExplanation 

√ Applicable □N/A Extensively implementing the major strategic plan on carbon peak and carbon neutrality proposed by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council, CSCEC made up and enhanced areas of weakness across all business sections, and actively responded to strategic requirements based on facts. The Company raised its political stance and closely submitted to the leadership of the Party by focusing on its status quo, specifying the goal of energy conservation, establishing professional institutions, structuring industrial layout and developing green construction and other key aspects. More efforts were made to integrate the green and low-carbon concept into the entire production and operation process, actively help the Company contribute to carbon peak and carbon neutrality, improve the green construction capacity and build an exemplar enterprise of low-carbon construction so as to promote the high-quality development of the construction industry. In 2022, according to the relevant guidelines and policy documents of national ministries and commissions and in light of the actual situation, the Company carried out extensive research and detailed study, and prepared the “Action Plan of CSCEC for Carbon Dioxide Peaking”, which was highly evaluated by a review group consisting of five academicians and four experts, and released to the whole society, receiving enthusiastic response from the society. We have implemented the “ten hundred million ( 个十 百千万 )” project, further carried out the “dual carbon” practice, and built the “CSCEC Carbon Emission Monitoring and Comprehensive Management Services Platform (中国建筑碳排放监测与管理综合服务平 台)”. The Company drew up a “dual carbon” technology map, and laid out major science and technology special projects for carbon peak and carbon neutrality. The Company has carried out the compilation of the collection of existing high-level scientific and technological achievements of the whole system, and comprehensively sorted out and prepared a catalogue of the first batch of 77 advanced scientific and technological achievements for carbon peak and carbon neutrality in terms of solid waste utilization, environmental protection, sponge city, existing building renovation, building energy saving, green building materials and green construction, including “key technologies for the recycling of construction waste and the preparation of recycled products” and “R&D and application of key technologies for energy conservation and consumption reduction of transmission and distribution systems in large-scale public building”. Based on the advanced scientific and technological achievements, the first batch of 62 carbon peak and carbon neutrality demonstration projects, such as “ CSCEC Green Industrial Park A Near-Zero Carbon Emission Park”, have been established. The Company’s subsidiaries have carried out energy conservation and carbon reduction technology innovation and related businesses. China Southwest Architecture funded the establishment of CSCEC Southwest Consulting Company Limited and set up a carbon neutral technology consulting center to lead green star construction projects such as the engineering design of the terminal area of Chengdu Tianfu International Airport and complete more than 1,000 low-carbon projects consulting such as the Unicorn Island NEAR-zero Carbon Emission Park Pilot Construction Plan (独角兽岛近零碳排放园区试点建设方案 ). China Construction Science and Industry has created GS-Building system and ME-House system products, which are widely used in six fields: schools, hospitals, office buildings, residential buildings, industrial parks and hotels, and has applied them in more than 200 projects with more than 30 million square meters of building area. China Construction Science & Technology strives to be a comprehensive service provider of the whole life cycle implementation capability of “conceiving, planning, investment and development, design, construction and operation” of carbon neutral smart cities, and carries out green construction consulting, carbon asset management, building energy investment, “photovoltaic, energy storage, direct current and flexibility” technology in urban renewal, etc. China Shanghai Architectural Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd. actively promotes the development and promotion of dual carbon related consulting and design products, and launches new consulting and design products such as nearly zero energy consumption building certification consulting and whole life cycle carbon emission consulting for buildings. CSCI has developed two structural systems, MiC for concrete and MiC for steel, which help more than 90% of the processes to be produced automatically in factories, shortening the construction period by 40%, reducing construction waste by more than 70% and construction carbon emissions by more than 50% compared with traditional construction techniques. 85 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

II.  Social Responsibility 

(I) Whether to disclose social responsibility report, sustainability report or ESG report separately 

√ Applicable □N/A The Company will release the 2022 report on social responsibility report on the website of the Shanghai Stock Exchange titled CSCEC: 2022 Sustainability Report. Please refer to the report for the information about the Company's social responsibility work. 

(II) Detailed description of the social responsibility work 

√ Applicable □N/A 

External Donation, Charity Project Amount/ Content Remarks 

Total investment (RMB0’000) 21,882 Free assistance and support, donations and charitable contributions to more than 10 assisted areas, including Kangle County, Kang County and Zhuoni County in Gansu Province where the Company provides paired assistance, Changting County in Fujian Province where the Company provides partner assistance, and Yengisar County in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, Tuanfeng County in Hubei Province, Qingyuan County in Guangdong Province, Luodian County in Guizhou Province, Yongshun County in Hunan Province, Langao County and Chunhua County in Shaanxi Province where the Company’s subsidiaries provide assistance. Including: Capital (RMB0’000) 19,336 Mainly used for the revitalization construction in terms of industry, talents, culture, ecology and organizational structures, including donations and capital investment for public welfare made by the Company. Material equivalence (RMB0’000) 2,546 Including donations of books, projectors, printers, etc. to assisted areas, as well as donations and investment in supplies for public welfare made by the Company. Number of people benefited (person) 113,655 Including the people benefited in Kangle County, Kang County and Zhuoni County in Gansu Province where the Company provides partner assistance, and people benefited in Changting County of Fujian Province where the Company provides partner assistance. 

Explanation 

√ Applicable □N/A Leveraging its brand, CSCEC has established a “CSCEC brand building and social responsibility working leadership group ( 中国建筑品牌建设和社会责任工作领导小组 )” to carry out specific initiatives, continuously deepening the brand-led social responsibility management model. The Company insists on the promotion path of “business lines as the horizontal basis and subsidiaries as the vertical extension ( 横向业务线为 基础、纵向子企业延伸 )”, implements the social responsibility strategic plan and improves the system of social responsibility management to ensure that the social responsibility tasks are executed consistently throughout the whole system and promoted at all levels. CSCEC communicates with communities to promote community development. The Company has incorporated community communication and engagement into the Social Responsibility Work Guidance Manual (《社会责任工作指导手册》 ), the Cultural Integration Manual (《文化融合手册》 ), and the Cultural Integration Implementation Manual ( 《文化融合执行手册》 ) for overseas organizations to clarify the methods of community communication, promote better understanding of community needs for projects, and formulate targeted community benefit policies. For development projects which affect communities, relevant information shall be disclosed to the community representatives in a complete, accurate and comprehensive manner, on which basis, in-depth communication and negotiation may be carried out to reach consensus. For community development needs, the Company shall develop relevant initiatives and make necessary investments to promote community development. CSCEC has carried out the “Hundreds of Lectures into the Construction Site ( 百场宣讲进工地 )” campaign themed for care and protection of left-behind children in rural areas for five consecutive years, covering 31 provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities, with volunteers focusing on policies and regulations, family guardianship, safety and self-care, and affectionate communication. A total of 500 thematic lectures were held covering more than 9 million people. Taking up global responsibility, the Company set up Luban College ( 鲁班学院 ) to cultivate overseas construction management and technical talents, and assisted in the construction of the PNG and China Friendship School to cultivate talents for Papua New Guinea. During the construction of Etihad Railway in the United Arab Emirates, the Company gave careful placement and care to animals and plants along the route and made every effort to protect the local ecological environment, etc. CSCEC has conducted research on authoritative social responsibility standards at home and abroad around the information needs of stakeholders from different regions and cultures around the world, compiled and issued sustainability reports for 13 consecutive years, received the highest rating for social responsibility report from the Chinese Academy of Social Science for 10 consecutive years, and actively compiled and issued key country-specific social responsibility reports, effectively enhancing the transparency of corporate operations and social communication capabilities. 86 SECTION VENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY 

III.  Information on Consolidating and Expanding the Results in Poverty Alleviation, Rural Revitalization and Other Specific Tasks 

√ Applicable □N/A 

Poverty Alleviation and Rural Revitalization Projects Amount/Content Remarks 

Total investment (RMB0’000) 16,135.8 Invested assistance funds of RMB161,358,000 in more than 10 assisted areas, including Kangle County, Kang County and Zhuoni County in Gansu Province where the Company provides paired assistance, Changting County in Fujian Province where the Company provides partner assistance, and Yengisar County in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, Tuanfeng County in Hubei Province, Qingyuan County in Guangdong Province, Luodian County in Guizhou Province, Yongshun County in Hunan Province, Langao County and Chunhua County in Shaanxi Province where the Company’s subsidiaries involved in for providing assistance. Including: Capital (RMB0’000) 15,783.2 Mainly used for the revitalization construction in terms of industry, talents, culture, ecology and organizational structures. Material equivalence (RMB0’000) 352.6 Donations of books, projectors, printers, etc. to assisted areas. Number of people benefited (person) 113,655 /Types of assistance (e.g., poverty alleviation by developing industries, creating jobs, and developing education) Industrial assistance, employment assistance, education assistance, consumption assistance and party building assistance, helping to address prominent issues to ensure rural poor people do not have to worry about food and clothing and have access to compulsory education, basic medical services and safe housing /

Explanation 

√ Applicable □N/A 

(I) Planning of rural revitalization 

The Company and its controlling shareholder China State Construction resolutely implemented the decisions and deployments of the CPC Central Committee and the State Council on rural revitalization and met the requirement of “sticking to responsibility, policy, support and regulation regardless of whether countries are removed from the poverty list”. The Company provided paired assistance to Kangle County, Zhuoni County and Kang County in Gansu Province (referred to as the three counties of Gansu), provided partner assistance to Changting County, Fujian Province, and actively participated in the work of rural revitalization in more than ten regions, including Yengisar County in Xinjiang, Tuanfeng County in Hubei Province and Luodian County in Guizhou Province. In 2022, the Company issued Annual Key Points of Rural Revitalization ( 年度助力乡村振兴工作要点 ), the List of Paired Assistance and Partner Assistance Tasks (《定点帮扶和对口支援工作任务清单》 ) and Partner Assistance to Green Building Materials Industrial Park in Changting County (《对口支援长汀绿色建材产业园帮扶方案》 ). The Company focused on the revitalization in terms of industry, talents, culture, ecology and organizational structures, with a view to promoting the consolidation and expansion of poverty alleviation achievements in assisted areas as well as the high-quality development of rural revitalization. 87 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

(II) Summary of rural revitalization 

In 2022, CSCEC sent 55 cadres to the three counties of Gansu, and Changting County of Fujian and Yengisar County in Xinjiang. The Company invited the CPC and government officials to visit the assisted areas four times, sent over 400 officers of the Company at all levels to carry out research and supervision in the assisted areas including the three counties of Gansu and Changting County of Fujian and held 40 seminars to discuss with the local CPC committees and governments on the plan for rural revitalization. The Company invested RMB161 million free assistance funds in assisted areas in respect of paired and partner assistance, and designated 13 predominant subsidiaries to make joint efforts to lift the three counties of Gansu and Changting County of Fujian out of poverty with 35 subsidiaries fully participating in poverty alleviation by promoting consumption, purchasing and helping to promote the sales of more than RMB67 million of agricultural products. Projects built with donations such as the Kangle County Tourism Channel, Zhuoni Hagaichuan Tourism Benchmark Village, the Tourism Development Demonstration Zone Phase IV in Kang County, and Memorial of Start of the Long March by the Central Red Army in Changting County to improve the tourism infrastructure in the assisted areas. We supported the building of the Green Building Materials Industrial Park in Changting County, the water plant in Yangba Town, Kang County, Zhuoni Blue Spring Water Plant (卓尼蓝泉水厂 ), and the Modern Agricultural Science and Technology Demonstration Base in Kangle County to revitalize natural resources, develop distinctive industries, and help revitalize local industries. The Company established Tsinghua University distance learning stations for rural revitalization in the three counties of Gansu and Changting County, with attendance reaching 156,000 people online, including 4,150 grassroots cadres, 1,155 leaders in rural revitalization and 1,178 other technicians. We held “Zhonghai Pearl Class ( 中海珍珠班 )”, “Rainbow Road ( 彩虹益路 )” and “Inspirational Navigation ( 励志领航 )” to help 136 students in difficulty in the three counties in a “one-to-one” pairing manner, and helped revitalize talents in the three counties of Gansu. In Kangle County, we have built 20 demonstration sites for civilization practice at the village level, constructed cultural facilities such as village history halls, village library and cultural square, conducted training on the social construction of ideological infrastructure in rural areas, laws and regulations, and carried out the selection and commendation of “model families of national unity and progress ( 民族团结进步示范家庭 )” to revitalize the rural culture. Taking advantage of its professional advantages, architects and two design institutes under the Company helped Kangle County to prepare 53 “multi-regulation integration ( 多规合一 )” village plans, and helped Zhuoni County to prepare the planning for the county-wide tourism and the Dayugou 5A scenic spot, and assisted Kangle County in the construction of key projects such as the Hua’er Homestay ( 花儿民宿 ) and Nagou Visitor Center ( 纳沟游客中心 ), so as to create beautiful countryside by developing the tourism industry and revitalize the ecological environment. The peer-to-peer cooperation among Party units from 22 villages in the three counties of Gansu and Changting County of Fujian, was conducted. Relying on the peer-to-peer cooperation among Party units, the Company donated to build 13 support workshops, including the Traditional Garment Processing Factory in Qiaonan in Zhuoni County, the Fungus Greenhouse in Zhangjiahe Village in Kang County, and the Chinese Medicine Cooperative in Laoshugou Village in Kangle County. Through designated exclusive sales, a large number of products such as Kangle mushroom, Zhuoni quinoa, and Kang walnuts were marketed, achieving local employment of 1,344 people. The Company also helped with the training of members of village Party branch committees and villagers committees to revitalize the organizational structures. 

(III) Subsequent plan for assisting in rural revitalization 

In 2023, the Company will fully implement the spirit of the 20th National Congress of the CPC and truly implement the important speeches on rural revitalization given by President Xi Jinping. By following the general requirements to build rural areas with thriving businesses, pleasant living environments, social etiquette and civility, effective governance, and prosperity, CSCEC will fully leverage the strength of “whole industrial chain” of construction to ensure paired and partner assistance in the three counties of Gansu Province and Changting County of Fujian Province, and endeavor to drive rural revitalization and high-quality development in the assisted areas. CSCEC will help to build tourism infrastructure projects and support the development and growth of tourism in these areas; give play to the advantages of the resources platform to create feature product brands in these areas, cultivate e-commerce talents and expand the e-commerce industry, strengthen the connection of production and sales and expand sales channels, so as to support the planting and breeding industry with local characteristics. We will also make efforts to continuously carry out educational assistance, introduce professional teaching resources, renovate and improve software and hardware environment and carry forward trainings for village teachers, organize special trainings for cadres working at the grassroots, entrepreneurial leaders, professional and technical personnel, so as to further improve the quality of rural teaching and villagers’ ability to become rich. We will innovatively carry out various cultural activities and guide villagers to transform outmoded habits and customs through education to build a civilized countryside. Taking village planning as guidance, we will promote the construction of rural ecological infrastructure to build a beautiful countryside. Beyond that, we will continue to build model villages for rural revitalization, increase party building paring, boost the development of village collective economy and assist with the ability improvement of village Party branch committees and villagers committees to drive the rural revitalization, thereby revitalizing the organizational structures. Combining with the actual situation of the assisted areas, CSCEC will assist with their medical, drinking water and housing issues to consolidate its achievements in addressing prominent issues to ensure rural poor people do not have to worry about food and clothing and have access to compulsory education, basic medical services and safe housing. 88 SECTION VIIMPORTANT MATTERS 

> SECTION VI  IMPORTANT MATTERS I.  Fulfillment of Commitments
> (I)  Commitments of the Company’s de facto controller, shareholders, related parties, acquirer, the Company, and other related parties during or subsisted at the end of the Reporting Period
> √ Applicable  □ N/A
> Background of commitment Type of commitment  Commitment Party  Contents of commitment  Time and term of commitment Is there a time limit for performance? Have the commitments been strictly and timely fulfilled Alternative plan if failed to timely fulfill commitment Alternative plan if failed to timely fulfill commitment
> Commitments in relation to initial public offering To resolve horizontal competition  China State Construction The Agreement on Avoidance of Horizontal Competition with the Company was signed. Please refer to the relevant contents of the Letter of Content in Relation to the Initial Public Offering of Shares by China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited published by the Company on July 13, 2009. No term  No  Yes  In the process of performance  N/A To resolve defects in land and other property ownership  China State Construction For the land use rights and properties injected as contributions into the Company and included in the scope of assets valuation report, at request of and with the cooperation from the Company, relevant procedures for registration of the said land use rights and properties under the existing name of the Company or its relevant subsidiaries shall be completed. No term  No  Yes  In the process of performance  N/A To resolve defects in land and other property ownership  China State Construction For the real estate projects injected as contributions into the Company, whose revenue had been recognized before the establishment of the Company, the land value-added tax payable in future final settlement shall be borne by China State Construction. No term  No  Yes  In the process of performance  N/A Other commitments made to minority shareholders of the Company To resolve horizontal competition  CSCEC Issued a non-competition commitment, with the same contents as those set out in the Entrusted Management Agreement, to China Overseas Land & Investment, a holding subsidiary listed in Hong Kong. Please refer to relevant content of the Announcement on the Signing of Entrusted Management Agreement between CSCEC and Its Holding Subsidiary China Overseas Land & Investment published by the Company on February 11, 2014. During the commitment term  Yes  Yes  In the process of performance  N/A To resolve horizontal competition  CSCEC Issued a non-competition deed to China Overseas Property, a holding subsidiary listed in Hong Kong, and please refer to the relevant content of the Listing Documents – Listing by Way of Introduction of the Entire Issued Share Capital of the Company on the Main Board of The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited published by China Overseas Property on October 14, 2015. During the commitment term  Yes  Yes  In the process of performance  N/A Others  Officers who also hold positions in China State Construction Undertook to fulfill their duties diligently during their term of office as an officer of the Company, properly handle the relationship between the Company and its controlling shareholder, live up to the trust of the Board of Directors and all shareholders of the Company, defend the interests of the Company and shareholders, and not to do anything that may jeopardize the interests of the Company and its minority shareholders due to serving them concurrently. During the commitment term  Yes  Yes  In the process of performance  N/A

89 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

(II) Where the Company has profit forecasts on assets or projects, and the Reporting Period is within the term of profit forecasts, the Company has to state whether such profit forecasts on assets or projects are fulfilled and the reasons therefor     

> □Fulfilled □Not Fulfilled √N/A

(III) Completion of performance commitment and its effect on goodwill impairment test   

> □Applicable √N/A

II.  Any Non-operating Misappropriation of Funds by the Controlling Shareholder and Other Related Parties during the Reporting Period   

> □Applicable √N/A

III.  Guarantees in Violation of Regulations   

> □Applicable √N/A

IV.  Explanation on the “Audit Report with Modified Opinion” of the Accounting Firm by the Board of Directors of the Company   

> □Applicable √N/A

V.  The Company’s Analysis of and Explanation on the Causes and Impacts of Changes in Accounting Policies and Estimates or Corrections of Material Accounting Errors 

(I) The Company’s analysis of and explanation on the causes and impacts of changes in accounting policies and estimates   

> □Applicable √N/A

(II) The Company’s analysis of and explanation on the reasons and impacts of the corrections of major accounting errors   

> □Applicable √N/A

(III) Communications with the former accounting firm   

> □Applicable √N/A

(IV) Other explanation   

> □Applicable √N/A

90 SECTION VIIMPORTANT MATTERS 

VI.  Appointment and Dismissal of the Accounting Firm 

Unit: ’0,000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Currently appointed 

Name of domestic accounting firm Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP (Special General Partnership) Remuneration of domestic accounting firm 4,180 Audit service years of domestic accounting firm 3Names of certified public accountants of the domestic accounting firm Zhou Ying, Yang Shujuan, Shen Yan Number of continuous years of audit service by certified public accountants of domestic accounting firm 3Name of overseas accounting firm /Remuneration of overseas accounting firm /Audit service years of overseas accounting firm /

Name Remuneration 

Accounting firm for internal control audit Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP (Special General Partnership) 315 Financial adviser / /Sponsor / /

Explanation on appointment and dismissal of accounting firm 

√ Applicable □ N/A On May 13, 2022, as considered and approved at the 2021 annual general meeting of the Company, Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP (Special General Partnership) was engaged as the auditor for the financial report and internal control of the Company for 2022, for a term of one year. For details, please refer to the Announcement on Re-appointment of Accounting Firm in 2022 published on April 16, 2022, the Information on the 2021 Annual General Meeting published on April 30, 2022, and the Announcement on Resolutions of the 2021 Annual General Meeting published on May 14, 2022, by the Company. Explanation on change of accounting firm during the audit period 

□Applicable √ N/A 

VII.  Risks of Delisting 

(I) Causes of delisting warning 

□Applicable √ N/A 

(II) Measures to be taken by the Company 

□Applicable √ N/A 

(III) Circumstances of and Reasons for Delisting 

□Applicable √ N/A 91 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

VIII.  Matters Related to Insolvency/Reorganization   

> □Applicable √N/A

IX.  Matters Related to Significant Litigation and Arbitration  

> □There were significant litigations and arbitrations during the year
> √There was no significant litigation or arbitration during the year

(I) Litigations and arbitrations disclosed in provisional announcements without subsequent progress   

> □Applicable √N/A

(II) Litigations and arbitrations not disclosed in provisional announcements or with subsequent progress   

> □Applicable √N/A

(III) Other explanation   

> □Applicable √N/A

X.  Suspected Violations, Penalty and Rectification of the Company and Its Directors, Supervisors, Senior Management, Controlling Shareholder, and De Facto Controller   

> □Applicable √N/A

XI.  Explanation on the Integrity of the Company and Its Controlling Shareholder and De Facto Controller during the Reporting Period   

> □Applicable √N/A

92 SECTION VIIMPORTANT MATTERS 

XII.  Material Related Party Transactions 

(I) Related party transactions associated with day-to-day operations 1. Matters disclosed in provisional announcements without further progress or changes in subsequent implementation 

√ Applicable □N/A 

Summary of matters Index for details 

On November 26, 2021 and December 15, 2021, the Proposal on the Renewal of the Comprehensive Service Framework Agreement between China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited and China State Construction Engineering Corporation was considered and approved at the 8th meeting of the third session of the Board of Directors, the 6th meeting of the third session of the Board of Supervisors and the third extraordinary general meeting of the Company in 2021. The Company and China State Construction renewed the Comprehensive Service Framework Agreement Between China State Construction Engineering Corporation and China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited in respect of the related party transactions arising from the sales, procurement, commercial factoring services, financial leasing services, property leasing and other business between the Company and China State Construction and its subsidiaries. During the term of the agreement in 2022, the sales between the Company and China State Construction and its subsidiaries shall not exceed RMB1.5 billion; procurement shall not exceed RMB8.5 billion; the maximum balance of commercial factoring services (excluding those from CSC Finance) shall not exceed RMB100 million, and factoring interest and service fee shall not exceed RMB5 million; the maximum balance of financial leasing services (excluding those from CSC Finance) shall not exceed RMB50 million, and financial leasing interest and service fee shall not exceed RMB2 million; property leasing shall not exceed RMB60 million; other daily related party transactions shall not exceed RMB200 million. During the Reporting Period, the sales between the Company and China State Construction and its subsidiaries was RMB170 million; the procurement was RMB3.38 billion; no commercial factoring services and financial leasing service was performed; the property leasing was RMB40 million; other daily related party transactions were RMB30 million. The amount of actual daily related party transactions of the Company was within the range set out in the agreement. Announcement on Resolutions of the 8th Meeting of the Third Board of Directors, Announcement on Resolutions of the 6th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors, and Announcement on the Renewal of the Comprehensive Service Framework Agreement between the Company and China State Construction Engineering Corporation & Daily Related-Party Transaction published on November 27, 2021. Announcement on Resolutions of the Third Extraordinary General Meeting in 2021 published on December 16, 2021. On November 26, 2021 and December 15, 2021, the Proposal on the Renewal of the Financial Service Framework Agreement between China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. and China State Construction Engineering Corporation was considered and approved at the 8th meeting of the third session of the Board of Directors, the 6th meeting of the third session of the Board of Supervisors and the third extraordinary general meeting of the Company in 2021. CSC Finance, a subsidiary of the Company, and China State Construction renewed the Financial Service Framework Agreement Between China State Construction Engineering Corporation and China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. in respect of the related party transactions arising from the deposits, loans, financial and financing consultancy and other relevant financial services provided to China State Construction and its subsidiaries by CSC Finance. During the term of the agreement, the daily balance cap of deposits (inclusive of accrued interests) to be placed by China State Construction and its subsidiaries with CSC Finance shall not exceed RMB20.0 billion, with the daily balance of loans (inclusive of accrued interests) to be obtained not exceeding the daily balance cap of the deposits (inclusive of accrued interests); the fees to be charged by CSC Finance for providing other financial services to China State Construction and its subsidiaries shall not exceed RMB300 million. During the Reporting Period, the actual performance complied with the agreement, and the actual daily balance cap of the deposits placed by China State Construction and its subsidiaries with CSC Finance was RMB10.39 billion (inclusive of accrued interests); and the maximum daily loan balance was RMB4.82 billion (inclusive of accrued interests); the fees charged by CSC Finance for providing other financial services to China State Construction and its subsidiaries was RMB5 million. For details, please refer to “(V) Financial business between the Company and the related-party financial companies, and between the Company’s holding financial companies and the related parties ”in “XII. Material Related Party Transactions ”under SECTION VI. Announcement on Resolutions of the 8th Meeting of the Third Board of Directors, Announcement on Resolutions of the 6th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors, and Announcement on the Renewal of the Financial Service Framework Agreement between China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. and China State Construction Engineering Corporation & Daily Related-Party Transaction published on November 27, 2021. Announcement on Resolutions of the Third Extraordinary General Meeting in 2021 published on December 16, 2021. 93 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Summary of matters Index for details 

On December 12, 2022 and December 28, 2022, the Proposal on the Renewal of the Comprehensive Service Framework Agreement between China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited and China State Construction Engineering Corporation was considered and approved at the 28th meeting of the third session of the Board of Directors, the 17th meeting of the third session of the Board of Supervisors and the first extraordinary general meeting of the Company in 2022. The Company and China State Construction renewed the Comprehensive Service Framework Agreement Between China State Construction Engineering Corporation and China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited in respect of the related party transactions arising from the sales, procurement, commercial factoring services, financial leasing services, property leasing and other business between the Company and China State Construction and its subsidiaries. During the term of the agreement in 2023, the sales between the Company and China State Construction and its subsidiaries shall not exceed RMB100 million; procurement shall not exceed RMB5.8 billion; the maximum balance of commercial factoring services (excluding those from CSC Finance) shall not exceed RMB300 million, and factoring interest and service fee shall not exceed RMB20 million; the maximum balance of financial leasing services (excluding those from CSC Finance) shall not exceed RMB100 million, and financial leasing interest and service fee shall not exceed RMB6 million; property leasing shall not exceed RMB100 million; other daily related party transactions shall not exceed RMB100 million. Announcement on Resolutions of the 28th Meeting of the Third Board of Directors, Announcement on Resolutions of the 17th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors, and Announcement on the Renewal of the Comprehensive Service Framework Agreement between the Company and China State Construction Engineering Corporation & Daily Related-Party Transaction published on December 13, 2022. Announcement on Resolutions of the First Extraordinary General Meeting in 2022 published on December 29, 2022. On December 12, 2022 and December 28, 2022, the Proposal on the Renewal of the Financial Service Framework Agreement between China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. and China State Construction Engineering Corporation was considered and approved at the 28th meeting of the third session of the Board of Directors, the 17th meeting of the third session of the Board of Supervisors and the first extraordinary general meeting of the Company in 2022. CSC Finance, a subsidiary of the Company, and China State Construction renewed the Financial Service Framework Agreement Between China State Construction Engineering Corporation and China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. in respect of the related party transactions arising from the deposits, loans, financial and financing consultancy and other relevant financial services provided to China State Construction and its subsidiaries by CSC Finance. During the term of the agreement, the daily balance cap of the deposits to be placed by China State Construction and its subsidiaries with CSC Finance shall not exceed RMB20.0 billion (inclusive of accrued interests), with the daily balance of loans (inclusive of accrued interests) to be obtained not exceeding the daily balance cap of the deposits (inclusive of accrued interests); the fees to be charged by CSC Finance for providing other financial services to China State Construction and its subsidiaries shall not exceed RMB300 million. Announcement on Resolutions of the 28th Meeting of the Third Board of Directors, Announcement on Resolutions of the 17th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors, and Announcement on the Renewal of the Financial Service Framework Agreement between China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. and China State Construction Engineering Corporation & Daily Related-Party Transaction published on December 13, 2022. Announcement on Resolutions of the First Extraordinary General Meeting in 2022 published on December 29, 2022. 2. Matters disclosed in provisional announcements with further progress or changes in subsequent implementation 

□Applicable √ N/A 

3. Matters not disclosed in provisional announcements 

□Applicable √ N/A 94 SECTION VIIMPORTANT MATTERS 

(II) Related party transactions as a result of acquisition or disposal of assets or equity 1. Matters disclosed in provisional announcements without further progress or changes in subsequent implementation 

√ Applicable □N/A 

Summary of matter Index for details 

On October 28, 2022, the Proposal on Cash Acquisition of 100% Equity of China Construction Eco-Environmental Group Co., Ltd. by China State Construction Development Co., Ltd. was considered and approved at the 26th meeting of the third session of the Board of Directors and the 15th meeting of the third session of the Board of Supervisors of the Company. CSCDC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, intends to sign an equity transfer agreement with China State Construction Innovation Investment, a wholly-owned subsidiary of China State Construction (the controlling shareholder of the Company), to acquire 100% equity interests in China Construction Eco-Environmental held by China State Construction Innovation Investment in cash, at a consideration of RMB1,706,284,700. This transaction will help expand the Company’s scope of business, improve the Company’s industrial chain, and enhance its market competitiveness in water environmental protection, which is in line with the Company’s business development needs. This matter constituted a related party transaction, but does not constitute a major asset reorganization as required by the Management Measures for Major Asset Reorganization of Listed Companies. As of this related party transaction, except for the related party transactions with China State Construction that have been considered and approved at the Company’s general meeting, the related party transactions between the Company and China State Construction within the past 12 months have not reached 5% of audited net assets of the Company for the latest period, and this related party transaction does not need to be submitted to the Company’s general meeting for consideration. This related party transaction was conducted in accordance with fair and reasonable commercial terms, and the pricing was fair and reasonable. The transaction followed the principles of objectivity, equity and fairness, and was in the interest of the Company. There was no matter that would harm the interests of shareholders, especially minority shareholders. This related party transaction will not have a negative impact on the Company. Announcement on Resolutions of the 26th Meeting of the Third Board of Directors, Announcement on Resolutions of the 15th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors, Proposal on Cash Acquisition of 100% Equity of China Construction E c o - E n v i r o n m e n t a l G r o u p C o . , Ltd. by China State Construction Development Co., Ltd. published on October 29, 2022. 2. Matters disclosed in provisional announcements with further progress or changes in subsequent implementation 

□Applicable √ N/A 

3. Matters not disclosed in provisional announcements 

□Applicable √ N/A 

4. Disclosure of performance achieved for the Reporting Period if performance agreements are involved 

□Applicable √ N/A 95 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

(III) Material related party transactions in joint external investment 1. Matters disclosed in provisional announcements without further progress or changes in subsequent implementation 

√ Applicable □N/A 

Summary of matter Index for details 

On August 17, 2022, the Proposal for the Company and Its Controlling Shareholder to Jointly Increase Capital in China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. and Related Party Transaction was considered and approved at the 22nd meeting of the third session of the Board of Directors and the 13th meeting of the third session of the Board of Supervisors of the Company. China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited and China State Construction Engineering Corporation i n c r e a s e d t h e c a p i t a l o f C h i n a S t a t e C o n s t r u c t i o n Finance Co., Ltd. in cash in proportion to their respective shareholding in China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd., among which, CSCEC and China State Construction increased RMB2.4 billion and RMB600 million, respectively. Upon the completion of the capital increase, the registered capital of CSC Finance will increase to RMB15 billion. This matter constituted a related party transaction, but does not constitute a major asset reorganization as required by the Management Measures for Major Asset Reorganization of Listed Companies. As of this related party transaction, except for the related party transactions with China State Construction that have been considered and approved at the Company’s general meeting, the related party transactions between the Company and China State Construction within the past 12 months have not reached 5% of audited net assets of the Company for the latest period, and this related party transaction does not need to be submitted to the Company’s general meeting for consideration. This related party transaction was conducted in accordance with fair and reasonable commercial terms, and the pricing was fair and reasonable. The transaction followed the principles of objectivity, equity and fairness, and was in the interest of the Company. There was no matter that would harm the interests of shareholders, especially minority shareholders. This related party transaction will not have a negative impact on the Company. A n n o u n c e m e n t o n R e s o l u t i o n s of the 22nd Meeting of the Third Board of Directors, Announcement on Resolutions of the 13th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors, A n n o u n c e m e n t o n t h e J o i n t Increase of Capital by the Company and Its Controlling Shareholder in China State Construction Finance C o . , L t d . a n d R e l a t e d P a r t y Transaction published on August 18, 2022. 2. Matters disclosed in provisional announcements with further progress or changes in subsequent implementation 

□Applicable √ N/A 

3. Matters not disclosed in provisional announcements 

□Applicable √ N/A 

(IV) Creditor’s rights and debts with related parties 1. Matters disclosed in provisional announcements without further progress or changes in subsequent implementation 

□Applicable √ N/A 

2. Matters disclosed in provisional announcements with further progress or changes in subsequent implementation 

□Applicable √ N/A 

3. Matters not disclosed in provisional announcements 

□Applicable √ N/A 96 SECTION VIIMPORTANT MATTERS 

(V) Financial business between the Company and the related-party financial companies, and between the Company’s holding financial companies and the related parties 

√ Applicable □N/A 

1. Deposit 

√ Applicable □N/A Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Related party Related relationship Maximum daily deposit limit (inclusive of accrued interest) Deposit interest rate range (%) Opening balance Amount incurred during the Reporting Period Total deposit during the Reporting Period Total withdrawal during the Reporting Period Closing balance 

China State Construction and its subsidiaries Controlling shareholder and its directly or indirectly controlled companies 20,000,000 0.455-1.755 2,623,164 24,061,786 24,238,203 2,446,747 

Total / / / 2,623,164 24,061,786 24,238,203 2,446,747 

2. Loan 

√ Applicable □N/A Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Related party Related relationship Loan amount Loan interest rate range (%) Opening balance Amount incurred during the Reporting Period Total loans during the Reporting Period Total repayments during the Reporting Period Closing balance 

China State Construction and its subsidiaries Controlling shareholder and its directly or indirectly controlled entities Not exceeding the maximum daily deposit limit (inclusive of accrued interest) 3.0-3.6 4,796,000 2,116,168 4,910,335 2,001,833 

Total / / / 4,796,000 2,116,168 4,910,335 2,001,833 

3. Credit facility or other financial businesses 

√ Applicable □N/A Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Related party Related relationship Business type Total amount Actual amount 

China State Construction and its subsidiaries Controlling shareholder and its directly or indirectly controlled companies Other financial businesses 300,000 4,542 97 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

4. Other explanation 

√ Applicable □N/A The above related party transactions of the Company have been considered and approved at the 8th meeting of the third session of the Board of Directors, the 6th meeting of the third session of the Board of Supervisors, the third extraordinary general meeting in 2021, and the 28th meeting of the third session of the Board of Directors, the 17th meeting of the third session of the Board of Supervisors, the first extraordinary general meeting in 2022 (revised to "2021" by clients @2023/6/6 (周二 ) 10:36), of the Company. For details, please refer to “(I) Related party transactions associated with day-to-day operations” in “XII. Material Related Party Transactions” under SECTION VI. 

(VI)  Miscellaneous 

√ Applicable □N/A For related party transactions of the Company, please refer to Note X “Related party relationships and transactions” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”. 

XIII.  Material Contracts and Their Fulfillment 

(I) Custody, contracting, and leasing 1. Custody 

□Applicable √ N/A 

2. Contracting 

□Applicable √ N/A 

3. Leasing 

□Applicable √ N/A 98 SECTION VIIMPORTANT MATTERS 

> (II)  Guarantees
> √ Applicable  □N/A Unit: ’000 yuan  Currency: RMB
> Guarantor Relationship between guarantor and the Company Guaranteed party  Guaranteed amount Creation date of guarantee (execution date of agreement) Commencement date of guarantee Expiry date of guarantee Type of guarantee Collateral (if any) Has the guarantee been fulfilled? Is the guarantee overdue? Overdue amount Is there counter guarantee? Is the guarantee provided to the related party? Related relationship
> China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited  The Company  Wuhan Communications Investment Group Limited Company  3,500,000  December 24, 2014  April 21, 2015  May 23, 2027  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 Yes  No  Others China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Chongqing Jiayi Property Development Company Limited ( 重庆嘉益房地产开发有限公司 ) 121,300  November 20, 2020 November 20, 2020 November 20, 2025 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Chongqing Jiayi Property Development Company Limited  345,000  March 15, 2022  March 15, 2022  March 15, 2027  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Qingdao Haijie Real Estate Co., Ltd. (青岛海捷置业有限公司 ) 49,923  January 13, 2022  January 13, 2022  June 7, 2024  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. (厦门市海贸地产有限公司 ) 28,380  December 14, 2021 December 14, 2021 December 13, 2024 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd.  13,936  December 17, 2021 December 17, 2021 December 16, 2024 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd.  9,704  December 20, 2021 December 20, 2021 December 20, 2024 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd.  259,459  January 24, 2022  January 24, 2022  December 13, 2024 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd.  186,049  January 21, 2022  January 21, 2022  December 16, 2024 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd.  90,277  January 7, 2022  January 7, 2022  December 20, 2024 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Infinite Sun Limited  1,119,148  December 4, 2019 December 4, 2019 December 4, 2024 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Infinite Sun Limited  257,145  January 25, 2022  January 25, 2022  December 4, 2024 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Marble Edge Investments Limited  810,475  June 1, 2020  June 1, 2020  December 1, 2024 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Marble Edge Investments Limited  143,568  May 12, 2022  May 12, 2022  December 1, 2024 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Dragon Star H.K.Investments Limited  928,534  July 27, 2020  July 27, 2020  January 27, 2025  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Dragon Star H.K.Investments Limited  125,569  January 17, 2022  January 17, 2022  January 27, 2025  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Ultra Keen Holdings Limited  1,745,958  November 11, 2020 November 11, 2020  October 30, 2025  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Ultra Keen Holdings Limited  215,642  January 31, 2022  January 31, 2022  October 30, 2025  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Asia Power Development Limited  1,199,970  May 27, 2022  May 27, 2022  May 27, 2026  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Changsha Yida Chuangzhi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. ( 长沙亿达创智置业发展有限 公司 )173,460  April 20, 2020  April 20, 2020  April 20, 2026  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Guangzhou Bizhen Real Estate Development Company Limited ( 广州碧臻房地产开发有限公司 ) 72,857  December 11, 2018 December 11, 2018 December 8, 2023 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Associate

99 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

> Guarantor Relationship between guarantor and the Company Guaranteed party  Guaranteed amount Creation date of guarantee (execution date of agreement) Commencement date of guarantee Expiry date of guarantee Type of guarantee Collateral (if any) Has the guarantee been fulfilled? Is the guarantee overdue? Overdue amount Is there counter guarantee? Is the guarantee provided to the related party? Related relationship
> China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Grand Ample Ltd.  932,254  June 22, 2021  June 22, 2021  June 22, 2024  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Associate China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary  Grand Ample Ltd.  156,026  January 10, 2022  January 10, 2022  June 22, 2024  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Associate China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Zhuzhou China Overseas Grand Oceans Properties Co., Ltd. ( 株洲中海宏洋地产有限公司 )32,700  March 31, 2022  March 31, 2022  September 28, 2027 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Associate China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Zhuzhou China Overseas Grand Oceans Properties Co., Ltd. 210,000  September 29, 2021 September 29, 2021 September 28, 2026 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Associate China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Guangdong Haichao Technology Industry Development Co., Ltd.( 广东海朝科技产业发展有限 公司 )39,163  October 31, 2022  October 31, 2022  October 31, 2041  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Chongqing CSCEC Hailong Two Rivers Construction Technology Co., Ltd. ( 重庆中建海龙两 江建筑科技有限公司 )97,300  October 29, 2021  October 29, 2021  October 29, 2031  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Chongqing CSCEC Hailong Two Rivers Construction Technology Co., Ltd.  11,088  January 27, 2022  January 27, 2022  May 10, 2023  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Shanghai Yongnianli Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. ( 上海永年里房地产开发有限公司 ) 39,200  September 28, 2022 September 28, 2022 September 27, 2034 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  No  Others China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Shanghai Yongnianli Real Estate Development Co., Ltd.  126,800  November 10, 2022 November 10, 2022 September 27, 2034 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  No  Others China Overseas Holdings Limited  Holding subsidiary Shanghai Yongnianli Real Estate Development Co., Ltd.  26,860  December 19, 2022 December 19, 2022 September 27, 2034 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  No  Others China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. Holding subsidiary Wuhan Optics Valley Science Island Construction and Development Co., Ltd. ( 武汉光谷科学岛建设发 展有限公司 )150,000  September 13, 2022 September 13, 2022 September 15, 2040 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. Holding subsidiary Suzhou Fuyuan Real Estate Co., Ltd. (苏州孚元置业有限公司 ) 195,500  December 29, 2020 December 29, 2020  May 31, 2024  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Associate China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. Holding subsidiary  Suzhou Fuyuan Real Estate Co., Ltd.  204,000  January 5, 2022  January 5, 2022  January 4, 2028  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Associate China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. Holding subsidiary Guangzhou Fuchuang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. ( 广州孚创房地产开发有限公司 ) 799,000  August 5, 2021  August 5, 2021  December 30, 2024 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Associate China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. Holding subsidiary Guangzhou Fuchuang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd.  510,000  December 28, 2021 December 28, 2021  January 6, 2030  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Associate China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. Holding subsidiary Suzhou Dongfu Yongxu Real Estate Co., Ltd. (苏州东孚永旭置业有限公司 ) 98,000  December 19, 2021  January 17, 2022  December 18, 2024 Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Joint venture China Construction (South Pacific) Development Co Pte Ltd Holding subsidiary  Fernvale Lane Pte Ltd.  147,500  June 4, 2020  June 4, 2020  March 3, 2025  Joint and several liability guarantee  Nil  No  No  0 No  Yes  Associate

100 SECTION VIIMPORTANT MATTERS 

> Guarantor Relationship between guarantor and the Company Guaranteed party  Guaranteed amount Creation date of guarantee (execution date of agreement) Commencement date of guarantee Expiry date of guarantee Type of guarantee Collateral (if any) Has the guarantee been fulfilled? Is the guarantee overdue? Overdue amount Is there counter guarantee? Is the guarantee provided to the related party? Related relationship
> Total amount of guarantees provided during the Reporting Period (excluding guarantees provided to subsidiaries)  3,658,439 Total balance of guarantees as at the end of the Reporting Period (A) (excluding guarantees provided to subsidiaries)  15,171,745 Guarantees provided by the Company to subsidiaries Total amount of guarantees provided to subsidiaries during the Reporting Period  72,764,186 Total balance of guarantees provided to subsidiaries as at the end of the Reporting Period (B)  309,340,120 Total amount of guarantees provided by the Company (including guarantees provided to subsidiaries) Total amount of guarantees (A+B)  324,511,865 Total amount of guarantees as a percentage of the net assets of the Company attributable to the parent company (%)  84.44 Of which: Amount of guarantees provided to shareholders, de facto controller and their related parties (C)  0Amount of debt guarantees provided directly or indirectly to guaranteed parties with an asset-liability ratio of over 70% (D)  255,883,520 Total amount of guarantees exceeding 50% of net assets attributable to the parent company (E)  132,350,794 Total of the above three classes of guarantees (C+D+E)  388,234,314 Explanation on contingent joint and several liability for undue guarantees  Nil Explanation on guarantees As at the end of the Reporting Period, the total guarantee of the Company (excluding mortgages provided for purchasers of property) amounted to RMB324.5 billion, including financing guarantee of RMB233.8 billion, operating guarantee of RMB90.8 billion, the balance of guarantee provided by the Company to purchasers of property in its real estate operations amounted to RMB124.0 billion. COHL holds a 2% stake in Shanghai Yongnianli Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. ( 上海永年里房地产开发有限公司 ), which does not constitute joint control or significant influence. Shanghai Yongnianli Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. ( 上海永年里房地产开发有限公司 ) is not a joint venture or associate of the Company. The Company’s independent directors have reviewed the guarantees provided by the Company to external parties as of December 31, 2022, and expressed relevant specific explanations and independent opinions.

101 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

(III) Entrusted cash asset management 1. Entrusted wealth management (1). Overall wealth management 

□Applicable √ N/A 

(2). Single entrusted wealth management 

□Applicable √ N/A 

(3). Impairment provision for entrusted wealth management 

□Applicable √ N/A 

2. Entrusted loans (1). Overall entrusted loans 

√ Applicable □ N/A Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Type Source of funds Amount incurred Outstanding balance Amount due but not recovered 

General entrusted loan Self-owned funds -134,990 498,116 0

Others 

√ Applicable □ N/A As of the end of the Reporting Period, the total external entrusted loan of the Company amounted to approximately RMB0.498 billion, which was mainly incurred from the financing and investing activities conducted by the Company to drive its general contracting projects. Please refer to Note V. 12 “Debt investments” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”. 

(2). Single entrusted loans 

□Applicable √ N/A Others 

□Applicable √ N/A 

(3). Impairment provision for entrusted loans 

□Applicable √ N/A 

3. Miscellaneous 

□Applicable √ N/A 102 SECTION VIIMPORTANT MATTERS 

(IV) Other material contracts 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

1. Major domestic business contracts during the Reporting Period 

Unit:100 million yuan Currency: RMB 

No. Name of contract Signing Party Value of contract Type of contract 

1 General Contract for Fangcun-Baiyun Airport Intercity Railway Construction Project ( 芳村至白云机场城际施工总承包项目合同 )China Construction Infrastructure Co., Ltd., China State C o n s t r u c t i o n E n g i n e e r i n g C o r p o r a t i o n L i m i t e d , C h i n a Construction South China Construction Investment Co., Ltd. (中建华南建设投资有限公司 ), China Construction First Group Corporation Limited, China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd., China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd., China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd., China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd., China Construction Industrial & Energy Engineering Group Co., Ltd. 183.52 Infrastructure construction 2 General Contract for the PPP Project of Guangxi Longsheng-Dongzhong Port Highway (Shanglin-Nanning Section) ( 广西龙胜 － 峒中口岸公路 (上林 至南宁段 )PPP 项目施工总承包合同 )China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, China Construction Infrastructure Co., Ltd., China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd., China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd., CSCEC Xinjiang Construction & Engineering (Group) Co., Ltd., China Construction Communications Engineering Group Co., Ltd. 98.42 Infrastructure construction 3 Contract (EPC) for LONGi New Energy Technology Industrial Park Project in Mengsu Economic Development Zone ( 蒙苏经济开发区隆基新 能源科技产业园项目 (EPC 模式 )合同 ) China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd. 97.00 Infrastructure construction 4 Partners Solicit Construction Contract for Jinan International Trade Center Project ( 济南国际贸易中心项目合作方征集项目施工合同 ) China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 83.10 Infrastructure construction 5General Contract for the PPP Project of Phase I Construction of Guanyang (Hunan-Guangxi boundary)-Tian’e (Xialao) Highway (Jiangyong-Guilin (Guangxi Section)) ( 灌阳 (湘桂界 )至天峨 (下老 )公路 (江永至桂林 (广西段 )) 一期工程 PPP 项目施工总承包合同 )China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, China Construction Infrastructure Co., Ltd., China Construction F i r s t G r o u p C o r p o r a t i o n L i m i t e d , C h i n a C o n s t r u c t i o n Second Engineering Bureau Ltd., China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd., China Construction Seventh Engineering Division Corp. Ltd., and China Construction Communications Engineering Group Co., Ltd. 78.03 Infrastructure construction 6General Contract for Section HNTZ-1 of Investor of Hannan Yangtze River Bridge and Connection Project of the Wuhan Metropolitan Area Ring Line ( 武汉都市区环线汉南长江大桥及接线工程投资人 HNTZ-1 标段工 程总承包合同 )China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 73.00 Infrastructure construction 7Contract for “Internet +” Future Science and Technology City Plot DY01-04 Neighborhood (Excluding Pile Foundation) Works and Weisan Road Municipal Engineering Construction (“互联网 +”未来科技城地块 

DY01-04 街坊 (不含桩基 )工程及纬三路市政工程施工合同 )The Sixth Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 65.27 Housing construction 8 General Contract for EPC project of quick renovation (including supporting infrastructure) of North Ring Road in Xinyang ( 信阳市北环路 快速化改造项目 (含附属配套设施 )EPC 工程总承包合同 ) China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd. 64.90 Infrastructure construction 9 General contract for the construction of Haikou Tower Project ( 海口塔项 目施工总承包工程合同 ) China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 64.35 Housing construction 10 Construction Contract for the NCIEC Phase II Project ( 新国展二期项目施 工承包合同 ) China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. 62.98 Housing construction 11 General Contract for the Construction of Renovation and Expansion of Terminal 3 at Changsha Airport ( 长沙机场改扩建工程 T3 航站楼施工总承 包项目 )China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd. and China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd. 62.45 Infrastructure construction 12 General Contract for the Standard Workshop Construction of Phase II Korean Power Battery Project ( 韩国动力电池项目二期标准厂房施工总承包 建设工程施工合同 ) China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd. 60.60 Housing construction 13 General Contract for Fengtang Project (Bao’an A308-125) Plots 03-06 & 03-07 ( 凤塘项目 (宝安 A308-125)03-06 地块 、03-07 地块施工总承包项目 合同 )C h i n a C o n s t r u c t i o n T h i r d E n g i n e e r i n g B u r e a u G r o u p (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd. ( 中建三局集团 (深圳 )有限公司 ) 57.61 Housing construction 14 General Contract for 4-10 North Plot of Fengtang Project (Bao’an A308-126) ( 凤塘项目 (宝安 A308-126) 4-10 北地块施工总承包工程合同 ) The Third Engineering Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Second Engineering Bureau 57.50 Housing construction 15 Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) Contract for Nanshan Intelligent Manufacturing (Honghualing Base) Urban Renewal Project (Phase I) (南山智造 (红花岭基地 )城市更新项目 (一期 )设计采购施工总承包 

(EPC) 合同 )The Second Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Second Engineering Bureau 57.00 Infrastructure construction 16 General Contract for Cornex New Energy Project in Yichang ( 宜昌楚能新 能源项目施工总承包项目合同 ) The First Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Third Engineering Bureau 56.00 Housing construction 17 Contract for the Urban Renewal Project in Laoxu Town, Longgang Street, Longgang District, Shenzhen ( 深圳龙岗区龙岗街道龙岗老墟镇城市 更新项目合同 )Third Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Eighth Engineering Division 56.00 Housing construction 18 General Contract for CBD Urban Renewal 14th FiveYear Plan Municipal Infrastructure Construction Project in Dali( 大理市中心城区城市更新 “十四 五” 市政基础设施建设项目工程总承包合同 )China Construction Infrastructure Co., Ltd., China Construction S e v e n t h E n g i n e e r i n g D i v i s i o n . C o r p . , L t d . , t h e T h i r d Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau, CSCEC Electronic Information Technology Co., Ltd., China Southwest Architectural Design and Research Institute Corp., Ltd. 55.39 Infrastructure construction 103 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

No. Name of contract Signing Party Value of contract Type of contract 

19 Contract for Phase III Expansion of Terminal 3 at Baiyun International Airport in Guangzhou ( 广州白云国际机场三期扩建工程 T3 航站楼工程合同 ) China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 55.07 Infrastructure construction 20 General Contract (EPC) for Modern Facilities Fishery Technology Industrial Park (Premium Salmon Farming Industry Chain Demonstration Base), Modern Facilities Fishery Technology Industrial Park (Germplasm Innovation and Breeding Demonstration Base of Famous and Excellent Aquatic Products) Project ( 现代设施渔业科技产业园 (优质三文鱼产业链示 范基地 )、现代设施渔业科技产业园 (名优水产种质创新与苗种繁育示范基地 )

工程总承包 EPC 项目合同 )China Construction First Group Corporation Limited 54.84 Infrastructure construction 21 General Contract for Comprehensive Development of the Northern Area of Fu’an City ( 福安市城区北部片区综合开发项目工程总承包合同 ) China Construction First Group Corporation Limited 54.12 Housing construction 22 General Contract for Super High-rise Project in Zhonghai Chengdu Tianfu New District ( 中海成都天府新区超高层项目总承包工程合同 ) China Construction Eighth Engineering Division. Corp., Ltd. 53.64 Housing construction 23 Contract for Jiangnan New District Comprehensive Development Project (Phase I) ( 江南新区综合开发项目 (一期 )合同 ) China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 52.00 Housing construction 24 G e n e r a l C o n t r a c t f o r C o n s t r u c t i o n o f C h o n g q i n g R a i l T r a n s i t Line 27 (YCK40+524.3~YCK51+102) ( 重庆轨道交通 27 号线工程 

(YCK40+524.3~YCK51+102) 施工总承包合同 )China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, China Construction First Group Corporation Limited, China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd., China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd., China Construction Eighth Engineering Division. Corp., Ltd. 51.91 Infrastructure construction 25 General Contract for LVGEM Baishizhou Jingting Project ( 绿景白石洲璟 庭项目总承包工程合同 ) The First Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Third Engineering Bureau 50.55 Housing construction 26 Contract for Shanghai Jiading Future City Project ( 上海嘉定未来城市项目 合同 ) China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. 50.11 Housing construction 27 EPC Contract for Yantai International Medical Isotope Innovation Application Base Project ( 烟台国际医用同位素创新应用基地项目 EPC 工程总承包合同 )The First Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau 46.80 Housing construction 28 General Contract for Plot Project in Yangjing West District ( 洋泾西区地块 项目总承包工程合同 ) China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 46.76 Housing construction 29 General Contract for Urban Renewal of Yangqikeng, Dongcheng, Dongguan, Guangdong ( 广东省东莞市东城洋杞坑城市更新总承包工程施工合同 ) China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 46.36 Housing construction 30 General Contract for 4-12 South Plot of Fengtang Project (Bao’an A308-127) ( 凤塘项目 (宝安 A308-127)4-12 南地块施工总承包工程合同 ) China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 45.00 Housing construction 31 Construction Contract for Lingling-Daoxian Expressway Project ( 零陵至 道县高速公路项目施工承包合同 ) China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 45.00 Infrastructure construction 32 General Contract (EPC) for 978MW Ecological Agriculture and Photovoltaic Tourism Project in Yuhu Town, Jiedong District, Jieyang, Guangdong (广东省揭阳市揭东区玉湖镇 978MW 生态农业与光伏旅游 

EPC 总承包项目合同 )The Third Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction Second Engineering Bureau, CSCEC Zhonghuan Ecological and Environmental Protection Technology Co. ( 中建中环生态环保科技有限公司 ), China Construction Power and Environment Engineering Co., Ltd. 43.33 Infrastructure construction 33 General Contract for Plot A of Jinmao Suwan Hexi Complex (Yuzui) Project ( 金茂苏皖河西综合体 (鱼嘴 )项目 A 地块总承包工程合同 ) China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 41.61 Housing construction 34 EPC Contract for PPP Project of Tuanjiehu Big Data Intelligent Industrial Park ( 团结湖大数据智能产业园 PPP 项目 EPC 工程总承包合同 ) China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 41.26 Infrastructure construction 35 General Contract for Jiuhua Mansion Phase II (Land Plot C and D) Construction Project (Sichuan) ( 九华府二期 (C 、D 地块 )施工项目 (四川 )总承包合同 ) China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 40.07 Housing construction 36 Construction Contract for Hainan New Energy Vehicle Experience Center Project ( 海南新能源汽车体验中心项目施工合同 ) China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 40.00 Housing construction 37 General Contract for Hongrongyuan Guancheng Project Lot 03 ( 鸿荣源 观城项目 03 地块施工总承包合同 ) C h i n a C o n s t r u c t i o n T h i r d E n g i n e e r i n g B u r e a u G r o u p (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd. ( 中建三局集团 (深圳 )有限公司 ) 40.00 Housing construction 38 Contract of Chengtou Yunzhishu Port for Cold Storage in Heze ( 菏泽城 投云智数冷鲜港项目合同 ) The Second Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau 40.00 Housing construction 39 General Contract (EPC) for Data Center Construction Project of Agricultural Bank of China Inner Mongolia ( 中国农业银行内蒙古数据中心 建设项目 EPC 总承包施工合同 ) China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 39.90 Housing construction 40 General Contract for Model Intelligent Manufacturing Community Project in Tiankeng Village, Hengli, Dongguan( 东莞横沥田坑村模具智造社区项目 施工总承包工程项目合同 )The Fifth Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction First Engineering Bureau 39.70 Housing construction 41 General Contract for the Design and Construction of Economic and Industrial Park Infrastructure Phase III around Baiyun Airport Phase III Expansion Project (land plots of Fangshi, Fenghe, Yahu, Herui Road, Zhusan) (白云机场三期扩建工程周边临空经济产业园区基础设施建设三期 工程 (方石 、凤和 、鸦湖 、和瑞路 、竹三地块 )设计施工总承包合同 )China State Construction Science & Technology Group Co., Ltd., China Construction Southwest Geotechnical Investigation & Design Institute Co., Ltd., China Southwest Architectural Design and Research Institute Corp., Ltd., China Construction First Group Corporation Limited, China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 39.60 Housing construction 42 Construction Contract for Section 1 of Terminal Area Engineering –Airport Engineering – Xiamen New Airport Project ( 厦门新机场项目一机 场工程一航站区工程一施工一标段施工合同 ) China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 39.02 Infrastructure construction 43 Contract for Infrastructure Construction Project of Finished Home Industrial Park Area in Lanshan District, Linyi ( 临沂市兰山区精装家居产 业园片区基础设施建设项目合同 ) China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 38.96 Infrastructure construction 44 General Contract for Lingang West Island Financial Center Project ( 临港 西岛金融中心项目施工总承包工程合同 ) China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. 37.50 Housing construction 45 Construction Contract for Phase I Project of East Extension Line of Fuzhou Rail Transit Line 2 ( 福州市轨道交通 2 号线东延线一期工程建设工 程施工合同 )China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, CSCEC Strait Construction and Development Co., Ltd., China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd. 37.08 Infrastructure construction 46 General Contract for alumina project (the second high-temperature production line) of Chifeng Qihui Aluminum Industry Development Co. Ltd. ( 赤峰启辉铝业发展有限公司氧化铝项目 (第二条高温生产线 )施工总承包 工程合同 )China Construction First Group Corporation Limited 37.00 Housing construction 47 Contract for Renovation Project of First Economic Cooperative in Shibietang Community, Guandu Subdistrict, Maonan District, Maoming City ( 茂名市茂南区官渡石鳖塘社区第一经济合作社三旧改造项目合同 )The First Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Fourth Engineering Division 36.61 Housing construction 48 EPC Contract for Prefabricated Vegetable Science and Technology Innovation Industrial Park and Food Union Ecological Project ( 预制菜科 创产业园及食联生态项目 EPC 项目总承包合同 ) China Construction First Group Corporation Limited 36.13 Infrastructure construction 49 General Contract for Huawei Industrial Project in the No. 5 Land Plot in Tuanbowa of Songshan Lake ( 华为松山湖团泊洼 5 号地块工业项目总承包 工程项目合同 )C h i n a C o n s t r u c t i o n T h i r d E n g i n e e r i n g B u r e a u G r o u p (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd. ( 中建三局集团 (深圳 )有限公司 ) 35.59 Housing construction 104 SECTION VIIMPORTANT MATTERS 

No. Name of contract Signing Party Value of contract Type of contract 

50 General Contract for Comprehensive Development and Utilization of Underground Space in Shanghe Plaza and Construction of Supporting Infrastructure (上合广场地下空间综合开发利用及配套基础设施建设工程总 承包项目合同 )China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, China Construction Qingdao Investment and Construction Co., Ltd. (中建青岛投资建设有限公司 ), China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd., China Construction Seventh Engineering Division Corp., Ltd., China Construction Eighth Engineering Division. Corp., Ltd., China State Construction Harbour and Channel Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 35.47 Infrastructure construction 51 Contract for Comprehensive Development Project of Binjiang Core Area in Longgang City ( 龙港市滨江核心区综合开发项目合同 ) China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 35.13 Housing construction 52 Engineering and Construction Contract for Zhuhai Taoist Activity Site Construction Project ( 珠海市道教活动场所建设工程设计施工总承包项目合同 ) China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 35.00 Housing construction 53 Construction Contract of Yuxiyuan Project ( 玉玺园项目建设工程施工合同 ) C h i n a C o n s t r u c t i o n T h i r d E n g i n e e r i n g B u r e a u U r b a n Construction Co., Ltd 35.00 Housing construction 54 Contract for the Ecological Restoration and Functional Improvement Project of Jinghu Lakeside, Donghu Mountain and Culture and Entertainment City in Deyang, Sichuan ( 四川省德阳市旌湖两岸 、东湖山 、

文化娱乐城生态修复和功能完善项目合同 )China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 34.44 Infrastructure construction 55 Construction Contract for Urban Renewal Project of Tianbei West Village, Fucheng Street, Longhua District, Shenzhen ( 深圳市龙华区福城 街道田背西村城市更新项目施工合同 )China Construction First Group South China Construction Co., Ltd. ( 中建一局集团华南建设有限公司 ) 33.26 Housing construction 56 Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) Contract of Danianhuawan Cultural Tourism and Rehabilitation Project (Plot A-08-03 on the South Side of Shatang Port) ( 大拈花湾文化旅游康养项目 (沙塘港河 南侧地块 A-08-03 地块 )设计采购施工总承包 EPC 合同 )China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 32.93 Housing construction 57 General Contract for YH-18 Unit of Yuhang Group (High-speed Railway Hub Center) of the Complex Project (West Zone) at Hangzhou West Station North ( 余杭组团 YH-18 单元 (高铁枢纽中心 )杭州西站北综合体项目 

(西区 )总承包工程合同 )The First Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau 32.91 Infrastructure construction 58 General Contract (EPC) for Yongjing Fashion Valley in Yongjing Qingcheng, Pingchuan ( 平川永京清城永京时尚谷 EPC 项目工程总承包合同 ) China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau South China Construction Co., Ltd. （中建八局华南建设有限公司） 32.60 Housing construction 59 Construction Contract for the Construction of Land Plot 1 and 6Reconstruction and Land Plot 2 Finance of Keenstar’s project in Huangdeng village, Guangzhou ( 勤诚达广州黄登项目复建 1、6 号及融资 

2 号地块总承包工程建设工程施工合同 )CSCEC4 Civil Engineering Co., Ltd. 32.38 Housing construction 60 General Contract (EPC) for New Infrastructure Construction of Communication Base Station in Shandong ( 山东省通信基站新基础设施建 设工程总承包 (EPC) 项目合同 ) China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Corp., Ltd. 32.36 Infrastructure construction 61 General Contract (EPC) for Ciyuan Business and Tourism Logistics Park in Ludian County and other special debt projects in 2022 ( 鲁甸县 2022 

年茨院商旅物流园等专债项目 (EPC) 总承包合同 ) China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 32.12 Infrastructure construction 62 EPC Contract for Environmental Protection New Material Industrial Park Phase I, II and III in Huaiyuan County ( 怀远县环保新材料产业园一期 、二期、三期 EPC 项目合同 )The Second Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau 32.04 Infrastructure construction 63 General Contract (EPC) for Intelligent Logistics and Trade Complex of Haiyun Square in Rizhao ( 日照海韵广场智慧物贸综合体 EPC 总包合同 ) The Second Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau 32.00 Housing construction 64 Construction Contract for Section WYZQ-4 of Hanchuan East to Yichang North Station on Wuhan-Yichang Section of the Newly-built Shanghai-Chongqing-Chengdu HighSpeed Railway ( 新建沪渝蓉高速铁路武汉至宜昌 段汉川东至宜昌北站前工程 WYZQ-4 标段施工承包合同 )China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 31.64 Infrastructure construction 65 General Contract for Wuxi Medical Health Industrial Park Project ( 无锡医 疗健康产业园项目施工总承包合同 ) China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 31.56 Housing construction 66 Civil Construction Contract for Nanchong-Chengdu Expressway Expansion Project (LJ6) ( 南充至成都高速公路扩容工程土建施工合同 (LJ6)) China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 31.26 Infrastructure construction 67 General Contract for Dongqiao Plaza Project (Design, Procurement and Construction General Contract) in Ningde ( 宁德市东侨广场项目 (设计采购 施工总承包 )工程总承包合同 ) CSCEC Strait Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 31.23 Housing construction 68 General Contract for Fengtang Project (Bao’an A308 – 126) Plots 13-01 (凤塘项目 (宝安 A308-126)13-01 地块施工总承包工程 ) 3rd Construction (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd. of China Construction 5th Engineering Bureau ( 中建五局第三建设 (深圳 )有限公司 ) 30.80 Housing construction 69 Construction contract of Intelligent Emergency Industrial Park in Banan District ( 巴南区智慧应急产业园项目施工合同 ) China Construction Tunnel Corp., Ltd. 30.55 Infrastructure construction 70 Contract for Civil Construction of Section 2 of Phase I Project of Qingdao Metro Line 15 ( 青岛市地铁 15 号线一期工程土建施工 2 标段项目 合同 )China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, China Construction Qingdao Investment and Construction Co., Ltd. (中建青岛投资建设有限公司 ), China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd., China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd., China Construction Harbour and Channel Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 30.30 Infrastructure construction 71 General Contract for the Headquarter of Jiangsu Women and Children Health Hospital ( 江苏省妇幼保健院总部项目工程总承包合同 ) China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 30.29 Housing construction 72 General Contract for Plot Z4 in the Core Area of Beijing Central Business District (CBD) ( 北京商务中心区 (CBD) 核心区 Z4 地块项目总承包施工合同 ) China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 30.25 Housing construction 73 Jingzhou Libu Yangtze River Highway-Railway Bridge LBTJ-2 Framework Contract ( 荆州李埠长江公铁大桥 LBTJ-2 框架合同 ) China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 30.25 Infrastructure construction 74 Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) Contract for World Computing – Changsha Smart Valley Project Zone 1 ( 世界计算 •长沙智谷 项目第一区设计 、采购 、施工 (EPC) 总承包合同 ) China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 30.18 Housing construction 75 EPC Contract for Real Estate Development on the East Side of Hongzheng Street, Xihongmen Town, Daxing District, Beijing ( 北京市大 兴区西红门镇宏政街东侧地块房地产开发 EPC 项目工程总承包合同 )China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Beijing Co., Ltd. ( 中建三局集团北京有限公司 ) 30.13 Housing construction 76 Contract for Project of Fuyao University of Science and Technology ( 福耀科技大学项目合同 ) China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 30.00 Housing construction 77 Construction Contract for Shanty Renovation Project in Area 404, Tongchuan District, Dazhou City ( 达州市通川区 404 片区棚改项目施工合同 ) China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 30.00 Housing construction 78 Contract for Hannan Yangtze River Bridge and Connection Project of the Wuhan Metropolitan Area Ring Line ( 武汉都市区环线汉南长江大桥及接线工程合同 ) China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 30.00 Infrastructure construction 79 General Contract for Construction of Weng’an Tongluowan Plaza Project (瓮安铜锣湾广场项目施工总承包合同 ) China Construction Science & Technology Group Co., Ltd. 30.00 Housing construction Note: The contracts listed above are mainly sourced from the statistics of the contracts actually entered into by the Company as at the end of the Reporting Period. 105 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

2. Major overseas business contracts during the Reporting Period 

Unit: 100 million dollars Currency: USD 

No. Name of contract Signing Party Value of contract Type of contract 

1 Contract for Combination of the Second and Third Sections of Saudi Arabia Traffic Tunnel (Mountain) ( 沙特 阿拉伯交通隧道 (山区部分 )二、三标段合并项目合同 )China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 11.36 Infrastructure construction 2 Baniyas North Development – Phase 3 China State Construction Engineering Corporation (Middle East) (L.L.C) 6.42 Housing construction 3 EPC Contract for Construction of the Emergency Hospital and Makeshift Hospital at the Lok Ma Chau Loop ( 河套应 急医院和方舱医院建设项目工程总承包 (EPC) 合同 )China Construction Science and Industry Corporation Ltd. 5.15 Housing construction 4 Contract for Abyssinia Bank Design and Build Project (Abyssinia 银行设计加建造工程项目合同 ) China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 4.27 Housing construction 5 EPC Contract for Iraqi Nasiriyah International Airport ( 伊拉克纳西里耶国际机场 EPC 工程总承包合同 ) China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 3.67 Infrastructure construction 6 HDB Bukit Merah C58 Rich Construction Company Pte Ltd ( 丰盛建筑有限公 司) 3.45 Housing construction 7 CONTRACT AGREEMENT ON FINANCING, DESIGN A N D C O N S T R U C T I O N O F T H E V U K O S A V L J E –BRCKO HIGHWAY SECTION China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited Banja Luka Branch ( 中国建筑股份有限公司巴尼 亚卢卡分公司 ) 3.39 Infrastructure construction 8 Contract for HDB BUKIT BATOK N4 C24&25 (BB5) China Construction (South Pacific) Development Co Pte Ltd 2.20 Housing construction 9 Mongolia “Silk Road ” Apartment Complex Project Contract ( 蒙古国 “丝绸之路” 公寓群项目合同 ) China Construction Mongolia Co., Ltd. ( 中建股份蒙古 国有限责任公司 ) 1.98 Housing construction 10 Contract for 2X133 MW combined cycle cogeneration plant in Loznica ( 洛兹尼察 2X133 兆瓦联合循环热电联产 厂合同 )China Construction UCF Group (Zrenjanin) Co., Ltd. (中国建筑先锋集团 (兹雷尼亚宁 )有限公司 ) 1.91 Infrastructure construction 11 General Contract for the Construction of Mares Premium Apartments, Maputo, Mozambique, Lot 2 Project ( 莫桑比 克首都马普托市 2 号地 Mares 高级公寓施工总承包项目合 同)China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 1.52 Housing construction 12 Contract for 360 Boulevard Project-DB Design and Construction in Sabah, Malaysia (马来西亚沙巴州 360 Boulevard 项目 -DB 设计与建造承包合同 )China State Construction Engineering (M) SDN. BHD. (中国建筑马来西亚有限公司 ) 1.50 Housing construction 13 Contract on Residential Project in Jeju Island, Republic of Korea ( 韩国济州岛住宅项目合同 ) China Construction Sixth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd. 1.43 Housing construction 14 Contract for Section C22B of the Roughing and Furnishing of AT&S Electronics Plant in Kulim Hi-Tech Industrial Park, Kedah, Malaysia ( 马来西亚吉打州居林高 科技产业园奥特斯电子厂房粗装修装修 C22B 标段项目合 同)China Changjiang (Malaysia) Construction Investment Co., Ltd. ( 中建长江 (马来西亚 )有限公司 ) 1.23 Housing construction 15 General Contract for SAVYAVASA Apartment Project (SAVYAVASA 公寓项目总承包合同 ) China State Construction Overseas Development Co., Ltd. 1.20 Housing construction 16 Contract for HDB TENGAH PARK C5 (TGP2) Rich Construction Company Pte Ltd ( 丰盛建筑有限公 司) 1.17 Housing construction 17 Contract for DLN Ramp and Tunnel (Part 1) S i n g a p o r e O f f i c e o f C h i n a S t a t e C o n s t r u c t i o n Engineering Corporation Limited 1.07 Infrastructure construction 18 General Contract for KIS International School Project (KIS 国际学校项目总承包合同 ) China State Construction Engineering (Thailand) Co., Ltd. ( 中国建筑工程 (泰国 )有限公司 ) 1.06 Housing construction 19 EPC Contract for New Dormitory Project in Chennai, India ( 印度金奈新建宿舍 EPC 项目合同 ) China Construction Sausum (India) Private Limited 1.02 Housing construction 

> Note: The contracts listed above are mainly sourced from the statistics of the contracts actually entered into by the Company as of the end of the Reporting Period.

106 SECTION VIIMPORTANT MATTERS 

3. Newly-signed comprehensive credit facility contracts 

Unit:100 million yuan/dollars Currency: RMB/USD 

No. Name of comprehensive credit facility contract Credit grantor Accredited party Comprehensive credit facility limit Credit period 

1 C o m p r e h e n s i v e c r e d i t facility contract Bank of Beijing Co., Ltd. (Zhongguancun Branch) China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited RMB6.0 billion May 23, 2022 – May 22, 2024 2 C o m p r e h e n s i v e c r e d i t facility contract Bank of Communications Co., Ltd. (Beijing Fuwai Branch) China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited RMB20.0 billion July 16, 2022 – July 15, 2023 3Credit facility agreement g u a r a n t e e d b y g r o u p clients C h i n a E x p o r t & C r e d i t I n s u r a n c e Corporation China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited USD0.4 billion June 8, 2022 – June 7, 2024 4 C r e d i t f a c i l i t y l i m i t contract Bank of China Limited (Beijing BOC Tower Branch) China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited RMB37.0 billion July 21, 2022 – July 10, 2023 4. Newly-signed strategic cooperation and business cooperation agreement 

During the Reporting Period, the Company continued to increase its strategic cooperation with local governments, large domestic and foreign enterprises and financial institutions. The following are the major cooperation agreements entered into by the Company: 

No. Name of contract Signing date Contents of contract 

1S t r a t e g i c C o o p e r a t i o n F r a m e w o r k A g r e e m e n t b e t w e e n t h e P e o p l e ’sGovernment of Xi ’an and China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited February 25, 2022 Based on the overall planning of the People ’s Government of Xi ’an, CSCEC ’s development and the principle of “equality and mutual benefit, complementary advantages, mutual support, long-term cooperation and shared development ”, the two parties established a long-term strategic partnership. The cooperation will mainly cover: urban infrastructure construction; urban renewal and comprehensive development, people ’slivelihood projects in science, education, culture and healthcare as well as other emerging fields. 2C o o p e r a t i o n F r a m e w o r k A g r e e m e n t between the People ’s Government of Xuzhou and China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited August 9, 2022 Based on the overall planning of the People ’s Government of Xuzhou, CSCEC’s development and the principle of “complementary advantages, mutual benefit and shared development ”, the two parties established a long-term strategic partnership. The cooperation will mainly cover: creating a new benchmark for central-local cooperation; jointly driving the development and construction of the region; comprehensively promoting the development of linkage and integration with local enterprises; and jointly serving the coordinated development of Huaihai Economic Zone. 3C o o p e r a t i o n F r a m e w o r k A g r e e m e n t between the People ’s Government of Changzhou and China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited September 6, 2022 Based on the overall planning of the People ’s Government of Changzhou, CSCEC’s development and the principle of “complementary advantages, mutual benefit and shared development ”, the two parties established a long-term strategic partnership. The cooperation will mainly cover: infrastructure projects; novel urbanization construction; and people’s livelihood projects. 4D e e p e n C o o p e r a t i o n S u p p l e m e n t a l A g r e e m e n t b e t w e e n t h e P e o p l e ’sgovernment of Wuxi and China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited September 6, 2022 Based on the overall planning of the People ’s government of Wuxi, CSCEC’s development and the principle of “complementary advantages, mutual benefit and shared development ”, the two parties established a long-term strategic partnership. The cooperation will mainly cover: jointly promoting the development of related enterprises and industries; jointly promoting regional development and construction; coordinating and linking with local enterprises; and jointly serving the integrated development strategy of the Yangtze River Delta, etc. 5S t r a t e g i c C o o p e r a t i o n F r a m e w o r k Agreement between Xinjiang Irtysh River Investment and Development (Group) Co., Ltd. (新疆额尔齐斯河投资开发 (集团 )

有限公司 ) and China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited December 23, 2022 Based on the overall planning of Xinjiang Irtysh River Investment and Development (Group) Co., Ltd., CSCEC’s development and the principle of “complementary advantages, shared resources, mutual benefit and win-win cooperation ”, the two parties established a long-term strategic partnership. The cooperation will mainly cover: major water projects and other major infrastructure projects among others. 107 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

XIV.  Explanation on Other Material Matters that Have Significant Impacts on Value Judgement and Investment Decision-making by Investors 

□Applicable √ N/A 

XV.  Index of Information Disclosure 

During the Reporting Period, the Company published 143 announcements and documents on the website of the Shanghai Stock Exchange (www.sse.com.cn), and related announcements were also published in the China Securities Journal, Shanghai Securities News, Securities Daily, and Securities Times. 

No. Matter Date of disclosure 

1 CSCEC Business Briefing for January-December 2021 January 8, 2022 2 Announcement on the Second Tranche of Unlocking in 2021 in Respect of Phase III Restricted A Share Incentive Scheme and Listing of Shares of CSCEC January 12, 2022 3 Legal Opinions of King & Wood Mallesons on Relevant Matters regarding Second Tranche of Unlocking in 2021 in Respect of Phase III Restricted A Share Incentive Scheme of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited January 12, 2022 4 Announcement on Winning the Bid for the PPP Project of (Phase I) Guangxi Guanyang (Hunan-Guangxi border) to Tian’e (Xialao) Highway (Jiangyong-Guilin (Guangxi Section)) of CSCEC January 15, 2022 5 Announcement on Significant Project of CSCEC January 25, 2022 6 Announcement on Winning the Bid for the PPP Project of Guangxi Congjiang-Rong’an-Lipu Highway (Rong ’an to Yangshuo Section via Yongfu) of CSCEC February 7, 2022 7 Announcement on Winning the Bid for the PPP Project of Guangxi Longsheng-Dongzhong Port Highway (Shanglin to Nanning Section) of CSCEC February 7, 2022 8 CSCEC Business Briefing for January 2022 February 19, 2022 9 Announcement on the Appointment of the Company’s President February 26, 2022 10 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 13th Meeting of the Third Board of Directors February 26, 2022 11 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Appointment of Zhang Zhaoxiang as the Company’s President February 26, 2022 12 Announcement on Significant Project of CSCEC February 26, 2022 13 Announcement on Resolutions of the 14th Meeting of the Third Board of Directors of CSCEC March 8, 2022 14 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on Amendments to the Regulations on the Management of Related Party Transactions of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited March 8, 2022 15 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on Amendments to the Regulations on the Management of Funds to and from Controlling Shareholder and Other Related Parties of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited March 8, 2022 16 Regulations on the Management of Related Party Transactions (2022 Revised Draft) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited March 8, 2022 17 Regulations on the Management of Funds to and from Controlling Shareholder and Other Related Parties (Revision in March 2022) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited March 8, 2022 18 Announcement on Resolutions of the 9th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors of CSCEC March 8, 2022 19 Announcement on Changes to the Investment in the Project on Historic Preservation and Urban Renewal in Shanghai Municipality of CSCEC March 8, 2022 20 CSCEC Business Briefing for January-February 2022 March 11, 2022 21 Announcement on Significant Project of CSCEC March 19, 2022 22 Announcement on Holding the 2021 Annual Earnings Announcement of the Company April 9, 2022 23 Legal Opinions of King & Wood Mallesons on Relevant Matters regarding Repurchase and Write-off of Partial Restricted Shares under Phases I, II, III and IV Restricted A Share Incentive Schemes of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited April 12, 2022 24 Announcement of CSCEC on Repurchase and Write-off of Partial Restricted Shares for Equity Incentives April 12, 2022 25 Announcement on Provision for Asset Impairment in 2021 of CSCEC April 16, 2022 26 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Company’s Provision for Asset Impairment in 2021 April 16, 2022 27 Annual Report 2021 of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited April 16, 2022 28 Summary of Annual Report 2021 of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited April 16, 2022 29 Special Explanation and Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Company’s External Guarantees for 2021 April 16, 2022 30 2021 Annual Financial Statements and Audit Report of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited April 16, 2022 108 SECTION VIIMPORTANT MATTERS 

No. Matter Date of disclosure 

31 Accounting Firm’s Special Report on Misappropriation of Funds by Controlling Shareholder and Other Related Parties April 16, 2022 32 2021 Work Report of Independent Directors of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited April 16, 2022 33 2021 Internal Control Evaluation Report of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited April 16, 2022 34 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the 2021 Internal Control Evaluation Report April 16, 2022 35 Accounting Firm’s Audit Report on the Company’s Internal Control April 16, 2022 36 2021 Sustainability Report of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited April 16, 2022 37 Specific Explanation on Deposits, Loans and Other Financial Business in Related Party Transactions with CSC Finance of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited April 16, 2022 38 Report on the Performance of Duties of the Audit and Risk Committee of the Board of Directors for 2021 of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited April 16, 2022 39 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Concurrent Appointment of Some Officers of the Company as Officers of the Controlling Shareholder April 16, 2022 40 Report on Sustained Evaluation on Risks of China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited April 16, 2022 41 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Company’s Related Party Transactions with China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. in 2021 April 16, 2022 42 Announcement on the Reappointment of Accounting Firm in 2022 of CSCEC April 16, 2022 43 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Re-appointment of the Company’s Accounting Firm for 2022 April 16, 2022 44 Opinions of Independent Directors on Prior Approval of the Re-appointment of the Company’s Accounting Firm for 2022 April 16, 2022 45 Announcement on Profit Distribution in 2021 of CSCEC April 16, 2022 46 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the 2021 Profit Distribution Plan of the Company April 16, 2022 47 Announcement on the Proposed Increase of External Guarantee Quota in 2022 of CSCEC April 16, 2022 48 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Proposed Increase of External Guarantee Quota of the Company in 2022 April 16, 2022 49 Notice on Convening 2021 Annual General Meeting of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited April 16, 2022 50 Announcement on Resolutions of the 15th Meeting of Third Session of Board of Directors of CSCEC April 16, 2022 51 2021 Investor Protection Work Report of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited April 16, 2022 52 China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited Dividend Distribution Plan for the Next Three Years (2021-2023) April 16, 2022 53 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Company’s Dividend Distribution Plan for the Next Three Years (2021-2023) April 16, 2022 54 Announcement on Resolutions of the 10th Meeting of Third Session of Board of Supervisors of CSCEC April 16, 2022 55 CSCEC Business Briefing for January-March 2022 April 19, 2022 56 Announcement on Significant Project of CSCEC April 28, 2022 57 Announcement on the Resolutions of the Eleventh Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors of CSCEC April 30, 2022 58 Announcement on the Resolutions of the Sixteenth Meeting of the Third Board of Directors of CSCEC April 30, 2022 59 Information on the 2021 Annual General Meeting of CSCEC April 30, 2022 60 Report of 2022Q1 of CSCEC April 30, 2022 61 Announcement on Resolutions of the 2021 Annual General Meeting of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited May 14, 2022 62 Legal Opinions of King & Wood Mallesons on the 2021 Annual General Meeting of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited May 14, 2022 63 Regulations on the Management of Related Party Transactions (Revision in May 2022) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited May 14, 2022 64 Announcement on the Partial Repurchase and Delisting of Phase III and Phase IV Restricted Shares to Reduce the Company ’s Registered Capital & Notification to Creditors of CSCEC May 14, 2022 65 CSCEC Business Briefing for January-April 2022 May 14, 2022 66 Announcement on Significant Project of CSCEC May 24, 2022 67 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 12th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors of CSCEC May 24, 2022 68 Announcement on the Resolutions of the Eighteenth Meeting of the Third Board of Directors of CSCEC May 24, 2022 69 Announcement on Investment in and Development of Real Estate Project in Lixia District, Jinan City by Subsidiary Companies of CSCEC May 31, 2022 70 Announcement on Investment in and Development of Real Estate Project in Chaoyang District, Beijing by Subsidiary Companies of CSCEC June 2, 2022 109 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

No. Matter Date of disclosure 

71 CSCEC Business Briefing for January-May 2022 June 18, 2022 72 Announcement of CSCEC on Implementing Rights and Interests Distribution for 2021 June 23, 2022 73 Announcement on Significant Project of CSCEC June 24, 2022 74 Announcement on Winning the Bid for Hannan Yangtze River Bridge and Connection Project of the Wuhan Metropolitan Area Ring Line of CSCEC July 12, 2022 75 CSCEC Business Briefing for January - June 2022 July 16, 2022 76 Announcement on Significant Project of CSCEC July 26, 2022 77 Announcement on Investment in and Development of Real Estate Project in Singapore by Subsidiary Company of CSCEC July 27, 2022 78 Announcement on Repurchase and Write-off of Partial Restricted Shares for Equity Incentives of CSCEC July 29, 2022 79 Legal Opinions of King & Wood Mallesons on Relevant Matters regarding Repurchase and Write-off of Partial Restricted Shares under Phases III and IV Restricted A Share Incentive Schemes of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited July 29, 2022 80 Announcement on the Joint Increase of Capital by the Company and Its Controlling Shareholder in China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. and Related Party Transaction of CSCEC August 18, 2022 81 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Joint Increase of Capital by the Company and Its Controlling Shareholder in China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. and Related Party Transaction August 18, 2022 82 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 22nd Meeting of the Third Board of Directors of CSCEC August 18, 2022 83 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 13th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors of CSCEC August 18, 2022 84 CSCEC Business Briefing for January-July 2022 August 18, 2022 85 Announcement on Holding the 2022 Interim Results Presentation of CSCEC August 23, 2022 86 Announcement on Significant Project of CSCEC August 27, 2022 87 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 14th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors of CSCEC August 30, 2022 88 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 23rd Meeting of the Third Board of Directors of CSCEC August 30, 2022 89 Report on Sustained Evaluation on Risks of China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited August 30, 2022 90 Announcement on Provision for Asset Impairment in 2022H1 of CSCEC August 30, 2022 91 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Company’s Provision for Asset Impairment in 2022H1 August 30, 2022 92 Summary of the Interim Report 2022 of CSCEC August 30, 2022 93 Interim Report 2022 of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited August 30, 2022 94 CSCEC Business Briefing for January-August 2022 September 17, 2022 95 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 25th Meeting of the Third Board of Directors of CSCEC September 21, 2022 96 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Appointment of Wang Yunlin as the Company ’s General Counsel September 21, 2022 97 Announcement on Appointment of the Company ’s General Counsel September 21, 2022 98 Announcement on International Credit Ratings of CSCEC September 23, 2022 99 Announcement on Significant Project of CSCEC September 28, 2022 100 Announcement on Investment in and Development of Real Estate Project in Jiading District, Shanghai by Subsidiary Company of CSCEC September 28, 2022 101 CSCEC Business Briefing for January - September 2022 October 14, 2022 102 Announcement on Significant Project of CSCEC October 19, 2022 103 Announcement on the Progress of the Establishment of China CSCEC Technology Innovation Group Co. Ltd. of CSCEC October 25, 2022 104 Report of 2022Q3 of CSCEC October 29, 2022 105 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 26th Meeting of the Third Board of Directors of CSCEC October 29, 2022 106 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 15th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors of CSCEC October 29, 2022 107 Announcement on the Acquisition of Equity Interests in China Construction Eco-Environmental Group Co., Ltd. and Related Party Transaction of CSCEC October 29, 2022 108 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on Cash Acquisition of 100% Equity of China Construction Eco-Environmental Group Co., Ltd. by China State Construction Development Co., Ltd. October 29, 2022 109 Opinions of Independent Directors on Prior Approval of Cash Acquisition of 100% Equity of China Construction Eco-Environmental Group Co., Ltd. by China State Construction Development Co., Ltd. October 29, 2022 110 SECTION VIIMPORTANT MATTERS 

No. Matter Date of disclosure 

110 Announcement on Holding the 2022Q3 Results Presentation of CSCEC November 4, 2022 111 CSCEC Business Briefing for January - October 2022 November 15, 2022 112 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 27th Meeting of the Third Board of Directors of CSCEC November 28, 2022 113 The Measures on the Management of Shares and Changes in Shareholdings of the Directors, Supervisors and Senior Management in the Company of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited (Revision in November 2022) November 28, 2022 114 Rules on the Work of the Board Secretary of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited (Revision in November 2022) November 28, 2022 115 Rules of Procedure of the Audit and Risk Committee of the Board of Directors of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited (Revision in November 2022) November 28, 2022 116 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 16th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors of CSCEC November 28, 2022 117 Announcement on Significant Project of CSCEC November 29, 2022 118 Announcement on the Renewal of the Comprehensive Services Framework Agreement between the Company and China State Construction Engineering Corporation and Daily Related-Party Transactions of CSCEC December 13, 2022 119 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Renewal of the Comprehensive Services Framework Agreement between China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited and China State Construction Engineering Corporation December 13, 2022 120 Opinions of Independent Directors on Prior Approval of the Renewal of the Comprehensive Services Framework Agreement between China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited and China State Construction Engineering Corporation December 13, 2022 121 Announcement on the Renewal of the Financial Services Framework Agreement between China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. and China State Construction Engineering Corporation and Daily Related-Party Transactions of CSCEC December 13, 2022 122 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Renewal of the Financial Services Framework Agreement between China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. and China State Construction Engineering Corporation December 13, 2022 123 Opinions of Independent Directors on Prior Approval of the Renewal of the Financial Services Framework Agreement between China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. and China State Construction Engineering Corporation December 13, 2022 124 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 17th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors of CSCEC December 13, 2022 125 Notice on Convening the First Extraordinary General Meeting in 2022 of CSCEC December 13, 2022 126 Announcement of CSCEC on Revision of the Articles of Association of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited December 13, 2022 127 Articles of Association of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited (2022 Revised Draft) December 13, 2022 128 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 28th Meeting of the Third Board of Directors of CSCEC December 13, 2022 129 CSCEC Business Briefing for January - November 2022 December 20, 2022 130 Information on the First Extraordinary General Meeting in 2022 of CSCEC December 22, 2022 131 Announcement on Winning the Bid for the PPP Project involving Pipeline Renovation of Mixture of Rainwater and Sewage in Central Urban Area and Urban Waterlogging Control in Drainage Zoning of Lashan River and Xingji River in Jinan, Shandong of CSCEC December 24, 2022 132 Announcement on the Resolutions of the First Extraordinary General Meeting in 2022 of CSCEC December 29, 2022 133 Legal Opinions of King & Wood Mallesons on the First Extraordinary General Meeting in 2022 of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited December 29, 2022 134 Articles of association of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited (Revision in December 2022) December 29, 2022 135 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 29th Meeting of the Third Board of Directors of CSCEC December 29, 2022 136 Rules of Procedure of the Supervisory Committee of the Board of Directors of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited December 29, 2022 137 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the Third Tranche of Unlocking in 2022 in Respect of Phase III Restricted A Share Incentive Scheme December 29, 2022 138 Independent Opinions of Independent Directors on the First Tranche of Unlocking in 2022 in Respect of Phase IV Restricted A Share Incentive Scheme December 29, 2022 139 Regulations on Investor Relations Management of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited (Revision in December 2022) December 29, 2022 140 Announcement on the Resolutions of the 18th Meeting of the Third Board of Supervisors of CSCEC December 29, 2022 141 Announcement on Partial Repurchase of Phase III and IV Restricted A Shares from Incentive Participants of CSCEC December 29, 2022 142 Legal Opinions of King & Wood Mallesons on Relevant Matters regarding the Repurchase and Write-off of Partial Restricted Shares in Respect of Phase III and IV Restricted A Share Incentive Scheme of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited December 29, 2022 143 Announcement on Significant Project of CSCEC December 31, 2022 111 SECTION VIICHANGES IN SHARES AND SHAREHOLDERS 

> SECTION VII  CHANGES IN SHARES AND SHAREHOLDERS I.  Changes in Share Capital
> (I)  Table of changes in shares 1.  Table of changes in shares
> As at the end of the Reporting Period, the changes in the Company’s share capital structure are as follows: Unit: Share(s)
> Before the change  Increase/decrease (+,-)  After the change Number  Percentage (%)  Issue of new shares  Bonus issue  Conversion from reserve  Others  Subtotal  Number  Percentage (%)
> I. Shares subject to trading moratorium  1,303,585,000  3.11  -204,519,000  -204,519,000  1,099,066,000  2.62 1. State-owned shares 2. Shares held by state-owned legal person 3. Shares held by other domestic shareholders  1,303,585,000  3.11  -204,519,000  -204,519,000  1,099,066,000  2.62 Including: Shares held by domestic non-state-owned legal persons Shares held by domestic natural persons  1,303,585,000  3.11  -204,519,000  -204,519,000  1,099,066,000  2.62 4. Shares held by foreign shareholders Including: Shares held by overseas legal persons Shares held by overseas natural persons II. Circulating shares not subject to trading moratorium  40,644,582,844  96.89  190,784,000  190,784,000  40,835,366,844  97.38 1. RMB ordinary shares  40,644,582,844  96.89  190,784,000  190,784,000  40,835,366,844  97.38 2. Domestic listed foreign shares 3. Overseas listed foreign shares 4. Others
> III. Total number of shares  41,948,167,844  100  -13,735,000  -13,735,000  41,934,432,844  100

112 SECTION VIICHANGES IN SHARES AND SHAREHOLDERS 

2. Explanation on changes in shares 

√ Applicable □N/A During the Reporting Period, there were three changes in the Company’s shares, which were caused by the Company’s unlocking of restricted shares, repurchase and cancellation of some restricted shares. The details are as follows: (1) The Company completed the unlocking of the second tranche of 190,784,000 restricted shares under the Phase III restricted A share incentive scheme, converting circulating shares subject to trading moratorium to circulating shares not subject to trading moratorium. The total share capital of the Company remained unchanged, i.e. 41,948,167,844. For details, please refer to the Announcement on the Second Tranche of Unlocking in 2021 in Respect of Phase III Restricted A Share Incentive Scheme and Listing of Shares published on January 12, 2022. (2) The Company completed the repurchase from the participants and cancellation of 7,309,000 restricted shares that were not eligible for unlocking. After the completion of the repurchase and cancellation, the registered capital (and share capital) of the Company was decreased by RMB7,309,000 (and 7,309,000 shares) to RMB41,940,858,844 (and 41,940,858,844 shares). For details, please refer to the Announcement on Repurchase and Write-off of Partial Restricted Shares for Equity Incentives published on April 12, 2022. (3) The Company completed the repurchase from the participants and cancellation of 6,426,000 restricted shares that were not eligible for unlocking. After the completion of the repurchase and cancellation, the registered capital (and share capital) of the Company was decreased by RMB6,426,000 (and 6,426,000 shares) to RMB41,934,432,844 (and 41,934,432,844 shares). For details, please refer to the Announcement on Repurchase and Write-off of Partial Restricted Shares for Equity Incentives published on July 29, 2022. 

3. The impact, if any, of changes in shares on financial indicators such as earnings per share, net asset per share for the latest year and the latest reporting period 

√ Applicable □N/A During the Reporting Period, changes in the Company’s shares were resulted from the repurchase and cancellation of restricted shares, and the impact was as follows: Unit: Yuan Currency: RMB 

Financial indicators Restricted shares cancellations considered Restricted shares cancellations not considered 

Earnings per share 1.23 1.23 Net asset per share 8.93 8.92 4. Other disclosures that the Company deemed necessary or were required by securities regulatory authorities 

□Applicable √ N/A 113 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

(II) Changes in shares subject to trading moratorium 

√ Applicable □N/A Unit: Share(s) 

Name of shareholder Number of shares subject to trading moratorium at the beginning of the year Number of shares released from trading moratorium for the year Number of new shares subject to trading moratorium for the year Number of shares subject to trading moratorium at the end of the year Reason for the trading moratorium Date of release from trading moratorium 

Participants of restricted share incentive scheme 1,303,585,000 -204,519,000 0 1,099,066,000 During the trading moratorium period /

Total 1,303,585,000 -204,519,000 0 1,099,066,000 / /

For details, please refer to “2. Explanation on changes in shares” in “(I) Table of changes in shares” under “I. Changes in Share Capital” in this section. 

II.  Issuance and Listing of Securities 

(I) Issue of securities during the Reporting Period 

□Applicable √ N/A 

(II) Changes in the Company’s total number of shares and structure of shareholders and changes in structure of asset and liability of the Company 

□Applicable √ N/A 

(III) Existing internal employee shares 

□Applicable √ N/A 114 SECTION VIICHANGES IN SHARES AND SHAREHOLDERS 

III.  Shareholders and De Facto Controller 

(I) Total number of shareholders 

Total number of ordinary shareholders as at the end of the Reporting Period 394,999 Total number of ordinary shareholders at the end of the month immediately before the date of disclosure of the Annual Report 401,199 

Total number of preference shareholders with voting rights restored as at the end of the Reporting Period N/A Total number of preference shareholders with voting rights restored at the end of the month immediately before the date of disclosure of the Annual Report N/A (II) Shareholding of top ten shareholders, top ten shareholders of circulating shares (or holders of shares not subject to trading moratorium) as of the end of the Reporting Period 

Unit: Share(s) 

Shareholding of top 10 shareholders Name of shareholder (full name) Increase/ decrease during the Reporting Period Number of shares held as at the end of the Reporting Period Percentage (%) Number of shares held subject to trading moratorium Pledged or frozen Nature of shareholder Status Number 

China State Construction Engineering Corporation 0 23,630,695,997 56.35 0 Nil 0 State-owned legal person Hong Kong Securities Clearing Company Limited 708,371,986 2,167,977,661 5.17 0 Nil 0 Others China Securities Finance Corporation Limited 0 1,258,300,898 3.00 0 Nil 0 Others Central Huijin Asset Management Ltd. 0 583,327,120 1.39 0 Nil 0 State-owned legal person National Social Security Fund Portfolio 413 64,428,216 197,990,036 0.47 0 Nil 0 Others Industrial & Commercial Bank of China – SSE 50 Exchange Traded Open-end Index Securities Investment Fund 2,551,260 179,654,263 0.43 0 Nil 0 Securities investment fund Bank of Ningbo Co., Ltd. – Zhongtai Xingyuan Value Selected Flexible Allocation Mixed Securities Investment Fund 133,764,705 161,504,244 0.39 0 Nil 0 Securities investment fund Bank of Communications Co., Ltd. GF CSI Infrastructure Project Traded Open-end Index ETF Securities Investment Fund 14,948,840 133,975,140 0.32 0 Nil 0 Securities investment fund China Life Insurance Company Limited – Traditional – General Insurance Products – 005L – CT001 Hu 124,284,618 126,037,718 0.30 0 Nil 0 Others Bank of Communications Co., Ltd. – E Fund SSE 50 Index Enhanced Securities Investment Fund -15,548,700 122,093,426 0.29 0 Nil 0 Securities investment fund 115 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Shareholdings of the top 10 holders of circulating shares not subject to trading moratorium Name of shareholder Number of circulating shares not subject to trading moratorium Class and number of shares Class Number 

China State Construction Engineering Corporation 23,630,695,997 RMB ordinary shares 23,630,695,997 Hong Kong Securities Clearing Company Limited 2,167,977,661 RMB ordinary shares 2,167,977,661 China Securities Finance Corporation Limited 1,258,300,898 RMB ordinary shares 1,258,300,898 Central Huijin Asset Management Ltd. 583,327,120 RMB ordinary shares 583,327,120 National Social Security Fund Portfolio 413 197,990,036 RMB ordinary shares 197,990,036 Industrial & Commercial Bank of China – SSE 50 Exchange Traded Open-end Index Securities Investment Fund 179,654,263 RMB ordinary shares 179,654,263 Bank of Ningbo Co., Ltd. – Zhongtai Xingyuan Value Selected Flexible Allocation Mixed Securities Investment Fund 161,504,244 RMB ordinary shares 161,504,244 Bank of Communications Co., Ltd. — GF CSI Infrastructure Project Traded Open-end Index ETF Securities Investment Fund 133,975,140 RMB ordinary shares 133,975,140 China Life Insurance Company Limited — Traditional – General Insurance Products – 005L – CT001 Hu 126,037,718 RMB ordinary shares 126,037,718 Bank of Communications Co., Ltd. – E Fund SSE 50 Index Enhanced Securities Investment Fund 122,093,426 RMB ordinary shares 122,093,426 Descriptions on special repurchase accounts among top 10 shareholders N/A Descriptions on entrusting voting rights, entrusted voting rights or waiving voting rights of the above shareholders N/A Descriptions on the related relationship or acts in concert of the above shareholders There is no related relationship or action in concert between China State Construction Engineering Corporation, the largest shareholder of the Company, and any other shareholders mentioned above. The Company is not aware of any related relationship among the above shareholders, or that they are parties acting in concert. Descriptions on the preference shareholders with voting rights restored and number of shares held N/A 

Number of shares held by top 10 holders of shares subject to trading moratorium and trading conditions 

□Applicable √ N/A Please refer to the relevant content of “(II) Changes in shares subject to trading moratorium” under “I. Changes in share capital” in this Section. 

(III) Strategic investors or general legal persons becoming the top 10 shareholders as a result of new share placement 

□Applicable √ N/A 116 SECTION VIICHANGES IN SHARES AND SHAREHOLDERS 

IV.  Controlling Shareholder and De Facto Controller 

(I) Controlling shareholder 1. Legal person 

√ Applicable □N/A 

Name China State Construction Engineering Corporation 

Person in charge of the company or legal representative Zheng Xuexuan Date of establishment It was established on June 11, 1982 following the official announcement of the former Ministry of Urban and Rural Construction and Environmental Protection, and obtained the business license from the former State Administration for Industry and Commerce on March 25, 1983. It was transformed to a wholly state-owned company on November 28, 2017, and changed its name to China State Construction Engineering Corporation (in Chinese: 中国建筑集团有限公司 )。.Principal business The operation of state-owned assets within the scope authorized by the State Council; undertaking of survey, design, construction, installation and consultation of civil and constructional engineering projects at home and abroad; operation of real estate; decoration works; sculpture and frescoes business; undertaking of foreign economic assistance projects of the state; contracting of foreign-related projects in the PRC, organization of non-trade enterprises overseas, carrying out of labor service cooperation in the PRC using foreign resources, funds and technology, and export business of equipment and materials required for foreign projects; production and operation of construction materials and other non-metallic mineral products, metal products for construction, tools, construction engineering machinery and drilling machinery; import and export of goods and technology, agent service for import and export; project investment; real estate development; engineering survey and design; construction project management; technical consulting, technical services; property management. (Market entities may independently choose business items and carry out business activities in accordance with the law; as for items subject to approval in accordance with the law, relevant business activities shall be carried out with the approval of the competent authorities and within the scope of the approval; business activities of the forbidden and restricted projects under the national and municipal industry policies are not allowed.) Shareholding and equity participation in other domestic and overseas listed companies during the Reporting Period Apart from the Company and the listed companies controlled by the Company, China State Construction holds 27.05% shares of CSCEC SCIMEE Sci. & Tech. Co., Ltd. (stock abbreviation: SCIMEE, stock code: 300425.SZ) through its wholly-owned subsidiary, China State Construction Innovation Investment Co., LTD (“CSCEC Innovation Investment”). CSCEC Innovation Investment is the controlling shareholder of SCIMEE. Other matters /2. Natural person 

□Applicable √ N/A 

3. Special explanation on absence of a controlling shareholder of the Company 

□Applicable √ N/A 

4. Details of the index and the date of change of the controlling shareholder during the Reporting Period 

□Applicable √ N/A 117 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

5. Chart showing the ownership and controlling relationship between the Company and the controlling shareholder 

√ Applicable □N/A 

(II) De facto controller 1. Legal person 

√ Applicable □N/A 

Name State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council 2. Natural person 

□Applicable √ N/A 

3. Special explanation on absence of a de facto controller of the Company 

□Applicable √ N/A 

4. Details of the index and the date of change of the de facto controller during the Reporting Period 

□Applicable √ N/A 

# 56.35% 

China State Construction Engineering Corporation China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 118 SECTION VIICHANGES IN SHARES AND SHAREHOLDERS 

5. Chart showing the ownership and controlling relationship between the Company and the de facto controller 

√ Applicable □N/A 

6. The de facto controller controlling the Company through a trust or other asset management company 

□Applicable √ N/A 

(III) Other information of the controlling shareholder and the de facto controller 

□Applicable √ N/A 

V.  The accumulated number of shares pledged by the controlling shareholder of the Company or the largest shareholder and its parties acting in concert represents more than 80% of the number of the shares of the Company held by them 

□Applicable √ N/A 

VI.  Other Corporate Shareholders Holding More than 10% of the Shares 

□Applicable √ N/A 

VII.  Explanation on Restrictions on the Reduction of Shareholding 

□Applicable √ N/A 

VIII.  Details of the Implementation of Share Repurchase during the Reporting Period 

□Applicable √ N/A 

# 100% 56.35% China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited China State Construction Engineering Corporation SASAC of the State Council 119 SECTION VIIIINFORMATION ON PREFERENCE SHARES 

# SECTION VIII  INFORMATION ON PREFERENCE SHARES 

□Applicable √ N/A 120 SECTION IXINFORMATION ON BONDS 

# SECTION IX  INFORMATION ON BONDS I.  Enterprise Bonds, Corporate Bonds and Non-financial Enterprise Debt Financing Instruments 

√ Applicable □N/A 

(I) Enterprise bonds 

□Applicable √ N/A 

(II) Corporate bonds 

√ Applicable □N/A 

1. Basic information of corporate bonds 

The Company’s countermeasures to the risks of termination of listing and trading of bonds 

□Applicable √ N/A Bonds in default 

□Applicable √ N/A Payment of interest and repayment of principal of bonds during the Reporting Period 

□Applicable √ N/A 

2. The triggering and implementation of the issuer’s or investor’s option clauses and investor protection clauses 

□Applicable √ N/A 

3. Intermediaries that provide services to the issuance of corporate bonds and the duration business 

Intermediary Office address Name of signatory accountants Contact person Tel 

Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP (Special General Partnership) Level 17, Ernst & Young Tower, Oriental Plaza, No. 1 East Chang An Avenue, Dongcheng District, Beijing, PRC Zhou Ying, Yang Shujuan, Shen Yan Zhou Ying 010-58153000 4. Use of raised funds at the end of the Reporting Period 

□Applicable √ N/A 

5. Adjustment of credit rating results 

□Applicable √ N/A 

6. The implementation and changes of guarantees, debt repayment plans and other debt repayment protection measures during the Reporting Period and their impact 

□Applicable √ N/A 121 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

> 7.  Explanation on other information of corporate bonds
> √ Applicable  □N/A The issuance of subsisting corporate bonds by subsidiaries as at the date of this Report is as follows:
> Issuance of Subsisting Corporate Bonds by Subsidiaries
> Unit: ’000 yuan  Currency: RMB
> No.  Name of bond  Abbreviation  Date of issuance Interest commencement date Maturity date  Issue size/ current size Interest rate (%) Principal repayment and interest payment
> 1 5.35% USD guaranteed notes due in 2042 of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.  CHINA OVS N4211  November 15, 2012 November 15, 2012 November 15, 2042  2,089,380.00  5.35  Normal 2 5.375% USD guaranteed notes due in 2023 of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.  CHINA OVS N2310  October 29, 2013  October 29, 2013  October 29, 2023  3,482,300.00  5.375  Normal 3 6.375% USD guaranteed notes due in 2043 of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.  CHINA OVS N4310  October 29, 2013  October 29, 2013  October 29, 2043  3,482,300.00  6.375  Normal 4 5.95% USD guaranteed notes due in 2024 of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.  CHINA OVS N2405  May 8, 2014  May 8, 2014  May 8, 2024  4,875,220.00  5.95  Normal 5 6.45% USD guaranteed notes due in 2034 of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.  CHINA OVS N3406  June 11, 2014  June 11, 2014  June 11, 2034  3,482,300.00  6.45  Normal 6 2016 corporate bonds (Tranche 1) publicly issued by China Overseas Property Group Co., Ltd.  16 China Overseas 01  August 22, 2016  August 23, 2016  August 23, 2026  1,900,000.00  3.60  Normal 7 3.5% USD guaranteed notes due in 2027 of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited  CSCEC II N2707  July 5, 2017  July 5, 2017  July 5, 2027  3,482,300.00  3.50  Normal 8 3.875% USD guaranteed notes due in 2027 of China State Construction International Holdings Limited  CSCFIN II N2711  November 29, 2017 November 29, 2017 November 29, 2027  1,741,150.00  3.875  Normal 9 4.25% USD guaranteed notes due in 2023 of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.  CHINA OVS N2304  April 26, 2018  April 26, 2018  April 26, 2023  5,223,450.00  4.25  Normal 10  4.75% USD guaranteed notes due in 2028 of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.  CHINA OVS N2804  April 26, 2018  April 26, 2018  April 26, 2028  5,223,450.00  4.75  Normal 11  2019 corporate bonds (Tranche 1) (Variety 2) of China Overseas Property Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to qualified investors 19 China Overseas 02  January 23, 2019  January 24, 2019  January 24, 2026  1,500,000.00  3.75  Normal 12  3.45% USD medium-term notes due in 2029 of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.  CHINA OVS N2907  July 15, 2019  July 15, 2019  July 15, 2029  3,134,070.00  3.45  Normal 13  2.9% HKD medium-term notes due in 2025 of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.  CHINA OVS N2501  July 15, 2019  July 15, 2019  January 15, 2025  1,786,540.00  2.90  Normal 14  3.05% USD medium-term notes due in 2029 of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.  CHINA OVS N2911  November 27, 2019 November 27, 2019 November 27, 2029  2,047,592.40  3.05  Normal 15  4% perpetual bonds of China State Construction International Holdings Limited  CSCFIN III SGPS  December 3, 2019 December 3, 2019 December 3, 2024  3,482,300.00  4.00  Normal 16  2.375% USD medium-term notes due in 2025 of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.  CHINA OVS N2503  March 2, 2020  March 2, 2020  March 2, 2025  2,089,380.00  2.375  Normal 17  2.75% USD medium-term notes due in 2030 of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.  CHINA OVS N3003  March 2, 2020  March 2, 2020  March 2, 2030  3,482,300.00  2.75  Normal 18  3.125% USD medium-term notes due in 2035 of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.  CHINA OVS N3503  March 2, 2020  March 2, 2020  March 2, 2035  1,392,920.00  3.125  Normal 19  2020 renewable corporate bonds (Tranche 1) (Variety 1) of China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 20 China Construction G2 Y1  June 24, 2020  June 30, 2020  June 30, 2023  1,500,000.00  3.74  Normal 20  2020 panda corporate bonds (Tranche 1) of China State Construction International Holdings Limited  20 CSCFIN G1  July 28, 2020  July 29, 2020  July 29, 2023  2,000,000.00  3.48  Normal 21  2020 housing rental special corporate bonds (Tranche 1) (Variety 1) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors  20 China Overseas 01  August 13, 2020  August 14, 2020  August 14, 2026  2,000,000.00  3.20  Normal

122 SECTION IXINFORMATION ON BONDS 

> No.  Name of bond  Abbreviation  Date of issuance Interest commencement date Maturity date  Issue size/ current size Interest rate (%) Principal repayment and interest payment
> 22  2020 renewable corporate bonds (Tranche 1) of China Construction First Group Corporation Limited  20 China Construction G1 Y1 September 4, 2020 September 7, 2020 September 7, 2023  1,500,000.00  4.30  Normal 23  2020 renewable corporate bonds (Tranche 2) of China Construction First Group Corporation Limited  20 China Construction G1 Y2 September 23, 2020 September 24, 2020 September 24, 2023  1,500,000.00  4.40  Normal 24  2020 renewable corporate bonds (Tranche 1) of China Construction Science and Industry Corporation Ltd.  20 CCSI Y1  October 26, 2020  October 27, 2020  October 26, 2023  900,000.00  5.60  Normal 25  2020 corporate bonds (Tranche 1) (Variety 1) by China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 20 China Overseas 03 November 6, 2020 November 9, 2020 November 9, 2023  2,400,000.00  3.40  Normal 26  2020 renewable corporate bonds (Tranche 1) of China Construction Science and Industry Corporation Ltd.  20 CCSI Y2  December 22, 2020 December 23, 2020 December 22, 2023  600,000.00  5.80  Normal 27  3.4% perpetual bonds of China State Construction International Holdings Limited  CSC FIN SGPSB  June 8, 2021  June 8, 2021  June 8, 2026  3,482,300.00  3.40  Normal 28  2021 corporate bonds (Tranche 1) (Variety 1) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 21 China Overseas 01  June 11, 2021  June 15, 2021  June 15, 2024  2,000,000.00  3.25  Normal 29  2021 corporate bonds (Tranche 1) (Variety 2) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 21 China Overseas 02  June 11, 2021  June 15, 2021  June 15, 2026  1,000,000.00  3.55  Normal 30  2021 corporate bonds (Tranche 2) (Variety 1) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 21 China Overseas 03  July 9, 2021  July 12, 2021  July 12, 2025  1,000,000.00  3.10  Normal 31  2021 corporate bonds (Tranche 2) (Variety 2) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 21 China Overseas 04  July 9, 2021  July 12, 2021  July 12, 2025  2,000,000.00  3.25  Normal 32  2021 corporate bonds (Tranche 3) (Variety 1) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 21 China Overseas 05  August 6, 2021  August 9, 2021  August 9, 2025  500,000.00  2.75  Normal 33  2021 corporate bonds (Tranche 3) (Variety 2) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 21 China Overseas 06  August 6, 2021  August 9, 2021  August 9, 2028  1,500,000.00  3.25  Normal 34  2021 renewable corporate bonds (Tranche 1) of China Construction First Group Corporation Limited publicly issued to professional investors 21 China Construction G1 Y1 November 10, 2021 November 12, 2021 November 12, 2024  1,000,000.00  3.48  Normal 35  2021 corporate bonds (Tranche 4) (Variety 1) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 21 China Overseas 07 November 24, 2021 November 25, 2021 November 25, 2024  1,700,000.00  3.08  Normal 36  2021 corporate bonds (Tranche 4) (Variety 2) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 21 China Overseas 08 November 24, 2021 November 25, 2021 November 25, 2026  1,200,000.00  3.38  Normal 37  2021 renewable corporate bonds (Tranche 1) (Variety 1) of China Construction Fangcheng Investment & Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors  21 Fangcheng Y1  December 7, 2021 December 8, 2021 December 8, 2023  500,000.00  3.80  Normal 38  2021 renewable corporate bonds (Tranche 1) (Variety 2) of China Construction Fangcheng Investment & Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors  21 Fangcheng Y2  December 7, 2021 December 8, 2021 December 8, 2024  1,200,000.00  4.25  Normal 39  2021 corporate bonds (Tranche 5) (Variety 1) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 21 China Overseas 09 December 17, 2021 December 20, 2021 December 20, 2024  1,300,000.00  2.98  Normal 40  2021 corporate bonds (Tranche 5) (Variety 2) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 21 China Overseas 10 December 17, 2021 December 20, 2021 December 20, 2026  800,000.00  3.38  Normal 41  2021 green renewable corporate bonds of China Construction Science & Technology Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors  G CCST Y1  December 24, 2021 December 28, 2021 December 28, 2024  300,000.00  4.30  Normal 42  2022 corporate bonds (Tranche 1) (Variety 1) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 22 China Overseas 01  April 6, 2022  April 7, 2022  April 7, 2025  2,000,000.00  3.05  Normal 43  2022 corporate bonds (Tranche 1) (Variety 2) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 22 China Overseas 02  April 6, 2022  April 7, 2022  April 7, 2027  1,000,000.00  3.50  Normal 44  2022 corporate bonds (Tranche 1) of China Construction Capital Holdings Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors  22 Capital Holding 01  April 26, 2022  April 27, 2022  April 27, 2025  1,000,000.00  3.30  Normal 45  2022 corporate bonds (Tranche 2) (Variety 1) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 22 China Overseas 03  May 9, 2022  May 10, 2022  May 10, 2025  1,500,000.00  2.75  Normal 46  2022 corporate bonds (Tranche 2) (Variety 2) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 22 China Overseas 04  May 9, 2022  May 10, 2022  May 10, 2027  1,500,000.00  3.48  Normal 47  2022 corporate bonds (Tranche 3) (Variety 1) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 22 China Overseas 05 September 19, 2022 September 20, 2022 September 20, 2025  1,000,000.00  2.40  Normal 48  2022 corporate bonds (Tranche 3) (Variety 2) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 22 China Overseas 06 September 19, 2022 September 20, 2022 September 20, 2027  500,000.00  3.15  Normal

123 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

> No.  Name of bond  Abbreviation  Date of issuance Interest commencement date Maturity date  Issue size/ current size Interest rate (%) Principal repayment and interest payment
> 49  2022 corporate bonds (Tranche 4) (Variety 1) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 22 China Overseas 07 December 19, 2022 December 20, 2022 December 20, 2025  1,500,000.00  2.25  Normal 50  2022 corporate bonds (Tranche 4) (Variety 2) of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors 22 China Overseas 08 December 19, 2022 December 20, 2022 December 20, 2027  1,500,000.00  2.70  Normal 51  2023 corporate bonds (Tranche 1) of China Construction Fangcheng Investment & Development Group Co., Ltd. publicly issued to professional investors  23 Fangcheng 01  March 27, 2023  March 28, 2023  March 28, 2026  800,000.00  3.38  Normal (III)  Debt financing instruments of non-financial enterprises in the interbank bond market
> √ Applicable  □ N/A
> 1.  Basic information of debt financing instruments of non-financial enterprises
> Unit: ’000 yuan  Currency: RMB
> No.  Name of bond  Abbreviation  Code  Date of issuance Interest commencement date Maturity date  Balance  Interest rate (%) Method of principal repayment and interest payment Venue of trading Arrangement to ensure the suitability of investors (if any) Trading mechanism Whether there is a risk of termination of the listing
> 12018 medium-term notes (Tranche 1) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 18 CSCEC MTN001  101800894  August 15, 2018 August 17, 2018 August 17, 2023  5,000,000.00  4.70 Payment of interest on an annual basis and principal upon maturity Inter-bank bond market  /Bidding, quotation, inquiry and agreement No 22018 medium-term notes (Tranche 2) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 18 CSCEC MTN002  101800900  August 15, 2018 August 17, 2018 August 17, 2023  5,000,000.00  4.70 Payment of interest on an annual basis and principal upon maturity Inter-bank bond market  /Bidding, quotation, inquiry and agreement No 32020 medium-term notes (Tranche 1) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 20 CSCEC MTN001  102000581  April 1, 2020  April 3, 2020  April 3, 2023  4,000,000.00  3.29 Payment of interest on an annual basis and principal upon maturity Inter-bank bond market  /Bidding, quotation, inquiry and agreement No 42020 medium-term notes (Tranche 2) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 20 CSCEC MTN002  102000650  April 9, 2020  April 13, 2020  April 13, 2023  3,000,000.00  3.10 Payment of interest on an annual basis and principal upon maturity Inter-bank bond market  /Bidding, quotation, inquiry and agreement No 52020 medium-term notes (Tranche 3) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 20 CSCEC MTN003  102000748  April 16, 2020  April 20, 2020  April 20, 2023  3,000,000.00  3.09 Payment of interest on an annual basis and principal upon maturity Inter-bank bond market  /Bidding, quotation, inquiry and agreement No
> For relevant details, please refer to note V. 35 “Current portion of non-current liabilities”, note V. 38 “Bonds payable” and note V. 46 “Other equity instruments” to the financial statements under section X “FINANCIAL REPORT”.

124 SECTION IXINFORMATION ON BONDS 

The Company’s countermeasures to the risks of termination of listing and trading of bonds 

□ Applicable √ N/A Outstanding bonds overdue 

□ Applicable √ N/A Payment of interest and repayment of principal of bonds during the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □ N/A 

Name of bond Description of payment of interest 

2018 medium-term notes (Tranche 1) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited Normal payment of interest 2018 medium-term notes (Tranche 2) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited Normal payment of interest 2020 medium-term notes (Tranche 1) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited Normal payment of interest 2020 medium-term notes (Tranche 2) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited Normal payment of interest 2020 medium-term notes (Tranche 3) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited Normal payment of interest 2. The triggering and implementation of the issuer’s or investor’s option clauses and investor protection clauses 

□Applicable √ N/A 

3. Intermediaries providing services for bond issuance and business over the duration 

Intermediary Office address Name of signatory accountants Contact person Tel 

Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP (Special General Partnership) Level 17, Ernst & Young Tower, Oriental Plaza, No. 1 East Chang An Avenue, Dongcheng District, Beijing, PRC Zhou Ying, Yang Shujuan, Shen Yan Zhou Ying 010-58153000 

Changes to the above intermediary 

□Applicable √ N/A 125 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

4. Use of proceeds at the end of the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □N/A Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Name of bond Total amount of proceeds Used amount Unused amount Operation of the special account for proceeds (if any) Rectification on illegal use of proceeds (if any) Whether it is consistent with the purpose, use plan and other agreements promised in the prospectus 

2018 medium-term notes (Tranche 1) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 5,000,000.00 5,000,000.00 0 Nil Nil Yes 2018 medium-term notes (Tranche 2) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 5,000,000.00 5,000,000.00 0 Nil Nil Yes 2020 medium-term notes (Tranche 1) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 4,000,000.00 4,000,000.00 0 Nil Nil Yes 2020 medium-term notes (Tranche 2) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 3,000,000.00 3,000,000.00 0 Nil Nil Yes 2020 medium-term notes (Tranche 3) of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 3,000,000.00 3,000,000.00 0 Nil Nil Yes 

The progress of the proceeds for construction projects and operating benefits 

□Applicable √ N/A Explanations on changing the use of proceeds from above-mentioned bonds during the Reporting Period 

□Applicable √ N/A Other explanations 

□Applicable √ N/A 

5. Adjustment of credit rating results 

□Applicable √ N/A 

6. The implementation and changes of guarantees, debt repayment plans and other debt repayment protection measures during the Reporting Period and their impact 

□Applicable √ N/A 126 SECTION IXINFORMATION ON BONDS 

> 7.  Explanation on other information of debt financing instruments of non-financial enterprises
> √ Applicable  □N/A The issuance of debt financing instruments of non-financial institutions by subsidiaries as at the disclosure date of this Report is as follows:
> Issuance of Debt Financing Instruments of Non-financial Institutions by Subsidiaries
> Unit: ’000 yuan  Currency: RMB
> No.  Name of bond  Abbreviation  Date of issuance  Interest commencement date  Maturity date  Issuance size/ current size Interest rate (%) Repayment of principal and interest payment
> 1 Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. in 2018  18  China  Construction  Second  Bureau MTN001  April 17, 2018  April 18, 2018  April 18, 2023  1,000,000.00  5.03  Normal 2 Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Communications Engineering Group Co., Ltd. in 2018  18 China Construction Communications MTN001  July 23, 2018  July 25, 2018  July 25, 2023  500,000.00  5.10  Normal 3 Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction First Group Corporation Limited in 2018 (Variety II)  18 China Construction First Group MTN001B  December 5, 2018  December 7, 2018  December 7, 2023  500,000.00  5.50  Normal 4 Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Communications Engineering Group Co., Ltd. in 2019  19 China Construction Communications MTN001  April 10, 2019  April 12, 2019  April 12, 2024  300,000.00  4.75  Normal 5 Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. in 2020  20 China Construction Fifth Division MTN001  April 20, 2020  April 22, 2020  April 22, 2023  2,000,000.00  3.35  Normal 6 Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. in 2020  20  China  Construction  Eighth  Division MTN001  June 11, 2020  June 15, 2020  June 11, 2025  2,000,000.00  4.04  Normal 7 Tranche 2 of medium-term note of China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. in 2020  20  China  Construction  Eighth  Division MTN002  August 26, 2020  August 28, 2020  August 26, 2023  2,000,000.00  4.45  Normal 8 Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Corp. Ltd. in 2020  20 China Construction Sixth Bureau MTN001  September 3, 2020  September 7, 2020  September 7, 2023  600,000.00  5.60  Normal 9 Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. in 2020  20  China  Construction  Second  Bureau MTN001 September 29, 2020 September 30, 2020 September 30, 2023  1,500,000.00  4.80  Normal 10  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. in 2020  20  China  Construction  Fourth  Division MTN001  October 19, 2020  October 21, 2020  October 21, 2023  1,500,000.00  5.10  Normal 11  Tranche 2 of medium-term note of China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. in 2020  20  China  Construction  Second  Bureau MTN002  October 26, 2020  October 28, 2020  October 28, 2023  1,000,000.00  4.78  Normal 12  Tranche 1 of RMB medium-term note of China State Construction International Investments Limited in 2020  20 China Construction Investments MTN001  October 26, 2020  October 28, 2020  October 28, 2023  500,000.00  3.45  Normal 13  Tranche 2 of medium-term note of China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Corp. Ltd. in 2020  20 China Construction Sixth Bureau MTN002  October 27, 2020  October 29, 2020  October 29, 2023  700,000.00  5.00  Normal 14  Tranche 2 of medium-term note of China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. in 2020  20 China Construction Third Bureau MTN002  October 27, 2020  October 28, 2020  October 28, 2023  1,500,000.00  4.50  Normal 15  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of CSCEC Strait Construction and Development Co., Ltd. in 2020  20 CSCEC Strait MTN001  November 3, 2020  November 5, 2020  November 5, 2023  1,000,000.00  4.85  Normal 16  Tranche 2 of medium-term note of China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. in 2020  20  China  Construction  Fourth  Division MTN002  November 3, 2020  November 5, 2020  November 5, 2023  2,500,000.00  5.05  Normal 17  Tranche 3 of medium-term note of China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. in 2020  20  China  Construction  Second  Bureau MTN003  November 4, 2020  November 6, 2020  November 6, 2023  1,000,000.00  4.60  Normal 18  Tranche 3 of medium-term note of China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. in 2020 (Variety II) 20  China  Construction  Third  Bureau MTN003B  November 11, 2020  November 12, 2020  November 12, 2023  1,200,000.00  4.45  Normal 19  Tranche 4 of medium-term note of China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. in 2020 (Variety II)  20  China  Construction  Second  Bureau MTN004B  November 25, 2020  November 27, 2020  November 27, 2023  1,000,000.00  4.89  Normal 20  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. in 2020  20 China Overseas Development MTN001  December 10, 2020  December 14, 2020  December 14, 2023  1,500,000.00  3.60  Normal 21  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd in 2020  20 China Construction Third Bureau MTN001  December 21, 2020  December 22, 2020  December 22, 2023  2,000,000.00  4.70  Normal

127 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

> No.  Name of bond  Abbreviation  Date of issuance  Interest commencement date  Maturity date  Issuance size/ current size Interest rate (%) Repayment of principal and interest payment
> 22  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. in 2021  21 China Overseas Development MTN001  January 13, 2021  January 15, 2021  January 15, 2024  1,500,000.00  3.35  Normal 23  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Eighth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. in 2021  21  China  Construction  Eighth  Division MTN001  March 19, 2021  March 23, 2021  March 19, 2024  3,000,000.00  4.48  Normal 24  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China State Construction International Investments Limited in 2021  21 China Construction Investments MTN001  May 27, 2021  May 31, 2021  May 31, 2024  1,000,000.00  3.52  Normal 25  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China West Construction Group Co., Ltd. in 2021  21 China West Construction MTN001  August 18, 2021  August 20, 2021  August 20, 2024  700,000.00  3.35  Normal 26  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Industrial & Energy Engineering Group Co., Ltd. in 2021  21 China Construction Industrial & Energy MTN001  August 20, 2021  August 24, 2021  August 24, 2024  300,000.00  4.96  Normal 27  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. in 2021  21  China  Construction  Second  Bureau MTN001  August 30, 2021  September 1, 2021  September 1, 2024  1,500,000.00  3.56  Normal 28  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. in 2021  21 China Construction Fifth Division MTN001  September 27, 2021 September 28, 2021 September 28, 2024  2,000,000.00  3.80  Normal 29  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. in 2021  21  China  Construction  Fourth  Division MTN001  October 25, 2021  October 27, 2021  October 27, 2024  1,000,000.00  4.30  Normal 30  Tranche 2 of medium-term note of China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. in 2021  21  China  Construction  Fourth  Division MTN002  November 15, 2021  November 17, 2021  November 17, 2024  2,000,000.00  4.18  Normal 31  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Seventh Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. in 2021  21 China Construction Seventh Division MTN001  November 17, 2021  November 19, 2021  November 19, 2024  1,500,000.00  3.60  Normal 32  Tranche 2 of medium-term note of China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. in 2021  21 China Construction Fifth Division MTN002  November 24, 2021  November 26, 2021  November 26, 2024  2,500,000.00  3.60  Normal 33  Tranche 2 of medium-term note of China West Construction Group Co., Ltd. in 2021  21 China West Construction MTN002  December 1, 2021  December 3, 2021  December 3, 2024  600,000.00  4.30  Normal 34  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. in 2021  21 China Construction Third Bureau MTN001  December 7, 2021  December 9, 2021  December 9, 2024  1,300,000.00  3.35  Normal 35  Tranche 2 of medium-term note of China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. in 2021  21 China Construction Third Bureau MTN002  December 9, 2021  December 13, 2021  December 13, 2024  1,200,000.00  3.35  Normal 36  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Construction Infrastructure Co., Ltd. in 2021  21 China Construction MTN001  December 9, 2021  December 13, 2021  December 13, 2024  500,000.00  3.80  Normal 37  Tranche 3 of medium-term note of China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. in 2021 (Variety I)  21  China  Construction  Fourth  Division MTN003A  December 20, 2021  December 20, 2021  December 20, 2026  1,000,000.00  3.30  Normal 38  Tranche 3 of medium-term note of China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. in 2021 (Variety II)  21  China  Construction  Fourth  Division MTN003B  December 20, 2021  December 20, 2021  December 20, 2026  1,000,000.00  3.95  Normal 39  Tranche 2 of medium-term note of China State Construction International Investments Limited in 2021  21 China Construction Investments MTN002  December 27, 2021  December 29, 2021  December 29, 2024  1,500,000.00  3.10  Normal 40  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. in 2022 (Variety I)  22 China Overseas Development MTN001A  January 12, 2022  January 14, 2022  January 14, 2025  1,800,000.00  2.88  Normal 41  Tranche 1 of medium-term note of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. in 2022 (Variety II)  22 China Overseas Development MTN001B  January 12, 2022  January 14, 2022  January 14, 2027  1,200,000.00  3.25  Normal 42  Tranche 2 of green medium-term note of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. in 2022  22 China Overseas Development MTN002 (green)  February 21, 2022  February 23, 2022  February 23, 2027  1,000,000.00  3.22  Normal 43  Tranche 1 of green medium-term note of China State Construction International Investments Limited in 2022  22 China Construction Investments MTN001 (green)  March 31, 2022  April 2, 2022  April 2, 2025  960,000.00  2.98  Normal 44  Tranche 2 of medium-term note of China State Construction International Investments Limited in 2022  22 China Construction Investments MTN002  April 25, 2022  April 27, 2022  April 27, 2025  1,500,000.00  3.09  Normal 45  Tranche 3 of medium-term note of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. in 2022 (Variety I)  22 China Overseas Development MTN003A  May 25, 2022  May 27, 2022  May 27, 2025  2,000,000.00  2.63  Normal 46  Tranche 3 of medium-term note of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. in 2022 (Variety II)  22 China Overseas Development MTN003B  May 25, 2022  May 27, 2022  May 27, 2027  1,000,000.00  3.10  Normal 47  Tranche 4 of medium-term note of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. in 2022  22 China Overseas Development MTN004  July 21, 2022  July 25, 2022  July 25, 2027  2,000,000.00  3.26  Normal 48  Tranche 3 of medium-term note of China State Construction International Investments Limited in 2022  22 China Construction Investments MTN003  August 17, 2022  August 19, 2022  August 19, 2027  1,040,000.00  2.70  Normal 49  Tranche 5 of medium-term note of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. in 2022  22 China Overseas Development MTN005  October 25, 2022  October 27, 2022  October 27, 2027  1,000,000.00  2.85  Normal

128 SECTION IXINFORMATION ON BONDS 

> No.  Name of bond  Abbreviation  Date of issuance  Interest commencement date  Maturity date  Issuance size/ current size Interest rate (%) Repayment of principal and interest payment
> 50  Tranche 6 of green medium-term note of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. in 2022  22 China Overseas Development MTN006 (green)  December 12, 2022  December 14, 2022  December 14, 2027  2,000,000.00  2.70  Normal 51  Tranche 7 of green medium-term note of China Overseas Development Group Co., Ltd. in 2022  22 China Overseas Development MTN007 (green)  December 12, 2022  December 14, 2022  December 14, 2027  1,000,000.00  2.70  Normal 52  Tranche 1 of ultra-short term financing bonds of China Construction Communications Engineering Group Co., Ltd. in 2023 23 China Construction Communications SCP001  March 1, 2023  March 2, 2023  August 29, 2023  300,000.00  3.20  Normal 53  Tranche 2 of ultra-short term financing bonds of China Construction Communications Engineering Group Co., Ltd. in 2023 23 China Construction Communications SCP002  March 2, 2023  March 3, 2023  August 30, 2023  300,000.00  3.20  Normal 54  Tranche 1 of ultra-short term financing bonds of China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Corp. Ltd. in 2023 (Science and Technology Innovation Notes) 23 China Construction Sixth Bureau SCP001 (Science and Technology Innovation Notes)  March 14, 2023  March 15, 2023  June 13, 2023  1,000,000.00  2.30  Normal 55  Tranche 2 of ultra-short term financing bonds of China Construction First Group Corporation Limited in 2023 (Science and Technology Innovation Notes) 23 China Construction First Group SCP002 (Science and Technology Innovation Notes)  March 28, 2023  March 29, 2023  June 29, 2023  3,000,000.00  2.20  Normal 56  Tranche 2 of ultra-short term financing bonds of China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. in 2023  23 China Construction Second Bureau SCP002  April 10, 2023  April 11, 2023  May 19, 2023  3,000,000.00  2.23  Normal
> For relevant details, please refer to Note V. 35 “Current portion of non-current liabilities” and Note V. 38 “Bonds repayable” to the financial statements under SECTION X “FINANCIAL REPORT”.
> (IV)  Loss in the Company’s consolidated statement during the Reporting Period exceeded 10% of its net assets at the end of the previous year
> □Applicable  √ N/A
> (V)  The delinquency of interest-bearing debts excluding the bond as at the end of the Reporting Period
> □Applicable  √ N/A
> (VI)  The violation of laws and regulations, Articles of Association and the information disclosure management system and the impact of the agreement or commitment of the bond prospectus on the rights and interests of bond investors during the Reporting Period
> □Applicable  √ N/A

129 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

(VII) Key accounting data and financial indicators for the last two years as at the end of the Reporting Period 

√ Applicable □N/A Unit: ’000 yuan Currency: RMB 

Major indicators 2022 2021 (After adjustment) Increase/decrease as at the end of the Reporting Period over the end of last year (%) Reason for the change 

Net profit attributable to shareholders of the Company after deducting non-recurring profit or loss 45,233,864 49,521,361 Decrease by 8.7 percentage points Decrease in operating profit Current ratio (%) 131.2 134.5 Decrease by 3.3 percentage points /Quick ratio (%) 65.0 65.4 Decrease by 0.4 percentage point Increase in quick liabilities Gearing ratio (%) 74.4 73.2 Increase by 1.2 percentage points Increase in total liabilities Debt-to-EBITDA ratio (%) 17.3 21.8 Decrease by 4.5 percentage points Increase in total debts Interest coverage ratio 3.6 4.5 -0.9 Increase in interest expenses Cash interest coverage ratio 2.1 2.6 -0.5 Increase in interest expenses EBITDA interest coverage ratio 4.0 5.1 -1.1 Increase in interest expenses Loan repayment ratio (%) 100.0 100.0 / /Interest repayment ratio (%) 100.0 100.0 / /

II.  Information on Convertible Corporate Bonds 

□Applicable √ N/A 130 SECTION XFINANCIAL REPORT 

# SECTION X  FINANCIAL REPORT I.  Audit Report 

√ Applicable □N/A See the attached for details 

II.  Financial Statements 

See the attached for details Chairman: Zheng Xuexuan Date of approval by the Board of Directors for submission: April 17, 2023 

Amendments 

□Applicable √ N/A 131 

Audited Financial Statements For the year ended 31 December 2022 

Pages 132 AUDITOR’ S REPORT AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 137 Consolidated balance sheet 139 Consolidated income statement 141 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 143 Consolidated statement of cash flows 145 Company balance sheet 147 Company income statement 148 Company statement of changes in equity 150 Company statement of cash flows 152 Notes to the financial statements Supplementary information provided by management 338 1. Statement of non-recurring profit or loss 338 2. Return on net assets and earnings per share 

# CONTENT 132 AUDITOR’S REPORT 

# AUDITOR’S REPORT 

Ernst & Young Hua Ming (2023) Shen Zi No. 61398485_A01 China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 

To the Shareholders of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited, (I)  Opinion 

We have audited the financial statements of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited (hereinafter the “Company”), which comprise the consolidated and company balance sheets as at 31 December 2022, and the consolidated and company income statements, the consolidated and company statements of changes in equity and the consolidated and company statements of cash flows for the year then ended, and notes to the financial statements. In our opinion, the accompanying financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the consolidated and company’s financial position as at 31 December 2022, and their financial performance and cash flows for the year ended in accordance with the requirements of Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises (“ASBEs”). 

# (II)  Basis for opinion 

We conducted our audit in accordance with China Standards on Auditing (“CSAs”). Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report. We are independent of the Company in accordance with 

China Code of Ethics for Certified Public Accountants (the “Code”), and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with the Code. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. 

# (III)  Key audit matters 

Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgement, were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period. These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters. For each matter below, our description of how our audit addressed the matter is provided in that context. We have fulfilled the responsibilities described in the 

Auditor’ s responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report, including in relation to these matters. Accordingly, our audit included the performance of procedures designed to respond to our assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements. The results of our audit procedures, including the procedures performed to address the matters below, provide the basis for our audit opinion on the accompanying financial statements. 133 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# AUDITOR’S REPORT (continued) 

Ernst & Young Hua Ming (2023) Shen Zi No. 61398485_A01 China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 

# (III)  Key audit matters (continued) Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Revenue recognition from construction contracts 

The revenue of the Company is mainly derived from construction contracts and recognised based on the performance progress over the period of the contract. Depending on the nature of construction projects, determined by input method, the performance progress is measured by reference to the percentage of actual contract costs incurred to the total budgeted costs. Management makes estimates on the revenue and budgeted costs at the inception of each contract. Management shall continuously review and revise financial impacts arising from the changes in the estimated total revenue and budgeted costs based on factors such as scope changes and cost to completion throughout the contract period. Estimates in respect of revenue, budgeted costs as well as the progress of related construction services involve management’s use of significant estimates and judgements, and have significant impact on the recognition of revenue. Therefore, we identified the revenue recognition from construction contracts as a key audit matter. The accounting policies and disclosures are included in Note III. 25 and III. 35 and Note V. 52 to the financial statements. We obtained an understanding of, tested and evaluated the relevant controls over revenue recognition from construction contracts, including the key internal control of preparation of revenue and budgeted costs, the determination of performance progress, and the calculation of revenue according to the performance progress. We obtained the list of construction contracts from m a n a g e m e n t , a n d w e p e r f o r m e d t h e f o l l o w i n g procedures on a sample basis: • Reviewed the key terms of the construction contracts, revenue and budgeted costs from management, as well as supporting documents such as changes on budgeted costs, variation orders made to the original contracts and c l a i m s a n d i n c e n t i v e s , e v a l u a t i n g t h e appropriateness of management’s estimation basis of revenue and budgeted costs; • Tested the accuracy of actual costs incurred during the year by reviewing supporting documents and verifying whether the actual c o s t s w e r e r e c o r d e d i n t h e a p p r o p r i a t e accounting period; • Recalculated performance progress based on contract costs of incurred and total projected costs of contracts, recalculated revenue recognised for the current period based on projected total revenue and performance progress, tested accuracy and performed analytical procedure based on gross margins. • V i s i t i n g s e l e c t e d s a m p l e s o f s i t e s o f construction projects to observe the progress, discussing with the site project management, c o m p a r i n g t h e p e r f o r m a n c e p r o g r e s s w i t h l e d g e r r e c o r d , a n d e v a l u a t i n g t h e reasonableness of the performance progress of the construction projects. Meanwhile, we evaluated the adequacy of disclosure of revenue recognition from construction contracts. 134 AUDITOR’S REPORT 

# AUDITOR’S REPORT (continued) 

Ernst & Young Hua Ming (2023) Shen Zi No. 61398485_A01 China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 

# (III)  Key audit matters (continued) Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Impairment allowance of accounts receivable and contract assets 

The impairment allowance of accounts receivable, contract assets was recognised based on expected credit losses (ECLs). The management determines the ECLs based on reasonable and supportable information on past events, current conditions and forecasts of future economic conditions etc., which involves significant management’s judgements and estimates. The balances of the Company’s accounts receivable and contract assets are significant, and their recoverability has a significant impact on the financial statements. Therefore, we identified the impairment allowance of accounts receivable, contract assets as a key audit matter. The accounting policies and disclosures are included in Note III. 9 and III. 35 and Note V. 4, V. 9 to the financial statements. We obtained an understanding of, tested and evaluated the relevant controls over the impairment allowance test of accounts receivable and contract assets. For accounts receivable and contract assets which the management assesses the ECLs individually, w e c h e c k e d s u p p o r t i n g d o c u m e n t s t o a s s e s s the customers’ payment ability and the historical settlement of the contract assets on a sample basis. Combined with the customers’ financial position, credit status, project progress, historical payment record and forecasted future economic situation, we evaluated the rationality and sufficiency of the management’s provision of ECLs. For accounts receivable, contract assets which the management assesses the ECLs collectively by reference to the credit risk characteristics based on the historical payment, settlement and ageing profile, combined with the current condition and forward-looking adjustments, we evaluated the appropriateness o f c l a s s i f i c a t i o n b y t h e m a n a g e m e n t a n d t h e estimated ECLs rate for different categories. On asample basis, we assessed the accuracy of the credit risk classification and ageing profiles of accounts receivable and contract assets receivables, and recalculated the provision of ECLs. We inspected the subsequent payments of accounts receivable and the subsequent settlements of contract assets on a sample basis; Meanwhile, we evaluated the adequacy of disclosure of impairment of accounts receivable and contract assets. 135 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# AUDITOR’S REPORT (continued) 

Ernst & Young Hua Ming (2023) Shen Zi No. 61398485_A01 China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 

# (IV)  Other information 

The management of the Company is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the information included in the annual report, other than the financial statements and our auditor’s report thereon. Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon. In connection with our audit of the financial statements, our responsibility is to read the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based on the work we have performed, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard. 

# (V)  Responsibilities of the management and those charged with governance for the financial statements 

The management of the Company is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements in accordance with ASBEs, and for designing, implementing and maintaining such internal control as the management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. In preparing the financial statements, the management is responsible for assessing the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting, unless the management either intends to liquidate the Company or to cease operations or has no realistic alternative but to do so. Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Company’s financial reporting process. 

# (VI)  Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements 

Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with CSAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are generally considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements. As part of an audit in accordance with CSAs, we exercise professional judgement and maintain professional scepticism throughout the audit. We also: (1) Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. (2) Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances. (3) Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by the management. (4) Conclude on the appropriateness of the management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required to draw attention in our auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Company to cease to continue as a going concern. 136 AUDITOR’S REPORT 

# AUDITOR’S REPORT (continued) 

Ernst & Young Hua Ming (2023) Shen Zi No. 61398485_A01 China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited 

# (VI)  Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements (continued) 

(5) Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation. (6) Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the financial information of the entities or business activities within the Company to express an opinion on the financial statements. We are responsible for the direction, supervision and performance of the group audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit opinion. We communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that we identify during our audit. We also provide statements to the governance regarding compliance with ethical requirements relating to independence, communicating with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be considered to affect the independence, as well as the relevant precautions (if applicable). From the matters communicated with those charged with governance, we determine those matters that were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. We describe these matters in our auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter should not be communicated in our report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication. 

Ernst & Young Hua Ming LLP Chinese Certified Public Accountant: Zhou Ying Chinese Certified Public Accountant: Yang Shujuan Chinese Certified Public Accountant: Shen Yan China Beijing 17 April, 2023 137 Consolidated balance sheet 

# CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET 

For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated) 

ASSETS Note V 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Current assets 

Cash and bank balances 1 335,254,102 328,008,557 Financial assets held for trading 2 20,153 71,597 Notes receivable 3 6,390,924 17,745,605 Accounts receivable 4 210,431,620 180,598,582 Accounts receivables financing 5 4,658,182 3,773,078 Prepayments 6 37,223,161 49,413,205 Other receivables 7 73,584,067 60,981,694 Inventories 8 771,548,600 703,452,109 Contract assets 9 262,511,324 215,633,918 Current portion of non-current assets 10 49,254,042 44,020,921 Other current assets 11 123,911,880 111,409,836 

Total current assets 1,874,788,055 1,715,109,102 

Non-current assets 

Debt investments 12 22,545,039 20,945,330 Other debt investments 272,924 264,083 Long-term receivables 13 109,091,602 103,423,119 Long-term equity investments 14 111,102,151 100,854,386 Investments in other equity instruments 15 4,610,471 5,062,186 Other non-current financial assets 16 1,565,153 1,559,354 Investment properties 17 147,675,206 122,696,798 Fixed assets 18 49,844,411 43,480,748 Construction in progress 19 3,999,701 3,703,096 Right of use assets 20 6,934,438 5,893,549 Intangible assets 21 26,203,627 22,547,531 Goodwill 22 2,339,280 2,237,894 Long-term prepaid expenses 23 1,288,110 1,143,219 Deferred tax assets 24 20,838,269 18,905,143 Other non-current assets 25 269,804,869 227,496,324 

Total non-current assets 778,115,251 680,212,760 

TOTAL ASSETS 2,652,903,306 2,395,321,862 

The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements 138 Consolidated balance sheet 

# CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET (continued) 

For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated) 

LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY Note V 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Current liabilities 

Short-term borrowings 27 78,154,159 59,945,832 Notes payable 28 10,303,981 7,707,393 Accounts payable 29 585,744,273 517,203,003 Advances from customers 30 729,857 782,465 Contract liabilities 31 337,693,219 324,053,883 Employee benefits payable 32 10,329,539 8,556,196 Taxes and surcharges payable 33 65,864,695 69,083,927 Other payables 34 137,554,165 126,743,319 Current portion of non-current liabilities 35 118,183,943 81,455,928 Other current liabilities 36 84,744,727 80,027,043 

Total current liabilities 1,429,302,558 1,275,558,989 

Non-current liabilities 

Long-term borrowings 37 398,970,893 338,776,755 Bonds payable 38 103,797,195 99,460,750 Lease liabilities 39 4,840,508 3,692,806 Long-term payables 40 14,992,672 16,585,992 Long-term employee benefits payable 41 1,667,930 1,809,320 Provisions 42 4,317,563 4,424,680 Deferred income 43 416,592 475,514 Deferred tax liabilities 24 9,537,504 5,398,797 Other non-current liabilities 44 4,672,981 7,459,201 

Total non-current liabilities 543,213,838 478,083,815 

TOTAL LIABILITIES 1,972,516,396 1,753,642,804 

Shareholders’ equity 

Paid-in capital 45 41,934,433 41,948,168 Other equity instruments 46 10,000,000 10,000,000 

Including: Perpetual bonds 10,000,000 10,000,000 Capital reserve 47 11,808,020 12,702,276 Less: Treasury shares (1,880,038) (3,485,347) Other comprehensive income 48 (1,953,749) (613,252) Special reserve 49 305,176 123,239 General risk reserve 2,185,029 1,741,579 Surplus reserve 50 14,349,125 12,843,667 Retained earnings 51 307,574,145 270,367,451 

Total equity attributable to the shareholders 384,322,141 345,627,781 

Non-controlling interests 296,064,769 296,051,277 

TOTAL SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY 680,386,910 641,679,058 

TOTAL LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY 2,652,903,306 2,395,321,862 

The financial statements have been signed by: 

Chairman: Zheng Xuexuan Chief Finance Officer: Wang Yunlin Head of the Finance Department: Xie Song 

The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements 139 Consolidated income statement 

# CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT 

For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated) 

Note V 2022 2021 (restated) 

Revenue 52 2,055,052,070 1,892,706,307 Less: Cost of sales 52 1,840,182,381 1,677,967,644 Taxes and surcharges 53 11,755,217 14,787,677 Selling and distribution expenses 54 6,543,630 6,176,686 General and administrative expenses 55 33,996,779 34,641,264 Research and development expenses 56 49,753,236 40,019,753 Finance expenses 57 19,673,762 11,294,318 

Including: Interest expenses 17,895,421 14,023,172 Interest income 3,913,677 3,196,953 Add: Other income 58 1,108,821 772,879 Investment income 59 5,675,523 4,703,372 Including:  Share of profit of associates and 

joint ventures 4,459,665 4,924,548 Losses from derecognition of financial assets measured at amortised cost (2,153,251) (1,968,990) Losses arising from changes in fair value 60 (116,297) (236,593) Credit impairment losses 61 (8,591,904) (9,212,752) Asset impairment losses 62 (4,955,812) (3,420,470) Gains on disposals of assets 465,690 327,051 Operating profit 86,733,086 100,752,452 Add: Non-operating income 63 2,318,279 832,641 Less: Non-operating expenses 64 215,930 546,908 

Profit before income taxes 88,835,435 101,038,185 Less: Income tax expenses 66 19,623,672 23,166,793 

Profit 69,211,763 77,871,392 Including:  Net profit of the merged party under business 

combination under common control before 

the combination 

50,362 134,352 Classified by continuity of operations Profit from continuing operations 69,211,763 77,871,392 Classified by ownership of the equity Profit attributable to owners of the parent 50,950,301 51,548,576 Profit attributable to non-controlling interests 18,261,462 26,322,816 

The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements 140 Consolidated income statement 

# CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT (continued) 

For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated) 

Note V 2022 2021 (restated) 

Other comprehensive income, net of tax (2,828,791) 193,930 Attributable to owners of the parents 48 (1,243,480) 391,948 Other comprehensive income that will not be reclassified to profit or loss (119,689) (465,812) Remeasurement gains or losses of a defined benefit plan 6,956 1,689 Changes in fair value of investments in other equity instruments (126,645) (467,501) Other comprehensive income that may be reclassified to profit or loss (1,123,791) 857,760 Shares of other comprehensive income that will be reclassified subsequently into profit or loss by the investee under equity method 

(567,030) (33,066) Changes in fair value of other debt investments (34,170) (3,180) Exchange differences on translation of foreign currency financial statements (522,591) 894,006 Attributable to non-controlling interests 48 (1,585,311) (198,018) 

Total comprehensive income 66,382,972 78,065,322 Including: Attributable to owners of the parent 49,706,821 51,940,524 Attributable to non-controlling interests 16,676,151 26,124,798 

Earnings per share 67 Basic earnings per share (RMB /share) 1.23 1.25 Diluted earnings per share (RMB /share) 1.23 1.25 

The financial statements have been signed by: 

Chairman: Zheng Xuexuan Chief Finance Officer: Wang Yunlin Head of the Finance Department: Xie Song 

The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements 141 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 

> CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
> For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated)
> For the year ended 31 December 2022 Attributable to shareholders of the Company Non-controlling interests Total shareholders equity Paid-in capital Other equity instruments Perpetual bonds Capital reserve Less: Treasury shares Other comprehensive incomes Special reserves General risk reserves Surplus reserves Retained earnings  Subtotal
> I.  Balance at the end of prior year  41,948,168  10,000,000  11,260,535  (3,485,347)  (613,252)  123,239  1,741,579  12,843,667  270,081,501  343,900,090  295,802,219  639,702,309 Add: Business combination under common control  – – 1,441,741  – – – – – 285,950  1,727,691  249,058  1,976,749
> II.  Balance at the beginning of the year  41,948,168  10,000,000  12,702,276  (3,485,347)  (613,252)  123,239  1,741,579  12,843,667  270,367,451  345,627,781  296,051,277  641,679,058
> III.  Changes for the year
> 1.  Total comprehensive income  – – – – (1,243,480)  – – – 50,950,301  49,706,821  16,676,151  66,382,972 2.  Owners’ contributions and reductions in capital (1)  Capital contributions by shareholders  – – – – – – – – – – 2,669,691  2,669,691 (2)  Capital deductions by the holders of other equity instruments  – – – – – – – – – – (8,835,161)  (8,835,161) (3)  Amount of share payments included in shareholders’ equity  – – 648,771  – – – – – – 648,771  (52,880)  595,891 (4)  Effect on changes in shareholding of subsidiaries  – – 216,412  – – – – – (1,293,073)  (1,076,661)  59,621  (1,017,040) (5)  Buyback and cancellation of locked restricted shares  (13,735)  – (31,936)  45,671  – – – – – – – –(6)  Effects on unlocking restricted stocks  – – – 1,559,638  – – – – – 1,559,638  – 1,559,638 (7)  Acquisition of subsidiary  – – – – – – – – – – 2,518,483  2,518,483 (8)  Business combination under common control  – – (1,716,437)  – – – – – – (1,716,437)  – (1,716,437) (9)  Other  – – (11,066)  – – – – – 203,872  192,806  (402,170)  (209,364) 3.  Profit distribution (1)  Appropriation to surplus reserve  – – – – – – – 1,505,458  (1,505,458)  – – –(2)  Appropriation to general risk reserve  – – – – – – 443,450  – (443,450)  – – –(3)  Profit distribution to shareholders  – – – – – – – – (10,485,215)  (10,485,215)  (9,178,745)  (19,663,960) (4)  Profit distribution to holders of other equity instruments  – – – – – – – – (317,300)  (317,300)  (3,441,498)  (3,758,798) 4.  Transfer within equity (1)  Other comprehensive income transferring to retained earnings  – – – – (97,017)  – – – 97,017  – – –5.  Special reserve (1)  Extraction for the year ended 31 December 2022  – – – – – 42,910,562  – – – 42,910,562  174,710  43,085,272 (2)  Use for the year ended 31 December 2022  – – – – – (42,728,625)  – – – (42,728,625)  (174,710)  (42,903,335)
> IV. Balance at the end of the year  41,934,433  10,000,000  11,808,020  (1,880,038)  (1,953,749)  305,176  2,185,029  14,349,125  307,574,145  384,322,141  296,064,769  680,386,910
> The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements

142 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 

> CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY (continued)
> For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated)
> For the year ended 31 December 2021 (restated) Attributable to shareholders of the Company Non-controlling interests Total shareholders equity Paid-in capital Other equity instruments Perpetual bonds Capital reserve Less: Treasury shares Other comprehensive incomes Special reserves General risk reserves Surplus reserves Retained earnings  Subtotal
> I.  Balance at the end of prior year  41,965,072  10,000,000  10,265,751  (4,204,385)  (1,179,401)  135,769  1,383,765  10,101,632  231,953,228  300,421,431  276,673,670  577,095,101 Add:  Business combination under common control  – – 1,159,093  – – 504  – – 117,218  1,276,815  234,540  1,511,355 Other changes in accounting policies  – – – – – – – – (672,735)  (672,735)  – (672,735)
> II.  Balance at the beginning of the year  41,965,072  10,000,000  11,424,844  (4,204,385)  (1,179,401)  136,273  1,383,765  10,101,632  231,397,711  301,025,511  276,908,210  577,933,721
> III.  Changes for the year
> 1.  Total comprehensive income  – – – – 391,948  – – – 51,548,576  51,940,524  26,124,798  78,065,322 2.  Owners’ contributions and reductions in capital (1)  Capital contributions by shareholders  – – – – – – – – – – 8,289,357  8,289,357 (2)  Capital contributions by the holders of other equity instruments  – – – – – – – – – – 23,965,025  23,965,025 (3)  Capital deductions by the holders of other equity instruments  – – – – – – – – – – (26,349,347)  (26,349,347) (4)  Amount of share payments included in shareholders’ equity  – – 888,052  – – – – – – 888,052  62,911  950,963 (5)  Effect on changes in shareholding of subsidiaries  – – 3,865  – – – – – – 3,865  (230,028)  (226,163) (6)  Buyback and cancellation of locked restricted shares  (16,904)  – (40,495)  57,399  – – – – – – – –(7)  Effects on unlocking restricted stocks  – – – 661,639  – – – – – 661,639  – 661,639 (8)  Business combination under common control  – – 297,768  – – – – – – 297,768  27,890  325,658 (9)  Other  – – 128,242  – – – – – 15,786  144,028  (11,770)  132,258 3.  Profit distribution (1)  Appropriation to  surplus reserve  – – – – – – – 2,742,035  (2,742,035)  – – –(2)  Appropriation to general risk reserve  – – – – – – 357,814  – (357,814)  – – –(3)  Profit distribution to shareholders  – – – – – – – – (9,006,272)  (9,006,272)  (8,509,858)  (17,516,130) (4)  Profit distribution to holders of other equity instruments  – – – – – – – – (314,300)  (314,300)  (4,220,815)  (4,535,115) 4.  Transfer within equity (1)  Other comprehensive income transferring to retained earnings  – – – – 174,201  – – – (174,201)  – – –5.  Special reserve (1)  Extraction for the year ended 31 December 2021  – – – – – 31,638,108  – – – 31,638,108  125,114  31,763,222 (2)  Use for the year ended 31 December 2021  – – – – – (31,651,142)  – – – (31,651,142)  (130,210)  (31,781,352)
> IV.  Balance at the end of the year  41,948,168  10,000,000  12,702,276  (3,485,347)  (613,252)  123,239  1,741,579  12,843,667  270,367,451  345,627,781  296,051,277  641,679,058
> The financial statements have been signed by:
> Chairman: Zheng Xuexuan  Chief Finance Officer: Wang Yunlin  Head of the Finance Department: Xie Song
> The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements

143 Consolidated statement of cash flows 

# CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 

For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated) 

Note V 2022 2021 (restated) 

I.  Cash flows from operating activities 

Cash receipts from sales of goods and rendering of 

services 2,127,797,407 2,014,118,683 Refund of taxes and surcharges 11,502,252 6,601,339 Cash receipts relating to other operating activities 68 15,092,571 18,158,280 

Sub-total cash flows from operating activities 2,154,392,230 2,038,878,302 Cash payments for goods and services 1,934,974,478 1,825,010,898 Cash payments to and on behalf of employees 104,179,143 93,309,518 Payments of taxes and surcharges 79,807,903 74,298,310 Cash payments relating to other operating activities 68 31,601,779 32,269,938 

Sub-total cash flows used in operating activities 2,150,563,303 2,024,888,664 

Net cash flows from operating activities 69 3,828,927 13,989,638 

II.  Cash flows from investing activities 

Cash receipts from disposal of investments 3,780,457 5,839,580 Cash receipts from returns on investments 4,261,963 4,772,195 Net cash receipts from disposal of fixed assets, 

intangible assets and other long-term assets 2,482,917 2,796,912 Net cash receipts from disposal of subsidiaries and 

other business units 448,115 3,059,952 Net cash receipts from acquisition of subsidiaries and 

other business units 1,614,107 –Cash receipts relating to other investing activities 68 23,169,015 9,038,667 

Sub-total cash flows from investing activities 35,756,574 25,507,306 Cash payments to acquire fixed assets, intangible 

assets and other long-term assets 25,948,593 31,370,174 Cash payments for investments 12,447,586 12,224,498 Net cash payments to acquire subsidiaries and 

other business units – 343,490 Net cash payments to disposal of subsidiaries and 

other business units 359,508 –Cash payments relating to other investing activities 68 8,478,139 14,201,600 

Sub-total cash flows used in investing activities 47,233,826 58,139,762 

Net cash flows used in investing activities (11,477,252) (32,632,456) 

The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements 144 Consolidated statement of cash flows 

# CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS (continued) 

For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated) 

Note V 2022 2021 (restated) 

III.  Cash flows from financing activities 

Cash receipts from capital contributions 2,669,691 32,594,382 

Including:  Cash receipts from capital contributions 

from non-controlling shareholders of 

subsidiaries 

2,669,691 32,594,382 Cash receipts from borrowings 465,358,466 394,141,640 Cash receipts from issuance of bonds 34,495,000 26,701,560 Cash receipts relating to other financing activities 68 17,129,076 16,056,412 

Sub-total cash flows from financing activities 519,652,233 469,493,994 Repayments of borrowings 442,670,838 339,819,213 Cash payments for distribution of dividends or 

profit and interest expenses 46,699,147 44,973,190 

Including:  Dividends or profit paid to non-controlling 

shareholders of subsidiaries 12,040,723 12,320,925 Other cash payments relating to financing activities 68 13,761,620 31,731,504 

Sub-total cash flows used in financing activities 503,131,605 416,523,907 

Net cash flows from financing activities 16,520,628 52,970,087 

IV.  Effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 2,057,637 (706,108) 

V.  Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 10,929,940 33,621,161 Add:  Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning 

of the year 302,070,251 268,449,090 

VI.  Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 69 313,000,191 302,070,251 

The financial statements have been signed by: 

Chairman: Zheng Xuexuan Chief Finance Officer: Wang Yunlin Head of the Finance Department: Xie Song 

The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements 145 Company balance sheet 

# COMPANY BALANCE SHEET 

For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated) 

ASSETS Note XV 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Current assets 

Cash and bank balances 20,029,597 22,054,786 Including: Deposited in financial company 3,759,894 5,722,693 Notes receivable 23,376 164,340 Accounts receivable 1 24,745,860 25,073,418 Accounts receivable financing 65,550 12,000 Prepayments 7,408,728 6,381,174 Other receivables 2 24,582,358 19,783,629 Inventories 132,987 126,677 Contract assets 14,514,926 11,932,569 Current portion of non-current assets 1,818,947 1,373,488 Other current assets 4,688,909 4,007,670 

Total current assets 98,011,238 90,909,751 

Non-current assets 

Debt investments 9,170,625 5,916,668 Long-term receivables 653,489 22,537 Long-term equity investments 3 216,923,658 205,860,857 Investments in other equity instruments 620,008 1,353,916 Other non-current financial assets 282,427 305,804 Investment properties 487,913 512,764 Fixed assets 1,005,720 962,829 Construction in progress 98,486 188,792 Right of use assets 656,546 403,122 Intangible assets 116,030 115,395 Long-term prepaid expenses 50,000 35,867 Deferred tax assets 1,625,028 1,244,055 Other non-current assets 6,167,158 6,886,085 

Total non-current assets 237,857,088 223,808,691 

TOTAL ASSETS 335,868,326 314,718,442 

The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements 146 Company balance sheet 

# COMPANY BALANCE SHEET (continued) 

For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated) 

LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Current liabilities 

Short-term borrowings 20,917,854 30,947,377 Accounts payable 55,843,707 48,935,866 Contract liabilities 11,634,516 12,400,313 Employee benefit payable 414,569 359,814 Taxes payable 2,722,102 3,020,084 Other payables 46,957,924 45,350,607 Current portion of non-current liabilities 17,305,991 7,941,396 Other current liabilities 3,951,737 3,623,984 

Total current liabilities 159,748,400 152,579,441 

Non-current liabilities 

Long-term borrowings 19,610,000 2,861,000 Bonds payable – 9,994,870 Lease liabilities 558,645 286,967 Long-term payables 9,598,952 9,734,635 Long-term employee benefit payable 113,510 129,050 Provisions 15,965 26,621 Deferred income 2,354 2,452 

Total non-current liabilities 29,899,426 23,035,595 

TOTAL LIABILITIES 189,647,826 175,615,036 

Shareholders’ equity 

Paid-in capital 41,934,433 41,948,168 Other equity instruments 10,000,000 10,000,000 Including: Perpetual bonds 10,000,000 10,000,000 Capital reserve 30,538,929 29,824,590 Less: Treasury shares (1,880,038) (3,485,347) Other comprehensive income (228,173) (693,172) Special reserve 35,061 –Surplus reserve 14,349,125 12,843,667 Retained earnings 51,471,163 48,665,500 

TOTAL SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY 146,220,500 139,103,406 

TOTAL LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY 335,868,326 314,718,442 

The financial statements have been signed by: 

Chairman: Zheng Xuexuan Chief Finance Officer: Wang Yunlin Head of the Finance Department: Xie Song 

The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements 147 Company income statement 

# COMPANY INCOME STATEMENT 

For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated) 

Note XV 2022 2021 

Revenue 4 72,670,029 86,061,467 Less: Cost of sales 4 68,657,169 81,661,678 Taxes and surcharges 72,290 91,924 General and administrative expenses 1,799,195 1,706,239 Research and development expenses 283,107 224,910 Finance expenses 1,650,727 2,126,214 Including: Interest expenses 1,974,945 1,932,186 Interest income 224,500 202,669 Add: Other income 4,825 6,854 Investment income 5 17,087,774 29,971,620 Including: Sh are of income/(losses) of associates and joint ventures 277,925 (155,552) Derecognition Losses of financial assets measured at amortized cost (2,510) (1,073) (Losses)/Gains from changes in fair value (23,377) 5,804 Credit impairment losses (892,217) (1,604,500) Asset impairment losses (19,084) (12,500) Gains/(Losses) on disposals of assets 7,598 (133) 

Operating profit 16,373,060 28,617,647 Add: Non-operating income 5,056 5,853 Less: Non-operating expenses 233,140 122,660 

Profit before income taxes 16,144,976 28,500,840 Less: Income tax expenses 1,090,402 1,080,493 

Profit 15,054,574 27,420,347 Including: Profit from continuing operations 15,054,574 27,420,347 Other comprehensive income, net of tax 524,061 45,553 Other comprehensive income that will not be reclassified to profit or loss 21,251 108,082 Remeasurement gains or losses of a defined benefit plan 5,390 7,160 Changes in fair value of investments in other equity instruments 15,861 100,922 Other comprehensive income that may be reclassified to profit or loss 502,810 (62,529) Shares of other comprehensive losses that will be reclassified subsequently into profit or loss by the investee under equity method 

(173) (626) Exchange differences on translation of foreign currency financial statements 502,983 (61,903) 

Total comprehensive income 15,578,635 27,465,900 

The financial statements have been signed by: 

Chairman: Zheng Xuexuan Chief Finance Officer: Wang Yunlin Head of the Finance Department: Xie Song 

The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements 148 Company statement of changes in equity 

> COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
> For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated)
> For the year ended 31 December 2022 Paid-in capital Other equity instruments Perpetual bonds Capital reserves Less: Treasury shares Other comprehensive incomes Special reserves Surplus reserves Retained earnings Total shareholders’ equity
> I.  Balance at the beginning of the year  41,948,168  10,000,000  29,824,590  (3,485,347)  (693,172)  – 12,843,667  48,665,500  139,103,406
> II.  Changes for the year
> 1.  Total comprehensive income  – – – – 524,061  – – 15,054,574  15,578,635
> 2.  Owners’ contributions and reductions in capital (1)  Capital contributions by the holders of other equity instruments  – – 746,275  – – – – – 746,275
> (2)  Buyback and cancellation of locked restricted shares  (13,735)  – (31,936)  45,671  – – – – –
> (3)  Effect on unlocking restricted shares  – – – 1,559,638  – – – – 1,559,638
> 3.  Profit distribution (1)  Appropriation to surplus reserve  – – – – – – 1,505,458  (1,505,458)  –
> (2)  Profit distribution to shareholders  – – – – – – – (10,485,215)  (10,485,215)
> (3)  Profit distribution to holders of other equity instruments  – – – – – – – (317,300)  (317,300)
> 4.  Special reserve (1)  Extraction for the year ended 31 December 2022  – – – – – 1,292,275  – – 1,292,275
> (2)  Use for the year ended 31 December 2022  – – – – – (1,257,214)  – – (1,257,214)
> 5.  Transfer within equity (1)  Other comprehensive income transferring to retained earnings  – – – – (59,062)  – – 59,062  –
> III.  Balance at the end of the year  41,934,433  10,000,000  30,538,929  (1,880,038)  (228,173)  35,061  14,349,125  51,471,163  146,220,500
> The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements

149 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

> COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY (continued)
> For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated)
> For the year ended 31 December 2021 Paid-in capital Other equity instruments Perpetual bonds Capital reserves Less: Treasury shares Other comprehensive incomes Special reserves Surplus reserves Retained earnings Total shareholders’ equity
> I.  Balance at the end of prior year  41,965,072  10,000,000  29,016,685  (4,204,385)  (738,725)  25,106  10,101,632  33,307,760  119,473,145
> II.  Changes for the year
> 1.  Total comprehensive income  – – – – 45,553  – – 27,420,347  27,465,900 2.  Owners’ contributions and reduction in capital (1)  Capital contributions by the holders of other equity instruments  – – 836,446  – – – – – 836,446 (2)  Buyback and cancellation of locked restricted shares  (16,904)  – (40,495)  57,399  – – – – –(3)  Effect on unlocking restricted shares  – – – 661,639  – – – – 661,639 (4)  Other  – – 11,954  – – – – – 11,954 3.  Profit distribution (1)  Appropriation to surplus reserve  – – – – – – 2,742,035  (2,742,035)  –(2)  Profit distribution to shareholders  – – – – – – – (9,006,272)  (9,006,272) (3)  Profit distribution to holders of other equity instruments  – – – – – – – (314,300)  (314,300) 4.  Special reserve (1)  Extraction for the year ended 31 December 2021  – – – – – 614,982  – – 614,982 (2)  Use for the year ended 31 December 2021  – – – – – (640,088)  – – (640,088)
> III.  Balance at the end of the year  41,948,168  10,000,000  29,824,590  (3,485,347)  (693,172)  – 12,843,667  48,665,500  139,103,406
> The financial statements have been signed by:
> Chairman: Zheng Xuexuan  Chief Finance Officer: Wang Yunlin  Head of the Finance Department: Xie Song
> The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements

150 Company statement of cash flows 

# COMPANY STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 

For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated) 

2022 2021 

I.  Cash flows from operating activities: 

Cash receipts from sales of goods and rendering of services 73,343,601 84,813,566 Refund of taxes and surcharges 67,139 33,230 Cash receipts relating to other operating activities 3,868,247 7,219,308 

Sub-total cash flows from operating activities 77,278,987 92,066,104 Cash payments for goods and services 65,755,717 83,942,735 Cash payments to and on behalf of employees 2,665,370 2,249,935 Payments of taxes and surcharges 2,207,876 1,389,799 Cash payments relating to other operating activities 6,174,962 3,440,679 

Sub-total cash flows used in operating activities 76,803,925 91,023,148 

Net cash flows from operating activities 475,062 1,042,956 

II.  Cash flows from investing activities: 

Cash receipts from disposal of investments 1,239,480 506,606 Cash receipts from returns on investments 14,469,731 29,590,909 Net cash receipts from disposal of fixed assets, intangible assets and other long-term assets 10,795 12,595 Cash receipts relating to other investing activities 1,124,495 3,760,120 

Sub-total cash flows from investing activities 16,844,501 33,870,230 Cash payments to acquire fixed assets, intangible assets and other long-term assets 241,577 547,593 Cash payments for investments 8,078,862 21,674,396 Cash payments relating to other investing activities 4,347,331 603,694 

Sub-total cash flows used in investing activities 12,667,770 22,825,683 

Net cash flows from investing activities 4,176,731 11,044,547 

The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements 151 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# COMPANY STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS (continued) 

For the year ended 31 December 2022 (All amounts in RMB Thousand Yuan unless otherwise stated) 

2022 2021 

III.  Cash flows from financing activities: 

Cash receipts from borrowings 45,721,000 43,460,000 Cash receipts relating to other financing activities – 200,000 

Sub-total cash flows from financing activities 45,721,000 43,660,000 Repayments of borrowings 39,386,167 45,522,000 Cash payments for distribution of dividends or profit and interest expenses 12,719,189 11,027,366 Other cash payments relating to financing activities 507,187 1,092,512 

Sub-total cash flows used in financing activities 52,612,543 57,641,878 

Net cash flows used in financing activities (6,891,543) (13,981,878) 

IV.  Ef fect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 350,441 (70,063) 

V.  Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents (1,889,309) (1,964,438) Add: Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 21,698,935 23,663,373 

VI.  Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 19,809,626 21,698,935 

The financial statements have been signed by: 

Chairman: Zheng Xuexuan Chief Finance Officer: Wang Yunlin Head of the Finance Department: Xie Song 

The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements 152 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# Notes to the financial statements I.  General information 

China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited (“the Company”) was established as ajoint stock limited company under the People’s Republic of China (“PRC”) laws and regulations in accordance with the approval of Guo Zi Gai Ge [2007] No. 1495 issued by State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council (“SASAC”) on 6 December 2007. The founder-members of the Company are China State Construction Engineering Corporation (“CSCEC”), China National Petroleum Corporation, Baosteel Group Corporation and Sinochem Corporation (the latter three are called by “other founder-members”). In November 2017, after approval by SASAC, C S C E C w a s t r a n s f o r m e d f r o m a w h o l l y people-owned enterprise to a wholly state-owned company. After the transformation, the Company’s name was changed to China State Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. (“CSCEC”), and its contributor was SASAC who represents the State Council. The Company was established on 10 December 2007 in Beijing, PRC, and its head quarter is situated in Beijing, PRC. The parent company and the ultimate parent company of the Company is CSCEC. The Company was listed on Shanghai Stock Exchange (“A shares”) for trading in July 2009. As at 31 December 2022, total share capital of the Company was approximately RMB41.9 billion at the par value of RMB1.00 per share. As at 31 December 2022, CSCEC held approximately 23,630,700,000 shares, representing 56.35% of the total share capital. The approved scope of business of the Company a n d i t s s u b s i d i a r i e s ( t o g e t h e r “ t h e G r o u p ” ) includes survey, design, construction, installation, consultation, development, decoration service, manufacturing, wholesale, retail and imports and exports. The core operations include: offering a full range of construction-related services to foreign and domestic civil engineering and building construction such as construction, installation and consultation, investment and construction of infrastructure projects, foreign and domestic real estate investment and development, architecture and infrastructure construction survey and design, decoration engineering, landscape engineering design and construction, industrial investment, contracting for foreign projects in PRC, import and export, production and distribution of construction materials and other non-metal mineral products, construction-related metalwork and tools and construction engineering and drilling equipment, and financial business such as lending and borrowing within the Group. These financial statements are authorised for issue by the Company’s Board of Directors on 17 April 2023. Please refer to Note VI for details of significant subsidiaries included in the consolidation scope in the current year. The Group does not have any significant subsidiaries newly included in the consolidation scope or excluded from the consolidation scope in the current year. 

# II.  Basis of preparation of the financial statements 

These financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises – Basic Standard and specific accounting standards, implementation guidance, interpretations, other relevant regulations issued subsequently by the Ministry of Finance (the “MOF”) (hereinafter collectively referred to as “ASBEs”). The financial statements have been presented on a going concern basis. The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention, except for certain financial instruments. If the assets are impaired, corresponding provisions for impairment shall be made according to relevant requirements. 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and estimates 

S p e c i f i c a c c o u n t i n g p o l i c i e s a n d e s t i m a t e s were decided by the Group according to the characteristics of its production and operation, m a i n l y i n c l u d i n g m e a s u r e m e n t o f e x p e c t e d credit losses on receivables and contract assets, valuation method of inventories, recognition and measurement of revenue. 

1.  Statement of compliance with ASBEs 

The consolidated and company financial statements present fairly and fully the financial position of the Group and the Company as at 31 December 2022, and the financial performance and the cash flows for the year 2022 in accordance with ASBEs. 

2.  Accounting period 

The accounting year of the Group is from 1 January to 31 December of each calendar year. 

3.  Functional currency 

The Group’s reporting and presentation currency is Renminbi (“RMB”). Unless otherwise specified, all are expressed in thousands of RMB. Each subsidiary, joint venture or associate of the Group determines its own functional currency based on the primary economic environment in which it operates. In preparation of the financial statements, their functional currencies are translated into RMB. 153 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and estimates (continued) 4.  Business combinations 

Business combinations are classified into business combinations involving entities under common control and business combinations not involving entities under common control. 

Business combinations involving entities under common control 

A business combination involving entities under common control is a business combination in which all of the combining entities are ultimately controlled by the same party or parties both before and after the combination, and that control is not transitory. The assets and liabilities (including goodwill arising from the ultimate controlling party’s acquisition of the entity being absorbed) that are obtained by the absorbing entity in a business combination involving entities under common control shall be measured on the basis of their carrying amounts in the financial statements of the ultimate controlling party at the combination date. The difference between the carrying amount of the net assets obtained and the carrying amount of the consideration paid for the combination (or the aggregate face value of shares issued as consideration) shall be adjusted to share premium under capital reserve. If the capital premium is not sufficient to absorb the difference, any excess shall be adjusted against retained earnings. 

Business combinations not involving entities under common control 

A business combination not involving entities under common control is a business combination in which all of the combining entities are not ultimately controlled by the same party or parties both before and after the combination. T h e a c q u i r e r s h a l l m e a s u r e t h e a c q u i r e e ’ s identifiable assets, liabilities and contingent liabilities acquired in the business combination at their fair values on the acquisition date. Goodwill is initially recognised and measured at cost, being the excess of the aggregate of the fair value of the consideration transferred (or the fair value of the equity securities issued) and any fair value of the Group’s previously held equity interest in the acquiree over the Group’s interest in the fair value of the acquiree’s net identifiable assets. After initial recognition, goodwill is measured at cost less any accumulated impairment losses. Where the aggregate of the fair value of the consideration transferred (or the fair value of the equity securities issued) and any fair value of the Group’s previously held equity interest in the acquiree is lower than the Group’s interest in the fair value of the acquiree’s net identifiable assets, the Group reassesses the measurement of the fair value of the acquiree’s identifiable assets, liabilities and contingent liabilities and the fair value of the consideration transferred (or the fair value of the equity securities issued), together with the fair value of the Group’s previously held equity interest in the acquiree. If after that reassessment, the aggregate of the fair value of the consideration transferred (or the fair value of the equity securities issued) and the Group’s previously held equity interest in the acquiree is still lower than the Group’s interest in the fair value of the acquiree’s net identifiable assets, the Group recognises the remaining difference in profit or loss. Where a business combination not involving enterprises under common control is achieved through multiple transactions in stages, the long-term equity investments held in the acquiree before the acquisition date are remeasured at fair value at the acquisition date, with any difference between the fair value and the carrying amount included in investment income for the current period. Where the long-term equity investments held in the acquiree before the acquisition date relates to other comprehensive income measured under the equity method, the accounting treatment shall be conducted on the same basis as the direct disposal of related assets or liabilities by the invested entity, other changes in shareholders’ equity except net profit or loss, other comprehensive income and profit distribution shall be transferred to income for the period in which the acquisition date falls. Where the equity instrument investments are held in the acquiree before the acquisition date, accumulated changes in the fair value of other comprehensive income of those equity instrument investment before the acquisition date are transferred to retained earnings. 

5.  Consolidated financial statements 

The scope of the consolidated financial statements, which include the financial statements of the Company and all of its subsidiaries, is determined on the basis of control. Subsidiary refers to the entity controlled by the company (including the divisible parts of the enterprises, the invested units, and the structured entities controlled by the company, etc). In the preparation of the consolidated financial statements, where the accounting policies of asubsidiary are different from those of the Company have made adjustments to the financial statements of the subsidiary based on the Company’s own accounting policies, Where the accounting period of a subsidiary is different from that of the Company, the Company has adjusted the financial statements of the subsidiary based on the Company’s own accounting period. All intra-group assets, liabilities, equity, income, expenses and cash flows relating to transactions between members of the Group are eliminated in full on consolidation. Where the loss for the current period attributable to non-controlling interests of a subsidiary exceeds the non-controlling interests of the opening balance of equity of the subsidiary, the excess shall still be allocated against the non-controlling interests. F o r s u b s i d i a r i e s a c q u i r e d t h r o u g h b u s i n e s s combinations not involving entities under common control, the financial performance and cash flows of the acquiree shall be consolidated from the date on which the Group obtains control, and continue to be consolidated until the date such control ceases. While preparing the consolidated financial statements, the Group shall adjust the subsidiary’s financial statements, on the basis of the fair values of the identifiable assets, liabilities and contingent liabilities recognised on the acquisition date. 154 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and estimates (continued) 5.  C o n s o l i d a t e d f i n a n c i a l s t a t e m e n t s (continued) 

F o r s u b s i d i a r i e s a c q u i r e d t h r o u g h b u s i n e s s combinations involving entities under common control, the financial performance and cash flows of the entity being absorbed shall be consolidated from the beginning of the period in which the combination occurs. While preparing the comparative financial statements, adjustments are made to related items in the financial statements for the prior period as if the reporting entity after the combination has been in existence since the date the ultimate controlling party first obtained the control. The Group reassesses whether or not it controls an investee if any changes in facts and circumstances indicate that there are changes to one or more of the three elements of control. A change in the non-controlling interests, without a loss of control, is accounted for as an equity transaction. If the accounting treatment of a transaction is inconsistent in the financial statements at the Group level and at the Company or its subsidiary level, adjustment will be made from the perspective of the Group. 

6.  Classification of joint arrangement and joint operation 

A joint arrangement is classified as either a joint operation or a joint venture. A joint operation is a joint arrangement whereby the joint operators have rights to the assets, and obligations for the liabilities, relating to the arrangement. A joint venture is a joint arrangement whereby the joint operators have rights to the net assets of the arrangement. A joint operator recognises the following items in relation to its interest in a joint operation: its solely-held assets and its share of any assets held jointly; its solely-assumed liabilities and its share of any liabilities incurred jointly; its revenue from the sale of its share of the output arising from the joint operation; its share of the revenue from the sale of the output by the joint operation; its solely-incurred expenses and its share of any expenses incurred jointly. 

7.  Cash and cash equivalents 

Cash comprises the Group’s cash on hand and bank deposits that can be readily withdrawn on demand. Cash equivalents are short-term, highly liquid investments that are readily convertible into known amounts of cash, and are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value. 

8.  Foreign currency transactions and foreign currency translation 

The Group translates foreign currency transactions into its functional currency. Foreign currency transactions are initially recorded, on initial recognition in the functional currency using the spot exchange rates prevailing at the dates of transactions in which the transactions occur. Monetary items denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the spot exchange rates ruling at the balance sheet date. Differences arising on settlement or translation of monetary items are recognised in profit or loss, with the exception of those relating to foreign currency borrowings specifically for the construction and acquisition of qualifying assets, which are capitalised in accordance with the guidance for capitalisation of borrowing costs. Non-monetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates at the dates of the initial transactions, and the amount denominated in the functional currency is not changed. Non-monetary items measured at fair value in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates at the date when the fair value was measured. The resulting exchange differences are recognised in profit or loss or other comprehensive income depending on the nature of the non-monetary items. For foreign operations, the Group translates their functional currency amounts into RMB when preparing the financial statements as follows: as at the balance sheet date, the assets and liabilities are translated using the spot exchange rates at the balance sheet date, and equity items other than “unappropriated profit” are translated at the spot exchange rates at the dates of transactions; revenue and expense items in profit or loss are translated using the average exchange rates (unless this average rate is not a reasonable approximation of the cumulative effect of the rates prevailing on the transaction dates, in which case income and expenses are translated using the spot exchange rates prevailing on the dates of the transactions). The resulting exchange differences are recognised in other comprehensive income. On disposal of a foreign operation, the component of other comprehensive income relating to that particular foreign operation is recognised in profit or loss. If the disposal only involves a portion of a particular foreign operation, the component of other comprehensive income relating to that particular foreign operation is recognised in profit or loss on a pro-rata basis. Foreign currency cash flows and the cash flows of foreign subsidiaries are translated using the average exchange rates (unless this average rate is not a reasonable approximation of the cumulative effect of the rates prevailing on the transaction dates, in which case cash flows are translated using the spot exchange rates prevailing on the dates of cash flows). The effect of exchange rate changes on cash is separately presented as an adjustment item in the statement of cash flows. 155 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and estimates (continued) 9.  Financial instruments 

A financial instrument is any contract that gives rise to a financial asset of one entity and a financial liability or equity instrument of another entity. 

Recognition and derecognition 

The Group recognises a financial asset or afinancial liability when it becomes a party to the contractual provisions of a financial instrument. A financial asset (or, where applicable, a part of a financial asset or part of a group of similar financial assets) is primarily derecognised (i.e., removed from the Group’s consolidated balance sheet) when: (1)  the rights to receive cash flows from the financial asset have expired; or (2)  the Group has transferred its rights to receive cash flows from the financial asset, or has assumed an obligation to pay the received cash flows in full without material delay to a third party under a “pass-through” arrangement; and either (a) has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of the financial asset, or (b) has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset, but has transferred control of the financial asset. A financial liability is derecognised when the o b l i g a t i o n u n d e r t h e l i a b i l i t y i s d i s c h a r g e d , cancelled, or expired. When an existing financial liability is replaced by another from the same lender on substantially different terms, or the terms of an existing liability are substantially modified, such an exchange or modification is treated as a derecognition of the original liability and arecognition of a new liability, and the difference between the respective carrying amounts is recognised in profit or loss. Regular way purchases and sales of financial assets are recognised and derecognised using trade date accounting. Regular way purchases and sales are purchases or sales of financial assets that require delivery within the period generally established by regulation or convention in the marketplace. The trade date is the date that the Group committed to purchase or sell a financial asset. 

Classification and measurement of financial assets 

The classification of financial assets at initial recognition depends on the financial asset’s contractual cash flow characteristics and the Group’s business model for managing them: financial assets at amortised cost, financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income and financial assets at fair value through profit or loss. All affected related financial assets will be reclassified only if the Group changes its business model for managing financial assets. Financial assets are measured at fair value on initial recognition, but accounts receivable or notes receivable arising from the sale of goods or rendering of services that do not contain significant financing components or for which the Group has applied the practical expedient of not adjusting the effect of a significant financing component due within one year, are initially measured at the transaction price. For financial assets at fair value through profit or loss, relevant transaction costs are directly recognised in profit or loss, and transaction costs relating to other financial assets are included in the initial recognition amounts. The subsequent measurement of financial assets depends on their classification as follows: 

Debt investments measured at amortised cost 

The Group measures financial assets at amortised cost if both of the following conditions are met: the financial asset is held within a business model with the objective to hold financial assets in order to collect contractual cash flows; the contractual terms of the financial asset give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding. Financial assets at amortised cost are subsequently measured using the effective interest method and are subject to impairment. Gains and losses are recognised in profit or loss when the asset is derecognised, modified or impaired. 156 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and estimates (continued) 9.  Financial instruments (continued) 

Classification and measurement of financial assets (continued) 

Debt investments at fair value through other comprehensive income 

The Group measures debt investment held at fair value through other comprehensive income if both of the following conditions are met: the financial asset is held within a business model with the objective of both holding to collect contractual cash flows and selling; the contractual terms of the financial asset give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding. Interest income is recognised using the effective interest method. The interest income, impairment losses and foreign exchange revaluation are recognised in profit or loss. The remaining fair value changes are recognised in other comprehensive income. Upon derecognition, the cumulative fair value change recognised in other comprehensive income is recycled to profit or loss. 

Equity investments at fair value through other comprehensive income 

The Group can elect to classify irrevocably its equity investments which are not held for trading as equity investments designated at fair value through other comprehensive income. Only the relevant dividend income (excluding the dividend income explicitly recovered as part of the investment cost) is recognised in profit or loss. Subsequent changes in the fair value are included in other c o m p r e h e n s i v e i n c o m e , a n d n o i m p a i r m e n t allowance is made. When the financial asset is derecognised, the accumulated gains or losses previously included in other comprehensive income are transferred from other comprehensive income to retained earnings. 

Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 

The financial assets other than the above financial assets measured at amortised cost and financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income are classified as financial assets at fair value through profit or loss. Such financial assets are subsequently measured at fair value with net changes in fair value recognised in profit or loss. 

Classification and measurement of financial liabilities 

Except for the financial guarantee contracts issued and the financial liabilities caused by financial assets that do not qualify for derecognition or by continuing involvement in transferred assets, the Group’s financial liabilities are, on initial recognition, classified into financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss, or financial liabilities at amortised cost. For financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss, relevant transaction costs are directly recognised in profit or loss, and transaction costs relating to financial liabilities at amortised cost are included in the initial recognition amounts. The subsequent measurement of financial liabilities depends on their classification as follows: 

Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss 

Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss consist of financial liabilities held for trading (including derivative instruments that are financial liabilities) and those designated upon initial recognition as at fair value through profit or loss. Financial liabilities held for trading (including derivative instruments that are financial liabilities) are subsequently measured at fair value. All changes in fair value of such financial liabilities are recognised in profit or loss. Financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss are subsequently measured at fair value and gains or losses are recognised in profit or loss, except for the gains or losses arising from the Group’s own credit risk which are presented in other comprehensive income. If gains or losses arising from the Group’s own credit risk which are presented in other comprehensive income will lead to or expand accounting mismatch in profit or loss, the Group will include all the changes in fair value (including the amount affected by changes in the Group’s own credit risk) of such financial liabilities in profit or loss. 

Financial liabilities at amortised cost 

For such financial liabilities, the effective interest rate method is adopted and the subsequent measurement is carried out according to the amortized cost. 

Impairment of financial assets 

Based on the expected credit losses (“ECLs”), the Group recognises an allowance for ECLs for the financial assets measured at amortised cost, debt investments at fair value through other comprehensive income, lease receivables, contract assets, and financial guarantee contracts. 157 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and estimates (continued) 9.  Financial instruments (continued) 

Impairment of financial assets (continued) 

For accounts receivable and contract assets excluding significant financing components, the Group applies the simplified approach to recognise a loss allowance based on lifetime ECLs. For accounts receivable and contract assets including significant financing components and lease receivable, the Group applies the simplified approach to recognise a loss allowance based on lifetime ECLs. Except for financial assets which apply the simplified approach as mentioned above, the G r o u p a s s e s s e s w h e t h e r t h e c r e d i t r i s k s o f other financial assets and financial guarantee contracts has increased significantly since initial recognition at each end of the reporting period. If the credit risk has not increased significantly since initial recognition (stage 1), the loss allowance is measured at an amount equal to 12-month ECLs by the Group and the interest income is calculated according to the carrying amount and the effective interest rate; if the credit risk has increased significantly since initial recognition but are not credit-impaired (stage 2), the loss allowance is measured at an amount equal to lifetime ECLs by the Group and the interest income is calculated according to the carrying amount and the effective interest rate; if such financial assets are credit-impaired after initial recognition (stage 3), the loss allowance is measured at an amount equal to lifetime ECLs by the Group and the interest income is calculated according to the amortised cost and the effective interest rate. If the credit risk of financial instruments is low at the end of the reporting period, the Group assumes that the credit risk has not increased significantly since initial recognition. The Group assesses the expected credit loss of financial instruments based on individual and portfolio. Taking into account the credit risk characteristics of different customers, the Group evaluates the expected credit loss of accounts receivable and contract assets on the basis of ageing portfolio. In case the ECLs of individually assessed accounts receivable and contract assets cannot be evaluated with reasonable cost, the Group divides accounts r e c e i v a b l e a n d c o n t r a c t a s s e t s i n t o c e r t a i n groupings based on credit risk characteristics, and calculates the ECLs of the groupings of accounts receivable. The groupings of accounts receivable are as follows: 

Grouping 1 Due from government, authorities and central state-owned enterprises Grouping 2 Due from overseas and enterprises Grouping 3 Due from other customers 

The Group, with consideration to historical credit loss experience, current conditions and forecasts of future economic conditions, prepares the cross-reference between the ageing of accounts receivable and the lifetime ECLs rates, and calculates the ECLs of the groupings of contract assets. The groupings of contract assets are as follows: 

Grouping 1 Engineering projects Grouping 2 Real estate projects Grouping 3 Unmatured warranties Grouping 4 Investments not confirmed by projects owner Grouping 5 Primary land development projects Grouping 6 Other contract assets 

Based on the exposure at default and the lifetime ECLs rate, the Group calculates the ECLs of contract assets that are classified into groupings with consideration to historical credit losses experience, current conditions and forecasts of future economic conditions. For long-term receivables arising from sales of goods or rendering of services in the ordinary course of the activities, such as receivables for BT projects, receivables for primary land development, advances for demolition, and receivables for other infrastructure projects, the Group calculates the ECLs through default risk exposure and the lifetime ECLs rate, on the basis of historical credit loss experience, the current conditions and forecasts of future economic conditions. Based on the exposure at default and the 12-month/lifetime ECLs rate, the Group calculates the ECLs of other long-term receivables with consideration of historical credit loss experience, the current conditions and forecasts of future economic conditions. In the case where the ECLs of other receivables i n d i v i d u a l l y a s s e s s e d c a n n o t b e e v a l u a t e d with reasonable cost, the Group divides other receivables into certain groupings based on credit risk characteristics, and calculates the ECLs for the groupings. The groupings of other receivables are as follows: 

Grouping 1 Guarantees, deposits and reserves receivables Grouping 2 Advances receivable Grouping 3 Other receivables 

The Group, on the basis of the exposure at default and the 12-month/lifetime ECLs rate, calculates the ECLs of other receivables that are classified into groupings with consideration to historical credit loss experience, the current conditions and forecasts of future economic conditions. The Group’s judgement criteria for a significant i n c r e a s e o f c r e d i t r i s k , t h e d e f i n i t i o n o f credit-impaired assets are disclosed in Note VIII. 3. 158 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and estimates (continued) 9.  Financial instruments (continued) 

Impairment of financial assets (continued) 

The factors reflected in the Group ’s method of measuring the expected credit losses of financial instruments include: the unbiased probability weighted average amount determined by evaluating a series of possible results, the time value of money, and the reasonable and reliable information about past events, current conditions and future economic conditions that can be obtained without unnecessary extra costs or efforts on the balance sheet date. When the Group no longer reasonably expects to be able to recover all or part of the contractual cash flows of a financial asset, the Group directly writes down the carrying amount of the financial asset. 

Offsetting of financial instruments 

Financial assets and financial liabilities are offset and the net amount is reported in the balance sheet if there is a currently enforceable legal right to offset the recognised amounts; and there is an intention to settle on a net basis, or to realise the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously. 

Financial guarantee contracts 

Financial guarantee contracts are those contracts that require a payment to be made by the issuer to reimburse the holder for a loss it incurs because the specified debtor fails to make a payment when due in accordance with the terms of a debt instrument. Financial guarantee contracts are measured, on initial recognition, at fair value. For financial guarantee contracts that are not designated as financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss, they are, after initial recognition, subsequently measured at the higher of: (i) the amount of provisions for ECLs at the balance sheet date, and (ii) the amount initially recognised less the cumulative amortisation recognised in accordance with the guidance for revenue recognition. 

Transfer of financial assets 

A financial asset is derecognised when the Group has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset to the transferee. A financial asset is not derecognised when the Group retains substantially all the risks and rewards of the financial asset. When the Group has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards of the financial asset, it either (i) derecognises the financial asset and recognises the assets and liabilities created in the transfer when it has not retained control of the asset; or (ii) continues to recognise the transferred asset to the extent of the Group’s continuing involvement, in which case, the Group also recognises an associated liability. Continuing involvement that takes the form of aguarantee over the transferred financial asset is measured at the lower of the original carrying amount of the financial asset and the guarantee amount. The guarantee amount is the maximum amount of consideration that the Group could be required to repay. 

10.  Inventories 

The inventories include inventories of raw materials, w o r k i n p r o g r e s s , f i n i s h e d g o o d s , t u r n o v e r materials, properties under development and completed properties for sale,etc. Inventories are initially carried at cost. Cost of inventories comprises all costs of purchase, laid down cost, costs of conversion and other costs. Cost is determined using the first-in first-out or weighted average method when raw materials, turnover materials, work in progress and finished goods are delivered. The cost of finished goods and work in progress comprises raw materials, direct labour and systematically allocated production overhead based on the normal production capacity. Properties under development and completed properties for sale mainly include costs for acquiring the land use rights, expenditures of basic facilities, expenditures of construction and installation work, borrowing costs incurred before the completion of development and other related e x p e n s e s d u r i n g t h e d e v e l o p m e n t p r o c e s s . Properties under development will be carried forward to the completed properties for sale according to the actual cost after the completion of the project, completed properties for sale are measured at actual cost. Turnover materials are amortised based upon numbers of usage. The Group adopts the perpetual inventory system. At the end of the reporting period, inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value. The inventories are written down below cost to net realisable value and the write-down is recognised in profit or loss if the cost is higher than the net realisable value.Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less the estimated costs of completion and the estimated costs necessary to make the sale and relevant taxes. For inventories with large quantity and low values, provision for decline in value is made based on categories of inventories, and other inventories are written down item by category. Items of inventories relating to the same product line that have the same or similar end uses or purposes, are produced and marketed in the same geographical area, and cannot be practicably evaluated separately from other items in that product line, are grouped and written down on an aggregate basis. 159 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 11.  Long-term equity investments 

Long-term equity investments include equity investments in subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates. A long-term equity investment is initially measured at its initial investment cost on acquisition. For a long-term equity investment acquired through a business combination involving entities under common control, the initial investment cost of the long-term equity investment is the acquirer’s share of the carrying value of shareholder’s equity of the party being absorbed at the combination date. For the difference between the initial investment cost and the book value of the merger consideration, the capital reserve shall be adjusted (if it is not enough to offset, the retained earnings shall be offset); for other comprehensive income before the merger date, the accounting treatment shall be conducted on the same basis as the direct disposal of relevant assets or liabilities by the investee,.The shareholder’s equity recognised due to changes in other shareholders’ equity of the investee other than net profit and loss, other comprehensive income and profit distribution shall be transferred to the current profit and loss when the investment is disposed of; among them, the long-term equity investment after disposal shall be carried forward proportionally, and that converted into financial instruments after disposal shall be carried forward in full. For a long-term equity investment through a business combination not involving entities under common control, the initial investment cost of the long-term equity investment is the cost of combination (for a business combination not involving entities under common control achieved in stages that involves multiple exchange transactions, the initial investment cost is carried at the aggregate of the carrying amount of the acquirer’s previously held equity interest in the acquiree and the new investment cost incurred on the acquisition date), the cost of combination is the aggregate of the fair values, at the acquisition date, of the assets given, liabilities incurred or assumed, and equity securities issued by the acquirer; For other comprehensive income held before the acquisition date and recognised by the equity method, the accounting treatment shall be carried out on the same basis as the direct disposal, relevant assets or liabilities by the investee, and the shareholder’s equity recognised due to changes in other shareholders’ equity of the investee other than net profit and loss, other comprehensive income and profit distribution, When the investment is disposed, it is transferred to the current profit and loss; among them, the long-term equity investment after disposal is carried forward proportionally, and the financial instrument converted after disposal is carried forward in full; the accumulated fair value change of the equity investment held before the purchase date as a financial instrument included in other comprehensive income is transferred to retained earnings when accounting by cost method. For a long-term equity investment acquired otherwise than through a business combination, the initial investment cost is determined as follows: for a long-term equity investment acquired by cash, the initial investment cost is the actual purchase price paid and direct costs, taxes and other necessary expenditures directly attributable to the acquisition of the long-term equity investment; for a long-term equity investment acquired by the issue of equity securities, the initial investment cost is the fair value of the securities issued; for a long-term equity investment acquired through exchange of non-monetary assets, the initial investment cost is determined in accordance with 

Accounting Standard for Business Enterprises No. 7 – Exchange of Non-monetary Assets ; for a long-term equity investment acquired through debt restructuring, the initial investment cost is determined in accordance with 

Accounting Standard for Business Enterprises No. 12 – Debt Restructuring .For a long-term equity investment where the Company can exercise control over the investee, the long-term investment is accounted for using the cost method in the Company’s individual financial statements. Control is achieved when the Group is exposed, or has rights, to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee. Under the cost method, the long-term equity investment is measured at its initial investment cost. When additional investment is made or the investment is recouped, the cost of long-term equity investment is adjusted accordingly. Cash dividends or profit distributions declared by the investee are recognised as investment income in profit or loss. The equity method is adopted when the Group has joint control, or exercises significant influence over the investee. Joint control is the contractually agreed sharing of control of an arrangement, which exists only when decisions about the relevant activities require the unanimous consent of the parties sharing control. Significant influence is the power to participate in the financial and operating policy decisions of the investee, but is not control or joint control with other parties over those policies. U n d e r t h e e q u i t y m e t h o d , w h e r e t h e i n i t i a l investment cost of a long-term equity investment exceeds the Group’s interest in the fair value of the investee’s identifiable net assets at the acquisition date, no adjustment is made to the initial investment cost. Where the initial investment cost is less than the Group’s interest in the fair values of the investee’s identifiable net assets at the acquisition date, the difference is charged to profit or loss, and the cost of the long-term equity investment is adjusted accordingly. 160 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 11.  Long-term equity investments (continued) 

Under the equity method, after it has acquired a long-term equity investment, the Group recognises its share of the investee’s profit or loss, as well as its share of the investee’s other comprehensive income, as investment income or loss and other comprehensive income, and adjusts the carrying amount of the investment accordingly. The Group recognises its share of the investee’s profit or loss after making appropriate adjustments to the investee’s profit or loss based on the fair value of the investee’s identifiable assets at the acquisition date, using the Group’s accounting policies and periods. Unrealised profits and losses from transactions with its joint ventures and associates a r e e l i m i n a t e d t o t h e e x t e n t o f t h e G r o u p ’ s investments in the associates or joint ventures (except for assets that constitute a business) (However, any loss arising from such transactions which are attributable to an impairment loss shall be recognised at its entirety). The carrying amount of the investment is reduced based on the Group’s share of any profit distributions or cash dividends declared by the investee. The Group’s share of net losses of the investee is recognised to the extent that the carrying amount of the investment together with any long-term interests that in substance form part of its net investment in the investee is reduced to zero, except that the Group has the obligations to assume further losses. The Group’s share of the investee’s equity changes, other than those arising from the investee’s profit or loss, other comprehensive income or profit distribution, is recognised in the Group’s equity, and the carrying amount of the long-term equity investment is adjusted accordingly. Upon disposal of a long-term equity investment, the difference between the proceeds actually received and the carrying amount is recognised in profit or loss. For a long-term equity investment accounted for using the equity method, when the Group discontinues using the equity method due to disposal, all amounts previously recognised in other comprehensive income are accounted for on the same basis as would have been required if the investee had directly disposed of the related assets or liabilities. Equity previously recognised resulting from the investee’s equity changes other than profit or loss, other comprehensive income and profit distribution is reclassified to profit or loss in its entirety. When the Group continues to use the equity method, the amounts previously recognised in other comprehensive income are accounted for on the same basis as would have been required if the investee had directly disposed of the related assets or liabilities and reclassified to profit or loss on a pro-rata basis. Equity previously recognised resulting from the investee’s equity changes other than profit or loss, other comprehensive income and profit distribution is reclassified to profit or loss on a pro-rata basis. 

12.  Investment properties 

Investment properties are properties held to earn rental income and/or for capital appreciation. Investment properties include land use rights leased out, land use rights held for transfer upon capital appreciation, and buildings leased out. An investment property is measured initially at cost. If the economic benefits relating to an investment property will probably flow in and the cost can be reliably measured, subsequent costs incurred for the property are included in the cost of the investment property. Otherwise, subsequent costs are recognised in profit or loss as incurred. The Group uses the cost model for the subsequent measurement of its investment properties. Buildings and land use rights are depreciated or amortised according to their service life and estimated net residual values rate. 

13.  Fixed assets 

A fixed asset is recognised only when the economic benefits associated with the asset will probably flow into the Group and the cost of the asset can be measured reliably. Subsequent expenditures incurred for a fixed asset that meets the recognition criteria shall be included in the cost of the fixed asset, and the carrying amount of the component of the fixed asset that is replaced shall be derecognised. Otherwise, such expenditures are recognised in profit or loss as incurred. Fixed assets are initially measured at cost. The cost of a purchased fixed asset comprises the purchase price, relevant taxes and any directly attributable expenditure for bringing the asset to working condition for its intended use. In addition to the safety production expenses extracted, depreciation of fixed assets is calculated using the straight-line method. The useful lives, estimated net residual value rates and annual depreciation rates of each category of the fixed assets are as follows: 

Useful life Estimated net residual value rate Annual depreciation rate 

Buildings 8 to 35 years 0% to 5% 2.71% to 12.50% Machinery and equipment 5 to 14 years 0% to 5% 6.79% to 20.00% Motor vehicles 3 to 10 years 0% to 5% 9.50% to 33.33% Office equipment, temporary 

facilities and others 5 to 10 years 0% to 5% 9.50% to 20.00% 

The Group reviews the useful life and estimated net residual value of a fixed asset and the depreciation method applied at least at each year end, and make adjustments if necessary. 161 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 14.  Construction in progress 

The cost of construction in progress is determined according to the actual expenditures incurred for the construction, including all necessary construction expenditures incurred during the construction period, borrowing costs that shall be capitalised before the construction is ready for its intended use, and other relevant expenditures. Construction in progress is transferred to fixed assets when it is ready for its intended use. 

15.  Borrowing costs 

The borrowing costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition, construction or production of a qualifying asset are capitalised. The amounts of other borrowing costs incurred are recognised as an expense in the period in which they are incurred. Qualifying assets are assets that necessarily take a substantial period of time of acquisition, construction or production to get ready for their intended use or sale. The capitalisation of borrowing costs commences only when all of the following conditions are satisfied: (1)  expenditures for the asset have been incurred; (2)  borrowing costs have been incurred; and (3)  activities that are necessary to acquire, construct or produce the asset for its intended use or sale have been undertaken. Capitalisation of borrowing costs ceases when the qualifying asset being acquired, constructed or produced gets ready for its intended use or sale. Any borrowing costs subsequently incurred are recognised in profit or loss. During the capitalisation period, the amount of interest eligible for capitalisation for each accounting period shall be determined as follows: (1)  where funds are borrowed specifically for the purpose of obtaining a qualifying a s s e t , t h e a m o u n t o f i n t e r e s t e l i g i b l e for capitalisation is the actual interest costs incurred on that borrowing for the period less any bank interest earned from depositing the borrowed funds before being used on the asset or any investment income on the temporary investment of those funds; or (2)  where funds are borrowed generally for the purpose of obtaining a qualifying asset, the amount of interest eligible for capitalisation is determined by applying a weighted a v e r a g e i n t e r e s t r a t e o n t h e g e n e r a l borrowings to the weighted average of the excess of the cumulative expenditures on the asset over the expenditures on the asset funded by the specific borrowings. Capitalisation of borrowing costs is suspended during periods in which the acquisition, construction or production of a qualifying asset is suspended abnormally by activities other than those necessary to get the asset ready for its intended use or sale, when the suspension is for a continuous period of more than 3 months. Borrowing costs incurred during these periods are recognised as an expense in profit or loss until the acquisition, construction or production is resumed. 

16.  Right-of-use assets 

At the commencement date of the lease, the Group recognises its right to use the leased asset within the lease term as the right to use assets at cost. The cost of right of use assets includes: the initial measurement amount of the lease liability; For the lease payment paid on or before the beginning of the lease term, if lease incentive exists, the relevant amount of lease incentive used shall be deducted; Initial direct expenses incurred by the lessee; The estimated cost incurred by the lessee for dismantling and removing the leased asset, restoring the site where the leased asset is located or restoring the leased asset to the condition agreed in the lease terms. If the Group remeasures lease liabilities due to changes in lease payments, the carrying amount of the right of use assets shall be adjusted accordingly. The Group subsequently depreciates the right of use assets by using the straight-line method. If the ownership of the leased asset is obtained at the expiration of the lease term by reasonable anticipation, the group accrues depreciation within the remaining service life of the leased asset. If the ownership of the leased asset cannot be obtained at the expiration of the lease term by reasonable anticipation, the group accrues depreciation within the shorter of the lease term and the remaining service life of the leased asset. 

17.  Intangible assets 

An intangible asset shall be recognised only when it is probable that the economic benefits associated with the asset will flow to the Group and the cost of the asset can be measured reliably. Intangible assets are measured initially at cost. However, intangible assets acquired in a business combination not involving entities under common control with a fair value that can be measured reliably are recognised separately as intangible assets and initially measured at the fair value at the date of acquisition. The useful life of an intangible asset is determined according to the period over which it is expected to generate economic benefits for the Group. An intangible asset is regarded as having an indefinite useful life when there is no foreseeable limit to the period over which the asset is expected to generate economic benefits for the Group. 162 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 17.  Intangible assets (continued) 

Land use rights that are purchased by the Group are accounted for as intangible assets. Buildings, such as plants that are developed and constructed by the Group, and relevant land use rights are accounted for as fixed assets and intangible assets, respectively. Payments for the land and buildings purchased are allocated between the land use rights and the buildings; they are accounted for as fixed assets if they cannot be reasonably allocated. The Group is involved in a number of service franchising arrangements. The Group carries out infrastructure projects for the licensor in accordance with the preconditions set by the licensor in exchange for the right to operate the relevant assets. Prescribed in the contract after the completion of the infrastructure, the Group engaged in business has rights to access the service object for a certain period of time of charge with uncertain amount, those rights do not constitute an unconditional charge right which can collect the certain amount of money or other financial assets, and is attributed to intangible assets. The Group will present the franchise acquired under such franchise arrangement as an intangible asset on its balance sheet. Upon completion of the relevant infrastructure project under the franchise arrangement, the franchise shall be amortized on a straight-line basis during the franchise period. An intangible asset with a finite useful life is amortised using the straight-line method over its useful life. For an intangible asset with a finite useful life, the Group reviews the useful life and amortisation method at least at each year end and makes adjustment if necessary. The Group classifies the expenditures on an internal research and development project into expenditure on the research phase and expenditure on the development phase. Expenditure on the research phase is recognised in profit or loss as incurred. Expenditure on the development phase is capitalised only when the Group can demonstrate all of the following: (i) the technical feasibility of completing the intangible asset so that it will be available for use or sale; (ii) the intention to complete the intangible asset and use or sell it; (iii) how the intangible asset will generate probable future economic benefits (among other things, the Group can demonstrate the existence of a market for the output of the intangible asset or the intangible asset itself or, if it is to be used internally, the usefulness of the intangible asset); (iv) the availability of adequate technical, financial and other resources to complete the development and the ability to use or sell the intangible asset; and (v) the ability to measure reliably the expenditure attributable to the intangible asset during the development phase. Expenditure on the development phase which does not meet these above criteria is recognised in profit or loss when incurred. 

18.  Impairment of assets 

The Group determines the impairment of assets, other than the impairment of inventories, contract assets and contract cost assets, deferred tax assets, and financial assets, by using the following methods: The Group assesses at the end of the reporting period whether there is any indication that an asset may be impaired. If any indication exists that an asset may be impaired, the Group estimates the recoverable amount of the asset and performs impairment testing; Goodwill arising from a business combination an intangible asset with an indefinite useful life and intangible assets that have not been ready for their intended use are tested for impairment at least at each year end, irrespective of whether there is any indication that the asset may be impaired. The recoverable amount of an asset is the higher of its fair value less costs to sell and the present value of the future cash flows expected to be derived from the asset. The Group estimates the recoverable amount on an individual basis unless it is not possible to estimate the recoverable amount of the individual asset, in which case the recoverable amount is determined for the asset group to which the asset belongs. Identification of an asset group is based on whether major cash inflows generated by the asset group are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or asset groups. When the recoverable amount of an asset or asset group is less than its carrying amount, the carrying amount is reduced to the recoverable amount by the Group. The reduction in the carrying amount is treated as an impairment loss and recognised in profit or loss. A impairment allowance loss of the asset is recognised accordingly. For the purpose of impairment testing, the carrying a m o u n t o f g o o d w i l l a c q u i r e d i n a b u s i n e s s combination is allocated from the acquisition date on a reasonable basis, to each of the related asset groups unless it is impossible to allocate to the related asset groups, in which case it is allocated to each of the related sets of asset groups. Each of the related asset groups or sets of asset groups is an asset group or a set of asset groups that is expected to benefit from the synergies of the business combination and shall not be larger than a reportable segment determined by the Group. 163 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 18.  Impairment of assets (continued) 

When testing an asset group (a set of asset groups) to which goodwill has been allocated for impairment, if there is any indication of impairment, the Group firstly tests the asset group (set of asset groups), excluding the amount of goodwill allocated, for impairment, i.e., the Group determines and compares the recoverable amount with the related carrying amount and recognises any impairment loss. After that, the Group tests the asset group (set of asset groups), including goodwill, for impairment, the carrying amount of the related asset group (set of asset groups) is compared to its recoverable amount. If the carrying amount of the asset group (set of asset groups) is higher than its recoverable amount, the amount of the impairment loss is firstly used to reduce the carrying amount of the goodwill allocated to the asset group (set of asset groups), and then used to reduce the carrying amount of other assets (other than the goodwill) within the asset group (set of asset groups), on a pro-rata basis of the carrying amount of each asset. Once the above impairment loss is recognised, it cannot be reversed in subsequent accounting periods. 

19.  Long-term prepaid expenses 

L o n g - t e r m p r e p a i d e x p e n s e s i n c l u d e t h e expenditure for improvements to fixed assets held under operating leases, and other expenditures that have been incurred but should be recognised as expenses over more than one year in the current and subsequent periods. Long-term prepaid expenses are amortised on the straight-line basis over the expected beneficial period and are presented at actual expenditure net of accumulated amortisation. 

20.  Employee benefits 

Employee benefits refer to all forms of consideration or compensation other than share-based payments given by the Group in exchange for services rendered by employees or for termination of employment. Employee benefits include short-term employee benefits, post-employment benefits, termination benefits and other long-term employee benefits. Benefits given by the Group to an employee’s spouse, children and dependents, family members of deceased employees and other beneficiaries are also employee benefits. 

Short-term employee benefits 

The short-term employee benefits actually occurred are recognised as a liability in the accounting period in which the service is rendered by the employees, with a corresponding charge to the profit or loss for the current period or the cost of relevant assets. 

Post-employment benefits (defined contribution plan) 

The employees of the Group participate in apension scheme and unemployment insurance m a n a g e d b y t h e l o c a l g o v e r n m e n t , a n d a n e n t e r p r i s e p e n s i o n f u n d , t h e c o r r e s p o n d i n g expenses shall be included in the cost of related assets or profit or loss. 

Post-employment benefits (defined benefit plan) 

The Group operates a defined benefit pension plan which requires contributions to be made to a separately administered fund. The benefits are unfunded. The cost of providing benefits under the defined benefit plan is determined using the projected unit credit method. Remeasurements arising from the defined benefit pension plan, comprising actuarial gains and losses, the effect of the asset ceiling (excluding amounts included in net interest on the net defined benefit liability) and the return on plan a s s e t s ( e x c l u d i n g a m o u n t s i n c l u d e d i n n e t interest on the net defined benefit liability), are recognised immediately in the balance sheet with a corresponding debit or credit to equity through other comprehensive income in the period in which they occur. Remeasurements are not reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent periods. Past service costs are recognised in profit or loss at the earlier of the date of the plan amendment a n d t h e d a t e t h a t t h e G r o u p r e c o g n i s e s restructuring-related costs or termination benefits. Net interest is calculated by applying the discount rate to the net defined benefit liability or asset. The Group recognises the following changes in the net defined benefit obligation under administrative expenses, and finance expenses in the income statement: service costs comprising current service costs, past service costs, gains and losses on settlements; net interest comprising interest income on plan assets, interest costs on the defined benefit obligation and interest on the effect of the asset ceiling. 

Termination benefits 

T h e G r o u p p r o v i d e s t e r m i n a t i o n b e n e f i t s t o e m p l o y e e s a n d r e c o g n i s e s a n e m p l o y e e benefits liability for termination benefits, with acorresponding charge to profit or loss, at the earlier of when the Group can no longer withdraw the offer of those benefits resulting from an employment termination plan or a curtailment proposal and when the Group recognise costs involving the payment of termination benefits. 164 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 20.  Employee benefits (continued) 

Early retirement benefits 

The Group offers early retirement benefits to those employees who accept early retirement arrangements. The early retirement benefits refer to the salaries and social security contributions to be paid to and for the employees who accept voluntary retirement before the statutory retirement age, as approved by management. The Group pays early retirement benefits to those early retired employees from the early retirement date until the normal retirement date. The Group accounts for the early retirement benefits in accordance with the treatment for termination benefits, in which the salaries and social security contributions to be paid to and for the early retired employees from the off-duty date to the normal retirement date are recognised as liabilities with a corresponding charge to the profit or loss for the current period. The differences arising from the changes in the respective actuarial assumptions of the early retirement benefits and the adjustments of benefit standards are recognised in profit or loss in the period in which they occur. The termination benefits expected to be settled within one year since the balance sheet date are classified as current liabilities. 

21.  Lease liabilities 

At the commencement date of the lease, the Group measures the lease liability at the present value of the lease payments that are not paid at that date, except for short-term leases and leases of low-value assets. The lease payment include: fixed payments (including in-substance fixed payments), less any lease incentives receivable, variable lease payments that depend on an index or a rate, amounts expected to be payable by the lessee under residual value guarantees, the exercise price of a purchase option if the lessee is reasonably certain to exercise that option, and payments of penalties for terminating the lease, if the lease term reflects the lessee exercising an option to terminate the lease. In calculating the present value of the lease p a y m e n t s , t h e G r o u p u s e s t h e i n t e r e s t r a t e implicated in the lease as the discount rate. If that rate cannot be readily determined, the Group uses the lessee’s incremental borrowing rate. The Group calculates the interest expenses of the lease liability in each period during the lease term using the constant periodic rate of interest, and recognises such interest expenses in profit or loss, except those recognised in the costs of the related asset as required. Variable lease payments that are not included in the measurement of the lease liabilities are recognised in profit or loss as incurred, except those recognised in the costs of the related asset as required. After the commencement date of the lease, the Group shall increase the carrying amount of lease liability to reflect interest on the lease liability and reduce the carrying amount of lease liability to reflect the lease payments made. When the actual fixed payment amount changes, the expected payable amount of the guaranteed residual value changes, the index or ratio used to determine the lease payment amount changes, the evaluation results or actual exercise of the purchase option, renewal option or termination option change, the Group remeasures the lease liabilities according to the present value of the changed lease payments. 

22.  Provisions 

An obligation related to a contingency shall be recognised by the Group as a provision when all of the following conditions are satisfied, except for contingent considerations and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination not involving entities under common control: (1)  the obligation is a present obligation of the Group; (2)  it is probable that an outflow of economic benefits from the Group will be required to settle the obligation; and (3)  a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation. A provision is initially measured at the best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the related present obligation, taking into account factors pertaining to a contingency such as the risks, uncertainties and time value of money as a whole. Provisions are reviewed at each balance sheet date. Where there is clear evidence that the carrying amount of a provision does not reflect the current best estimate, the carrying amount is adjusted to the current best estimate. The expected credit losses of financial guarantees are listed as provisions. 

23.  Share-based payments 

A share-based payment is classified as either a n e q u i t y - s e t t l e d s h a r e - b a s e d p a y m e n t o r a c a s h - s e t t l e d s h a r e - b a s e d p a y m e n t . A n equity-settled share-based payment is a transaction in which the Group receives services and uses shares or other equity instruments as consideration for settlement. A n e q u i t y - s e t t l e d s h a r e - b a s e d p a y m e n t i n exchange for services received from employees is measured at the fair value of the equity instruments granted to the employees. If such equity-settled share-based payment could vest immediately, related costs or expenses at an amount equal to the fair value on the grant date are recognised, with a corresponding increase in capital reserve; if such equity-settled share-based payment could not vest until the completion of services for a vesting period, or until the achievement of a specified performance condition, the Group at each balance sheet date during the vesting period recognises the services received for the current period as related costs and expenses, with a corresponding increase in capital reserve, at an amount equal to the fair value of the equity instruments at the grant date, based on the best estimate of the number of equity instruments expected to vest, which is made on the basis of the latest available information such as the changes in the number of covered employees. The fair value of the Share Options was determined by the Binomial Options Pricing Model, as stated in Note XI. 165 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 23.  Share-based payments (continued) 

No cost or expense is recognized for share payments that are ultimately unexercised due to non-market conditions and/or term of service conditions not being met. Where a market condition or non-viable option condition is specified in the share-based payment agreement, it is deemed to be a viable option provided that all other performance conditions and/or term of service conditions are satisfied, regardless of whether the market condition or non-viable option condition is satisfied. Where the terms of an equity-settled share-based award are modified, as a minimum an expense is recognised as if the terms had not been modified. In addition, an expense is recognised for any modification that increases the total fair value of the share-based payments, or is otherwise beneficial to the employee as measured at the date of modification. Where an equity-settled share-based award is cancelled, it is treated as if it had vested on the date of cancellation, and any expense not yet recognised for the award is recognised immediately. This includes any award where non-vesting conditions within the control of either the Group or the employee are not met. However, if a new award is substituted for the cancelled award, and is designated as a replacement on the date that it is granted, the cancelled and new awards are treated as if they were a modification of the original award. 

24.  Other equity instruments 

Upon the maturity of the perpetual bonds issued by the Group, the Group has the right to extend the term indefinitely. For the coupon interest of the perpetual bonds, the Group has the right to defer payment. When the perpetual bonds are in the same order of repayment as ordinary bonds and other debts issued by the issuer, the Group considers whether the repayment order results in the expectation of contractual obligation of holder to pay cash or other financial assets to issuer cautiously. For the perpetual bonds classified as equity instruments, the Group has no contractual obligation to pay cash or other financial assets. 

25.  Revenue from contracts with customers 

R e v e n u e f r o m c o n t r a c t s w i t h c u s t o m e r s i s recognised when the Group has fulfilled its performance obligations in the contracts, that is, when the customer obtains control of relevant goods or services. Control of relevant goods or services refers to the ability to direct the use of the goods, or the provision of the services, and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from the goods or services. 

Revenue from construction contracts 

The revenue from construction contracts between the Group and the customer usually includes performance obligations of housing construction and infrastructure construction. Because the Group’s performance creates or enhances an asset that the customer controls as the asset is created or enhanced, the revenue is recognised over time only if the Group can reasonably m e a s u r e i t s p r o g r e s s t o w a r d s t h e c o m p l e t e satisfaction of the performance obligation. The Group uses the input method and determines the progress towards the complete satisfaction of the rendering of services on the basis of costs incurred. If the progress towards the complete satisfaction of the performance obligation cannot be reasonably measured, but the Group expects to recover the costs incurred in satisfying the performance obligation, the revenue is recognised only to the extent of the costs incurred until such time that the Group can reasonably measure the progress towards the complete satisfaction of the performance obligation. 

Revenue from sales of real estate 

The Group’s revenue from real estate development business is recognised when the control over properties is transferred to the customer. According to the terms under the sales contract and laws and regulations applicable to the contract, the control over properties can be transferred within a certain period of time or at a certain point of time. Where goods produced during the Group’s performance of the contract are irreplaceable and the Group is entitled to collect payments for the part of the performance that has been completed so far during the entire contract period, revenue is recognised within a certain period of time based on the progress of performance obligation fulfilment during the contract period, and the progress of performance obligation fulfilment is determined based on the proportion of contract costs incurred for the fulfilled performance obligations to the estimated total contract costs. Otherwise, revenue is recognised when the customer obtains the physical ownership of goods or the legal ownership of completed properties and the Group obtains the present right to receive payment and probably recovers the contract consideration. 166 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 25.  Revenue from contracts with customers (continued) 

Revenue from design services 

Due to the reason that the design services provided by the Group during the performance of contracts have irreplaceable uses, and the Group has the right to receive payments for the completed portions of the projects during the entire contract period. Therefore, such services are accounted for as performance obligations to be fulfilled within certain periods of time, and revenue is recognised based on the performance schedule, unless the performance of the contract cannot be reasonably determined. The Group determines the performance progress for the services rendered by using the input method. Where the performance of the contract cannot be reasonably determined, revenue is recognised at the amount of costs incurred if it is predicted that the costs can be compensated till the performance progress can be reasonably determined. 

Contracts for the sale of goods 

A contract for the sale of goods between the Group and the customer usually only includes the performance obligation to transfer the goods. The revenue is recognised at transfer control point in time based on the following indicators, which include: a present right to payment for goods, the transfer of significant risks and rewards of ownership of goods, the transfer of legal title to goods, the transfer of physical possession of goods, the customer’s acceptance of goods. 

Variable consideration 

Some of the Group’s contracts with customers include arrangements of variable consideration. T h e G r o u p d e t e r m i n e s t h e b e s t e s t i m a t e o f variable consideration by using the expected value method or the most likely amount method. However, the transaction price including variable consideration is only to the extent that it is highly probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognised will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. 

Significant financing components 

When the contract contains a significant financing component, the Group determines the transaction price based on an amount that reflects the price that a customer would have paid for the goods or services in cash at the time of obtaining the control of the goods or services, and amortises the difference between the transaction price and the consideration promised in the contract under the effective interest method within the contract period using the discount rate that discounts the nominal amount of the contract consideration to the current selling price of the goods or services. The Group does not consider the effects of a significant financing component in the contract if it is expected that the period between when the customer obtains control of the goods or services and when the customer pays for such goods or services will be one year or less. 

Warranties 

The Group provides a warranty in connection with the sale of a good or the construction of an asset in accordance with the contract and the relevant laws and regulations, etc. For an assurance-type warranty that provides the customer the assurance that the goods sold or the assets built complies with agreed-upon specifications, the Group accounts for the warranty in accordance with Notes III.22. For a service-type warranty that provides a customer with a service in addition to the assurance that the product complies with agreed-upon specifications, t h e G r o u p a c c o u n t s f o r i t a s a s e p a r a t e performance obligation. On the basis of the relative proportion between the stand-alone selling price of the good and the service-type warranty, a portion of the transaction price is allocated to the service-type warranty and revenue is recognised when acustomer obtained control of the good. When assessing whether a service-type warranty provides a customer with a separate service in addition to the assurance that the good complies with agreed-upon specifications, the Group considers whether the warranty is required by law, the length of the warranty coverage period and the nature of the tasks that the Group promises to perform, etc. 

Principal/agent 

The Group judges whether the identity of the group is a principal or an agent when the transaction is conducted based on whether the Group has control over the product or service before transferring to the customer. Under the circumstance that the Group controls goods or services before goods or services are transferred to the customer, the Group is a principal and recognises revenue in the gross amount of consideration received or receivable. Otherwise, the Group is an agent and recognises revenue in the amount of any fee or commission to which it expects to be entitled from the customer. The amount is the net amount of the gross consideration received or receivable after paying the other party the consideration received in exchange for the goods or services to be provided by that party or determined by the agreed-upon amount or proportion of commissions, etc. 

Recognition of revenue from Public-Private Partnership (“PPP”) 

Public-Private-Partnership project contracts refers to the contract established by the Group and the government for PPP project cooperation in accordance with laws and regulations, and the contract shall meet the following features at the same time (hereinafter referred to as “double features”): (1)  The Group provides public products and services on behalf of the government by using PPP project assets during the contractually agreed operation period; (2)  The Group is compensated for the public goods and services it provides for the period agreed in the contract. 167 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 25.  Revenue from contracts with customers (continued) 

Recognition of revenue from Public-Private Partnership (“PPP”) (continued) 

The following conditions shall be met at the same time (hereinafter referred to as “double controls”): (1)  The government controls or regulates the type, object and price of public goods and services that the Group must provide in the use of PPP project assets; (2)  When the PPP project contract is terminated, the government party controls the significant residual interests of the PPP project assets through ownership, income rights or other forms of control. The social capital party who provides multiple service (eg. providing construction service for PPP project and operation and maintenance service after the construction is complete) base o n P P P c o n t r a c t , r e c o g n i s e s r e v e n u e s a n d costs of construction service in accordance with construction contract. Revenue from construction service is measured by consideration collected or entitled to charge and recognise contact assets at the same time. In accordance with the PPP contract, during the operation of PPP project, the Group, entitled to collect certain cash flows (or other financial assets), should recognise revenue and receivables simultaneously when the social capital party has the right to collect such consideration (a right is only determined by the passage of time), in accordance w i t h “ A c c o u n t i n g S t a n d a r d s f o r B u s i n e s s Enterprises No. 22 – Recognition and Measurement of Financial Instruments”. In accordance with the PPP contract, during the operation of PPP project, the Group is entitled to collect cash flows from parties who received public products and services with uncertain amount, and such right doesn’t constitute an unconditional right to collect cash. The Group should recognise the consideration or the revenue recognised from construction activity of PPP assets as intangible assets when the PPP assets reach working condition, in accordance with “Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises No. 6 –Intangible Assets”. After PPP assets reach working condition, the social capital party should recognise revenue for operation of PPP projects in accordance with “Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises No. 14 – Revenue”. 

Recognition of revenue from Build-Transfer (“BT”) 

For construction services rendered by the Group, related revenue and costs are recognised during t h e s t a g e o f c o n s t r u c t i o n a c c o r d i n g t o t h e construction contract. Revenue from construction services is measured at the consideration received or receivable by the Group. The Group recognises contract assets when recognising revenue, and accounts for any significant financing component in the contractual arrangement. The contract assets are transferred to financial assets when the Group obtains the right to unconditionally collect consideration and is deducted against long-term receivables after the Group receives the payment from the project owner. 

26.  Contract assets and contract liabilities 

The Group presents contract assets or contract liabilities depending on the relationship between the satisfaction of its performance obligations and the customer’s payment in the balance sheet. The Group offsets the contract assets and contract liabilities under the same contract and presents the net amount. 

Contract assets 

A contract asset is the right to consideration in exchange for goods or services that the Group has transferred to a customer, and that right is conditioned on something other than the passage of time. For details of how the Group measures and accounts for the ECLs of a contract asset, refer to Notes III.9. 

Contract liabilities 

A contract liability is the obligation to transfer goods or services to a customer for which the Group has received consideration or an amount of consideration is due from the customer, such as an amount of consideration that an entity has received before the transfer of the promised goods or services. 168 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 27.  Contract cost assets 

The Group’s contract cost assets include the costs to obtain and fulfil a contract and are classified as inventories, other current assets and other non-current assets by liquidity. The Group recognises as an asset the incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer if the Group expects to recover those costs, unless the amortisation period of the asset is one year or less. Other than the costs which are capitalised as inventories, fixed assets and intangible assets, etc., costs incurred to fulfil a contract with a customer are capitalised as an asset if all of the following criteria are met: (1)  the costs relate directly to a contract or to an anticipated contract, including direct labour, direct materials, overheads (or similar expenses), costs that are explicitly chargeable to the customer and other costs that are incurred only because an entity entered into the contract; (2)  the costs generate or enhance resources of the Group that will be used in satisfying performance obligations in the future; and (3)  the costs are expected to be recovered. The contract cost asset is amortised and charged to profit or loss on a systematic basis that is consistent with the pattern of the revenue to which the asset related is recognised. The Group accrues provisions for impairment and recognises impairment losses to the extent that the carrying amount of a contract cost asset exceeds: (1)  the remaining amount of consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for the goods or services to which the asset relates; less (2)  the costs that are expected to be incurred to transfer those related goods or services. 

28.  Government grants 

Government grants are recognised when all attaching conditions will be complied with and the grants will be received. If a government grant is in the form of a transfer of a monetary asset, it is measured at the amount received or receivable. If a government grant is in the form of a transfer of a non-monetary asset, it is measured at fair value; if fair value is not reliably determinable, it is measured at a nominal amount. According to the government documents, those used for the purposes of purchase, construction or other formations of long-term assets shall be regarded as the government grants related to assets; if the government documents are not clear, the judgment shall be made on the basis of the basic conditions that must be met to obtain the grants. The government grants related to assets shall be those based on the purchase, construction or other formations of long-term assets, and the others shall be regarded as the government grants related to income. The group adopts the total method to measure government grants. A government grant related to income is accounted for as follows: (i) if the grant is a compensation for related expenses or losses to be incurred in subsequent periods, the grant is recognised as deferred income, and released in profit or loss over the periods in which the related costs are recognised; or (ii) if the grant is a compensation for related expenses or losses already incurred, it is recognised immediately in profit or loss. A government grant relating to an asset shall be offset against the carrying amounts of relevant assets, or recognised as deferred income and amortised in profit or loss over the useful life of the related asset by annual instalments in a systematic and rational way (however, a government grant measured at a nominal amount is recognised directly in profit or loss). Where the assets are sold, transferred, retired or damaged before the end of their useful lives, the rest of the remaining deferred income is released to profit or loss for the period in which the relevant assets are disposed of. Where the Group receives loans granted at abelow-market rate of interest from a lending bank funded with financial interest subsidies, the initial carrying amount of the borrowings is the actual proceeds received, and the calculation of the borrowing costs shall be based on the principal and the below-market rate of interest. 169 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 29.  Deferred Income tax 

Deferred tax is provided using the balance sheet liability method, on all temporary differences at the end of the reporting period between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts, and temporary differences between the tax bases and the carrying amounts of the items, which have a tax base according to related tax laws but are not recognised as assets and liabilities. Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for all taxable temporary differences, except: (1)  when the taxable temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill, or an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and, at the time of transaction, affects neither accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss; and (2)  in respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures, when the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not be reversed in the foreseeable future. D e f e r r e d t a x a s s e t s a r e r e c o g n i s e d f o r a l l d e d u c t i b l e t e m p o r a r y d i f f e r e n c e s , a n d t h e carryforward of unused tax losses and any unused tax credits. Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary differences, the carryforward of unused tax losses and unused tax credits can be utilised, except: (1)  when the deductible temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and, at the time of the transaction, affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss; and (2)  in respect of the deductible temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries, associates and joint ventures, deferred tax assets are only recognised to the extent that it is probable that the temporary differences will be reversed in the foreseeable future and taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised in the future. At the end of the reporting period, deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the period when the asset is realised or the liability is settled, in accordance with the requirements of tax laws. The measurement of deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities reflects the tax consequences that would follow from the manner in which the Group expects, at the end of the reporting period, to recover the assets or settle the liabilities. The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at the end of the reporting period and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available in future periods to allow the deferred tax assets to be utilised. Unrecognised deferred tax assets are reassessed at the end of the reporting period and are recognised to the extent that it has become probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow all or part of the deferred tax asset to be recovered. Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are offset if and only if the Group has a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets and current tax liabilities, and the deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority on either the same taxable entity or different taxable entities which intend either to settle current tax liabilities and assets on a net basis, or to realise the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously, in each future period in which significant amounts of deferred tax liabilities or assets are expected to be settled or recovered. 

30.  Leases 

At inception of a contract, an entity shall assess whether the contract is, or contains, a lease. Acontract is, or contains, a lease if the contract conveys the right to control the use of an identified a s s e t f o r a p e r i o d o f t i m e i n e x c h a n g e f o r consideration. 

As lessee 

Except for short-term leases and leases for which the underlying asset is of low value, the Group shall recognise right of use assets and lease liabilities. For the general accounting treatment refers to Note III.16 and Note III. 21. For a contract that contains a lease component and one or more additional lease or non-lease c o m p o n e n t s , t h e G r o u p s h a l l a l l o c a t e t h e c o n s i d e r a t i o n i n t h e c o n t r a c t a c c o r d i n g t o stand-alone selling prices. 170 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 30.  Leases (continued) 

As lessee (continued) 

Short-term leases and leases of low-value assets 

T h e G r o u p c o n s i d e r s a l e a s e t h a t , a t t h e commencement date of the lease, has a lease term of 12 months or less, and does not contains any purchase option as a short-term lease; and a lease for which the value of the individual underlying asset is not more than RMB30,000 when it is new as a lease of low-value assets. If the Group subleases an asset, or expects to sublease an asset, the head lease does not qualify as a lease of a low-value asset. The Group does not recognise the right-of-use assets and lease liabilities for short-term leases and of low-value assets. The Group recognises lease payments on short-term leases and leases of low-value assets in the costs of the related asset or profit or loss on a straight-line basis over the lease term. 

As lessor 

A lease is classified as a finance lease if it transfers substantially all the risks and rewards incidental to ownership of an underlying asset, except that a lease is classified as an operating lease at the inception date. The Group, as an intermediate lessor, classifies the sublease by reference to the right-of-use asset arising from the head lease For a contract that contains a lease component and one or more additional lease or non-lease components, the Group shall allocate the consideration in the contract according to stand-alone selling prices. 

As lessor of an operating lease 

Rent income under an operating lease is recognised on a straight-line basis over the lease term, through profit or loss. Variable lease payments that are not included in the measurement of lease receivables are charged to profit or loss as incurred. The Group shall add initial direct costs incurred in obtaining an operating lease to the carrying amount of the underlying asset and recognise those costs as an expense over the lease term on the same basis as the lease income. 

Sale and leaseback transactions 

T h e G r o u p a s s e s s a n d d e t e r m i n e w h e t h e r the assets transferred in sale and lease back transactions is sales activity in accordance with Note III. 25. 

As a seller-lessee 

For assets transferred in sale and lease back transactions constitutes a sale, the Group, as aseller-lessee, measures the right-of-use asset arising from the leaseback at the proportion of the previous carrying amount of the asset that relates to the right of use retained, and recognises only the amount of any gain or loss that relates to the rights transferred to the buyer-lessor. For assets transferred in sale and lease back transactions doesn’t constitute a sale, the Group, as a lessee, continues to recognise the transferred asset, and recognises a financial liability which equals to the transfer proceeds and accounts for the financial liability in accordance with Note III.9. 

31.  Share repurchase 

Considerations and transaction costs paid for repurchase of our equity instruments should be accounted for a deduction from equity. In addition to share-based payment, the issuance (including refinancing), repurchase, sales or cancellations of own equity instruments shall be treated as changes in equity. 

32.  Profit distribution 

The cash dividend is recognised as a liability upon approval in the general meeting of shareholders. 

33.  Safety production expenses 

Safety production expenses provided according to the regulations are included in costs of related products or profit or loss, and credited to the special reserve. They are treated differently when being utilised: (i) the special reserve are debited for those expenditure with the expense nature; or (ii) the cumulative expenditures are capitalised as a fixed asset for those expenditure to be capitalised when the working condition for the intended use is reached, and at the same time, special reserve are debited with the full depreciation of the fixed asset of the same amount. 

34.  Fair value measurement 

The Group measures part of its debt instruments and equity investments at fair value at each end of the reporting period. Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. All assets and liabilities for which fair value is measured or disclosed in the financial statements are categorised within the fair value hierarchy based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement as a whole: 

Level 1 Based on quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities; Level 2 Based on valuation techniques for which the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement is observable, either directly or indirectly; Level 3 Based on valuation techniques for which the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement is unobservable. 

For assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis, the Group determines whether transfers have occurred between levels in the hierarchy by reassessing categorisation on each balance sheet date. 171 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 35.  Significant accounting judgements and estimates 

The preparation of the financial statements requires management to make judgements, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of revenue, expenses, assets and liabilities, and their accompanying disclosures, and the disclosure of contingent liabilities at the end of the reporting period. Uncertainty about these assumptions and estimates could result in outcomes that could require a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of the assets or liabilities affected in the future. 

Judgements 

In the process of applying the Group’s accounting policies, management has made the following judgements which have a significant effect on the amounts recognised in the financial statements: 

Operating leases – the Group as lessor 

The Group has entered into lease agreements on its investment property portfolio. The Group has determined these leases to be operating leases, based on an evaluation of the terms and conditions of the agreements, that it retains almost all the significant risks and rewards of ownership of these properties. 

Division of investment properties and inventories 

The properties constructed by the group may be used for sale, rent earning and/or capital appreciation. At the initial stage of construction, the Group classifies the property into inventory or investment property according to the holding purpose. During the period under construction, the properties used for sale after completion are classified as inventories-properties under development and included in current assets, and the properties used to earn rent and/or capital appreciation after completion are classified as investment properties in progress and included in non-current assets. After completion, the p r o p e r t i e s u s e d f o r s a l e a r e t r a n s f e r r e d t o inventories-completed properties for sale, while the properties used to earn rent and/or capital a p p r e c i a t i o n a r e t r a n s f e r r e d t o i n v e s t m e n t properties. 

Division of investment properties and fixed assets 

The Group determines whether the property it holds meets the definition of investment property and establishes relevant standards when making judgments. The Group classifies the property held for earning rent or capital appreciation, or both (including buildings under construction or development for future use for rental). The Group will consider whether the cash flow generated by the property is largely independent of other assets held by the group. Some properties are used to earn rent or capital appreciation, and the remaining part is used to produce goods, provide services or operation and management. If the part used to earn rent or capital appreciation can be sold or leased separately, the Group measures that part separately. If not, the property will be classified as investment property only if the part used for producing goods, providing labor services or operation and management is not significant. When determining whether the importance of auxiliary services is sufficient to make the property not meet the recognition conditions of investment property, the Group will make a separate judgment based on individual property benchmark. 

Determination method of construction contract performance schedule 

The Group determines the performance progress of the construction contract according to the input method. Specifically, the Group determines the performance progress according to the proportion of the accumulated actual construction cost in the estimated total cost. The accumulated actual cost includes the direct cost and indirect cost incurred in the process of the Group transferring goods to customers. The construction contract price with the customer is determined based on the construction cost. The proportion of the actual construction cost to the estimated total cost can truly reflect the performance progress of the construction service. In view of the long lifetime of the construction contract and the possibility of spanning several accounting periods, the Group will review and revise the budget with the progress of the construction contract, and adjust the revenue recognition amount accordingly. 

Business model 

The classification of financial assets at initial recognition depends on the Group’s business model for managing financial assets. When determining the business model, the Group considers the methods to include evaluation and report financial asset performance to key management, the risks affecting the performance of financial assets and the risk management, and the manner in which the relevant management receives remuneration. When assessing whether the objective is to collect contractual cash flows, the Group needs to analyse and judge the reason, timing, frequency and value of the sale before the maturity date of the financial assets. 

Contractual cash flow characteristics 

The classification of financial assets at initial recognition depends on the financial asset’s contractual cash flow characteristics, and the judgements on whether the contractual cash flows are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding, including when assessing the modification of the time value of money, the judgement on whether there is any significant difference from the benchmark cash flow and whether the fair value of the prepayment features is insignificant for financial assets with prepayment features, etc. 172 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 35.  Significant accounting judgements and estimates (continued) 

Judgements (continued) 

Whether a contract is, or contains, a lease 

T h e G r o u p s i g n e d t h e l e a s e a g r e e m e n t o n equipment for some engineering construction projects. The Group believes that, based on the agreement, there is no identified asset, or the supplier has the substantive right to substitute the underlying asset throughout the period of use. Therefore, the agreement does not contain a lease, and the Group treats it as acceptance of a service. 

Revenue from sales of real estate 

According to the accounting policies described in Note III. 25, the Group’s revenue from real estate development business is recognised when the control over properties is transferred to the customer. According to the terms under the sales contract and laws and regulations applicable to the contract, the control over properties can be transferred within a certain period of time or at a certain point of time. Where goods produced during the Group’s performance of the contract are irreplaceable and the Group is entitled to collect payments for the part of the performance that has been completed so far during the entire contract period, revenue is recognised over a certain period of time based on the progress of performance obligation fulfilment during the contract period. O t h e r w i s e , r e v e n u e i s r e c o g n i s e d w h e n t h e customer obtains the physical ownership of goods or the legal ownership of completed properties, and the Group obtains the present right to receive payment and probably recovers the contract consideration. Due to the restriction of real estate sales contract, the Group’s properties generally have no alternative u s e . H o w e v e r , w h e t h e r t h e G r o u p h a s t h e enforcement right to collect the part that has been completed so far and use the method of recognising income over a period of time depends on the agreement of each contract term and the relevant law applicable to the contract. In order to assess whether the Group has obtained the enforcement right on the part that has been performed, the Group reviews its contract terms, relevant local laws, and takes into account the opinions of local regulatory authorities when necessary, and needs to make a lot of judgments. When the Group signs a sales contract with aproperly buyer, according to the requirements of some banks, if the buyer needs to obtain amortgage loan from the bank to pay the house money, the Group will enter into a tripartite mortgage guarantee loan agreement with the buyer and the bank. The Group will provide phased joint liability guarantee for mortgage loans issued by banks to the properly buyer. The phased joint liability guarantee will be released after the properly buyer has completed the house ownership certificate and completed the real estate mortgage registration procedures. The Group only needs to provide guarantee to the bank for the outstanding mortgage loan of the buyer within the guarantee period. The bank will only claim against the Group if the buyer defaults and fails to repay the mortgage loan. According to the Group’s historical experience in selling similar developed products, the Group believes that during the period of phased joint l i a b i l i t y g u a r a n t e e , t h e r a t i o o f t h e G r o u p ’ s guarantee liability to the bank due to the buyer’s failure to repay the mortgage loan is very low, and the Group can claim the advance payment paid by the buyer for undertaking the guarantee of phased joint liability. In the case of non-repayment by the buyer, the Group can avoid loss by giving priority to the relevant property according to the relevant purchase contract. Therefore, the Group believes that the financial guarantee has no significant impact on the recognition of sales revenue of development products. 

Equity instruments 

Equity instruments such as perpetual bonds issued by the Group do not need to be settled by the Group’s own equity instruments, excluding the contractual obligations to deliver cash or other financial assets to other parties, or to exchange financial assets or financial liabilities with other p a r t i e s u n d e r p o t e n t i a l a d v e r s e c o n d i t i o n s . Therefore, the Group calculates them as other equity instruments. 

Estimation uncertainty 

The key assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the end of the reporting period, that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the future accounting periods, are described below. 

Impairment of financial instruments and contract assets 

The Group uses the expected credit loss model to assess the impairment of financial instruments and contract assets. The Group is required to perform significant judgements and estimations and take into account all reasonable and supportable information, including forward-looking information. When making such judgements and estimates, the Group infers the expected changes in the debtor’s credit risk based on historical repayment data combined with economic policies, macroeconomic indicators, industry risks and other factors. The different estimates may impact the impairment assessment, and the impairment allowance may also not be representative of the actual impairment loss in the future. 173 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 35.  Significant accounting judgements and estimates (continued) 

Estimation uncertainty (continued) 

Impairment of non-current assets other than financial assets (other than goodwill) 

T h e G r o u p a s s e s s e s w h e t h e r t h e r e a r e a n y indications of impairment for all non-current assets other than financial assets at the end of the reporting period. Intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are tested for impairment annually and at other times when such an indication exists. Other non-current assets other than financial assets are tested for impairment when there are indications that the carrying amounts may not be recoverable. An impairment exists when the carrying amount of an asset or asset group exceeds its recoverable amount, which is the higher of its fair value less costs of disposal and the present value of the future cash flows expected to be derived from it. The calculation of the fair value less costs of disposal based on available data from binding sales transactions in an arm’s length transaction of similar assets or observable market prices less incremental costs for disposing of the assets. When the calculations of the present value of the future cash flows expected to be derived from an asset or asset group are undertaken, management must estimate the expected future cash flows from the asset or asset group and choose a suitable discount rate in order to calculate the present value of those cash flows. 

Impairment of goodwill 

The Group determines whether goodwill is impaired at least on an annual basis. This requires an estimation of the value in use of the cash-generating units to which the goodwill has been allocated. Testing the value in use requires the Group to make an estimate of the expected future cash flows from the cash-generating units and also to choose a suitable discount rate in order to calculate the present value of those cash flows. 

Fair value of unlisted equity investments 

For a part of unlisted equity investments, the Group adopts the market approach to estimate the fair value, which involves choosing comparable companies and market multiples and estimating the liquidity discount rate. Therefore, it is subject to uncertainty. For all the other unlisted equity investments, the Group estimates the fair value through the expected cash flows discounted at current rates applicable for items with similar terms and risk characteristics. This valuation requires the Group to make estimates about expected future cash flows, credit risk, volatility and discount rates, and hence they are subject to uncertainty. 

Construction and service contracts 

R e c o g n i t i o n o f r e v e n u e a n d e x p e n s e s f r o m c o n s t r u c t i o n a n d s e r v i c e c o n t r a c t s r e q u i r e s management to make relevant estimates. If losses are expected to occur in construction and service contracts, such losses should be recognised as current costs. The management of the Group estimates the possible losses based on the construction and service contract budget. Due to the characteristics of housing construction, infrastructure construction, and design businesses, the date at which the contract activity is entered into and the date when the activity is completed usually fall into different accounting periods. The Group reviews and revises the estimates of both contract revenue and contract costs in each contract budget as the contract progresses. 

Deferred tax assets 

Deferred tax assets are recognised for all unused tax losses to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the losses can be utilised. Significant judgement from the management is required to determine the amount of deferred tax assets that can be recognised, based upon the likely timing and level of future taxable profits together with future tax planning strategies. 

Land appreciation tax 

The Group is required to pay land appreciation tax in accordance with tax laws on the value-added portion of property sales. The provision for land appreciation tax is the best estimate made by the management based on the understanding of relevant tax laws and regulations. The actual land appreciation tax liability must be determined by the tax authority when the land appreciation tax is settled. The Group has not yet determined its land appreciation tax settlement and taxation plans for certain real estate development projects with tax authorities. The final land appreciation tax calculation result may be different from the amount initially recorded, and any difference will affect the land appreciation tax expenditure and related provision amount during the period when the difference is realised. 

Confirmation and allocation of properties under development 

The cost of real estate construction is recorded as inventory during the construction period, and will be carried forward to the income statement after real estate sales revenue is confirmed. Before the final settlement of project costs and other related real estate development costs, such costs need to be estimated by the management of the Group based on budgeted costs and development progress. The Group’s real estate development is generally carried out in stages, and the cost directly related to the development of a certain period is recorded as the cost of that period. The common costs of different stages are allocated to each stage according to the saleable area. If the final settlement of the project cost and the related cost allocation are different from the initial estimate, the increase or decrease of the project cost and other costs will affect the profit and loss in the future years. 174 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# III.  Significant accounting policies and accounting estimates (continued) 35.  Significant accounting judgements and estimates (continued) 

Estimation uncertainty (continued) 

Inventory impairment 

The Group’s inventory is measured at the lower of cost and net realisable value. The net realisable value of inventory refers to the estimated selling price of the inventory minus the estimated cost, estimated selling expenses and relevant taxes and fees at the time of completion. The management’s calculation of the net realisable value of inventories involves the estimation of estimated selling prices, estimated costs to be incurred by the time of completion, estimated selling expenses and relevant taxes. Changes in these estimates will affect the book value of inventories and the profit and loss of future changes. 

Measurement of defined benefit obligations 

T h e G r o u p r e c o g n i s e d t h e s u p p l e m e n t a r y allowances and benefits paid to certain retired and early retirement employees as liabilities. The amount of these welfare expenses and liabilities are determined using actuarial valuations conducted by independent professional actuaries. Independent professional actuaries evaluate the actuarial status of the Group’s retirement plan every year. These actuarial valuations involve assumptions made on discount rates, retirement benefit inflation rates and other factors. In view of its long-term nature, the above estimates are uncertain. 

Useful lives and residual values of fixed assets 

After considering the residual value of the fixed assets, the Group accrues depreciation within the estimated useful life. The Group regularly reviews the estimated useful life and residual value of related assets to determine the amount of depreciation expenses that will be included in each reporting period. The useful life and residual value of assets are determined by the Group based on the past experience of similar assets and combined with expected technological changes. If the previous estimate changes significantly, the depreciation expense will be adjusted in the future period. 

Lessee’ s incremental borrowing rate 

If the interest rate implicit in the lease cannot be readily determined, the Group measures the lease liability at the present value of the lease payments discounted using the lessee’s incremental borrowing rate. According to the economic environment, the Group takes the observable interest rate as the reference basis for determining the incremental borrowing rate, then adjusts the observable interest rate based on its own circumstances, underlying assets, lease terms and amounts of lease liabilities to determine the applicable incremental borrowing rate. 

# IV.  Taxation 1.  Main taxes and rates 

Value-added tax –

Taxable income is calculated at the corresponding tax rate as output tax, and the value-added tax is calculated on the basis of the difference after deducting the input tax allowed to be deducted in the current period. The applicable tax rates of the Group for the year ended 31 December 2022 included 13%, 9%, 6%, 5% and 3%. According to the “Regulations on Issues Related to the Pilot Reform of Business Tax to Value-Added Tax” issued by the Ministry of Finance and the State Administration of Taxation in 2016, the Group calculates tax payable at 3% and 5% of taxable income for old projects in the construction industry based on simple tax calculation methods and in the real estate development industry, respectively. 

City maintenance and construction tax – Calculated and paid at 7% or 5% of the actual turnover tax paid. 

Corporate income tax –

The Group’s corporate income tax in Mainland China is calculated and paid at 25% of the taxable income (except for the tax incentives described in Note IV.2). The corporate income tax in Hong Kong, China is calculated and paid at 16.5% of the taxable income. For other overseas regions, the taxable income shall be 0% to 35% of the taxable income. 

Education surcharge – Calculated and paid at 3% of the actual turnover tax paid. 

Land appreciation tax –

If the Group transfers land use rights and the property rights of buildings or other attachments on the ground for a fee, the land appreciation tax is calculated and paid at a four-tier progressive tax rate of 30% to 60%. 

Real estate tax – Real estate tax is levied at 1.2% of the original value of the property or 12% of the rental income. 175 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# IV.  Taxation (continued) 2.  Preferential tax treatments 

The corporate income tax preferences enjoyed by the Group are as follows: 

(1)  Preferential tax treatment for key high and new technological enterprises encouraged and supported by the state 

According to the income tax law and other relevant regulations, the Group’s subsidiaries recognised as key high and new technological enterprises encouraged and supported by the state are as follows: 

Company name Certificate of High and New Technological Enterprises Effective tax rate 

China Municipal Engineering Northwest Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd. GR202162000417 15% China Architecture Southwest Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd. GR202051002428 15% China State Construction Northeast Architectural Design Institute Co., Ltd. GR202021001043 15% China Construction Aolian Decoration Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202244207198 15% China Construction Dongshe Geotechnical Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202021001224 15% CSCEC (Tianjin) Industrial Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202112003765 15% China Construction First Engineering Bureau Group Construction & Development Co., Ltd. GR202011001749 15% China Construction First Engineering Bureau Huajiang Construction Co., Ltd. GR202111002519 15% The Second Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction First Engineering Bureau GR202111000744 15% Beijing Construction Engineering Quality Sixth Testing Institute Co., Ltd. GR202211002384 15% Beijing Zhongjian Building Research Institute Co., Ltd. GR202011006430 15% China Construction First Engineering Bureau (Group) Co., Ltd. GR202111000630 15% China Construction First Engineering Bureau Group Decoration Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202011004486 15% China Construction First Engineering Bureau Third Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202011002605 15% Beijing Zhongjian Architectural Design Institute Co., Ltd. GR202211007788 15% China Construction Science and Industry Group Co., Ltd. GR202044202198 15% The Fifth Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction First Engineering Bureau GR202111000242 15% China Construction Engineering Design Group Corporation Limited GR202011003894 15% China Construction Southwest Survey and Design Institute Co., Ltd. GR202051000142 15% China Construction Underground Space Co., Ltd. GR202251005258 15% China Construction Ecological Environment Group Co., Ltd. GR202011000210 15% China Construction Infrastructure Co., Ltd. GR202011000318 15% China Construction Steel Structure Guangdong Co., Ltd. GR202144011432 15% China Construction Steel Structure Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202144205230 15% China Construction Science and Technology Group Smart Parking Technology Co., Ltd. GR202244200933 15% China State Construction Technology (Shenshan Special Cooperation Zone) Co., Ltd. GR202044204908 15% China State Construction Technology Group Co., Ltd. GR202044206081 15% China State Construction Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd. GR202011001695 15% China State Construction Engineering Industry Technology Research Institute Co., Ltd. GR202111005533 15% China Building Decoration Group Co., Ltd. GR202211008320 15% China State Construction Curtain Wall Co., Ltd. GR202242008622 15% China Construction Oriental Decoration Co., Ltd. GR202131000852 15% China Construction Lighting Co., Ltd. GR202044200342 15% 176 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# IV.  Taxation (continued) 2.  Preferential tax treatments (continued) 

(1)  Preferential tax treatment for key high and new technological enterprises encouraged and supported by the state (continued) 

According to the income tax law and other relevant regulations, the Group’s subsidiaries recognised as key high and new technological enterprises encouraged and supported by the state are as follows: (continued) 

Company name Certificate of High and New Technological Enterprises Effective tax rate 

China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Building Energy Saving Technology Co., Ltd. GR202143003490 15% China Construction No. 2 Curtain Wall Decoration Co., Ltd. GR202143000237 15% China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Decorative Curtain Wall Co., Ltd. GR202143002509 15% The Third Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau GR202143001620 15% China State Construction Technology Hunan Co., Ltd. GR202143000481 15% China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Installation Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202043002082 15% China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau East China Construction Co., Ltd. GR202231001316 15% China State Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. GR202043000761 15% China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau South China Construction Co., Ltd. GR202244201874 15% China Construction Sixth Bureau First Construction Co., Ltd. GR202012001086 15% China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Construction and Development Co., Ltd. GR202112001037 15% China Construction Bridge Co., Ltd. GR202251101476 15% Shanghai Haida Communication Co., Ltd. GR202131000679 15% China Construction Port and Shipping Bureau Group Co., Ltd. GR202131001570 15% China Construction Port Group Co., Ltd. GR202037100401 15% The Third Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction Second Engineering Bureau GR202111006398 15% China Construction Second Engineering Bureau First Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202111000524 15% China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. GR202011005634 15% China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Decoration Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202011000990 15% China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Installation Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202111000676 15% CSCEC Jiuhe Development Group Co., LTD. GR202211004893 15% The Second Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction Second Engineering Bureau GR202044203757 15% China Construction Zhonghuan New Energy Co., Ltd. GR202232014683 15% China Construction Second Engineering Bureau sunshine Intelligent Manufacturing Co., Ltd. GR202044010624 15% China State Construction West Construction Hunan Co., Ltd. GR202243000326 15% Henan Zhongjian Western Construction Co., Ltd. GR202141003468 15% China Construction West Construction New Material Technology Co., Ltd. GR202251004147 15% Nanjing Huajian Testing Technology Co., Ltd. GR202232014332 15% China State Construction Electronic Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202211000245 15% CSCEC Wuzhou Engineering Equipment Co., Ltd. GR202032006648 15% China Construction Industrial & Energy Engineering Group Co., Ltd. GR202132010981 15% CSCEC Xinjiang Installation Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202065000255 15% Guangxi Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau GR202145001083 15% 177 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# IV.  Taxation (continued) 2.  Preferential tax treatments (continued) 

(1)  Preferential tax treatment for key high and new technological enterprises encouraged and supported by the state (continued) 

According to the income tax law and other relevant regulations, the Group’s subsidiaries recognised as key high and new technological enterprises encouraged and supported by the state are as follows: (continued) 

Company name Certificate of High and New Technological Enterprises Effective tax rate 

The Second Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau GR202137002542 15% Shandong Zhongjian Construction Checking Testing Co., Ltd. GR202137004126 15% China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Fourth Construction Co., Ltd. GR202137101123 15% Jiangsu Tianyu design and Research Institute Co., Ltd. GR202032011349 15% The First Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. of China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau GR202037003064 15% Investment Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Eighth Engineering Division (Shandong) GR202137000714 15% China Construction Technology (Jinan) Co., Ltd. GR202037001173 15% China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau (Xiamen) Construction Co., Ltd. GR202135100676 15% China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Decoration Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202131000520 15% China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau South China Construction Co., Ltd. GR202144014361 15% China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Rail Transit Construction Co., Ltd. GR202032012507 15% Northwest Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau GR202161002076 15% China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Technology Construction Co., Ltd. GR202131000014 15% China Construction Eighth Bureau Development and Construction Co., Ltd. GR202145001083 15% Southwest Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau GR202051003475 15% China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Environmental Protection Technology Co., Ltd. GR202231004662 15% China State Construction Xinjiang Construction Group Fifth Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202265000206 15% China Construction Xinjiang Construction Engineering Group First Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202265000227 15% China State Construction Xinjiang Construction Engineering (Group) Co., Ltd. GR202165000046 15% China State Construction Zhongxin Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202037101613 15% China State Construction Xinjiang Construction Group Third Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202065000046 15% China State Construction Xinjiang Construction Engineering Civil Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202165000059 15% China Construction Western Construction Building Materials Science Research Institute Co., Ltd. GR202251003078 15% China Architecture Shanghai Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd. GR202131003421 15% China Construction Zhongyuan Architectural Design Institute Co., Ltd. GR202241003089 15% China Construction Strait Construction Development Co., Ltd. GR202235001605 15% China Construction Technology Henan Co., Ltd. GR202241000224 15% China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Civil Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202243000667 15% China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Garden Co., Ltd. GR202143002615 15% China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Third Construction Co., Ltd. GR202132007163 15% China Construction Fourth Engineering Bureau First Construction Co., Ltd. GR202144000186 15% China Construction Fourth Engineering Bureau Installation Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202252000123 15% China Construction Fourth Engineering Bureau Third Construction Co., Ltd. GR202152000142 15% 178 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# IV.  Taxation (continued) 2.  Preferential tax treatments (continued) 

(1)  Preferential tax treatment for key high and new technological enterprises encouraged and supported by the state (continued) 

According to the income tax law and other relevant regulations, the Group’s subsidiaries recognised as key high and new technological enterprises encouraged and supported by the state are as follows: (continued) 

Company name Certificate of High and New Technological Enterprises Effective tax rate 

China Construction Fourth Engineering Bureau Civil Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202044205254 15% Guizhou Zhongjian Architectural Research and Design Institute Co., Ltd. GR202052000333 15% Second Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Third Engineering Division GR202042002204 15% Third Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Third Engineering Division GR202042001764 15% China Construction Third Engineering Design Co., Ltd. GR202242001692 15% Shenzhen Overseas Decoration Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202044206222 15% China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Installation Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202242002833 15% China State Construction Technology Wuhan Co., Ltd. GR202042001219 15% China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd. GR202142003113 15% China Construction Fourth Engineering Bureau Fifth Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202044204395 15% China Construction Communications Construction Group Co., Ltd. GR202111000067 15% China Construction Municipal Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202111000695 15% Liaoning traffic engineering Co., Ltd. GR202121000707 15% China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Civil Engineering Group Co., Ltd. GR202111008514 15% China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Water Conservancy and Hydropower Construction Group Co., Ltd. GR202112001611 15% Huanan Construction Co., Ltd. of China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau GR202144207418 15% China Construction Third Engineering Bureau infrastructure construction investment Co., Ltd. GR202142004991 15% China Construction Railway Investment Testing Co., Ltd. GR202121002182 15% Chongqing Xinda Engineering Testing Technology Co., Ltd. GR202051101356 15% China Construction Seventh Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. GR202241001707 15% China State Construction Technology (Fuzhou) Co., Ltd. GR202035000126 15% China State Construction Northeast Architectural Design Institute (Xiamen) Co., Ltd. GR202035100542 15% China Construction Eighth Engineering Division. Co., Ltd. GR202231009889 15% China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Decoration Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202231002194 15% China Construction Fourth Engineering Bureau Sixth Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202234000052 15% China Construction Commodity Concrete Co., Ltd. GR202142000108 15% Xinjiang Institute of Building Research (Limited Liability Company) GR202065000035 15% China Construction Railway Investment and Construction Group Co., Ltd. GR202111005102 15% China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. GR202212003407 15% China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. GR202242002413 15% Guangdong Zhongjian New Building Components Co., Ltd. GR202144001673 15% China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Urban Construction Co., Ltd. GR202022000413 15% China Construction Integrated Technology Co., Ltd. GR202111008263 15% 179 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# IV.  Taxation (continued) 2.  Preferential tax treatments (continued) 

(1)  Preferential tax treatment for key high and new technological enterprises encouraged and supported by the state (continued) 

According to the income tax law and other relevant regulations, the Group’s subsidiaries recognised as key high and new technological enterprises encouraged and supported by the state are as follows: (continued) 

Company name Certificate of High and New Technological Enterprises Effective tax rate 

Xinjiang Construction Engineering Quality and Safety Testing Center GR202265000205 15% China Construction Third Engineering Bureau First Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202142002193 15% China State Construction Fourth Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. GR202244002938 15% China State Construction Intelligent Technology Co., Ltd. GR202011001520 15% China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Testing Technology Co., Ltd. GR202211006171 15% Hong Kong Huayi Design Consultants (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd. GR202044204944 15% Zhongjian Hailong Technology Co., Ltd. GR202144205013 15% Anhui Hailong Construction Industry Co., Ltd. GR202134004805 15% Shandong Hailong Construction Technology Co., Ltd. GR202237005327 15% Zhonghai Construction Co., Ltd. GR202244203757 15% Shenzhen Xinghai Electromechanical Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202144204632 15% Shenzhen Xinghai Internet of Things Technology Co., Ltd. GR202044200845 15% China Construction Xinke Decoration Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202211000432 15% China Construction Steel Wuhan Co., Ltd. GR202242005943 15% China Construction Science and Engineering Group Operations Management Co., Ltd. GR202244207907 15% China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Decoration Curtain Wall Co., Ltd. GR202232012957 15% China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau New Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. GR202231001001 15% China Construction Fourth Engineering Bureau South China Construction Co., Ltd. GR202244003699 15% China Construction Fourth Engineering Bureau Construction Development Co., Ltd. GR202235100237 15% China Construction Third Engineering Group South China Co., Ltd. GR202244013374 15% China Construction Third Engineering Group Beijing Co., Ltd. GR202211003712 15% China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Green Industry Investment Co., Ltd. GR202242006156 15% Hubei China Construction Third Bureau Construction Engineering Technology Co., Ltd. GR202242000742 15% 180 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# IV.  Taxation (continued) 2.  Preferential tax treatments (continued) 

(2)  Preferential tax policy related with Western Development Strategies and Xinjiang region 

Company name Effective tax rate 

Xi ’an Xingchu Construction Co., Ltd. 15% Chongqing Maohe Infrastructure Construction Co., Ltd. 15% Haidong Underground Tube Construction and Operation Management Co., Ltd. 15% Chongqing Kaizhou China Construction Tube Installation Co., Ltd. 15% China Construction Tunnel Construction Co., Ltd. 15% Chongqing Jinsha Yangtze River Bridge Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 15% CSCEC Zunyi Xinpu Construction Development Co., Ltd. 15% China Northwest design and Research Institute Co., Ltd. 15% Sichuan Southwest Construction Management and Consulting China Northwest design and Research Institute Co., Ltd. 15% CSCEC Southwest Consulting Company Limited 15% Shihezi Tube Construction and Investment Co., Ltd. 15% Yanqi Xiqingjiyuan Construction Co., Ltd. 15% CSCEC Wuzhou Infrastructure Investment Co., Ltd. 15% China Construction Technology Mianyang Co., Ltd. 15% China Construction Silk Road Construction and Investment Co., Ltd. 15% Shihezi Western Construction Co., Ltd. 15% Xinjiang Construction Engineering Quality and Safety Testing Center 15% China Construction Communications Engineering (Xizang) Co., Ltd. 15% Shaanxi China Construction Northwest Engineering Supervision Co., Ltd. 15% Sichuan Southwest Construction Engineering Consulting Co., Ltd. 15% Sichuan Southwest Engineering Project Management Consulting Co., Ltd. Tibet Branch 15% China Construction Steel Structure Sichuan Co., Ltd. 15% Sichuan West Construction Xingcheng Building Materials Co., Ltd. 15% Chengdu West Construction Xiangtou New Material Co., Ltd. 15% Nanning China Construction West Construction Co., Ltd. 15% Guangxi China Construction West Construction Co., Ltd. 15% Chongqing China Construction West Construction Co., Ltd. 15% CSCEC Rongcheng building materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. 15% CSCEC West Construction southwest Co., Ltd. 15% Yunnan China Construction West Construction Co., Ltd. 15% Meishan China Construction West Construction Co., Ltd. 15% 181 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Company name Effective tax rate 

Chengdu West Construction Sancha Lake building materials Co., Ltd. 15% China Construction West Construction North Co., Ltd. 15% Guiyang Zhongjian West Construction Co., Ltd. 15% Kashgar West Construction Co., Ltd. 15% CSCEC western construction Xinjiang Co., Ltd. 15% Gansu China Construction West Construction Co., Ltd. 15% Xinjiang West Construction Qingsong Co., Ltd. 15% Ya ’an West Land and Sea Construction Engineering Management Co., Ltd. 15% CSCEC Silk Road Xi ’an Construction and Operation Co., Ltd. 15% China Railway Construction (Chengdu) Co., Ltd. 15% China Construction Fifth Bureau (Ganzhou) Engineering Construction Co., Ltd. 15% Kunming Haixiang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 15% Kunming Haijia Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 15% Chongqing Xinyue Real Estate Co., Ltd. 15% Chongqing Jinjiahai Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 15% Note: According to the Notice Concerning the Continuation of the Cestern Development Enterprise Income Tax Policies (Ministry of Finance Notice No. 23 of 2020), the eligible enterprises are entitled 15% preferential income tax rate. 

# IV.  Taxation (continued) 2.  Preferential tax treatments (continued) 

(2)  Preferential tax policy related with Western Development Strategies and Xinjiang region (continued) 182 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements 1.  Cash and bank balances 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Cash on hands 128,867 79,733 Cash at banks 328,536,332 322,029,481 Other cash and bank balances 6,588,903 5,899,343 Total 335,254,102 328,008,557 

Other cash and bank balances represents deposits for bank acceptance notes, guarantee deposits and deposits for migrant workers’ wages, etc. As at 31 December 2022, the amount of fixed deposit with maturity of more than 3 months in the Group’s bank deposits is RMB715,000 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB8,658,299 thousand). Restricted cash and bank balances mainly represents reserves with Central Bank, deposits for bank acceptance notes, guarantee deposits, pre-sale supervision fund, mortgage deposits and salary deposit for migrant workers. As at 31 December 2022, the restricted cash and bank balances is RMB21,538,911 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB17,280,007 thousand). As at 31 December 2022, the offshore deposits of the Group amounted to RMB35,751,807 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB31,387,163 thousand).The amount deposited abroad and restricted in remittance recovery is RMB2,727,915 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB2,622,085 thousand). Short-term time deposits are made for varying periods of between one day and one year depending on the immediate cash requirements of the Group, and earn interest at the respective short term time deposit rates. 

2.  Financial assets held for trading 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 

Debt investments (Note 1) – 47,864 

Equity investments (Note 2) 20,153 23,733 Total 20,153 71,597 Note 1:  The fair value of an investment in debt instrument held for trading is mainly determined based on the trading price published by the financial institution in which it trades on the last trading day of the current period. Note 2:  The fair value of an investment in equity instrument held for trading is determined based on the closing price of the last trading day of the current period of the stock exchange in which the instrument trades. 

3.  Notes receivable 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Commercial acceptance bills 6,455,791 18,247,621 

Less: Impairment allowance (64,867) (502,016) 

Total 6,390,924 17,745,605 183 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 3.  Notes receivable (continued) 

The pledged notes receivable are as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Commercial acceptance bills 64,736 14,210 As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the notes receivable that were pledged by the Group to banks for borrowings are presented in details in Note V. 70. Notes receivable and impairment provisions disclosed by category: 

31 December 2022 Gross carrying amount Impairment allowance Carrying value Amount Ratio (%) Amount Ratio (%) 

Impairment of individually accrued 684,853 10.61 41,776 6.10 643,077 

Impairment of collectively accrued by credit risk portfolio 5,770,938 89.39 23,091 0.40 5,747,847 

Total 6,455,791 100.00 64,867 1.00 6,390,924 31 December 2021 Gross carrying amount Impairment allowance Carrying value Amount Ratio (%) Amount Ratio (%) 

Impairment of individually accrued 2,740,914 15.02 439,989 16.05 2,300,925 Impairment of collectively accrued by credit risk portfolio 15,506,707 84.98 62,027 0.40 15,444,680 Total 18,247,621 100.00 502,016 2.75 17,745,605 

Regardless of whether there is a significant financing component or not, the impairment provision of the Group’s notes receivables are measured based on the lifetime ECL. Commercial acceptance bills which had not matured but had been endorsed to other parties are as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Derecognised Recognised Derecognised Recognised 

Commercial acceptance bills – 2,985,517 – 8,412,053 In 2022, the amount of the bill turned into accounts receivable due to the drawer’s failure to perform the contract or the group’s initiative to return the bill is RMB2,339,074 thousand (2021: RMB10,713,977 thousand). 184 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 4.  Accounts receivable 

(1)  The ageing of accounts receivable is analysed as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Within 1 year 163,872,112 146,629,478 1-2 years 44,799,267 31,768,951 2-3 years 16,856,351 16,185,318 3-4 years 9,754,016 8,865,583 4-5 years 6,823,066 5,092,307 Over 5 years 6,261,543 5,296,535 Sub-total 248,366,355 213,838,172 Less: Impairment allowance (37,934,735) (33,239,590) Total 210,431,620 180,598,582 (2)  Provision for impairment: Accounts receivable and impairment allowance are disclosed by category: 

31 December 2022 Gross carrying amount Impairment allowance Carrying value Amount Ratio (%) Amount Ratio (%) 

Impairment of individually accrued 91,210,378 36.72 21,844,067 23.95 69,366,311 

Impairment of collectively accrued by credit risk portfolio 157,155,977 63.28 16,090,668 10.24 141,065,309 

Total 248,366,355 100.00 37,934,735 15.27 210,431,620 31 December 2021 (restated) Gross carrying amount Impairment allowance Carrying value Amount Ratio (%) Amount Ratio (%) 

Impairment of individually accrued 70,007,122 32.74 19,531,732 27.90 50,475,390 Impairment of collectively accrued by credit risk portfolio 143,831,050 67.26 13,707,858 9.53 130,123,192 Total 213,838,172 100.00 33,239,590 15.54 180,598,582 

As at 31 December 2022, impairment allowance of accounts receivable individually accrued is as follows: 

Carrying amount Impairment allowance Expected credit loss ratio Reasons 

Company 1 1,783,618 198,497 11.13% Recovery possibility 

Company 2 1,543,000 1,543,000 100.00% Recovery possibility 

Company 3 1,295,060 104,349 8.06% Recovery possibility 

Company 4 1,182,525 147,816 12.50% Recovery possibility 

Company 5 831,593 654,920 78.75% Recovery possibility 

Other 84,574,582 19,195,485 22.70% Recovery possibility 

Total 91,210,378 21,844,067 185 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 4.  Accounts receivable (continued) 

(2)  Provision for impairment: (continued) As at 31 December 2021, impairment allowance of accounts receivable individually accrued is as follows: 

Carrying amount Impairment allowance Expected credit loss ratio Reasons 

Company 1 2,422,103 1,723,593 71.16% Recovery possibility 

Company 2 1,643,000 1,643,000 100.00% Recovery possibility 

Company 3 1,303,425 162,928 12.50% Recovery possibility 

Company 4 1,106,794 1,015,604 91.76% Recovery possibility 

Company 5 958,498 166,689 17.39% Recovery possibility 

Other 62,573,302 14,819,918 23.68% Recovery possibility 

Total 70,007,122 19,531,732 The accounts receivable with impairment allowance collectively accrued by credit risk portfolio are as follows: Portfolio 1: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Estimated gross carrying amount at default Expected credit loss ratio (%) Lifetime expected credit loss Estimated gross carrying amount at default Expected credit loss ratio (%) Lifetime expected credit loss 

Within 1 year 28,829,427 2.00 575,757 25,901,239 2.00 518,025 1-2 years 8,740,694 5.00 437,035 5,406,440 5.00 270,322 2-3 years 3,000,543 15.00 450,081 2,432,319 15.00 364,848 3-4 years 1,504,956 30.00 451,487 960,602 30.00 288,181 4-5 years 655,213 45.00 294,846 307,392 45.00 138,326 Over 5 years 464,331 100.00 464,331 329,430 100.00 329,430 Total 43,195,164 2,673,537 35,337,422 1,909,132 

Portfolio 2: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Estimated gross carrying amount at default Expected credit loss ratio (%) Lifetime expected credit loss Estimated gross carrying amount at default Expected credit loss ratio (%) Lifetime expected credit loss 

Within 1 year 3,437,067 6.00 206,258 2,759,637 6.00 165,578 1-2 years 381,619 12.00 45,794 507,748 12.00 60,930 2-3 years 193,490 25.00 48,373 311,655 25.00 77,914 3-4 years 197,553 45.00 88,899 169,648 45.00 76,342 4-5 years 150,166 70.00 105,117 33,614 70.00 23,530 Over 5 years 140,766 100.00 140,766 107,152 100.00 107,152 Total 4,500,661 635,207 3,889,454 511,446 186 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 4.  Accounts receivable (continued) 

(2)  Provision for impairment: (continued) The accounts receivable with impairment allowance collectively accrued by credit risk portfolio are as follows: (continued) Portfolio 3: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Estimated gross carrying amount at default Expected credit loss ratio (%) Lifetime expected credit loss Estimated gross carrying amount at default Expected credit loss ratio (%) Lifetime expected credit loss 

Within 1 year 71,884,831 4.50 3,233,859 73,514,262 4.50 3,308,142 1-2 years 20,882,232 10.00 2,088,223 14,267,572 10.00 1,426,757 2-3 years 6,622,900 20.00 1,324,414 9,555,196 20.00 1,911,039 3-4 years 5,151,576 40.00 2,060,630 3,633,652 40.00 1,453,461 4-5 years 2,410,901 65.00 1,567,086 1,273,172 65.00 827,561 Over 5 years 2,507,712 100.00 2,507,712 2,360,320 100.00 2,360,320 Total 109,460,152 12,781,924 104,604,174 11,287,280 

The movements in impairment allowance for accounts receivable are as follows: 2022 

Opening balance Provision Reversal Write-off Other movements Closing balance 33,239,590 21,559,382 (14,839,522) (246,155) (1,778,560) 37,934,735 

2021 (restated) 

As at 31 December 2020 Accounting policy alternative Opening balance Provision Reversal Write-off Other movements Closing balance 

25,792,354 12,430 25,804,784 19,341,507 (11,112,880) (644,966) (148,855) 33,239,590 The major amounts reversal or collection of 2022 are as follows: 

Reason for reversal/ collection Basis and rationality for determining the provision for impairment Amount of reversal/ collection Way of collection 

Company 1 Recover project funds Individually accrued 911,035 Cession Company 2 Recover project funds Individually accrued 132,980 Cession Company 3 Recover project funds Individually accrued 121,037 Cession Company 4 Recover project funds Individually accrued 103,976 Cash Company 5 Recover project funds Individually accrued 96,925 Cession Others Recover project funds, etc. Individually and collectively accrued 13,473,569 Cash or reversal Total 14,839,522 187 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 4.  Accounts receivable (continued) 

(3)  As at 31 December 2022, the five largest accounts receivable according to customers are analysed as follows: 

Amount Amount of Impairment allowance Percentage of total accounts receivable 

Total amount of the five largest accounts receivable 8,791,233 2,180,852 3.54% 

As at 31 December 2021, the five largest accounts receivable according to customers are analysed as follows: 

Amount Amount of Impairment allowance Percentage of total accounts receivable 

Total amount of the five largest accounts receivable 9,138,994 3,668,654 4.27% For the year ended 31 December 2022, the amount of accounts receivable and contract assets derecognised by the Group due to the transfer of financial assets was RMB61,208,013 thousand (2021: RMB43,232,447 thousand), and the related expenses were RMB2,153,251 thousand (2021: RMB1,968,990 thousand). As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, accounts receivable that were pledged by the Group to banks for borrowings are presented in details in Note V. 70. 

5.  Accounts receivable financing 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Bank acceptance bills 4,658,182 3,773,078 

The Group discounts and endorses some bank acceptance bills according to the needs of daily capital management. Therefore, bank acceptance bills are classified as financial assets measured at fair value and their changes included in other comprehensive income. Accounts receivable financing that have been endorsed or discounted on the balance sheet date but not overdue are as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Derecognised Recognised Derecognised Recognised 

Bank acceptance bills 1,246,298 1,322,082 1,415,666 1,389,861 As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the Group measured impairment allowance based on the expected credit loss of the entire lifetime. The bank acceptance bills held by the assessment was not subject to significant credit risk, and the amount of expected credit loss was not significant. 

6.  Prepayments 

The ageing analysis of prepayments is as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Carrying amount Ratio (%) Carrying amount Ratio (%) 

Within 1 year 31,772,261 85.36 46,641,323 94.39 

1-2 years 4,518,940 12.14 1,663,278 3.37 

2-3 years 595,982 1.60 717,754 1.45 

Over 3 years 335,978 0.90 390,850 0.79 

Total 37,223,161 100.00 49,413,205 100.00 As at 31 December 2022, prepayments aged more than 1 year amounted to RMB5,450,900 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB2,771,882 thousand), mainly including advances to subcontractors and prepayments for land use rights, where the project is not completed, or land has not been obtained. 188 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 6.  Prepayments (continued) 

As at 31 December 2022, the five largest prepayments to suppliers are as follows: 

Amount Percentage of total balance 

Total amount of the five largest prepayments to suppliers 10,898,498 29.28% 

As at 31 December 2021, the five largest prepayments to suppliers are as follows: 

Amount Percentage of total balance 

Total amount of the five largest prepayments to suppliers 21,300,072 43.11% 

7.  Other receivables 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Other receivables 73,584,067 60,981,694 The ageing analysis of other receivables is as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Within 1 year 58,670,492 42,330,545 1 to 2 years 10,147,845 13,208,940 2 to 3 years 4,697,506 6,371,798 3 to 4 years 3,915,904 3,812,884 4 to 5 years 2,529,849 830,082 Over 5 years 1,780,768 1,521,033 Sub-total 81,742,364 68,075,282 Less: Impairment allowance (8,158,297) (7,093,588) Total 73,584,067 60,981,694 

Natures of other receivables are as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Deposits and petty cash receivable 16,405,471 14,399,091 Advances receivable 32,021,771 24,797,576 Receivables from related parties (Note X. 7) 5,593,651 5,660,953 Deposit receivable 4,702,770 4,164,185 Others 23,018,701 19,053,477 Sub-total 81,742,364 68,075,282 Less: Impairment allowance (8,158,297) (7,093,588) Total 73,584,067 60,981,694 189 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 7.  Other receivables (continued) 

Changes in impairment allowance recognised for the future 12-month ECLs and lifetime ECLs on other receivables are as follows: 2022 

Stage 1 Stage 3 Total 12-month expected credit losses Credit-impaired financial assets (Lifetime expected credit losses) 

Opening balance of the year 2,051,818 5,041,770 7,093,588 

Provision 1,561,342 1,135,598 2,696,940 

Reversal (1,221,707) (476,526) (1,698,233) 

Write-off (11,829) (74,077) (85,906) 

Others 75,756 76,152 151,908 

Closing balance of the year 2,455,380 5,702,917 8,158,297 

2021 (restated) 

Stage 1 Stage 3 Total 12-month expected credit losses Credit-impaired financial assets (Lifetime expected) credit losses 

Opening balance of the year 2,025,888 4,734,463 6,760,351 

Changes due to the opening balance Transfer of stages (73,704) 73,704 –

Provision 1,525,545 604,044 2,129,589 

Reversal (1,120,503) (266,743) (1,387,246) 

Write-off (292,788) (96,228) (389,016) 

Others (12,620) (7,470) (20,090) 

Closing balance of the year 2,051,818 5,041,770 7,093,588 The major amounts reversal or collection of 2022 is as follows: 

Reason for reversal/collection Receivable collected Amount of reversal/ collection Way of collection 

Company 1 Receivable collected Combined accrual 33,892 Cash 

Company 2 Receivable collected Combined accrual 29,131 Cash 

Company 3 Receivable collected Individual accrual 27,828 Cash 

Company 4 Receivable collected Individual accrual 26,880 Cash 

Company 5 Receivable collected Combined accrual 25,215 Cash 

Others Receivable collected, etc. Individual and combined accrual 1,555,287 Cash or Reversal 

Total 1,698,233 190 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 7.  Other receivables (continued) 

As at 31 December 2022, other receivables from the five largest customers are as follows: 

Amount % of total balance Nature Ageing Impairment allowance Amount 

Company 1 999,138 1.22 Account current 1 to 2 years 39,966 

Company 2 918,000 1.12 Account current 2 to 3 years, 3 to 4 years 209,400 

Company 3 848,634 1.04 Account current Within 1 year, 1 to 2 years 33,964 

Company 4 626,814 0.77 Cash deposit 1 to 2 years 1,880 

Company 5 593,500 0.73 Account current 1 to 2 years 23,740 

Total 3,986,086 4.88 308,950 

As at 31 December 2021, other receivables from the five largest customers are as follows: 

Amount % of total balance Nature Ageing Impairment allowance Amount 

Company 1 1,584,775 2.33 Account current Within 1 year, 1 to 2 years 122,377 

Company 2 1,125,658 1.65 Cash deposit Within 1 year, 1 to 2 years 44,026 

Company 3 926,360 1.36 Account current Within 1 year 36,807 

Company 4 918,000 1.35 Account current 1 to 2 years, 2 to 3 years 104,400 

Company 5 626,726 0.92 Account current Within 1 year, 1 to 2 years 40,275 

Total 5,181,519 7.61 347,885 

8.  Inventories 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Carrying amount Impairment provision Net value Carrying amount Impairment provision Net value 

Properties under development 601,559,471 (5,041,972) 596,517,499 568,518,817 (3,184,784) 565,334,033 Completed properties for sale 150,927,611 (1,704,555) 149,223,056 112,087,777 (873,390) 111,214,387 Raw materials 19,849,281 (880) 19,848,401 21,070,777 (21,110) 21,049,667 Work in progress 1,506,507 – 1,506,507 926,326 – 926,326 Finished goods 4,187,585 (7,550) 4,180,035 4,781,195 (2,971) 4,778,224 Others 273,102 – 273,102 149,472 – 149,472 Total 778,303,557 (6,754,957) 771,548,600 707,534,364 (4,082,255) 703,452,109 

As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the inventories that were pledged by the Group to banks for borrowings are presented in details in Note V. 70. 191 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 8.  Inventories (continued) 

The details of properties under development are as follows: 

Project Name Date of commencement Estimated completion time Estimated completion investment 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Jianguo East Road 69th Street December 2022 December 2025 35,754,365 21,582,926 11,924,394 Guangzhou Asian Games City November 2011 December 2023 23,652,451 17,062,620 –Beijing Daji Critical Reform Project January 2003 December 2023 33,966,945 11,466,640 19,135,708 Beijing Fuhuali November 2022 September 2024 13,088,490 10,897,285 –Zhonghai Huanyu Shidai Residence March 2021 November 2024 15,380,153 9,291,741 11,325,546 Yangpu Project June 2022 December 2024 9,300,000 7,953,446 –Shanghai Hongkou District Duolun Road Project November 2015 December 2025 10,940,594 7,473,286 7,263,200 Huashanlongcheng Project July 2014 July 2024 50,021,918 7,148,368 7,024,918 Guanggang No.234 Plot March 2022 December 2023 11,193,700 6,897,955 3,201,194 Dalian CITIC Harbour City January 2013 May 2028 7,500,000 6,831,337 3,681,643 Canal new town 22 Plots December 2021 December 2023 7,780,040 6,548,586 3,008,423 Sun Palace August 2022 February 2025 8,577,000 6,079,577 –Lake light August 2022 April 2024 8,856,524 5,977,119 –Herui 3rd December 2022 December 2024 6,613,520 5,541,428 –Zhonghai Huideli Mansion March 2022 December 2024 8,103,847 5,488,250 6,044,902 CSCEC Yipin Xuefu Residence March 2022 June 2024 6,296,730 5,400,243 103 China Construction LuMing Mansion Project June 2021 September 2024 7,129,000 4,999,969 4,471,866 Zhonghai Jianqiao July 2020 December 2027 22,200,054 5,151,745 3,991,852 Zhonghai Huawan September 2021 December 2023 6,222,670 5,033,112 4,494,182 Zhonghai Chunlang Garden April 2021 April 2023 5,514,270 4,903,312 3,985,128 CSCEC Yipin Xuefu Residence West District February 2022 June 2024 6,000,000 4,863,852 24 Beijing Company Rice Field Project November 2020 January 2023 5,602,640 4,835,818 4,766,084 246 Xiangshan’s Island Project December 2020 June 2025 6,687,242 4,701,208 3,870,786 Zhonghai Xinchuan Huafu September 2022 April 2024 6,061,410 4,689,335 –Cuilanyunjing February 2022 December 2023 5,513,873 4,671,204 –No. 6066, 6067 and other plots projects October 2021 December 2024 7,684,640 4,667,716 4,334,772 Beijing Huideli May 2022 October 2023 6,089,037 4,658,138 4,658,325 Zhonghai Guanyuan project January 2022 June 2024 5,200,000 4,600,083 3,266,297 CSCEC Tianfu Residence September 2020 December 2024 7,659,000 4,470,503 4,213,904 Jiangbei district 2021 G15 December 2021 October 2023 5,343,490 4,396,094 3,730,971 Nanjing Xiyuan mansion July 2018 December 2023 9,200,000 4,228,858 4,283,140 Suzhou high tech Zone headquarters base residence April 2022 March 2024 5,800,000 4,203,976 115 Zhonghai Beilonghuzhu July 2021 December 2023 5,316,020 4,178,865 3,770,830 Guangzhou Haizhu Nanzhou Road Project March 2021 October 2023 5,757,869 4,133,501 4,755,781 192 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 8.  Inventories (continued) 

The details of properties under development are as follows: (continued) 

Project Name Date of commencement Estimated completion time Estimated completion investment 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Guanggang Nanping continent Plot October 2021 December 2023 4,731,055 4,104,069 3,537,916 Zhonghai Wenhuali March 2022 December 2023 4,784,671 4,036,210 2,924,880 No.1 consulate October 2020 June 2023 4,666,580 3,990,660 3,503,254 Top scientists community 02 Group Project June 2021 December 2023 6,110,000 3,979,453 2,698,410 Dongguan Zhonghai Qirui garden November 2021 September 2023 4,754,784 3,946,175 3,247,144 Zhonghai Huanyu Longchen February 2022 April 2024 4,756,310 3,898,327 2,439,786 Xihongmen Project July 2022 June 2024 5,289,020 3,801,914 –Tianjin Zuo’an Yuanjing Project November 2021 October 2023 4,553,890 3,736,839 1,431,946 Huizhili March 2022 June 2024 4,932,926 3,711,573 –Guanjiang Jiayuan September 2022 December 2024 5,836,330 3,600,644 –Tianjin Park City May 2013 December 2028 16,813,110 3,588,152 4,559,543 Shanghai Shenggang academy B0701 Project July 2021 December 2023 4,897,830 3,530,708 2,693,433 Shili Guanlan Project August 2021 September 2023 4,138,700 3,511,096 2,770,378 Unit FXC1-0016, Fengxian new town Commercial housing project of plot 27-06 August 2021 March 2024 5,855,000 3,508,931 115,200 Changzhou hongken project January 2021 September 2023 5,270,948 3,507,282 3,415,087 Shenzhen Light phoenix Plot March 2023 September 2025 4,812,540 3,397,424 –Taiyuan Zhonghai Internation Community May 2019 February 2026 13,307,682 3,326,726 1,615,261 Shenyang Huideli July 2020 June 2023 4,268,144 3,270,258 3,296,776 China Construction Fudi starlight City December 2014 December 2023 12,921,810 3,261,449 7,301,033 Shanghai Heke Public Project October 2022 September 2025 11,184,571 3,253,812 –Top Scientist Community 03 Group Project June 2021 December 2023 4,570,000 3,189,237 2,013,381 Suzhou Gaoxin Nanda Supporting Project March 2022 November 2023 5,500,000 3,179,533 202 Beijing Chaoyang Cuigezhuang Naixi Village 318 Plot September 2022 December 2024 3,599,920 3,154,078 –Guiyang Zhonghai Yingshan Lake Project February 2020 April 2023 6,626,460 3,084,710 4,738,287 Spring Scenery Yayuan Project April 2021 September 2024 4,163,510 3,060,978 2,499,364 Jin’an Lake 3rd March 2022 September 2023 3,496,650 3,001,074 2,165,517 Ningbo Fuhuali December 2022 December 2024 4,784,260 2,977,701 –The Big Mansion Project December 2020 October 2025 13,947,382 2,976,845 2,568,201 Kunming Southwest Forestry University April 2021 December 2023 3,756,500 2,951,510 2,542,126 Chengdu Zhonghai Tianfu Plot 3 and 4 July 2018 January 2026 20,618,446 2,877,906 2,726,838 Taihu Lake Star Residential Project October 2021 August 2024 4,578,423 2,841,767 35,197 Others 270,274,334 372,475,569 Total 601,559,471 568,518,817 193 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 8.  Inventories (continued) 

The details of completed properties held for sale are as follows: 2022 

Project Name Completion time of the latest phase At the beginning of the balance Additions Deductions At the end of the balance 

Hong Kong Kai Tak 6575 Plot Project December 2022 – 10,974,890 (3,966,458) 7,008,432 

Shenzhen Zhonghai Minzhi Project December 2022 – 4,000,508 (42,991) 3,957,517 

Zhongjian • Jinxiu World December 2022 171,050 6,523,335 (3,064,891) 3,629,494 

Tianjin city park project December 2022 1,843,481 1,461,432 (741,375) 2,563,538 

Fengtai Zaojia Village September 2022 – 7,224,663 (4,838,527) 2,386,136 

Zhonghai Jincheng International November 2021 755,620 1,681,142 (65,846) 2,370,916 

Zhonghai Shangxuefu phase 2 December 2022 335,467 2,171,209 (177,153) 2,329,523 

Yunlujiuli II Phase December 2021 2,892,117 – (797,890) 2,094,227 

Jilin Changchun Zhonghai Shengshi City D September 2022 1,721,589 515,855 (152,652) 2,084,792 

Dalian Zhonghai Park Uptown Project October 2022 1,579,209 1,855,037 (1,370,519) 2,063,727 

Jiangsu 2017-WG-40 Plot January 2022 – 4,771,518 (2,778,798) 1,992,720 

Guangzhou Asian Games City November 2022 – 8,364,366 (6,394,800) 1,969,566 

Kunming Zhonghai Universe World Plot 11 December 2020 2,791,685 – (969,698) 1,821,987 

Changxindian Plot C December 2022 300 3,715,658 (1,910,882) 1,805,076 

Xin zhi yuan jing September 2022 – 5,108,488 (3,304,055) 1,804,433 

Zhonghai Universe Times December 2022 853,761 1,154,578 (309,862) 1,698,477 

Zhongjian Guanhu Mansion December 2022 – 1,690,110 – 1,690,110 

Zhonghai Xi Garden December 2021 1,910,714 – (298,361) 1,612,353 

Zhonghai Longwan peninsula Garden A December 2022 – 5,722,514 (4,194,031) 1,528,483 

Zhonghai Universe World four Period December 2022 – 6,960,087 (5,434,157) 1,525,930 

Dalian CITIC Harbour City December 2022 2,687,779 – (1,174,296) 1,513,483 

Zhongjian Binshui Garden December 2022 – 1,505,798 – 1,505,798 

Zhongjian Huafu-B Plot-Real Estate June 2022 1,406,700 131,191 (94,893) 1,442,998 

No.9 Mansion December 2019 1,937,460 – (514,004) 1,423,456 

Zhonghairuyuan March 2022 1,221,148 563,656 (376,779) 1,408,025 

Guangzhou Zhonghai Litchi Mansion August 2022 – 1,367,277 (148,595) 1,218,682 

Comprehensive Reform Zone Yangzhuang Project 1# June 2022 515,511 2,310,823 (1,697,398) 1,128,936 

Technology City Project December 2022 – 1,947,294 (821,149) 1,126,145 

Zhonghai Yunchuan Yuanjing November 2022 – 1,626,280 (500,323) 1,125,957 

Zhonghai Erqi Binjiang (business zone) November 2022 – 1,116,086 – 1,116,086 

Eastlight December 2022 – 1,086,424 (28,244) 1,058,180 

Jilin Changchun Zhonghai Shengshi City C September 2022 1,027,891 61,582 (44,923) 1,044,550 

Zhonghai New City No.1 Mansion I December 2022 1,064,676 18,346 (70,994) 1,012,028 

Harbin Zhonghai Tianyu December 2021 1,391,000 – (396,557) 994,443 

Zhongjian Meixi Shangjun September 2022 – 1,020,726 (29,524) 991,202 194 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 8.  Inventories (continued) 

The details of completed properties held for sale are as follows: (continued) 2022 (continued) 

Project Name Completion time of the latest phase At the beginning of the balance Additions Deductions At the end of the balance 

Zhonghai Yunzhu November 2020 1,218,674 – (242,793) 975,881 

Mirror of the sky June 2022 – 5,045,432 (4,127,020) 918,412 

Taiyuan Zhonghai international community April 2022 1,120,106 1,806,124 (2,015,468) 910,762 

Wuxi Jiangyin Yuecheng River September 2022 – 1,050,503 (170,387) 880,116 

Changchun Zhonghai Jincheng October 2021 1,427,763 – (549,792) 877,971 

3 Eco-Health City, Chengdu November 2018 944,998 – (76,758) 868,240 

Chongqin Kafu Project September 2022 604,534 843,201 (580,646) 867,089 

Zhongjian Guanhu Mansion December 2022 – 862,492 – 862,492 

Zhonghai Huideli September 2022 – 1,595,477 (737,941) 857,536 

Zhonghai Wansongjiuli June 2021 1,082,316 – (249,643) 832,673 

Kowloon peak June 2019 759,144 63,574 – 822,718 

Guangzhou Zhonghai Zuo’an Lanting Project September 2021 1,050,683 – (230,126) 820,557 

Licang District Hotel Management School west side plot project – Huishui road September 2022 – 827,857 (33,599) 794,258 

Universe Times May 2022 723,815 2,855,703 (2,813,159) 766,359 

Plot 116 Project January 2022 494,875 553,676 (292,909) 755,642 

Zhonghai Yonghexi’an Mansion December 2022 1,060,401 – (308,077) 752,324 

Hangzhou Royal Road Plot 1, 2012-2013 October 2018 750,502 – (372) 750,130 

Zhonghai Lixianghu Project December 2013 852,381 – (111,274) 741,107 

Shenzhen Zhonghai Wanjinxi’an December 2020 1,307,346 – (569,854) 737,492 

Zhonghai Chunxiaodongyuan June 2022 – 1,185,954 (470,128) 715,826 

No.0056 Plot Project November 2022 – 2,820,908 (2,124,585) 696,323 

Zhonghai Yunzhu December 2019 1,057,776 – (364,732) 693,044 

Hefei China Construction Industrial Base June 2022 701,414 70,165 (79,670) 691,909 

Jilin Changchun Oak Park December 2022 745,717 202,300 (256,975) 691,042 

537 Greenwich Senior apartment project June 2022 1,287,597 232,520 (830,333) 689,784 

Jinli 2019-09 lot project November 2022 77,117 1,228,739 (616,272) 689,584 

Shougang Garden II September 2022 148,928 813,166 (274,071) 688,023 

Fuzhou Zhonghai Ziyu Garden December 2022 714,810 289,087 (317,853) 686,044 

Zhongjian Jinxiu world B, C block August 2021 699,708 – (39,259) 660,449 

Zhonghai Shijihui Garden January 2020 838,538 – (196,994) 641,544 

Foshan Yunlu Residence December 2022 972,482 731,644 (1,063,767) 640,359 

Nanchang Zhonghai Universal World March 2019 425,177 228,534 (15,540) 638,171 

Dalian Zhonghai Wanjin Mansion September 2022 577,765 181,995 (123,287) 636,473 195 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 8.  Inventories (continued) 

The details of completed properties held for sale are as follows: (continued) 2022 (continued) 

Project Name Completion time of the latest phase At the beginning of the balance Additions Deductions At the end of the balance 

Dragon Bay U-live November 2021 715,766 1 (86,871) 628,896 

Yunqi Garden, Yunshang Garden, Yunzhen Garden April 2022 – 635,184 (13,914) 621,270 

Zhongjian City 7th Project December 2022 185,608 1,315,349 (897,043) 603,914 

Beijing Yizhuang Smart City Project December 2022 – 10,357,402 (9,756,933) 600,469 

Nanjing Xiyuan Mansion June 2022 1,276,595 717,475 (1,397,042) 597,028 

Tsingdao Linxishijia Project June 2022 999,313 13,902 (418,147) 595,068 

Universe World January 2022 82,540 756,635 (245,979) 593,196 

Zhonghai Huanyu Mansion December 2022 – 3,175,453 (2,587,660) 587,793 

Konggang Lanting Bueaty B June 2022 629,322 10,630 (66,688) 573,264 

Goya Park Project June 2022 534,942 693,934 (666,877) 561,999 

Zhonghai Hongzhu Project December 2019 556,391 304 (2,082) 554,613 

Huideli June 2022 – 749,056 (194,832) 554,224 

Zhongjian Luxi lan’an December 2022 – 534,410 – 534,410 

Fangshanyin June 2022 – 2,852,617 (2,322,758) 529,859 

Shenzhou Peninsula Second Bay June 2022 23,446 986,921 (484,044) 526,323 

Xingang Senior apartment project March 2022 1,016,380 77,331 (570,422) 523,289 

Zhonghai Lichun Lake Villa December 2021 2,153,057 – (1,631,219) 521,838 

Runshan Mansion June 2021 848,689 – (329,566) 519,123 

Zhongjian Shangshu Garden December 2022 – 518,132 – 518,132 

Others 55,314,003 127,372,944 (133,801,784) 48,885,163 

Total 112,087,777 260,907,604 (222,067,770) 150,927,611 

Movements in the carrying amount of inventories are as follows: 2022 

At the beginning of the balance Additions Deductions At the end of the balance 

Properties under development 568,518,817 316,366,194 (283,325,540) 601,559,471 

Completed properties for sale 112,087,777 260,907,604 (222,067,770) 150,927,611 

Raw materials 21,070,777 614,265,827 (615,487,323) 19,849,281 

Work in progress 926,326 3,049,995 (2,469,814) 1,506,507 

Finished goods 4,781,195 50,937,822 (51,531,432) 4,187,585 

Others 149,472 8,582,342 (8,458,712) 273,102 

Total 707,534,364 1,254,109,784 (1,183,340,591) 778,303,557 196 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 8.  Inventories (continued) 

Movements in the carrying amount of inventories are as follows: (continued) 2021 (restated) 

At the beginning of the balance Additions Deductions At the end of the balance 

Properties under development 575,666,522 310,738,209 (317,885,914) 568,518,817 Completed properties for sale 79,177,264 300,114,770 (267,204,257) 112,087,777 Raw materials 20,162,404 600,307,598 (599,399,225) 21,070,777 Work in progress 716,143 4,027,627 (3,817,444) 926,326 Finished goods 3,298,251 52,991,031 (51,508,087) 4,781,195 Others 302,270 4,230,864 (4,383,662) 149,472 Total 679,322,854 1,272,410,099 (1,244,198,589) 707,534,364 

Movements in the impairment provision of inventories are as follows: 2022 

1 January 2022 Increase during the year Decrease during the year 31 December 2022 Accrual Others Reversal Write-off Others 

Properties under development 3,184,784 1,441,565 415,623 – – – 5,041,972 

Completed properties for sale 873,390 1,067,788 80,117 (291,212) (25,528) – 1,704,555 

Raw materials 21,110 880 – (4,111) – (16,999) 880 

Finished goods 2,971 4,520 59 – – – 7,550 

Total 4,082,255 2,514,753 495,799 (295,323) (25,528) (16,999) 6,754,957 

2021 

1 January 2021 Increase during the year Decrease during the year 31 December 2021 Accrual Others Reversal Write-off Others 

Properties under development 3,537,411 291,532 (599,600) – – (44,559) 3,184,784 Completed properties for sale 557,024 360,280 599,600 (612,225) (10,878) (20,411) 873,390 Raw materials 17,803 16,999 – (8,126) (5,566) – 21,110 Finished goods 60,411 21,149 – (59,266) (19,323) – 2,971 Total 4,172,649 689,960 – (679,617) (35,767) (64,970) 4,082,255 

Net realisable value Reasons of reversal and write-off during the period 

Properties under development Completed properties for sale Raw materials Expected selling price less estimated costs to be incurred at completion, the estimated selling expenses and the relevant taxes and fees Net realisable value increased or sales realised 197 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 9.  Contract assets 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Unconfirmed Investment payment 220,578,461 181,988,662 Receivables for Construction project 193,324,278 157,324,720 Project quality warranty 110,188,617 95,637,640 Franchise rights not yet in operation 11,087,255 10,437,049 Primary land development 9,513,644 9,510,441 Others 3,185,013 3,670,867 Sub-total 547,877,268 458,569,379 Less: Provision for impairment allowance of contract assets (11,311,279) (8,841,709) Sub-total 536,565,989 449,727,670 Less: Co ntract assets disclosed within the other non-current assets (Note V. 25) (263,334,996) (223,656,703) Less: Co ntract assets disclosed within the intangible assets (Note V. 21) (10,719,669) (10,437,049) Total 262,511,324 215,633,918 Original value of current contract assets 269,902,884 221,728,920 Provision for impairment allowance of current contract assets (7,391,560) (6,095,002) 

The Group provides construction services to customers and recognizes revenue and contract assets over a period of time. These contract assets are transferred to accounts receivable after the formation of unconditional payment rights, or to intangible assets after reaching the predetermined usable state. Changes in provision for impairment of contract assets are as follows: 2022 

1 January 2022 Provision Reversal Write-offs Other changes 31 December 2022 8,841,709 4,843,733 (2,202,417) (1,208) (170,538) 11,311,279 

2021 (restated) 

31 December 2020 Changes in accounting policies 1 January 2021 Provision Reversal Write-offs Other changes 31 December 2021 

5,331,714 377,813 5,709,527 4,132,172 (856,222) (105,649) (38,119) 8,841,709 The changes in the impairment allowance of the current part of contract assets are as follows: 2022 

1 January 2022 Provision Reversal Write-offs Other changes 31 December 2022 6,095,002 3,319,629 (1,813,081) (1,208) (208,782) 7,391,560 

2021 (restated) 

31 December 2020 Changes in accounting policies 1 January 2021 Provision Reversal Write-offs Other changes 31 December 2021 

3,818,976 15,134 3,834,110 3,061,077 (671,997) (105,649) (22,539) 6,095,002 Whether the contract assets have significant financing components or not,the provisions for impairment is measured according to the expected credit loss of the whole duration. 198 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 9.  Contract assets (continued) 31 December 2022 Gross carrying amount Provision for bad debts Amount Ratio (%) Amount Withdrawal ratio (%) 

Impairment of individually accrued 57,492,327 21.30 6,091,220 10.59 

Impairment of collectively accrued by credit risk portfolio 212,410,557 78.70 1,300,340 0.61 

Total 269,902,884 100.00 7,391,560 2.74 31 December 2021 (restated) Gross carrying amount Provision for bad debts Amount Ratio (%) Amount Withdrawal ratio (%) 

Impairment of individually accrued 41,867,440 18.88 5,070,255 12.11 

Impairment of collectively accrued by credit risk portfolio 179,861,480 81.12 1,024,747 0.57 

Total 221,728,920 100.00 6,095,002 2.75 As at 31 December 2022, contract assets individually assessed for expected credit losses are as follows: 

Carrying amount Impairment allowance ECLs rate for the entire lifetime (%) Reasons 

Company 1 781,310 32,665 4.18 Note 

Company 2 385,994 170,524 44.18 Note 

Company 3 358,580 146,744 40.92 Note 

Company 4 259,695 79,940 30.78 Note 

Company 5 232,345 46,469 20.00 Note 

Others 55,474,403 5,614,878 10.12 Note 

Total 57,492,327 6,091,220 

As at 31 December 2021, contract assets individually assessed for expected credit losses are as follows: 

Carrying amount Impairment allowance ECLs rate for the entire lifetime (%) Reasons 

Company 1 1,124,502 324,276 28.84 Note Company 2 626,795 62,679 10.00 Note Company 3 375,643 117,651 31.32 Note Company 4 210,724 210,724 100.00 Note Company 5 191,841 44,124 23.00 Note Others 39,337,935 4,310,801 10.96 Note Total 41,867,440 5,070,255 

> Note: The Group provides construction services to customers above. Due to the shortage of funds of the customers, the Group expected some contract assets are difficult to be settled and impairment allowance is provided accordingly.

The terminated contract assets by the Group are presented in detail in Note V. 4. As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the contract assets that were pledged by the Group to banks for borrowings are presented in detail in Note V. 70. 199 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 10.  Current portion of non-current assets 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Current portion of long-term receivables (Note V. 13) 41,729,496 37,533,482 Current portion of debt Investments (Note V. 12) 6,920,385 5,891,532 Current portion of other debt Investments – 142,945 Others 604,161 452,962 Total 49,254,042 44,020,921 

11.  Other current assets 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Input VAT to be credited 46,987,300 40,569,051 Prepaid taxes 47,007,377 39,436,844 Receivables from related parties (Note X. 7) 15,065,951 20,874,947 Short term debt investment measured at amortization cost 5,162,736 5,196,946 Others 11,363,641 6,270,094 Sub-total 125,587,005 112,347,882 Less: Provision for impairment allowance (1,675,125) (938,046) Total 123,911,880 111,409,836 

12.  Debt investments 31 December 2022 Gross carrying amount Provision for impairment Carrying amount 

Loans receivable from related parties (Note X. 7) 24,647,313 (95,197) 24,552,116 

Entrusted loans 498,116 (3,999) 494,117 

Including: Entrusted loans from related parties (Note X. 7) 357,867 (3,578) 354,289 

Others 4,631,706 (212,515) 4,419,191 

Sub-total 29,777,135 (311,711) 29,465,424 

Less: De bt investments of non-current assets due within one year (Note V. 10) 7,126,817 (206,432) 6,920,385 

Total 22,650,318 (105,279) 22,545,039 31 December 2021 (restated) Gross carrying amount Provision for impairment Carrying amount 

Loans receivable from related parties (Note X. 7) 24,040,370 (7,414) 24,032,956 Entrusted loans 633,106 (4,502) 628,604 

Including: Entrusted loans from related parties (Note X. 7) 359,732 (3,597) 356,135 Others 2,387,739 (212,437) 2,175,302 Sub-total 27,061,215 (224,353) 26,836,862 Less: De bt investments of non-current assets due within one year (Note V. 10) 6,098,340 (206,808) 5,891,532 Total 20,962,875 (17,545) 20,945,330 200 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 13.  Long-term receivables 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Receivables from PPP projects 28,455,821 26,145,380 Receivables from BT projects 63,201,890 60,541,030 Primary land development 28,402,595 27,643,763 Receivables from Infrastructure construction projects 30,163,780 25,424,887 Project quality warranty 2,474,659 2,397,707 Receivables from related parties (Note X. 7) 22,130 15,053 Others 379,164 515,458 Sub-total 153,100,039 142,683,278 Less: Impairment allowance (2,278,941) (1,726,677) Sub-total 150,821,098 140,956,601 Less: Due within 1 year (Note V. 10) (41,729,496) (37,533,482) Total 109,091,602 103,423,119 

As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the Group pledged long-term receivables to banks as guarantees for obtaining loans, please refer to Note V. 70. 

14.  Long-term equity investments 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Joint ventures 52,430,699 49,067,296 Associates 58,967,722 52,080,910 Sub-total 111,398,421 101,148,206 Less: Impairment allowance for long term equity investment (296,270) (293,820) Total 111,102,151 100,854,386 201 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

> V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 14.  Long-term equity investments (continued)
> 2022
> (a)  Joint ventures
> Opening Balance of the year Movement during the year Closing balance of the year Impairment allowance at the end of the year Increase/ (Decrease) investment Investment profits/ (losses) under equity method Other comprehensive income adjustment Declaration of cash dividends Others (Note 1)
> Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd.  2,422,996  – 224,812  (15,705)  – 16,509  2,648,612  –
> Guiheng Investment Co., Ltd.  2,612,784  – (9,796)  (172,911)  – 172,911  2,602,988  –
> Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd.  1,824,133  – 338,284  (38,699)  – – 2,123,718  –
> China Overseas Polytec Real Estate (Foshan) Co., Ltd.  1,908,276  – 65,072  (34,960)  – 34,960  1,973,348  292,462
> Guizhou Leirong Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd.  1,321,507  547,808  – (45,607)  – 64,209  1,887,917  –
> Zunyi Nanhuan Expressway Development Co., Ltd.  1,545,576  – 82,302  – – – 1,627,878  –
> CSCEC Jianxin No. 9 Urbanization Investment Private Equity Fund.  1,248,043  36,262  – – – – 1,284,305  –
> CSCEC New Urbanization (Xinjiang) Investment Co., Ltd.  1,154,265  22,018  61,410  – – – 1,237,693  –
> Beijing Chenxing International Convention and Exhibition Co., Ltd.  1,199,964  – – – – – 1,199,964  –
> CSCEC Road & Bridge Group Co., Ltd.  1,149,729  – 34,283  (433)  – (3,417)  1,180,162  –
> Nanjing Second Yangtze River Bridge Co., Ltd.  1,202,302  – 110,596  219,467  (214,739)  (185,273)  1,132,353  –
> Qingdao Haijie Real Estate Co., Ltd.  1,761,322  (793,760)  119,149  – – – 1,086,711  –
> Anhui Bengwu Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd.  1,045,167  – – (43,873)  – 52,705  1,053,999  –
> Shanghai Lingang New District Jingang Dongjiu Real Estate Co., Ltd.  909,040  – (7,876)  – – – 901,164  –
> Shanghai Linbo Haihui City Construction and Development Co., Ltd.  883,409  14,073  (13,848)  (9,503)  – (7,156)  866,975  –
> Liupanshui urban pipe gallery construction and Development
> Investment Co., Ltd.  854,001  – (16,810)  – – – 837,191  –
> China Overseas South Airlines Construction and Development Co., Ltd.  812,302  – (6,709)  (4,499)  – 4,498  805,592  –
> Beijing Nanyue Real Estate Development Co., Ltd.  766,668  – (21,172)  – – – 745,496  –
> Chongqing Zhongjian Erhengxian Infrastructure Construction Co., Ltd.  686,780  – 40,642  – – – 727,422  –
> Xinggui Investment Co., Ltd.  595,813  – 4,369  49,101  – (49,101)  600,182  –
> Zh engzhou Zhongjian Zhicheng Comprehensive Pipe Gallery Construction Management Co., Ltd.  495,325  75,319  1,973  – – – 572,617  –
> Others  22,667,894  2,707,194  862,099  (516,937)  (800,011)  414,173  25,334,412  1,358
> Joint ventures sub-total  49,067,296  2,608,914  1,868,780  (614,559)  (1,014,750)  515,018  52,430,699  293,820
> Note 1:  Other changes are mainly caused by changes in the scope of consolidation this year, changes in equity of the invested party other than other comprehensive income, and changes in exchange rates.

202 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

> V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 14.  Long-term equity investments (continued)
> 2022 (continued)
> (b)  Associates
> Opening Balance of the year (restated) Movement during the year Closing balance of the year Impairment allowance at the end of the year Increase/ (Decrease) investment Investment profits/ (losses) under equity method Other comprehensive income adjustment Declaration of cash dividends Others (Note 1)
> China Overseas Grand Oceans Group Ltd.  11,008,526  340,494  1,248,519  (543,189)  (413,767)  225,509  11,866,092  –
> Anhui Guoyuan Trust Co., Ltd.  3,208,922  – 242,404  30,301  (61,537)  (7,999)  3,412,091  –
> Jiqing Express Railway Co., Ltd.  2,262,313  – (60,062)  – – – 2,202,251  –
> CCCC Jijiao Expressway Investment & Development Co., Ltd.  1,650,377  296,304  (27,077)  – – – 1,919,604  –
> Everbright Securities Co., Ltd.  1,498,311  – 97,179  – (35,761)  138,395  1,698,124  –
> Yunnan Huali expressway investment and Development Co., Ltd.  1,561,094  – 22,670  – – – 1,583,764  –
> Shandong Ningliang Expressway Co., Ltd.  1,033,900  – 89,948  – – – 1,123,848  –
> Sanmenxia National Highway 310 South Moving Project Construction Management Co., Ltd.  1,263,227  – (177,121)  – – – 1,086,106  –
> Anhui Guoyuan Investment Co., Ltd.  1,012,527  – 16,066  (66)  (9,828)  268  1,018,967  –
> Taizhongyin Railway Co., Ltd.  933,707  – 32,776  – – – 966,483  –
> Shenzhen Zhaohang Real Estate Co., Ltd.  – 925,007  8 (8,012)  – – 917,003  –
> Suzhou Fuyuan Real Estate Co., Ltd.  945,284  – (39,277)  – – – 906,007  –
> Nantong Ring Expressway Co., Ltd.  888,624  – – – – – 888,624  –
> Jinmao Investment (Changsha) Co., Ltd.  808,297  – 22,393  – – – 830,690  –
> Xiamen Yueqin Hailian Construction and Development Co., Ltd.  – 814,500  (15,356)  – – – 799,144  –
> Fast Shift Investments Limited  1,025,572  – 57,247  – (373,665)  78,150  787,304  –
> China State Construction Xi’an Urban Construction Investment Co., Ltd.  628,013  – 48,906  – – – 676,919  –
> Guangzhou Fuchuang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd.  636,062  – (9,782)  – – – 626,280  –
> Chongqing Jinke Zhaoji Real Estate Development Co., Ltd.  622,466  – 473  – – – 622,939  –
> Tianjin Zhonghai Haixin Real Estate Co., Ltd.  – 588,800  (943)  (6,781)  – 33,723  614,799  –
> Shanghai Jiasheng Real Estate Development Co., Ltd.  984,889  (392,000)  (5,363)  – – – 587,526  –
> Others  20,108,799  4,335,256  1,047,277  (208,034)  (348,680)  (1,101,461)  23,833,157  2,450
> Associates sub-total  52,080,910  6,908,361  2,590,885  (735,781)  (1,243,238)  (633,415)  58,967,722  2,450
> Total  101,148,206  9,517,275  4,459,665  (1,350,340)  (2,257,988)  (118,397)  111,398,421  296,270
> Note 1:  Other changes are mainly caused by changes in the scope of consolidation this year, changes in equity of the invested party other than other comprehensive income, and changes in exchange rates.

203 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

> V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 14.  Long-term equity investments (continued)
> 2021
> (a)  Joint ventures
> Opening Balance of the year Movement during the year Closing balance of the year Impairment allowance at the end of the year Increase/ (Decrease) investment Investment profits/ (losses) under equity method Other comprehensive income adjustment Declaration of cash dividends Others (Note 1)
> Guiheng Investment Co., Ltd.  2,413,091  – 199,693  – – – 2,612,784  –
> Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd.  2,452,818  – (29,443)  (379)  – – 2,422,996  –
> China Overseas Polytec Real Estate (Foshan) Co., Ltd.  1,925,754  – (17,478)  – – – 1,908,276  292,462
> Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd.  – 1,846,000  (21,867)  – – – 1,824,133  –
> Qingdao Haijie Real Estate Co., Ltd.  – – (2,087)  – – 1,763,409  1,761,322  –
> Zunyi Nanhuan Expressway Development Co., Ltd.  1,402,963  46,550  96,063  – – – 1,545,576  –
> Guizhou Leirong Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd.  1,004,347  329,667  – (12,507)  – – 1,321,507  –
> CSCEC Jianxin No. 9 Urbanization Investment Private Equity Fund.  1,230,138  22,643  106,596  – (111,334)  – 1,248,043  –
> Nanjing Second Yangtze River Bridge Co., Ltd.  1,010,136  – 214,589  (948)  (21,475)  – 1,202,302  –
> Beijing Chenxing International Convention and Exhibition Co., Ltd.  – 1,199,964  – – – – 1,199,964  –
> CSCEC New Urbanization (Xinjiang) Investment Co., Ltd.  826,422  292,852  44,703  – (9,712)  – 1,154,265  –
> CSCEC Road & Bridge Group Co., Ltd.  1,101,373  – 44,846  (1,567)  – 5,077  1,149,729  –
> Anhui Bengwu Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd.  740,658  309,750  – (5,241)  – – 1,045,167  –
> Shanghai Lingang New District Jingang Dongjiu Real Estate Co., Ltd.  911,400  – (2,360)  – – – 909,040  –
> Shanghai Linbo Haihui City Construction and Development Co., Ltd.  947,670  30,221  (13,867)  (80,615)  – – 883,409  –
> Liupanshui urban pipe gallery construction and Development Investment Co., Ltd.  794,934  – 59,067  – – – 854,001  –
> China Overseas South Airlines Construction and Development Co., Ltd.  825,130  – (12,828)  – – – 812,302  –
> Beijing Nanyue Real Estate Development Co., Ltd.  764,918  – 1,750  – – – 766,668  –
> Nanjing Zhongjian Gubei Urban Development Co., Ltd.  10,000  17,718  (39,834)  – – 711,320  699,204  –
> Chongqing Zhongjian Erhengxian Infrastructure Construction Co., Ltd.  – – 37,902  – – 648,878  686,780  –
> Guangdong Guotong Logistics City Co., Ltd.  666,978  16,206  (27,612)  (26,497)  – – 629,075  –
> Xinggui Investment Co., Ltd.  261,358  – 334,455  – – – 595,813  –
> Others  20,630,104  1,755,913  587,830  191,166  (496,536)  (833,537)  21,834,940  1,358
> Joint ventures sub-total  39,920,192  5,867,484  1,560,118  63,412  (639,057)  2,295,147  49,067,296  293,820
> Note 1:  Other changes are mainly caused by changes in the scope of consolidation this year, changes in equity of the invested party other than other comprehensive income, and changes in exchange rates.

204 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

> V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 14.  Long-term equity investments (continued)
> 2021 (continued)
> (b)  Associates (restated)
> Opening Balance of the year Movement during the year Closing balance of the year Impairment allowance at the end of the year Increase/(Decrease) investment Investment profits/ (losses) under equity method Other comprehensive income adjustment Declaration of cash dividends Others (Note 1)
> China Overseas Grand Oceans Group Ltd.  9,247,852  – 1,935,380  212,798  (384,708)  (2,796)  11,008,526  –
> Anhui Guoyuan Trust Co., Ltd.  3,010,767  – 253,270  (77,422)  (46,152)  68,459  3,208,922  –
> Jiqing Express Railway Co., Ltd.  2,312,211  – (49,898)  – – – 2,262,313  –
> CCCC Jijiao Expressway Investment & Development Co., Ltd.  1,662,658  95,000  (107,281)  – – – 1,650,377  –
> Yunnan Huali expressway investment and Development Co., Ltd.  1,185,000  376,094  – – – – 1,561,094  –
> Everbright Securities Co., Ltd.  1,453,184  – 110,523  (3,747)  (23,345)  (38,304)  1,498,311  –
> Sanmenxia National Highway 310 South Moving Project Construction Management Co., Ltd.  1,242,936  85,734  (65,443)  – – – 1,263,227  –
> Shandong Ningliang Expressway Co., Ltd.  1,033,900  – – – – – 1,033,900  –
> Fast Shift Investments Limited  1,032,289  – 200,659  – (167,678)  (39,698)  1,025,572  –
> Anhui Guoyuan Investment Co., Ltd.  989,025  – 33,696  (2,109)  (8,546)  461  1,012,527  –
> Shanghai Jiasheng Real Estate Development Co., Ltd.  987,142  – (2,253)  – – – 984,889  –
> Suzhou Fuyuan Real Estate Co., Ltd.  966,270  – (20,986)  – – – 945,284  –
> Taizhongyin Railway Co., Ltd.  886,606  – 47,101  – – – 933,707  –
> Nantong Ring Expressway Co., Ltd.  – 888,624  – – – – 888,624  –
> Jinmao Investment (Changsha) Co., Ltd.  997,925  – 3,726  – (193,354)  – 808,297  –
> Guangzhou Fuchuang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd.  669,119  – (33,057)  – – – 636,062  –
> China State Construction Xi’an Urban Construction Investment Co., Ltd.  548,866  90,000  (10,853)  – – – 628,013  –
> Chongqing Jinke Zhaoji Real Estate Development Co., Ltd.  612,740  – 9,726  – – – 622,466  –
> Guangzhou Lihe Real Estate Development Co., Ltd.  1,066,922  – 524,141  – (1,008,747)  – 582,316  –
> Liupanshui Dongda Highway Investment and Development Co., Ltd.  501,602  – – (5,340)  – – 496,262  –
> Zhengzhou Public Utilities Zhongcheng Road and Bridge Construction Management Co., Ltd.  477,658  – – – – – 477,658  –
> Shanxi International Power Group Real Estate Development Co., Ltd.  494,659  – (25,287)  – – – 469,372  –
> Xiamen International Trade Exhibition Center Co., Ltd.  – 449,280  (1,125)  – – – 448,155  –
> Others  15,489,006  1,638,885  562,391  137,844  (277,683)  84,593  17,635,036  –
> Associates sub-total  46,868,337  3,623,617  3,364,430  262,024  (2,110,213)  72,715  52,080,910  –
> Total  86,788,529  9,491,101  4,924,548  325,436  (2,749,270)  2,367,862  101,148,206  293,820 Note 1:  Other changes are mainly caused by changes in the scope of consolidation this year, changes in equity of the invested party other than other comprehensive income, and changes in exchange rates.

205 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 14.  Long-term equity investments (continued) 

The movements in provision for impairment of long-term equity investments are as follows: 2022 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year (Note) Closing balance of the year 

China Overseas Polytec Real Estate 

(Foshan) Co., Ltd. 292,462 – – 292,462 

Others 1,358 2,450 – 3,808 

Total 293,820 2,450 – 296,270 

2021 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year (Note) Closing balance of the year 

China Overseas Polytec Real Estate 

(Foshan) Co., Ltd. 292,462 – – 292,462 Others 1,594 – (236) 1,358 Total 294,056 – (236) 293,820 

> Note: The decrease in 2022 and 2021 was due to the disposal of long-term equity investments by the Group’s subsidiaries, resulting in a corresponding reduction in impairment provisions.

15.  Investments in other equity instruments 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Equity investments 

Listed equity investments 300,867 1,204,980 

Unlisted equity investments 4,309,604 3,857,206 Total 4,610,471 5,062,186 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Equity investments 

Cost 

Listed equity investments 241,479 1,039,951 

Unlisted equity investments 3,959,989 3,246,472 

Cumulative changes in fair value 

Listed equity investments 59,388 165,029 

Unlisted equity investments 349,615 610,734 Total 4,610,471 5,062,186 206 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 15.  Investments in other equity instruments (continued) 

2022 

Changes in fair value accumulated to other comprehensive income Fair value Dividend income of the year Reasons designated as fair value measurement with changes included in other comprehensive income Equity instruments derecognised in the current period Equity instruments still held 

Listed equity investments 59,388 300,867 40,111 19,594 Non-tradable 

Unlisted equity investments 349,615 4,309,604 60 46,668 Non-tradable 

Total 409,003 4,610,471 40,171 66,262 

2021 (restated) 

Changes in fair value accumulated to other comprehensive income Fair value Dividend income of the year Reasons designated as fair value measurement with changes included in other comprehensive income Equity instruments derecognised in the current year Equity instruments still held 

Listed equity investments 165,029 1,204,980 473 72,913 Non-tradable Unlisted equity investments 610,734 3,857,206 12 127,319 Non-tradable Total 775,763 5,062,186 485 200,232 

For the year 2022, the Group disposed of RMB1,277,806 thousand of other equity instrument investment (2021: RMB223,707 thousand), and a total amount of RMB97,017 thousand has been transferred from other comprehensive income to retained earnings. (2021: RMB174,201 thousand). 

16.  Other non-current financial assets 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Financial assets measured at fair value and the change of 

which is included in the profit or loss of the current period 1,565,153 1,559,354 

17.  Investment properties 

Subsequent measurement under the cost model: 2022 

Buildings Land use rights Investment properties in progress Total 

Cost 

Opening balance 73,848,542 24,065,540 37,173,830 135,087,912 

Increase in the current year 13,647,273 7,923,459 9,340,497 30,911,229 

Decrease in the current year (1,462,068) (1,241,725) (365,443) (3,069,236) 

Closing balances 86,033,747 30,747,274 46,148,884 162,929,905 

Accumulated depreciation and amortisation 

Opening balance (9,690,375) (2,646,395) – (12,336,770) 

Increase in the current year (2,453,015) (786,387) – (3,239,402) 

Decrease in the current year 236,229 137,805 – 374,034 

Closing balance (11,907,161) (3,294,977) – (15,202,138) 207 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Buildings Land use rights Investment properties in progress Total 

Provision for impairment 

Opening balance (54,344) – – (54,344) 

Increase in the current year (7,897) – – (7,897) 

Decrease in the current year 9,680 – – 9,680 

Closing balance (52,561) – – (52,561) 

Net book value 

At the end of the year 74,074,025 27,452,297 46,148,884 147,675,206 

At the beginning of the year 64,103,823 21,419,145 37,173,830 122,696,798 

2021 

Buildings Land use rights Investment properties in progress Total 

Cost 

Opening balance 61,368,409 16,536,224 29,176,233 107,080,866 

Increase in the current year 13,393,558 7,609,085 8,783,512 29,786,155 

Decrease in the current year (913,425) (79,769) (785,915) (1,779,109) 

Closing balance 73,848,542 24,065,540 37,173,830 135,087,912 Accumulated depreciation and amortisation 

Opening balance (7,810,724) (2,125,309) – (9,936,033) 

Increase in the current year (2,008,580) (538,406) – (2,546,986) 

Decrease in the current year 128,929 17,320 – 146,249 

Closing balance (9,690,375) (2,646,395) – (12,336,770) Provision for impairment 

Opening balance (21,153) – – (21,153) 

Increase in the current year (35,146) – – (35,146) 

Decrease in the current year 1,955 – – 1,955 

Closing balance (54,344) – – (54,344) Net book value 

At the end of the year 64,103,823 21,419,145 37,173,830 122,696,798 

At the beginning of the year 53,536,532 14,410,915 29,176,233 97,123,680 

The investment property is leased out to a third party or a related party under an operating leases. 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 17.  Investment properties (continued) 

Subsequent measurement under the cost model: (continued) 2022 (continued) 208 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 17.  Investment properties (continued) 

For the year ended 31 December 2022, the Group changes the houses and buildings with a book value of RMB69,250 thousand (original price: RMB120,784 thousand) for self use and transferred them into fixed assets accounting from the date of change of use; For the year of 2021, the Group changed the use of houses and buildings with a carrying amount of RMB175,992 thousand (A cost of: RMB255,100 thousand) for self-use and transferred them into fixed assets at the date of change of use. For the year ended 31 December 2022, the Group will convert the investment properties with book value of RMB54,668 thousand (original price: RMB61,150 thousand) to inventories accounting; For the year of 2021, the Group changed the investment properties with a carrying amount of RMB270,013 thousand (A cost of: RMB273,494 thousand) to inventories. For the year ended 31 December 2022, the Group changes the inventories with book value of RMB11,524,550 thousand (original price: RMB11,524,550 thousand) to lease, and turns the inventories into investment properties accounting from the date of change of use; For the year of 2021, the Group changed the inventories with a carrying amount of RMB11,983,694 thousand (A cost of: RMB11,983,694 thousand) to lease, and transfers the inventories into investment properties at the date of change of use. For the year ended 31 December 2022, the Group changes fixed assets with book value of RMB1,218,160 thousand (original price: RMB1,239,195 thousand) to lease, and turns the fixed assets into investment properties accounting from the date of change of use; For the year of 2021, the Group changed the fixed assets with a carrying amount of RMB253,572 thousand (A cost of: RMB327,465 thousand) to lease, and transferred from fixed assets to investment properties at the date of change of use. For the year ended 31 December 2022, the Group changes construction in progress with book value of RMB90,227 thousand (original price: RMB90,227 thousand) to lease, and turns the construction in progress into investment properties accounting from the date of change of use; For the year of 2021, the Group’s construction in progress project with a carrying amount of RMB5,857,271 thousand (A cost of: RMB5,857,271 thousand) was completed and used for leasing, which was changed to investment properties. For the year ended 31 December 2022, the Group disposed the investment properties with book value of RMB1,099,522 thousand with a disposal losses of RMB3,324 thousand; For the year of 2021, the Group disposed the investment properties with book value of RMB805,284 thousand with a disposal income of RMB19,619 thousand. For the year ended 31 December 2022 and December 31 2021, refers to Note V. 70 for details of the group’s mortgage of investment properties to the bank as a guarantee for obtaining loans. 209 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 18.  Fixed assets 

2022 

Buildings Machinery and equipment Motor vehicles Office equipment, temporary facilities and others Total 

Cost 

Opening balance of the year 35,831,179 18,090,593 3,227,927 21,313,004 78,462,703 

Purchases 1,286,050 1,734,489 294,562 3,166,825 6,481,926 

Transfers from construction 

in progress (Note V. 19) 2,052,191 283,814 438 1,116,262 3,452,705 

Other addition 5,451,789 474,161 42,582 32,540 6,001,072 

Disposals or retirements (606,822) (787,548) (254,904) (804,185) (2,453,459) 

Other decrease (1,096,739) (201,778) (32,005) (337,446) (1,667,968) 

Closing balance of the year 42,917,648 19,593,731 3,278,600 24,487,000 90,276,979 

Accumulated depreciation 

Opening balance of the year (6,570,680) (10,560,216) (2,129,147) (15,484,186) (34,744,229) 

Depreciation accrued 

during the year (1,114,934) (1,409,286) (272,834) (4,019,520) (6,816,574) 

Other additions (205,290) (393,796) (41,653) (143,754) (784,493) 

Disposals or retirements 163,761 625,659 217,461 756,794 1,763,675 

Other decrease 48,920 136,311 23,855 198,365 407,451 

Closing balance of the year (7,678,223) (11,601,328) (2,202,318) (18,692,301) (40,174,170) 

Impairment allowance 

Opening balance of the year (228,305) (9,033) (353) (35) (237,726) 

Impairment accrued during 

the year (950) (22,586) (506) (356) (24,398) 

Other additions (287) – (62) (136) (485) 

Disposals or retirements 950 1,913 794 492 4,149 

Other decrease – – 62 – 62 

Closing balance of the year (228,592) (29,706) (65) (35) (258,398) 

Net book value 

At the end of the year 35,010,833 7,962,697 1,076,217 5,794,664 49,844,411 

At the beginning of the 

year (restated) 29,032,194 7,521,344 1,098,427 5,828,783 43,480,748 210 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 18.  Fixed assets (continued) 

2021 (restated) 

Buildings Machinery and equipment Motor vehicles Office equipment, temporary facilities and others Total 

Cost 

Opening balance of the period 30,771,272 17,866,152 3,178,675 18,558,213 70,374,312 

Changes in accounting policies – (710,394) (342) – (710,736) 

Opening balance of the year 30,771,272 17,155,758 3,178,333 18,558,213 69,663,576 

Purchases 1,480,507 1,532,015 393,482 3,470,194 6,876,198 

Transfers from construction in 

progress (Note V. 19) 4,346,681 217,842 4,810 1,253,525 5,822,858 

Other addition 1,139,413 558,937 100,366 224,759 2,023,475 

Disposals or retirements (782,944) (1,366,426) (348,555) (1,168,990) (3,666,915) 

Other decrease (1,123,750) (7,533) (100,509) (1,024,697) (2,256,489) 

Closing balance of the year 35,831,179 18,090,593 3,227,927 21,313,004 78,462,703 Accumulated depreciation 

Opening balance of the period (5,605,382) (10,338,048) (2,106,545) (12,823,444) (30,873,419) 

Changes in accounting policies – 137,189 96 – 137,285 

Opening balance of the year (5,605,382) (10,200,859) (2,106,449) (12,823,444) (30,736,134) 

Depreciation accrued during 

the year (1,088,032) (1,270,050) (298,412) (3,795,836) (6,452,330) 

Other additions (131,028) (81,541) (85,639) (126,345) (424,553) 

Disposals or retirements 77,275 985,786 305,861 920,639 2,289,561 

Other decrease 176,487 6,448 55,492 340,800 579,227 

Closing balance of the year (6,570,680) (10,560,216) (2,129,147) (15,484,186) (34,744,229) Impairment allowance 

Opening balance of the year (211,876) (12,979) (2,877) (35) (227,767) 

Impairment accrued 

during the year (17,605) – – – (17,605) 

Other additions – (3) – – (3) 

Disposals or retirements 1,042 3,949 2,524 – 7,515 

Other decrease 134 – – – 134 

Closing balance of the year (228,305) (9,033) (353) (35) (237,726) Net book value 

At the end of the year 29,032,194 7,521,344 1,098,427 5,828,783 43,480,748 

At the beginning of the year 24,954,014 6,941,920 1,069,007 5,734,734 38,699,675 

Operating leased fixed assets are as follows: As at 31 December 2022, the fixed assets with a carrying amount of RMB110,165 thousand, and a cost of RMB210,303 thousand are leased out under operating leases (31 December 2021: a carrying amount of RMB130,502 thousand, and a cost of RMB235,471 thousand). As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the fixed assets that were pledged by the Group to banks for borrowings are presented in detail in Note V. 70. 211 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 19.  Construction in progress 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Carrying amount Impairment allowance Net book value Carrying amount Impairment allowance Net book value 

Construction in 

progress 4,250,969 (251,268) 3,999,701 3,954,041 (250,945) 3,703,096 

Changes of significant projects of construction in progress are as follows: 2022 

Budgeted amount Opening balance of the year Additions Transfer to fixed assets (Note V. 18) Other transferred out (Note) Closing balance of the year Source of funds Proportion of investment to budget (%) 

Zhangjiang Project B07-9 Office Building Project 3,000,000 – 806,872 – – 806,872 Self-funding 27 

K05-01 Office building project 960,000 185,765 185,285 – – 371,050 Self-funding and loan 39 

Wanning Jinxin Grand Hyat 1,340,814 988,298 237,257 (900,579) – 324,976 Self-funding and loan 91 

Xi’an Jinxiu Tiandi Area A Office Building Project 337,643 – 270,112 – – 270,112 Self-funding 80 

Decoration Project of Headquarters Building of China Construction Northeast Design and Research Institute Co., Ltd. 

298,000 633 266,264 – – 266,897 Self-funding 90 

CSCEC Algeria headquarters building project 282,849 182,553 52,647 – – 235,200 Self-funding and loan 83 

Chonghe Bay Engineering Real Estate General Contracting Project 213,333 168,409 40,657 – – 209,066 Self-funding 98 

Shenzhen Shantou Green Industrial Park Project 417,148 245,255 967 – (73,457) 172,765 Self-funding and loan 77 

Others N/A 2,183,128 2,297,048 (2,552,126) (334,019) 1,594,031 Self-funding and loan N/A 

Total 3,954,041 4,157,109 (3,452,705) (407,476) 4,250,969 

2021 (restated) 

Budgeted amount Opening balance of the year Additions Transfer to fixed assets (Note V. 18) Other transferred out (Note) Closing balance of the year Source of funds Proportion of investment to budget (%) 

Beijing Advanced Business Park Office Building of China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. 2,320,424 1,923,147 397,278 (2,200,556) (119,869) – Self-funding and loan 100 Shanghai Zhongjian Yuelan Mountain Project 1,473,684 936,438 51,970 – (988,408) – Self-funding 67 CSCEC Jinxiutiandi Construction Project 1,215,997 895,968 320,029 – (1,215,997) – Self-funding and loan 100 Songjiang Building Construction Project 1,360,223 839,821 520,402 – (1,360,223) – Self-funding and loan 100 Wanning Jinxin Grand Hyatt 1,340,814 714,036 274,262 – – 988,298 Self-funding and loan 74 Liutai Building of China Construction Sixth Engineering Division Corp. Ltd. 720,808 626,476 94,332 (720,808) – – Self-funding 100 Songjiang Yunzhu Shenlan Construction Project 383,163 369,439 10,302 – (379,741) – Self-funding and loan 99 Zhonghai Huanyu City Construction Project 591,139 348,621 242,518 (591,139) – – Self-funding and loan 100 Others N/A 4,530,270 3,494,311 (2,310,355) (2,748,483) 2,965,743 Self-funding and loan N/A Total 11,184,216 5,405,404 (5,822,858) (6,812,721) 3,954,041 Note:  Other transferred out mainly includes the conditions that construction in progress is used for leasing after completing and transferred to Long-term prepaid expenses. 212 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 19.  Construction in progress (continued) 

Interest of significant projects of construction in progress are as follows: 2022 

Progress Accumulated amount of interest capitalised Including: Interest capitalised during the year Capitalisation rate during the year (%) 

Shenzhen Shantou Green Industrial Park Project 77% 24,904 964 3.95 

K05-01 Office building project 39% 18,426 15,982 4.50 

CSCEC Algeria headquarters building project 83% 4,576 660 1.95 

Others N/A 769 – N/A 

Total 48,675 17,606 

2021 

Progress Accumulated amount of interest capitalised Including: Interest capitalised during the year Capitalisation rate during the year (%) 

Beijing Advanced Business Park Office Building of China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. 100% 209,501 22,084 5.78 CSCEC Jinxiutiandi Construction Project 100% 135,000 19,730 4.50 Songjiang Yunzhushenlan Construction Project 99% 6,716 413 4.75 Others N/A 99,234 39,851 N/A Total 450,451 82,078 

As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the construction in progress that were pledged by the Group to banks for borrowings are presented in details in Note V. 70. Impairment allowance of construction in progress: 2022 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Closing balance of the year Reason 250,945 323 251,268 The book value is higher than the recoverable amount 

2021 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Closing balance of the year Reason 

250,945 – 250,945 The book value is higher than the recoverable amount 213 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 20.  Right of use assets 

2022 

Buildings Machinery and equipment Motor vehicles Other equipment Total 

Cost Opening balance of the year 6,292,463 1,381,301 21,174 160,503 7,855,441 

Increase during the year 3,099,882 353,075 11,533 34,529 3,499,019 

Decrease during the year (537,749) (300,488) (4,139) (2,708) (845,084) 

Closing balance of the year 8,854,596 1,433,888 28,568 192,324 10,509,376 

Accumulated amortisation Opening balance of the year (1,414,414) (492,121) (9,832) (45,525) (1,961,892) 

Increase during the year (1,679,590) (396,099) (8,250) (91,258) (2,175,197) 

Decrease during the year 346,038 211,880 2,754 1,479 562,151 

Closing balance of the year (2,747,966) (676,340) (15,328) (135,304) (3,574,938) 

Net book value Closing balance of the year 6,106,630 757,548 13,240 57,020 6,934,438 

Opening balance of the year 4,878,049 889,180 11,342 114,978 5,893,549 

2021 (restated) 

Buildings Machinery and equipment Motor vehicles Other equipment Total 

Cost As of 31 December 2020 – – – – –Changes in accounting policies 4,310,238 1,610,259 15,633 219,392 6,155,522 Opening balance of the year 4,310,238 1,610,259 15,633 219,392 6,155,522 Increase during the year 2,797,627 240,131 12,027 13,494 3,063,279 Decrease during the year (815,402) (469,089) (6,486) (72,383) (1,363,360) Closing balance of the year 6,292,463 1,381,301 21,174 160,503 7,855,441 Accumulated amortisation As of 31 December 2020 – – – – –Changes in accounting policies – (137,189) (96) – (137,285) Opening balance of the year – (137,189) (96) – (137,285) Increase during the year (1,442,558) (476,635) (9,736) (45,538) (1,974,467) Decrease during the year 28,144 121,703 – 13 149,860 Closing balance of the year (1,414,414) (492,121) (9,832) (45,525) (1,961,892) Net book value Closing balance of the year 4,878,049 889,180 11,342 114,978 5,893,549 Opening balance of the year 4,310,238 1,473,070 15,537 219,392 6,018,237 214 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 21.  Intangible assets 

2022 

Land use rights Franchise rights Software Others Total 

Cost Opening balance of the year 8,038,945 19,267,856 1,083,526 692,337 29,082,664 

Increase during the year 1,457,057 4,091,571 172,876 87,205 5,808,709 

Decrease during the year (208,466) (1,005,478) (10,104) (24,729) (1,248,777) 

Closing balance of the year 9,287,536 22,353,949 1,246,298 754,813 33,642,596 

Accumulated amortisation Opening balance of the year (1,244,721) (1,735,836) (621,286) (361,730) (3,963,573) 

Increase during the year (193,332) (248,763) (123,230) (60,208) (625,533) 

Decrease during the year 49,041 75,156 7,619 23,909 155,725 

Closing balance of the year (1,389,012) (1,909,443) (736,897) (398,029) (4,433,381) 

Impairment allowance Opening balance of the year (1,618,900) (952,660) – – (2,571,560) 

Increase during the year (66,573) (367,586) – – (434,159) 

Decrease during the year – 131 – – 131 

Closing balance of the year (1,685,473) (1,320,115) – – (3,005,588) 

Net book value Closing balance of the year 6,213,051 19,124,391 509,401 356,784 26,203,627 

Opening balance of the year 5,175,324 16,579,360 462,240 330,607 22,547,531 

2021 (restated) 

Land use rights Franchise rights Software Others Total 

Cost Opening balance of the year 7,737,010 20,852,063 891,948 705,356 30,186,377 Increase during the year 410,806 3,783,882 214,342 47,659 4,456,689 Decrease during the year (108,871) (5,368,089) (22,764) (60,678) (5,560,402) Closing balance of the year 8,038,945 19,267,856 1,083,526 692,337 29,082,664 Accumulated amortisation Opening balance of the year (1,146,805) (1,469,176) (487,121) (346,583) (3,449,685) Increase during the year (114,784) (266,660) (149,946) (15,437) (546,827) Decrease during the year 16,868 – 15,781 290 32,939 Closing balance of the year (1,244,721) (1,735,836) (621,286) (361,730) (3,963,573) Impairment allowance Opening balance and Closing balance (1,618,900) (952,660) – – (2,571,560) Net book value Closing balance of the year 5,175,324 16,579,360 462,240 330,607 22,547,531 Opening balance of the year 4,971,305 18,430,227 404,827 358,773 24,165,132 215 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 21.  Intangible assets (continued) 

As at 31 December 2022, the franchise rights in the construction period of contract assets RMB10,719,669 thousand are listed as Intangible assets – franchise rights (31 December 2021: RMB10,437,049 thousand). As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the intangible assets that were pledged by the Group to banks for borrowings are presented in details in Note V. 70. 

22.  Goodwill 

2022 

The invested entity Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Other movements (Note) Closing balance of the year 

China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. 1,375,252 – 115,169 1,490,421 

China State Construction Development Holdings Limited 469,063 – 39,281 508,344 

Plaza Construction LLP 96,465 – 8,909 105,374 

Finqnciere Groupe Betom 59,407 – – 59,407 

China Construction Sixth Engineering Division Water Conservancy and Hydropower Construction Group 

42,797 – – 42,797 

China Construction Zhonghuan New Energy Co., Ltd. (Original name: CSCEC Zhong Huan Engineering Co., Ltd.) 

40,103 – – 40,103 

Yueyang Hecheng Construction Investment 27,027 – – 27,027 

China State Construction Built Port Group 15,583 – – 15,583 

Xinjiang Zhongjian West Construction Cement Manufacturing Co., Ltd. 14,601 – – 14,601 

China Construction Sixth Bureau (Qingdao) Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. (Original name: Dezhou Haoyu Investment Co., Ltd.) 

13,142 – – 13,142 

China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. Civil Air Defense Construction Design Institute 

11,563 – – 11,563 

Yunnan Changkun Hydropower Base Construction Management Co., Ltd. 11,163 – – 11,163 

Liaoning Road & Bridge Construction Group 10,562 – – 10,562 

Chongqing Zhonghai Investment Co., Ltd. 10,246 – 858 11,104 

Others 92,585 – (61,961) 30,624 

Sub-total 2,289,559 – 102,256 2,391,815 

Less: Impairment allowance 51,665 52,535 

Total 2,237,894 2,339,280 216 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 22.  Goodwill (continued) 

2021 

The invested entity Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Other movements (Note) Closing balance of the year 

China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. 1,429,449 – (54,197) 1,375,252 China State Construction Development Holdings Limited 487,548 – (18,485) 469,063 Plaza Construction LLP 98,722 – (2,257) 96,465 Finqnciere Groupe Betom 58,403 – 1,004 59,407 China Construction Sixth Engineering Division Water Conservancy and Hydropower Construction Group 42,797 – – 42,797 China Construction Zhonghuan New Energy Co., Ltd. (Original name: CSCEC Zhong Huan Engineering Co., Ltd.) 40,103 – – 40,103 Yueyang Hecheng Construction Investment 27,027 – – 27,027 China State Construction Built Port Group 15,583 – – 15,583 Xinjiang Zhongjian West Construction Cement Manufacturing Co., Ltd. 14,601 – – 14,601 China Construction Sixth Bureau (Qingdao) Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. (Original name: Dezhou Haoyu Investment Co., Ltd.) 13,142 – – 13,142 China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. Civil Air Defense Construction Design Institute 11,563 – – 11,563 Yunnan Changkun Hydropower Base Construction Management Co., Ltd. 11,163 – – 11,163 Liaoning Road & Bridge Construction Group 10,562 – – 10,562 Chongqing Zhonghai Investment Co., Ltd. 10,650 – (404) 10,246 Others 73,629 21,603 (2,647) 92,585 Sub-total 2,344,942 21,603 (76,986) 2,289,559 Less: Impairment allowance 54,681 51,665 Total 2,290,261 2,237,894 

Changes in impairment allowance of goodwill are as below: 2022 

Opening balance of the year Accrued this period Other movements (Note) Closing balance of the year 

Xinjiang Zhongjian West Construction Cement Manufacturing Co., Ltd. 14,601 – – 14,601 

China Construction Sixth Bureau (Qingdao) Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. (Original name: Dezhou Haoyu Investment Co., Ltd.) 

13,142 – – 13,142 

Chongqing Zhonghai Investment Co., Ltd. 10,246 – 858 11,104 

China Construction Zhonghuan New Energy Co., Ltd. (Original name: CSCEC Zhong Huan Engineering Co., Ltd.) 

12,031 – – 12,031 

Others 1,645 – 12 1,657 

Total 51,665 – 870 52,535 217 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 22.  Goodwill (continued) 

Changes in impairment allowance of goodwill are as below: (continued) 2021 

Opening balance of the year Accrued this year Other movements (Note) Closing balance of the year 

Xinjiang Zhongjian West Construction Cement Manufacturing Co., Ltd. 14,601 – – 14,601 China Construction Sixth Bureau (Qingdao) Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. (Original name: Dezhou Haoyu Investment Co., Ltd.) 13,142 – – 13,142 Chongqing Zhonghai Investment Co., Ltd. 10,650 – (404) 10,246 China Construction Zhonghuan New Energy Co., Ltd. (Original name: CSCEC Zhong Huan Engineering Co., Ltd.) 12,031 – – 12,031 Others 4,257 34 (2,646) 1,645 Total 54,681 34 (3,050) 51,665 Note: Other movements are mainly due to changes in exchange rates. 

The group allocates the book value of goodwill to the asset group or portfolio that can benefit from the synergy of business combination, and carries out impairment test on this basis. The goodwill obtained from business combination has been allocated to the following asset groups or portfolio for impairment test: Asset group-China Overseas Land & Investment Asset group-State Construction Development The measurement basis and main assumptions of the recoverable amount of the above asset groups are as follows: 

Asset Group-China Overseas Land & Investment 

The recoverable amount of China Overseas Land & Investment is determined by the present value of the expected future cash flow of the asset group portfolio according to the cash flow forecast based on the five-year financial budget approved by the management. The discount rate used for cash flow forecast is 9.5%, and the growth rate of cash flow of China Overseas Land & Investment after 5 years is 3.0%. 

Asset Group-State Construction Development 

The recoverable amount of State Construction Development shall be the net amount of the fair value of the asset group minus the disposal expenses. The carrying amount of goodwill is apportioned to the asset group or portfolio as follows: 

China Overseas Land & Investment State Construction Development Total 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Carrying amount of goodwill 1,490,421 1,375,252 508,344 469,063 1,998,765 1,844,315 218 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 23.  Long-term prepaid expenses 

2022 

Opening balance of the year Increase Amortisation Other decrease Closing balance of the year 

Ex penditure on improvement of leased fixed assets 497,571 272,260 (178,770) (167) 590,894 

Others 645,648 372,147 (266,446) (54,133) 697,216 

Total 1,143,219 644,407 (445,216) (54,300) 1,288,110 

2021 (restated) 

31 December 2020 Changes in accounting policies Opening balance of the year Increase Amortisation Other decrease Closing balance of the year 

Expenditure on improvement of leased fixed assets 444,600 – 444,600 222,902 (153,167) (16,764) 497,571 

Office rent 154,202 (154,202) – – – – –

Others 532,547 – 532,547 406,198 (282,036) (11,061) 645,648 

Total 1,131,349 (154,202) 977,147 629,100 (435,203) (27,825) 1,143,219 

24.  Deferred tax assets/liabilities 

Deferred tax assets and liabilities without taking into consideration the offsetting of balances: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Deductible temporary differences and losses Deferred tax assets Deductible temporary differences and losses Deferred tax assets 

Deferred tax assets 

Impairment allowance of assets 55,232,889 9,755,897 42,007,226 7,310,128 

Elimination of intra group unrealised profit 9,270,681 1,850,124 7,024,945 1,469,229 

Accrued expenses 22,195,727 5,394,162 29,193,942 7,148,365 

Accrued liabilities 2,628,236 482,981 3,118,363 514,395 

Deductible losses 16,712,358 4,181,507 14,657,896 3,481,511 

Tax differences on lease liabilities 7,092,352 1,433,132 5,696,798 1,114,115 

Others 4,383,044 1,072,272 2,204,032 534,794 

Total 117,515,287 24,170,075 103,903,202 21,572,537 219 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 24.  Deferred tax assets/liabilities (continued) 

Deferred tax assets and liabilities without taking into consideration the offsetting of balances: (continued) 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Taxable temporary differences Deferred tax liabilities Taxable temporary differences Deferred tax liabilities 

Deferred tax liabilities Depreciation of fixed assets 334,834 60,620 351,378 74,323 

Depreciation of investment properties 6,679,785 1,669,946 4,850,763 1,212,691 

Fair value adjustment of business combinations involving enterprises not under common control 

23,322,873 5,821,068 10,043,291 2,501,096 

Gain from special restructuring of subsidiaries (Note 1) 1,179,437 294,859 1,179,437 294,859 

Withholding tax for dividends (Note 2) 2,978,567 148,928 3,271,939 163,597 

Revenue from BT/PPP projects 10,307,967 2,576,973 6,372,427 1,597,641 

Tax differences on right of use assets 6,613,463 1,315,859 5,384,277 1,046,470 

Others 3,988,262 981,057 4,553,646 1,175,514 

Total 55,405,188 12,869,310 36,007,158 8,066,191 

> Note 1: According to Notice of the Ministry of Finance and the State Administration of Taxation on Enterprise Income Tax Treatment of Enterprise Reorganization (Cai Shui [2009] No. 59), deferred tax liabilities are recognised by the Company and other related subsidiaries for the difference between tax base and accounting base of equity investment arising from reorganization of West Construction. Note 2: According to the arrangement between Mainland China and Hong Kong Special Administrative Region over income taxes to avoid double taxation and tax evasion, signed between Mainland China and Hong Kong, withholding tax for dividends are provided by domestic subsidiaries, domestic associates and domestic joint ventures of the subsidiaries of China Overseas Land & Investment and China State Construction International Holdings Limited (“China State Construction International”) for profit estimated to be distributed to the subsidiaries of China Overseas Land & Investment and China State Construction International at the tax rate of 5%.

Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities that are presented at the net amount after offsetting: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Offsetting amount Net amount after offsetting Offsetting amount Net amount after offsetting 

Deferred tax assets 3,331,806 20,838,269 2,667,394 18,905,143 

Deferred tax liabilities 3,331,806 9,537,504 2,667,394 5,398,797 Deductible temporary differences and deductible tax losses for which deferred tax assets are not recognised are listed as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Deductible temporary differences 23,357,459 21,509,681 Deductible tax losses 23,381,631 19,726,831 Total 46,739,090 41,236,512 

Deductible tax losses that are not recognised as deferred tax assets will expire in the following years: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

2022 – 1,175,677 2023 1,462,151 1,954,484 2024 3,237,977 3,922,016 2025 4,034,114 4,760,868 2026 7,119,147 7,913,786 2027 to 2031 7,528,242 –Total 23,381,631 19,726,831 220 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 25.  Other non-current assets 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Contract assets (Note V. 9) 266,887,129 226,403,410 Include: PPP Project 190,927,489 162,521,421 Warranty deposit 51,180,886 46,066,901 Others 24,778,754 17,815,088 Input VAT to be verified 816,807 907,103 Prepayment of purchase of long-term assets 2,432,438 418,719 Others 3,384,630 2,573,693 Sub-total 273,521,004 230,302,925 Less: Impairment allowance (3,716,135) (2,806,601) Total 269,804,869 227,496,324 

As at 31 December 2022, the impairment allowance of the above contract assets is RMB3,552,133 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB2,746,707 thousand). 

26.  Impairment allowance of assets 

2022 

Opening balance of the year Provision for the year Decrease during the year Other movement Closing balance of the year Reversal Transfer/ Write-off 

Impairment allowance of notes receivable 502,016 50,314 (469,360) – (18,103) 64,867 

Impairment allowance of accounts receivable 33,239,590 21,559,382 (14,839,522) (246,155) (1,778,560) 37,934,735 

Impairment allowance of other receivables 7,093,588 2,696,940 (1,698,233) (85,906) 151,908 8,158,297 

Impairment allowance of other current assets 938,046 1,254,844 (517,757) – (8) 1,675,125 

Impairment allowance of current portion of non-current assets 459,492 249,330 (69,503) (61) 2,896 642,154 

Impairment allowance of other non-current assets 2,806,601 1,245,520 (389,583) – 53,597 3,716,135 

Other ECLs provisions 27,201 – (750) – – 26,451 

Impairment allowance of debt investments 17,545 89,764 (2,342) – 312 105,279 

Impairment allowance of long-term receivables 1,365,997 308,117 (106,430) – 69,103 1,636,787 

Impairment allowance of contract assets (Note) 6,095,002 3,319,629 (1,813,081) (1,208) (208,782) 7,391,560 

Impairment allowance of inventories 4,082,255 2,514,753 (295,323) (25,528) 478,800 6,754,957 

Impairment allowance of long-term equity investments 293,820 2,450 – – – 296,270 

Impairment allowance of fixed assets 237,726 24,398 – (4,149) 423 258,398 

Impairment allowance of construction in progress 250,945 – – – 323 251,268 

Impairment allowance of investment properties 54,344 – – – (1,783) 52,561 

Impairment allowance of intangible assets 2,571,560 434,159 – – (131) 3,005,588 

Impairment allowance of goodwill 51,665 – – – 870 52,535 

Total 60,087,393 33,749,600 (20,201,884) (363,007) (1,249,135) 72,022,967 

Note: The impairment allowance of contract assets listed here only includes the impairment of current portion of contract assets. 221 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 26.  Impairment allowance of assets (continued) 

2021 (restated) 

31 December 2020 Changes in accounting policies Opening balance of the year Provision for the year Decrease during the year Other movement Closing balance of the year Reversal Transfer/ Write-off 

Impairment allowance of notes receivable – – – 502,016 – – – 502,016 

Impairment allowance of accounts receivable 25,792,354 12,430 25,804,784 19,341,507 (11,112,880) (644,966) (148,855) 33,239,590 

Impairment allowance of other receivables 6,760,351 – 6,760,351 2,129,589 (1,387,246) (389,016) (20,090) 7,093,588 

Impairment allowance of other current assets 1,531,269 – 1,531,269 83,548 (671,198) – (5,573) 938,046 

Impairment allowance of current portion of non-current assets 449,032 29,126 478,158 170,436 (138,041) (1,371) (49,690) 459,492 

Impairment allowance of other non-current assets 1,512,744 333,553 1,846,297 1,146,832 (178,570) (187) (7,771) 2,806,601 

Other ECLs provisions 1,200 – 1,200 25,998 – – 3 27,201 

Impairment allowance of debt investments 15,228 – 15,228 5,414 (2,970) – (127) 17,545 

Impairment allowance of long-term receivables 1,425,700 (379,301) 1,046,399 647,259 (380,680) (117) 53,136 1,365,997 

Impairment allowance of contract assets (Note) 3,818,976 15,134 3,834,110 3,061,077 (671,997) (105,649) (22,539) 6,095,002 

Impairment allowance of inventories 4,172,649 – 4,172,649 689,960 (679,617) (35,767) (64,970) 4,082,255 

Impairment allowance of long-term equity investments 294,056 – 294,056 – – (236) – 293,820 

Impairment allowance of fixed assets 227,767 – 227,767 17,605 – (7,515) (131) 237,726 

Impairment allowance of construction in progress 250,945 – 250,945 – – – – 250,945 

Impairment allowance of investment properties 21,153 – 21,153 35,146 – – (1,955) 54,344 

Impairment allowance of intangible assets 2,571,560 – 2,571,560 – – – – 2,571,560 

Impairment allowance of goodwill 54,681 – 54,681 34 – (2,641) (409) 51,665 

Total 48,899,665 10,942 48,910,607 27,856,421 (15,223,199) (1,187,465) (268,971) 60,087,393 

> Note: The impairment allowance of contract assets listed here only includes the impairment of current portion of contract assets.

27.  Short-term borrowings 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Unsecured borrowings 74,694,488 52,938,117 Guaranteed borrowings 1,632,714 1,527,472 Pledged borrowings 1,499,896 5,097,643 Mortgaged borrowings 327,061 382,600 Total 78,154,159 59,945,832 

As at 31 December 2022,the annual interest rate for the above borrowings varied from 0.90% to 8.00% (31 December 2021: 1.00% to 10.00%). As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the Group has mortgaged or pledged various assets to banks as security for borrowings that are presented in details in Note V. 70. 222 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 28.  Notes payable 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Commercial acceptance bills 723,120 780,529 Bank acceptance bills 9,580,861 6,926,864 Total 10,303,981 7,707,393 

29.  Accounts payable 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Payables for projects and for real estate development 284,284,912 257,486,405 Payables for purchase of materials 200,712,588 174,776,995 Payables for services 68,651,444 57,759,230 Rent payable 17,834,521 16,185,139 Others 14,260,808 10,995,234 Total 585,744,273 517,203,003 

As at 31 December 2022, accounts payable over 1 year with a carrying amount of RMB157,976,975 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB143,694,525 thousand) are mainly payables for projects, which are unsettled as the projects have not been completed or settled. 

30.  Advances from customers 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Rent and others 729,857 782,465 

As at 31 December 2022, advances from customers over 1 year with a carrying amount of RMB37,024 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB12,481 thousand) are mainly for advance rent receipts. 

31.  Contract liabilities 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Amount due to customers for contract work 72,781,751 81,360,626 Advances for projects 59,062,934 58,083,500 Advances for sale of properties 200,565,988 178,702,437 Others 5,282,546 5,907,320 Total 337,693,219 324,053,883 223 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 31.  Contract liabilities (continued) 

At the balance sheet date, the details of advances for sale of properties are as follows: 

Project name 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Estimated completion/ completion date (Note) Pre-sale percentage (%) (Note) 

Guangzhou Asian Games City H Division 8,233,831 – October 2023 77 

Sun Palace 7,002,765 – April 2025 71 

Heyingyunji 6,068,296 – December 2023 89 

CSCEC Yipin Xuefu Residence 5,147,200 – June 2024 100 

Cuilanyunjing 4,843,154 – December 2023 94 

Zhonghai Guanyuan project 4,818,961 – June 2023 95 

CSCEC Yipin Xuefu Residence West district 4,602,069 – June 2024 79 

China Construction LuMing mansion Project 4,307,832 – September 2024 61 

Guangzhou Nanzhou Road Project 4,107,127 1,344,954 October 2023 82 

Unit FXC1-0016, Fengxian new town Commercial housing project of plot 27-06 3,885,930 – December 2023 82 

CSCEC Tianfu Residence phase II 3,771,685 – December 2023 100 

Beijing Huideli 3,480,472 – October 2023 87 

Jinan Zhonghai Huashan Longcheng Project 3,460,627 3,447,172 July 2024 56 

Top scientist community 02 group project 3,388,835 – December 2023 43 

Xueshili Project 3,295,117 – June 2023 86 

Zhonghai Wenhuali 2,988,032 – December 2023 60 

South Mountain Seal 2,783,030 1,217,666 August 2023 91 

Changsha Zhongjian Yuhe City 2,603,234 2,228,422 December 2023 74 

C5B-11 2,372,607 – December 2023 99 

Kunshan 137 plot project 2,325,586 – September 2024 80 

Duolundao Project 2,278,235 – June 2024 100 

Shanghai Pudong Huinan Minle Affordable Housing Project 2,276,232 1,898,309 December 2023 90 

Top scientist community 03 group project 2,198,747 – December 2023 50 

6039, 6040 plot project 2,163,465 1,076,562 December 2022 86 

Beijing Chaoyang Cuigezhuang Naixi Village 318 Plot 2,143,480 – December 2024 100 

Rice field project 2,090,515 874,557 December 2023 33 

Jiufengli Project 1,841,788 389,973 January 2023 86 

Zhonghai Universe World four Period 1,771,057 2,922,598 March 2023 100 

Zhonghai Huanyu Longchen 1,765,719 – April 2024 100 

Changzhou Hongken Project 1,744,543 436,026 December 2023 40 

Zhonghai Mingdeli 1,642,858 821,597 December 2022 40 

Lake Light 1,576,835 – April 2024 28 

Taihu Lake Star Residential Project 1,558,949 – August 2024 68 

Shandong First Medical University Staff Dormitory A-2 Plot 1,520,919 1,281,009 March 2023 63 

Wuhan Zhonghai Guanggu East Donglu Project (Phase I and II) 1,480,491 1,153,202 September 2022 58 224 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

Project name 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Estimated completion/ completion date (Note) Pre-sale percentage (%) (Note) 

Suzhou high tech Zone headquarters base residence 1,429,510 – November 2024 100 

East Lake Star Project 1,404,547 383,998 June 2024 48 

Zhongjian Lake view Garden Project 1,387,744 1,083,273 January 2023 84 

Zhongjian Big Mansion K3 1,375,179 – December 2021 99 

B0603 project of harbour College of CSCEC Second Bureau 1,349,746 208,668 December 2023 78 

Shiliguanlan Project 1,346,065 336,194 September 2023 47 

Nanjing Xiyuan Mansion 1,309,366 549,754 December 2023 50 

Zhongjian Platinum Mansion 1,305,187 1,160,527 December 2023 80 

Zhonghai Yunlu Mansion (Phase I) 1,232,775 756,160 December 2022 100 

Guangzhou Guanggang No.234 Plot 1,219,001 – December 2023 31 

Shanghai Hongqi Village Project 1,199,903 1,205,084 June 2023 100 

Residential project of Unit 042701, BSP 0-0104, Gucun Village, Baoshan District 1,182,144 – September 2024 31 

Chongqing Zhongjian Yuhu No. 1 1,164,936 1,924,809 December 2025 60 

Shanghai Shenggang academy B0701 Project 1,130,338 – December 2023 27 

Huizhili 1,119,367 – December 2023 44 

Zhongjian Lujiang Mansion 1,104,595 – December 2023 80 

Zhongjian Forest County 3# plot project 1,019,296 858,874 September 2023 57 

Guangzhou Asian Games City E Division 1,009,296 – November 2023 82 

Guangzhou Haizhu Haoke Island plot project 978,698 – April 2024 11 

Zhongjian Guanhu Yuefu 971,559 758,571 December 2022 57 

Plot A, north of Tianchen Street and east of Development Road, Xianwen Area 955,614 – March 2024 32 

Yamenkou 670 Plot 916,765 – June 2025 100 

Zhonghai Huanyu Era 915,392 1,930,826 November 2024 14 

0056 plot project 908,909 1,827,817 May 2024 73 

Zhonghai Chunlang Garden 904,294 – January 2023 30 

Concentric Lake Project Lot A 891,262 683,929 November 2023 100 

Chengdu Zhonghai Huanyunju 886,213 133,581 June 2023 64 

Zhongjian Binshui Garden 885,772 424,115 December 2022 48 

Guanjiangyue Project 859,530 – November 2023 100 

Chefang Project 840,268 – June 2023 100 

CSCEC Chang’an Lufu project 839,208 286,670 September 2024 47 

Changsha Zhongjian Jinghe City Project 832,111 1,296,701 December 2022 99 

Beijing Fuhuali 819,534 – October 2024 15 

No. 6066, 6067 and other plots projects 816,535 39,001 December 2023 25 

Beijing Third Courtyard 804,978 3,276,345 December 2022 100 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 31.  Contract liabilities (continued) 

At the balance sheet date, the details of advances for sale of properties are as follows: (continued) 225 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Project name 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Estimated completion/ completion date (Note) Pre-sale percentage (%) (Note) 

Licang District Hotel Management School west side plot project – Huishui Road 801,436 730,197 September 2022 100 

CSCEC Longyuetai Phase I 799,973 187,312 June 2024 27 

Zhonghai Xiangshui Mansion 791,609 – December 2024 88 

East Circle Time 787,896 – December 2023 35 

Taiyuan Zhonghai International Community 768,940 1,317,089 February 2026 32 

Guangzhou Haizhushigang Road Project 760,809 – August 2023 29 

Suzhou Baofeng Road Project 734,425 236,146 June 2023 24 

Jinan Zhangma New East Railway Station Project C6-1 plot 693,646 581,142 June 2023 72 

Zuo’anlanting 689,278 – October 2023 100 

Zhongjian Meixi Lake Center 682,890 540,474 December 2024 99 

Zhongjian Jiangshan Jiuyue Metro First Phase 665,892 543,337 June 2023 92 

Xihongmen Project 633,418 – June 2024 100 

Chongzhou Zhongwu Project 632,875 – September 2023 41 

Changsha Zhongjian Phoenix Terrace Project 625,155 819,244 December 2024 92 

Zhonghai Yunlu Mansion (Phase II) 617,857 829 December 2022 100 

Dongguan Zhonghai Qirui Garden 608,936 – September 2023 53 

Zhongjian Xingguang city KT2 plot 595,589 4,307,169 December 2022 100 

Jinan Zhangma New East Railway Station Project A8 plot 593,629 26,659 June 2024 58 

Jinan Zhangma New East Railway Station Project A3 plot 585,954 490,519 September 2023 69 

Nanchang Zhonghai Sunny Rose Garden 577,154 163,598 June 2023 63 

Zhonghai Time Mansion II 563,725 231,391 November 2021 70 

Yunqi Garden, Yunshang Garden, Yunzhen Garden 559,897 1,199,061 April 2022 100 

Dongsha Project 549,878 160,502 March 2023 29 

Zhonghai Yingshanhu Preoject II 541,064 135,526 December 2023 41 

Huanyu City 536,554 163,195 November 2022 44 

Fangshan Dongyangzhuang Project 531,258 – June 2024 18 

Guangxi Zhongjian Yonghe Mansion 524,216 1,951,756 September 2023 95 

Tianjin Zuo’an Yuanjing Project 521,171 – October 2023 15 

CSCEC Yinghu Yuefu 516,014 268,896 July 2024 12 

Huanhu Time 495,948 12,360 October 2023 100 

Others 32,723,042 126,419,091 

Total 200,565,988 178,702,437 

> Note: Most of the above projects are phased development projects. The estimated completion time is the last phase of completion, and the pre-sale ratio is the proportion of the contracted area of the housing area that not meets the sales conditions at the end of each year.

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 31.  Contract liabilities (continued) 

At the balance sheet date, the details of advances for sale of properties are as follows: (continued) 226 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 32.  Employee benefits payable 

2022 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year Closing balance of the year 

Short-term employee benefits payable 8,313,076 90,751,667 (89,148,229) 9,916,514 

Defined contribution plans payable (Defined contribution plans) 228,620 9,444,657 (9,269,812) 403,465 

Termination benefits payable (Note V. 41) 14,500 45,045 (49,985) 9,560 

Total 8,556,196 100,241,369 (98,468,026) 10,329,539 

2021 (restated) 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year Closing balance of the year 

Short-term employee benefits payable 7,967,214 86,175,076 (85,829,214) 8,313,076 Defined contribution plans payable (Defined contribution plans) 219,657 7,797,838 (7,788,875) 228,620 Termination benefits payable (Note V. 41) 19,620 17,720 (22,840) 14,500 Total 8,206,491 93,990,634 (93,640,929) 8,556,196 

Short-term employee benefits payable are as follows: 2022 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year Closing balance of the year 

Salaries, bonuses, allowances and subsidies 6,738,672 70,092,267 (68,796,948) 8,033,991 

Staff welfare 20,596 7,865,369 (7,839,606) 46,359 

Social security 115,106 4,395,195 (4,332,909) 177,392 

Including: Medical insurance 94,493 3,951,506 (3,896,227) 149,772 

Work injury insurance 12,422 327,787 (322,789) 17,420 

Maternity insurance 8,191 115,902 (113,893) 10,200 

Supplementary commercial insurance 5,225 199,421 (198,957) 5,689 

Housing funds 88,292 5,755,830 (5,708,123) 135,999 

Union running costs and employee education costs 1,221,422 2,016,832 (1,776,378) 1,461,876 

Other short-term benefits 123,763 426,753 (495,308) 55,208 

Total 8,313,076 90,751,667 (89,148,229) 9,916,514 

2021 (restated) 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year Closing balance of the year 

Salaries, bonuses, allowances and subsidies 6,524,660 67,586,518 (67,372,506) 6,738,672 Staff welfare 18,178 6,845,022 (6,842,604) 20,596 Social security 94,756 3,842,128 (3,821,778) 115,106 Including: Medical insurance 79,576 3,425,007 (3,410,090) 94,493 Work injury insurance 9,940 284,462 (281,980) 12,422 Maternity insurance 5,240 132,659 (129,708) 8,191 Supplementary commercial insurance 1,013 189,905 (185,693) 5,225 Housing funds 106,926 5,070,755 (5,089,389) 88,292 Union running costs and employee education costs 1,128,425 2,005,142 (1,912,145) 1,221,422 Other short-term benefits 93,256 635,606 (605,099) 123,763 Total 7,967,214 86,175,076 (85,829,214) 8,313,076 227 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 32.  Employee benefits payable (continued) 

Defined contribution plans are as follows: 2022 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year Closing balance of the year 

Basic pension insurance 167,348 7,672,784 (7,569,244) 270,888 

Contribution to annuity 50,727 1,539,817 (1,477,832) 112,712 

Unemployment insurance 10,545 232,056 (222,736) 19,865 

Total 228,620 9,444,657 (9,269,812) 403,465 

2021 (restated) 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year Closing balance of the year 

Basic pension insurance 172,860 6,250,401 (6,255,913) 167,348 Contribution to annuity 37,821 1,338,769 (1,325,863) 50,727 Unemployment insurance 8,976 208,668 (207,099) 10,545 Total 219,657 7,797,838 (7,788,875) 228,620 

33.  Taxes and surcharges payable 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Land appreciation tax 29,812,248 33,450,665 Corporate income tax 21,114,103 23,677,966 Value-added tax 12,546,057 9,626,421 Individual income tax 1,118,494 1,209,506 Urban maintenance and construction tax 506,551 451,875 Educational surcharge 277,362 233,809 Others 489,880 433,685 Total 65,864,695 69,083,927 

34.  Other payables 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Dividends payable 1,771,700 1,192,181 Other payables 135,782,465 125,551,138 Total 137,554,165 126,743,319 Dividends payable 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Dividends payable to non-controlling interests 1,454,400 874,881 Preference perpetual bond dividends payable 317,300 317,300 Total 1,771,700 1,192,181 228 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 34.  Other payables (continued) 

Other payables 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Guarantees payable 34,461,711 33,236,549 Project financing payables 43,840,048 34,654,452 Deposits payable 9,294,574 7,820,443 Payables for advances and construction incentives 22,521,661 24,273,310 Payments due to restricted stock incentive object 1,939,955 3,545,264 Others 23,724,516 22,021,120 Total 135,782,465 125,551,138 

As at 31 December 2022, other payables over 1 year with a carrying amount of RMB47,190,222 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB48,579,926 thousand) are mainly guarantees payable and project financing payables, which were unsettled due to the incompleteness of projects. 

35.  Current portion of non-current liabilities 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Current portion of long-term borrowings (Note V. 37) 61,453,543 53,314,143 Current portion of bonds payable (Note V. 38) 35,441,981 14,858,213 Current portion of long-term payables (Note V. 40) 13,927,227 11,030,386 Current portion of lease liabilities (Note V. 39) 2,347,216 2,201,995 Current portion of other non-current liabilities (Note V. 44) 4,967,342 –Others 46,634 51,191 Total 118,183,943 81,455,928 

36.  Other current liabilities 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

VAT output to be transferred 79,757,803 72,066,921 Absorption deposits 3,071,922 3,993,191 Short term financing bonds (Note 1) – 2,000,000 Estimated liabilities (Note V. 42) 1,803,708 1,892,816 

Including: Estimated contract losses 836,638 1,146,911 

Warranties 925,844 659,173 

Pending litigations 33,473 53,398 Others 111,294 74,115 Total 84,744,727 80,027,043 Note 1: The information of short-term financing bonds is listed as follows: 

Issuance date Maturity Opening balance Issue of current period Repayment in current period Ending balance Annual interest rate (%) 

China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. 2021 fifth ultra short term financing bonds November 12, 2021 105 days 2,000,000 – 2,000,000 – 2.48 229 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 37.  Long-term borrowings 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Unsecured borrowings 299,689,759 259,485,252 Guaranteed borrowings 13,571,608 13,047,953 Pledged borrowings 126,804,400 101,630,260 Mortgage borrowings 20,358,669 17,927,433 Sub-total 460,424,436 392,090,898 Less: Long-term borrowings due within 1 year (Note V. 35) Including: Unsecured borrowings (42,301,352) (45,277,842) Guaranteed borrowings (1,083,393) (1,312,843) Pledged borrowings (14,489,861) (5,573,834) Mortgage borrowings (3,578,937) (1,149,624) Total 398,970,893 338,776,755 

As at 31 December 2022, the annual interest rate of long-term borrowings (including current portion of long-term borrowings) varied from 1.20% to 7.36% (31 December 2021: 1.03% to 7.00%). As at 31 December 2022, the Group had RMB37,702,110 thousand long-term loan principal pledged by future income rights and the project franchise (31 December 2021: RMB20,907,226 thousand). At 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the Group has mortgaged or pledged various assets to banks as security for borrowings that are presented in detail in Note V. 70. 

38.  Bonds payable 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Corporate bonds 37,726,099 31,276,197 Non-public targeted bond financing instruments 82,629,210 69,109,991 Others 18,883,867 13,932,775 Sub-total 139,239,176 114,318,963 Less: Bonds payable due within 1 year (Note V. 35) (35,441,981) (14,858,213) Total 103,797,195 99,460,750 230 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

> V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 38.  Bonds payable (continued)
> As at 31 December 2022, the amount of bonds payable is as follows:
> Par value  Issuance date  Maturity Issuance amount Opening balance of the year Issuance during the year Par interest accrued Interest adjustment  Repayment Others (Note) Closing balance of the year
> 2012 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 4579  USD700 million  15-Nov-2012  10 years  USD700 million  4,422,191  – 101,847  5,622  (4,784,327)  254,667  –
> 2012 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 4580  USD300 million  15-Nov-2012  30 years  USD300 million  1,856,610  – 163,753  463  (162,492)  154,402  2,012,736
> 2013 Hong Kong Class B Guaranteed Notes  USD500 million  29-Oct-2013  10 years  USD500 million  3,171,223  – 197,336  4,122  (191,399)  262,591  3,443,873
> 2013 Hong Kong Class C Guaranteed Notes  USD500 million  29-Oct-2013  30 years  USD500 million  3,156,163  – 194,313  628  (194,441)  261,378  3,418,041
> 2014 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 5746  USD700 million  8-May-2014  10 years  USD700 million  4,438,205  – 413,030  (2,396)  (395,283)  370,072  4,823,628
> 2014 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 6013  USD500 million  11-Jun-2014  20 years  USD500 million  3,131,036  – 78,741  1,475  (91,882)  260,397  3,379,767
> 2016 China Overseas Real Estate Phase I Corporate Bonds  RMB6 billion  22-Aug-2016  10 years  RMB6 billion  1,900,000  – 69,967  – (47,678)  – 1,922,289
> CSCEC II N 2207  USD500 million  5-Jul-2017  5 years  USD500 million  3,230,808  – 51,615  2,446  (3,583,287)  298,418  –
> CSCEC II N 2707  USD500 million  5-Jul-2017  10 years  USD500 million  3,222,483  – 121,880  3,634  (182,821)  297,649  3,462,825
> 2017 Hong Kong Class A Guaranteed Notes  USD550 million  29-Nov-2017  5 years  USD550 million  3,490,751  – 124,372  3,303  (3,819,875)  201,449  –
> 2017 Hong Kong Class B Guaranteed Notes  USD250 million  29-Nov-2017  10 years  USD250 million  1,581,219  – 58,450  1,233  (57,996)  131,993  1,714,899
> 2018 China Construction Second Bureau Phase I Medium-Term Notes  RMB1 billion  17-Apr-2018  5 years  RMB1 billion  1,034,888  – 50,862  – (50,300)  – 1,035,450
> 2018 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 4475  USD750 million  26-Apr-2018  5 years  USD750 million  4,780,733  – 290,866  5,222  (273,122)  397,381  5,201,080
> 2018 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 4476  USD750 million  26-Apr-2018  10 years  USD750 million  4,769,420  – 161,592  3,271  (172,565)  396,021  5,157,739
> 2018 China State Construction Transportation Phase I Medium-term Notes  RMB500 million  23-Jul-2018  5 years  RMB500 million  511,178  – 25,570  – (25,500)  – 511,248
> 2018 First Medium Term Notes  RMB5 billion  15-Aug-2018  5 years  RMB5 billion  5,085,640  – 235,000  1,617  (235,000)  – 5,087,257
> 2018 Second Medium Term Notes  RMB5 billion  15-Aug-2018  5 years  RMB5 billion  5,085,640  – 235,000  1,617  (235,000)  – 5,087,257
> 2019 China Overseas Real Estate Phase I Corporate Bond Variety I  RMB2 billion  23-Jan-2019  6 years  RMB2 billion  2,000,000  – – – (2,000,000)  – –
> 2019 China Overseas Real Estate Phase I Corporate Bond Variety II  RMB1.5 billion  23-Jan-2019  7 years  RMB1.5 billion  1,500,000  – 55,237  – (37,641)  – 1,517,596
> 2019 China State Construction Transportation Phase I Medium Term Notes  RMB300 million  10-Apr-2019  5 years  RMB300 million  310,307  – 14,250  – (14,250)  – 310,307
> 2019 China State Construction Xinjiang Construction Engineering Phase I Medium-term Notes  RMB800 million  20-Jun-2019  3+N years  RMB800 million  822,487  – 11,680  370  (834,537)  – –
> 2019 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 4437  HKD2 billion  15-Jul-2019  5.5 years  HKD2 billion  1,689,216  – 70,024  1,226  (113,926)  135,726  1,782,266
> 2019 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 4438  USD450 million  15-Jul-2019  10 years  USD450 million  2,865,279  – 69,210  1,192  (62,983)  238,435  3,111,133
> 2019 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 40076  USD294 million  27-Nov-2019  10 years  USD294 million  1,863,118  – 77,352  1,925  (60,440)  155,180  2,037,135
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 01 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB88 million  20-Dec-2019  3.082 years  RMB88 million  25,006  – 5,622  – (30,628)  – –

231 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

> Par value  Issuance date  Maturity Issuance amount Opening balance of the year Issuance during the year Par interest accrued Interest adjustment  Repayment Others (Note) Closing balance of the year
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 02 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB129 million  20-Dec-2019  6.088 years  RMB129 million  134,075  – 3,121  – (54,753)  – 82,443
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 03 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB149 million  20-Dec-2019  9.085 years  RMB149 million  154,861  – 5,861  – (5,861)  – 154,861
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 04 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB174 million  20-Dec-2019  12.09 years  RMB174 million  180,845  – 6,845  – (6,845)  – 180,845
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 05 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB201 million  20-Dec-2019  15.088 years  RMB201 million  208,907  – 7,907  – (7,907)  – 208,907
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 06 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB234 million  20-Dec-2019  18.096 years  RMB234 million  243,205  – 9,205  – (9,205)  – 243,205
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 07 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB271 million  20-Dec-2019  21.093 years  RMB271 million  281,661  – 10,661  – (10,661)  – 281,661
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 08 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB315 million  20-Dec-2019  24.099 years  RMB315 million  327,392  – 12,392  – (12,392)  – 327,392
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 09 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB365 million  20-Dec-2019  27.096 years  RMB365 million  379,359  – 14,359  – (14,359)  – 379,359
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 10 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB274 million  20-Dec-2019  29.104 years  RMB274 million  284,779  – 10,779  – (10,779)  – 284,779
> 2020 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 40177  USD300 million  2-Mar-2020  5 years  USD300 million  1,895,824  – 125,936  2,596  (89,529)  158,102  2,092,929
> 2020 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 40178  USD500 million  2-Mar-2020  10 years  USD500 million  3,149,585  – 33,709  2,942  (38,022)  262,463  3,410,677
> 2020 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 40179  USD200 million  2-Mar-2020  15 years  USD200 million  1,266,726  – 19,471  275  (19,953)  105,466  1,371,985
> Beijing Zhonghai Plaza Commercial Development Co., Ltd. CMBS Phase I  RMB3.701 billion  28-Apr-2020  18 years  RMB3.701 billion  3,694,351  – 57,189  – (63,763)  – 3,687,777
> China State Construction International Group Co., Ltd. 2020 for Professional Investors – Public Offering of Corporate Bonds (Phase I)
> RMB2 billion  28-Jul-2020  3 years  RMB2 billion  2,022,907  – 195,695  1,461  (67,313)  – 2,152,750
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2020 for Professional Investors – Public Offering of Special Corporate Bonds for Housing Leasing (Phase I)
> RMB2 billion  13-Aug-2020  6 years  RMB2 billion  2,000,000  – 73,650  – (50,188)  – 2,023,462
> Beijing China Overseas Plaza Commercial Development Co., Ltd. CMBS Phase II  RMB3 billion  17-Aug-2020  18 years  RMB3 billion  3,001,122  – 116,892  – (118,672)  – 2,999,342
> China State Construction International Investment Group Co., Ltd. 2020 first medium-term notes  RMB500 million  26-Oct-2020  3 years  RMB500 million  503,074  – 17,250  – (12,257)  – 508,067 V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 38.  Bonds payable (continued)
> As at 31 December 2022, the amount of bonds payable is as follows: (continued)

232 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

> Par value  Issuance date  Maturity Issuance amount Opening balance of the year Issuance during the year Par interest accrued Interest adjustment  Repayment Others (Note) Closing balance of the year
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2020 for Professional Investors – Public Offering of Corporate Bonds (Phase I)
> RMB2.4 billion  6-Nov-2020  3 years  RMB2.4 billion  2,400,000  – 88,379  – (60,225)  – 2,428,154
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Limited 2020 First Medium Term Notes  RMB1.5 billion  10-Dec-2020  3 years  RMB1.5 billion  1,500,000  – 55,237  – (37,641)  – 1,517,596
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2021 First Medium-Term Notes  RMB1.5 billion  13-Jan-2021  3 years  RMB1.5 billion  1,500,000  – 55,237  – (37,641)  – 1,517,596
> CITIC Securities – China Overseas Commercial Management No. 3 Asset-Backed Special Plan  RMB1.001 billion  23-Mar-2021  18 years  RMB1.001 billion  1,001,329  – 36,781  – (27,593)  – 1,010,517
> China State Construction International Investment Group Co., Ltd. 2021 First Medium-Term Notes  RMB1 billion  27-May-2021  3 years  RMB1 billion  1,020,924  – 44,167  – (9,309)  – 1,055,782
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. Open to Professional Investors in 2021 – Public Issuance of Corporate Bonds (Phase I) (Variety 1)
> RMB2 billion  11-Jun-2021  3 years  RMB2 billion  2,000,000  – 73,650  – (50,188)  – 2,023,462
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. Open to Professional Investors in 2021 – Public Issuance of Corporate Bonds (Phase I) (Variety 2)
> RMB1 billion  11-Jun-2021  5 years  RMB1 billion  1,000,000  – 36,825  – (25,094)  – 1,011,731
> CITIC Securities – Chengdu China Overseas International Center Green Asset-Backed Special Program  RMB2.101 billion  23-Jun-2021  18 years  RMB2.101 billion  2,105,458  – 75,274  – (112,653)  – 2,068,079
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. Publicly Issues Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors in 2021 (Phase II) (Variety 1)
> RMB1 billion  9-Jul-2021  4 years  RMB1 billion  1,000,000  – 36,825  – (25,094)  – 1,011,731
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. Publicly Issues Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors in 2021 (Phase II) (Variety 2)
> RMB2 billion  9-Jul-2021  4 years  RMB2 billion  2,000,000  – 73,650  – (50,188)  – 2,023,462
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. Publicly Issues Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors in 2021 (Phase III) (Variety 1)
> RMB500 million  6-Aug-2021  4 years  RMB500 million  500,000  – 18,412  – (12,547)  – 505,865
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. Publicly Issues Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors in 2021 (Phase III) (Variety 2)
> RMB1.5 billion  6-Aug-2021  7 years  RMB1.5 billion  1,500,000  – 55,237  – (37,641)  – 1,517,596
> 2021 China State Construction West Construction Phase I Medium-term Notes  RMB700 million  18-Aug-2021  3 years  RMB700 million  707,611  – 23,450  350  (23,450)  – 707,961
> CITIC Securities – China Overseas Business Management Corporation 2021 Phase I Asset Support Special Plan  RMB1.9 billion  10-Nov-2021  18 years  RMB1.9 billion  1,910,426  – 18,241  – (17,276)  – 1,911,391
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2021 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase IV) (Variety 1)
> RMB1.7 billion  24-Nov-2021  3 years  RMB1.7 billion  1,700,000  – 62,602  – (42,659)  – 1,719,943
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2021 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase IV) (Variety 2)
> RMB1.2 billion  24-Nov-2021  5 years  RMB1.2 billion  1,200,000  – 44,190  – (30,113)  – 1,214,077
> 2021 China Construction Fourth Bureau Phase III Medium-term Notes (Variety 1)  RMB1 billion  16-Dec-2021  5 years  RMB1 billion  1,000,650  – 39,609  – (38,415)  – 1,001,844
> 2021 China Construction Fourth Bureau Phase III Medium-term Notes (Variety 2)  RMB1 billion  16-Dec-2021  5 years  RMB1 billion  1,000,095  – 33,090  – (34,085)  – 999,100 V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 38.  Bonds payable (continued)
> As at 31 December 2022, the amount of bonds payable is as follows: (continued)

233 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

> Par value  Issuance date  Maturity Issuance amount Opening balance of the year Issuance during the year Par interest accrued Interest adjustment  Repayment Others (Note) Closing balance of the year
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2021 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase V) (Variety 1)
> RMB1.3 billion  17-Dec-2021  3 years  RMB1.3 billion  1,300,000  – 47,872  – (32,622)  – 1,315,250
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2021 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase V) (Variety 2)
> RMB800 million  17-Dec-2021  5 years  RMB800 million  800,000  – 29,460  – (20,075)  – 809,385
> China State Construction International Investment Group Co., Ltd. 2021 Second Medium-Term Notes  RMB1.5 billion  27-Dec-2021  3 years  RMB1.5 billion  1,500,196  – 36,500  – (23,815)  – 1,512,881
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Phase I Medium-term Notes (Variety 1)  RMB1.8 billion  12-Jan-2022  3 years  RMB1.8 billion  – 1,800,000  50,832  – – – 1,850,832
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Phase I Medium-term Notes (Variety 2)  RMB1.2 billion  12-Jan-2022  5 years  RMB1.2 billion  – 1,200,000  38,242  – – – 1,238,242
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Phase II Green Medium-term Notes  RMB1 billion  21-Feb-2022  5 years  RMB1 billion  – 1,000,000  27,996  – – – 1,027,996
> CITIC Securities – Shanghai Zhonghai International Center Green asset support special plan (special for carbon neutrality)  RMB5 billion  29-Mar-2022  18 years  RMB5 billion  – 4,995,000  130,138  – (61,830)  – 5,063,308
> China Construction International Investment Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Phase I Green Medium-term Notes  RMB960 million  31-Mar-2022  3 years  RMB960 million  – 960,000  21,694  – (21,535)  – 960,159
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase I) (Variety 1)
> RMB2 billion  6-Apr-2022  3 years  RMB2 billion  – 2,000,000  45,581  – – – 2,045,581
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase I) (Variety 2)
> RMB1 billion  6-Apr-2022  5 years  RMB1 billion  – 1,000,000  26,153  – – – 1,026,153
> China Construction International Investment Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Phase II Medium-term Notes  RMB1.5 billion  25-Apr-2022  3 years  RMB1.5 billion  – 1,500,000  32,291  – (32,033)  – 1,500,258
> China Construction Capital Holdings Co., Ltd. 2022 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase I)  RMB1 billion  27-Apr-2022  3 years  RMB1 billion  – 1,000,000  22,513  (1,468)  – – 1,021,045
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase II) (Variety 1)
> RMB1.5 billion  9-May-2022  3 years  RMB1.5 billion  – 1,500,000  27,042  – – – 1,527,042
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase II) (Variety 2)
> RMB1.5 billion  9-May-2022  5 years  RMB1.5 billion  – 1,500,000  34,220  – – – 1,534,220
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Phase III Medium-term Notes (Variety 1)  RMB2 billion  25-May-2022  3 years  RMB2 billion  – 2,000,000  32,144  – – – 2,032,144
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Phase III Medium-term Notes (Variety 2)  RMB1 billion  25-May-2022  5 years  RMB1 billion  – 1,000,000  18,944  – – – 1,018,944
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Phase IV Medium-term Notes  RMB2 billion  21-July-2022  5 years  RMB2 billion  – 2,000,000  29,521  – – – 2,029,521
> China Construction International Investment Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Phase III Medium-term Notes  RMB1.04 billion  11-Aug-2022  5 years  RMB1.04 billion  – 1,040,000  10,452  – – – 1,050,452
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase III) (Variety 1)
> RMB1 billion  19-Sep-2022  3 years  RMB1 billion  – 1,000,000  6,800  – – – 1,006,800 V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 38.  Bonds payable (continued)
> As at 31 December 2022, the amount of bonds payable is as follows: (continued)

234 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

> Par value  Issuance date  Maturity Issuance amount Opening balance of the year Issuance during the year Par interest accrued Interest adjustment  Repayment Others (Note) Closing balance of the year
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase III) (Variety 2)
> RMB500 million  19-Sep-2022  5 years  RMB500 million  – 500,000  4,463  – – – 504,463
> China State Construction Seventh Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. 2022 Phase I Medium Term Notes  RMB1.5 billion  26-Oct-2022  3 years  RMB1.5 billion  – 1,500,000  – – – – 1,500,000
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Phase V Medium-term Notes  RMB1 billion  25-Oct-2022  5 years  RMB1 billion  – 1,000,000  5,304  – – – 1,005,304
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Phase VI Green Medium-term Notes  RMB2 billion  12-Dec-2022  5 years  RMB2 billion  – 2,000,000  2,850  – – – 2,002,850
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Phase VII Green Medium-term Notes  RMB1 billion  12-Dec-2022  5 years  RMB1 billion  – 1,000,000  1,425  – – – 1,001,425
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase IV) (Variety 1)
> RMB1.5 billion  19-Dec-2022  3 years  RMB1.5 billion  – 1,500,000  1,031  – – – 1,501,031
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2022 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase IV) (Variety 2)
> RMB1.5 billion  19-Dec-2022  5 years  RMB1.5 billion  – 1,500,000  1,036  – – – 1,501,036
> Sub-total  114,318,963  34,495,000  5,153,851  43,126  (19,113,554)  4,341,790  139,239,176
> Less: bonds payable due within one year (Note V.35)  (14,858,213)  (35,441,981)
> Total  99,460,750  103,797,195 V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 38.  Bonds payable (continued)
> As at 31 December 2022, the amount of bonds payable is as follows: (continued)

235 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

> V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 38.  Bonds payable (continued)
> As at 31 December 2021, the amount of bonds payable is as follows:
> Par value  Issuance date  Maturity Issuance amount Opening balance of the year Issuance during the year Par interest accrued Interest adjustment  Repayment Others (Note) Closing balance of the year
> 2012 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 4579  USD700 million  15-Nov-2012  10 years  USD700 million  4,575,930  – 176,948  (5,909)  (163,334)  (161,444)  4,422,191
> 2012 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 4580  USD300 million  15-Nov-2012  30 years  USD300 million  1,943,858  – 101,528  (422)  (116,553)  (71,801)  1,856,610
> 2013 Hong Kong Class B Guaranteed Notes  USD500 million  29-Oct-2013  10 years  USD500 million  3,304,713  – 172,113  (3,228)  (185,096)  (117,279)  3,171,223
> 2013 Hong Kong Class C Guaranteed Notes  USD500 million  29-Oct-2013  30 years  USD500 million  3,268,148  – 204,135  (568)  (193,705)  (121,847)  3,156,163
> 2014 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 5746  USD700 million  8-May-2014  10 years  USD700 million  4,614,376  – 266,684  1,449  (267,592)  (176,712)  4,438,205
> 2014 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 6013  USD500 million  11-Jun-2014  20 years  USD500 million  3,253,288  – 205,299  (1,331)  (206,388)  (119,832)  3,131,036
> 2015 China State Construction Eighth Bureau First Medium Term Notes  RMB100 million  29-Apr-2015  5 years  RMB100 million  7,947  – – – (7,947)  – –
> 2015 China State Construction Eighth Bureau Second Medium Term Notes  RMB1.6 billion  17-Aug-2015  5 years  RMB1.6 billion  18,613  – – – (18,613)  – –
> 2015 China Overseas Real Estate Phase I Corporate Bonds  RMB7 billion  19-Nov-2015  6 years  RMB7 billion  3,439,691  – 133,643  – (3,573,334)  – –
> 2015 China Overseas Real Estate Phase II Corporate Bonds  RMB1 billion  19-Nov-2015  7 years  RMB1 billion  10,267  – – – (10,267)  – –
> CITIC Real Estate Co., Ltd. 2016 Non-public Issuance of Corporate Bonds (Phase 1)  RMB1 billion  15-Jan-2016  5 years  RMB1 billion  416,925  – 542  – (417,467)  – –
> 2016 First Medium Term Notes  RMB3 billion  11-Apr-2016  5 years  RMB3 billion  3,034,180  – 53,556  264  (3,088,000)  – –
> CSCEC II N 2106  USD500 million  14-Jun-2016  5 years  USD500 million  3,264,387  – 38,972  2,139  (3,230,886)  (74,612)  –
> 2016 China Overseas Real Estate Phase I Corporate Bonds  RMB6 billion  22-Aug-2016  10 years  RMB6 billion  6,152,201  – 173,882  – (4,426,083)  – 1,900,000
> 2016 China State Construction Sixth Bureau First Medium Term Notes  RMB500 million  24-Aug-2016  5 years  RMB500 million  505,816  – 11,251  333  (517,400)  – –
> 2016 China Construction West Construction Phase I Medium-term Notes  RMB700 million  27-Sep-2016  5 years  RMB700 million  705,990  – 20,633  1,167  (727,790)  – –
> CSCEC II N 2207  USD500 million  5-Jul-2017  5 years  USD500 million  3,301,999  – 92,448  4,313  (92,448)  (75,504)  3,230,808
> CSCEC II N 2707  USD500 million  5-Jul-2017  10 years  USD500 million  3,294,580  – 111,576  3,237  (111,575)  (75,335)  3,222,483
> 2017 Hong Kong Class A Guaranteed Notes  USD550 million  29-Nov-2017  5 years  USD550 million  3,624,870  – 122,561  6,077  (122,970)  (139,787)  3,490,751
> 2017 Hong Kong Class B Guaranteed Notes  USD250 million  29-Nov-2017  10 years  USD250 million  1,642,368  – 63,962  – (64,176)  (60,935)  1,581,219
> 2018 China Overseas Real Estate Phase 1 Medium-Term Notes  RMB3 billion  5-Feb-2018  3 years  RMB3 billion  3,069,759  – 17,266  – (3,087,025)  – –
> 2018 China Construction Second Bureau Phase I Medium-Term Notes  RMB1 billion  17-Apr-2018  5 years  RMB1 billion  1,034,354  – 50,834  1,200  (51,500)  – 1,034,888
> 2018 China Construction Fangcheng Non-public Issuance of Corporate Bonds (Phase I)  RMB700 million  24-Apr-2018  3 years  RMB700 million  726,537  – 12,176  – (738,713)  – –
> 2018 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 4475  USD750 million  26-Apr-2018  5 years  USD750 million  4,951,294  – 204,586  (4,811)  (193,121)  (177,215)  4,780,733
> 2018 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 4476  USD750 million  26-Apr-2018  10 years  USD750 million  4,966,747  – 228,656  (3,000)  (242,724)  (180,259)  4,769,420

236 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

> Par value  Issuance date  Maturity Issuance amount Opening balance of the year Issuance during the year Par interest accrued Interest adjustment  Repayment Others (Note) Closing balance of the year
> 2018 China State Construction Transportation Phase I Medium-term Notes  RMB500 million  23-Jul-2018  5 years  RMB500 million  511,178  – 25,500  – (25,500)  – 511,178
> 2018 First Medium Term Notes  RMB5 billion  15-Aug-2018  5 years  RMB5 billion  5,114,358  – 204,739  1,543  (235,000)  – 5,085,640
> 2018 Second Medium Term Notes  RMB5 billion  15-Aug-2018  5 years  RMB5 billion  5,114,358  – 204,739  1,543  (235,000)  – 5,085,640
> 2018 China Overseas Real Estate Phase I Corporate Bonds  RMB3.5 billion  19-Oct-2018  6 years  RMB3.5 billion  3,565,531  – 130,879  – (3,696,410)  – –
> 2018 China State Construction Seventh Bureau Phase I Medium-Term Notes  RMB2 billion  8-Nov-2018  3 years  RMB2 billion  2,017,386  – 67,814  – (2,085,200)  – –
> 2018 China Construction Fourth Bureau Third Medium-Term Notes  RMB2 billion  22-Nov-2018  3 years  RMB2 billion  2,009,544  – 76,256  – (2,085,800)  – –
> 2019 China Overseas Real Estate Phase I Corporate Bond Variety I  RMB2 billion  23-Jan-2019  6 years  RMB2 billion  2,067,645  – 64,878  – (132,523)  – 2,000,000
> 2019 China Overseas Real Estate Phase I Corporate Bond Variety II  RMB1.5 billion  23-Jan-2019  7 years  RMB1.5 billion  1,536,238  – 52,586  – (88,824)  – 1,500,000
> 2019 China State Construction Transportation Phase I Medium Term Notes  RMB300 million  10-Apr-2019  5 years  RMB300 million  310,307  – 14,250  – (14,250)  – 310,307
> 2019 China State Construction Xinjiang Construction Engineering Phase I Medium-term Notes  RMB800 million  20-Jun-2019  3+N years  RMB800 million  821,622  – 45,965  740  (45,840)  – 822,487
> 2019 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 4437  HKD2 billion  15-Jul-2019  5.5 years  HKD2 billion  1,710,356  – 200,257  (1,144)  (158,710)  (61,543)  1,689,216
> 2019 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 4438  USD450 million  15-Jul-2019  10 years  USD450 million  2,988,422  – 53,604  (1,107)  (65,687)  (109,953)  2,865,279
> 2019 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 40076  USD294 million  27-Nov-2019  10 years  USD294 million  1,973,321  – 30,960  (1,794)  (69,992)  (69,377)  1,863,118
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 01 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB88 million  20-Dec-2019  3.082 years  RMB88 million  91,585  – 10,768  – (77,347)  – 25,006
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 02 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB129 million  20-Dec-2019  6.088 years  RMB129 million  134,255  – 5,075  – (5,255)  – 134,075
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 03 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB149 million  20-Dec-2019  9.085 years  RMB149 million  155,070  – 5,861  – (6,070)  – 154,861
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 04 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB174 million  20-Dec-2019  12.09 years  RMB174 million  181,089  – 6,845  – (7,089)  – 180,845
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 05 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB201 million  20-Dec-2019  15.088 years  RMB201 million  209,189  – 7,907  – (8,189)  – 208,907
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 06 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB234 million  20-Dec-2019  18.096 years  RMB234 million  243,533  – 9,205  – (9,533)  – 243,205
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 07 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB271 million  20-Dec-2019  21.093 years  RMB271 million  282,041  – 10,661  – (11,041)  – 281,661
> V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 38.  Bonds payable (continued)
> As at 31 December 2021, the amount of bonds payable is as follows: (continued)

237 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

> Par value  Issuance date  Maturity Issuance amount Opening balance of the year Issuance during the year Par interest accrued Interest adjustment  Repayment Others (Note) Closing balance of the year
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 08 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB315 million  20-Dec-2019  24.099 years  RMB315 million  327,833  – 12,392  – (12,833)  – 327,392
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 09 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB365 million  20-Dec-2019  27.096 years  RMB365 million  379,870  – 14,359  – (14,870)  – 379,359
> China Construction Third Bureau – Shiyan Pipe Corridor PPP Project Asset-Backed Special Plan Priority 10 Asset-Backed Securities  RMB274 million  20-Dec-2019  29.104 years  RMB274 million  285,163  – 10,779  – (11,163)  – 284,779
> 2020 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 40177  USD300 million  2-Mar-2020  5 years  USD300 million  1,972,538  – 24,602  (2,451)  (29,440)  (69,425)  1,895,824
> 2020 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 40178  USD500 million  2-Mar-2020  10 years  USD500 million  3,261,612  – 47,475  (2,750)  (38,833)  (117,919)  3,149,585
> 2020 Hong Kong Guaranteed Notes No. 40179  USD200 million  2-Mar-2020  15 years  USD200 million  1,314,775  – 21,580  (257)  (20,263)  (49,109)  1,266,726
> Beijing China Overseas Plaza Commercial Development Co., Ltd. CMBS Phase I  RMB3.701 billion  28-Apr-2020  18 years  RMB3.701 billion  3,706,541  – 61,679  – (73,869)  – 3,694,351
> China State Construction International Group Co., Ltd. 2020 for Professional Investors – Public Offering of Corporate Bonds (Phase I)
> RMB2 billion  28-Jul-2020  3 years  RMB2 billion  2,025,943  – 70,603  1,407  (75,046)  – 2,022,907
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2020 for Professional Investors – Public Offering of Special Corporate Bonds for Housing Leasing (Phase I)
> RMB2 billion  13-Aug-2020  6 years  RMB2 billion  2,024,711  – 59,831  – (84,542)  – 2,000,000
> Beijing China Overseas Plaza Commercial Development Co., Ltd. CMBS Phase II  RMB3 billion  17-Aug-2020  18 years  RMB3 billion  3,005,982  – 78,020  – (82,880)  – 3,001,122
> China State Construction International Investment Group Co., Ltd. 2020 first medium-term Notes  RMB500 million  26-Oct-2020  3 years  RMB500 million  503,072  – 17,252  – (17,250)  – 503,074
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2020 for professional investors – Public Offering of Corporate Bonds (Phase I)  RMB2.4 billion  6-Nov-2020  3 years  RMB2.4 billion  2,411,787  – 56,091  – (67,878)  – 2,400,000
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Limited 2020 First Medium Term Notes  RMB1.5 billion  10-Dec-2020  3 years  RMB1.5 billion  1,503,150  – 50,482  – (53,632)  – 1,500,000
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2021 First Medium-Term Notes  RMB1.5 billion  13-Jan-2021  3 years  RMB1.5 billion  – 1,500,000  49,133  – (49,133)  – 1,500,000
> CITIC Securities – China Overseas Commercial Management No. 3 Asset-Backed Special Plan  RMB1.001 billion  23-Mar-2021  18 years  RMB1.001 billion  – 1,001,000  25,690  – (25,361)  – 1,001,329
> China State Construction International Investment Group Co., Ltd. 2021 First Medium-Term Notes  RMB1 billion  27-May-2021  3 years  RMB1 billion  – 1,000,000  20,924  – – – 1,020,924
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. Open to Professional Investors in 2021 – Public Issuance of Corporate Bonds (Phase I) (Variety 1)  RMB2 billion  11-Jun-2021  3 years  RMB2 billion  – 2,000,000  35,931  – (35,931)  – 2,000,000
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. Open to Professional Investors in 2021 – Public Issuance of Corporate Bonds (Phase I) (Variety 2)  RMB1 billion  11-Jun-2021  5 years  RMB1 billion  – 1,000,000  19,624  – (19,624)  – 1,000,000
> CITIC Securities – Chengdu China Overseas International Center Green Asset-Backed Special Program  RMB2.101 billion  23-Jun-2021  18 years  RMB2.101 billion  – 2,101,000  108,744  – (104,286)  – 2,105,458
> V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 38.  Bonds payable (continued)
> As at 31 December 2021, the amount of bonds payable is as follows: (continued)

238 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

> Par value  Issuance date  Maturity Issuance amount Opening balance of the year Issuance during the year Par interest accrued Interest adjustment  Repayment Others (Note) Closing balance of the year
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. Publicly Issues Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors in 2021 (Phase II) (Variety 1)  RMB1 billion  9-Jul-2021  4 years  RMB1 billion  – 1,000,000  14,811  – (14,811)  – 1,000,000
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. Publicly Issues Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors in 2021 (Phase II) (Variety 2)  RMB2 billion  9-Jul-2021  4 years  RMB2 billion  – 2,000,000  31,056  – (31,056)  – 2,000,000
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. Publicly Issues Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors in 2021 (Phase III) (Variety 1)  RMB500 million  6-Aug-2021  4 years  RMB500 million  – 500,000  5,500  – (5,500)  – 500,000
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. Publicly Issues Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors in 2021 (Phase III) (Variety 2)  RMB1.5 billion  6-Aug-2021  7 years  RMB1.5 billion  – 1,500,000  19,500  – (19,500)  – 1,500,000
> 2021 China State Construction West Construction Phase I Medium-term Notes  RMB700 million  18-Aug-2021  3 years  RMB700 million  – 700,000  8,544  (933)  – – 707,611
> 2021 CITIC Securities – China Overseas Commercial Management Phase I Asset-Backed Special Plan  RMB1.9 billion  10-Nov-2021  18 years  RMB1.9 billion  – 1,901,000  9,426  – – – 1,910,426
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2021 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase IV) (Variety 1)  RMB1.7 billion  24-Nov-2021  3 years  RMB1.7 billion  – 1,700,000  5,236  – (5,236)  – 1,700,000
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2021 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase IV) (Variety 2)  RMB1.2 billion  24-Nov-2021  5 years  RMB1.2 billion  – 1,200,000  4,056  – (4,056)  – 1,200,000
> 2021 China Construction Fourth Bureau Phase III Medium-term Notes (Variety 1)  RMB1 billion  16-Dec-2021  5 years  RMB1 billion  – 999,460  1,190  – – – 1,000,650
> 2021 China Construction Fourth Bureau Phase III Medium-term Notes (Variety 2)  RMB1 billion  16-Dec-2021  5 years  RMB1 billion  – 999,100  995  – – – 1,000,095
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2021 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase V) (Variety 1)  RMB1.3 billion  17-Dec-2021  3 years  RMB1.3 billion  – 1,300,000  1,184  – (1,184)  – 1,300,000
> China Overseas Enterprise Development Group Co., Ltd. 2021 Public Offering of Corporate Bonds to Professional Investors (Phase V) (Variety 2)  RMB800 million  17-Dec-2021  5 years  RMB800 million  – 800,000  826  – (826)  – 800,000
> China State Construction International Investment Group Co., Ltd. 2021 Second Medium-Term Notes  RMB1.5 billion  27-Dec-2021  3 years  RMB1.5 billion  – 1,500,000  196  – – – 1,500,196
> Sub-total  118,888,843  24,701,560  4,579,711  (4,293)  (31,816,970)  (2,029,888)  114,318,963
> Less: bonds payable due within one year (Note V. 35)  (30,106,372)  (14,858,213)
> Total  88,782,471  99,460,750
> Note: Others are mainly caused by change of foreign exchange rate.
> V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 38.  Bonds payable (continued)
> As at 31 December 2021, the amount of bonds payable is as follows: (continued)

239 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 39.  Lease liabilities 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Buildings 6,387,714 4,897,387 Machinery and equipment 570,361 797,096 Motor vehicles 18,449 11,333 Other equipments 211,200 188,985 Sub-total 7,187,724 5,894,801 Less: Lease liabilities due within one year (Note V. 35) (2,347,216) (2,201,995) Total 4,840,508 3,692,806 

40.  Long-term payables 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Project quality warranty payable 21,719,856 20,643,915 Payables for minority interest financing 2,360,837 2,087,549 Payables for leasing companies 1,349,254 1,364,020 Others 3,489,952 3,520,894 Sub-total 28,919,899 27,616,378 Less: Current portion of long-term payables (Note V. 35) (13,927,227) (11,030,386) Total 14,992,672 16,585,992 

41.  Long-term employee benefits payable 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Net defined benefit liability (a) 1,645,740 1,778,960 Long-term termination benefits (b) 31,750 44,860 Sub-total 1,677,490 1,823,820 Le ss: Te rmination benefits expected to be paid within one year (Note V. 32) (9,560) (14,500) Total 1,667,930 1,809,320 (a)  Net defined benefit liability 

The company pays supplementary retirement benefits for its employees who retire on or before 31 March 2007 in addition to the contribution made to statutory insurance schemes. Such supplementary retirement benefits are defined benefit plans. The present value of the defined benefit plan obligation is calculated annually by the external independent actuary Towers Watson Consulting Company based on the interest rate of the national debt similar to the obligation period and currency, using the expected cumulative benefit unit method. The principal actuarial assumptions used as at the balance sheet date are as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Discount rate 2.75% 3.00% Annual growth rate of living expenses for the family dependents of deceased employees 4.50% 4.50% Annual growth rate of average medical expenses 8.00% 8.00% Annual growth rate of supplementary welfare for retired employees 0.00% 0.00% Mortality rate 

Move three years backward annuity life chart of China’s Life Insurance Industry of man/ women (Year 2010-2013) 

Move three years backward annuity life chart of China’s Life Insurance Industry of man/ women (Year 2010-2013) 240 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 41.  Long-term employee benefits payable (continued) 

(a)  Net defined benefit liability (continued) 

The quantitative sensitivity analysis for significant assumptions used is as follows: 31 December 2022 

Increase %Decrease in defined benefit obligations Decrease %Increase in defined benefit obligations 

Discount rate 0.25 (31,040) 0.25 32,210 

31 December 2021 

Increase %Decrease in defined benefit obligations Decrease %Increase in defined benefit obligations 

Discount rate 0.25 (33,730) 0.25 35,010 

The sensitivity analysis above has been determined based on a method that extrapolates the impact on defined benefit obligations as a result of reasonable changes in key assumptions occurring at the balance sheet date. The sensitivity analysis is based on a change in a significant assumption, keeping all other assumptions constant. The sensitivity analysis may not be representative of an actual change in the defined benefit obligations as it is unlikely that changes in assumptions would occur in isolation of one another. The total expenses recognised in profit or loss in respect of the plan are as follows: 

2022 2021 

Past service cost 6,190 (33,420) Net interest 49,700 59,230 Net cost of post-employment benefits 55,890 25,810 Recognised/(Write-off) in administrative expenses 6,190 (33,420) Recognised in finance expenses 49,700 59,230 Total 55,890 25,810 

Movements in the present value of defined benefit obligations are as follows: 

2022 2021 

Opening balance 1,778,960 1,955,040 Included in profit or loss Past service cost 6,190 (33,420) Net interest 49,700 59,230 Included in other comprehensive income Actuarial gains (7,120) (1,500) Other changes Benefits paid (181,990) (200,390) Closing balance 1,645,740 1,778,960 241 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 41.  Long-term employee benefits payable (continued) 

(b)  Long-term termination benefits 

Some of the Group’s employees early retired. At the balance sheet date, the main actuarial assumptions used to determine the Group’s early retirement benefits payable are as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Discount rate 2.50% 2.50% Annual growth rate of living expenses for the family dependents of deceased employees 4.50% 4.50% Annual growth rate of average medical expenses 8.00% 8.00% Mortality rate 

Move three years backward annuity life chart of China’s Life Insurance Industry of man/ women (Year 2010-2013) 

Move three years backward annuity life chart of China’s Life Insurance Industry of man/ women (Year 2010-2013) 

Early retirement benefits recognised in profit or loss for the current period: 

2022 2021 

Recognised/(Write-off) in administrative expenses 30 (2,050) Financial expenses 860 1,380 Total 890 (670) 

42.  Provisions 

2022 

Opening balance (restated) Increase Decrease Closing balance 

Pending litigations 3,176,132 68,638 (400,132) 2,844,638 

Warranties 1,804,059 1,070,503 (583,570) 2,290,992 

Estimated contract losses 1,191,728 539,120 (884,166) 846,682 

Others 145,577 69,787 (76,405) 138,959 

Sub-total 6,317,496 1,748,048 (1,944,273) 6,121,271 

Less: Current portion of provisions (Note V. 36) (1,892,816) (1,803,708) 

Total 4,424,680 4,317,563 43.  Deferred income 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Government grants 411,592 469,975 Others 5,000 5,539 Total 416,592 475,514 242 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 43.  Deferred income (continued) 

As at December 31 2022, government grants related to liabilities were as follows: 

Opening balance of the year Increase During the year Amount recognised in other income during the year Amount recognised in non-operating income during the year Other changes during the year Closing balance of the year Related to assets/ Related to income 

Government Compensation for Workshop Construction of Guangdong Construction Base Co., Ltd. 137,003 – (4,167) – – 132,836 Related to assets 

Government Compensation for Demolition of Tangshan Fengrun District Linyin Road West Side Land 72,414 – – (14,206) – 58,208 Related to assets 

Government Compensation for Demolition of Guiyang Dayingpo Renovation Project 70,260 – (2,370) – – 67,890 Related to assets 

Others 190,298 73,434 (72,760) (4,118) (34,196) 152,658 Related to assets and income 

Total 469,975 73,434 (79,297) (18,324) (34,196) 411,592 

As at December 31 2021, government grants related to liabilities were as follows: 

Opening balance of the year Increase During the year Amount recognised in other income during the year Amount recognised in non-operating income during the year Other changes during the year Closing balance of the year Related to assets/ Related to income 

Government Compensation for Workshop Construction of Guangdong Construction Base Co., Ltd. 142,003 – (5,000) – – 137,003 Related to assets Government Compensation for Demolition of Tangshan Fengrun District Linyin Road West Side Land 77,408 – – (4,994) – 72,414 Related to assets Government Compensation for Demolition of Guiyang Dayingpo Renovation Project 72,631 – (2,371) – – 70,260 Related to assets Others 171,711 154,565 (99,277) (5,299) (31,402) 190,298 Related to assets and income Total 463,753 154,565 (106,648) (10,293) (31,402) 469,975 

44.  Other non-current liabilities 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Exchangeable bonds in 2016 (Note 1) 4,967,342 4,488,392 Prepaid investment of convertible bonds in 2015 (Note 2) 2,333,865 1,485,882 Advance receipt of capital increase (Note 3) – 400,000 VAT output to be transferred 893,468 288,751 Others 1,445,648 796,176 Sub-total 9,640,323 7,459,201 Less: Current portion of non-current liabilities (Note V. 35) (4,967,342) –Total 4,672,981 7,459,201 Note 1:  The Group’s subsidiary China Overseas Finance Investment (Cayman) V Limited (here in after “the issuer”) publicly issued exchangeable bonds of USD1.5 billion on Hong Kong Stock Exchange on 6 January 2016. The bonds are guaranteed by China Overseas Holdings Limited, and the maturity date is 5 January 2023. Related clauses are as follows: (1)  The bondholder is entitled to apply for redemption of bonds at 111.54% of par value on 5 January 2020; (2)  In cases of the change of guarantor, or delisting or restricted trading of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. on Hong Kong Stock Exchange, bond holders have the right to require the issuer to redeem the bonds readily; 243 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 44.  Other non-current liabilities (continued) 

Note 1:  (continued) (3)  Bond holders have the right to apply for redemption on maturity date at 121.07% of par value; (4)  During the exchange period from 15 February 2016 to 8 work days before maturity date, bond holders have the right to exchange the bonds for ordinary shares of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd., the par value of which is HKD0.10, at the price of HKD41.50 per share; (5)  At any time from 5 January 2020 to 7 work days before maturity date, if the stock price of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. during 15 trading days is continuously higher than 130% of early redemption price set in the agreement divided by exchange rate, the issuer has the right to carry out exchange in the full (not partial) amount, and should release notice in no more than 3 days after the matter occurs. Exchangeable bonds in 2016 were recognised as financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss in the first place and disclosed in other non-current liabilities. Changes in fair value caused by changes in relevant credit risks are insignificant. The Exchangeable bonds were redeemed on January 4, 2023. Note 2:  Related information regarding prepaid investment of convertible bonds in 2015: Strategic Capital, LLC, a subsidiary of the Group, received a prepaid investment of USD300 million from Riton Holdings Corporation Limited, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Guoxin International Investment Co., Ltd. The interest of the above convertible bonds is calculated from the issuance date to the date of full repayment or conversion, and the annual interest rate is LIBOR average interest rate plus 370 basis points. As at 31 December 2022,under the convertible bond framework agreement entered into by both parties, and the relevant conversion clauses under the framework agreement have not yet been determined, and Strategic Capital, LLC has redeemed a total of USD$67 million. Note 3:  The Group’s subsidiary China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd., received an advance capital increase of RMB400 million from its shareholder, China State Construction Engineering Corporation, in 2021. As at 31 December 2022, the capital increase procedures have been completed. 

45.  Paid-in capital 

2022 

Opening balance of the year Movement during the year Closing balance of the year 

Shares not subjected to trading restriction 40,644,583 190,784 40,835,367 

Shares subjected to trading restriction 1,303,585 (204,519) 1,099,066 

Total 41,948,168 (13,735) 41,934,433 

2021 

Opening balance of the year Movement during the year Closing balance of the year 

Shares not subjected to trading restriction 41,253,603 (609,020) 40,644,583 Shares subjected to trading restriction 711,469 592,116 1,303,585 Total 41,965,072 (16,904) 41,948,168 244 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 46.  Other equity instruments 

2022 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year Closing balance of the year amount net book value amount net book value amount net book value amount net book value 

Perpetual Bond – 10,000,000 – – – – – 10,000,000 

2021 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year Closing balance of the year amount net book value amount net book value amount net book value amount net book value 

Perpetual Bond – 10,000,000 – – – – – 10,000,000 

During the period from April 1 to 2 April 2020, the Company issued the 2020 first-phase medium-term notes of which the value date was 3 April 2020, and it can be redeemed by the Company on 3 April 2023 and there after. The total issuance amount was RMB4 billion, and the actual amount received was RMB4 billion. The value date of issuance from April 9 to April 10, 2020 is April 13, 2020, and it can be issued on April 13, 2023 The second-phase medium-term notes can be redeemed on April 3, 2023 and beyond and thereafter has a total issuance of RMB3 billion, and the actual receipt of RMB3 billion. The value date of the company’s issuance from April 16 to April 17, 2020 is April 20, 2020, the 2020 third-phase medium-term notes, which can be redeemed on and after April 20, 2023, have a total issuance of RMB3 billion, and actually received RMB3 billion. According to the issuance terms of the batch of medium-term notes, the batch of medium-term notes will last for a long time before being redeemed by the Company. On the third and every subsequent interest payment date of the batch of medium-term notes, the company has the right to redeem the batch of medium-term notes (hereinafter referred to as Right of “redemption”) at face value plus interest payable (including all deferred interest and its yield). Investors of this batch of medium-term notes have no right to sell back. Unless there is a compulsory interest payment event that can be determined by the company to control whether it occurs, on each interest payment date of the batch of medium-term notes, the company can choose to include the current interest and all interest and its fruits that have been deferred in accordance with the terms. Interest is deferred to the next interest payment date, and is not subject to any restrictions on the number of deferred interest payments. The coupon rate of this batch of medium-term notes remained unchanged for the first three interest-bearing years. The annual interest rate of the first phase of medium-term notes in 2020 is 3.29%, and the annual interest rate of the second phase of medium-term notes in 2020 is 3.10%. The annual interest rate of the third-phase medium-term notes is 3.09%. If the Company does not exercise the Right of redemption, the annual interest rate will be reset every 3 years based on the current benchmark interest rate plus the initial spread plus 300 basis points from the fourth interest calculation year. Among them, the initial spread is the difference between the coupon rate and the initial benchmark interest rate. The aforementioned compulsory interest payment event refers to one of the following circumstance occurring within 12 months before the interest payment date: (1) Dividend distribution to ordinary shareholders (except for the profit paid by a wholly state-owned enterprise); (2) Reduction of registered capital. The issuer promises that there is no hidden compulsory dividend. As of 31 December 2022, the carrying amount of the perpetual bonds issued by the Company was RMB10,000,000 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB10,000,000 thousand). 245 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 47.  Capital reserve 

2022 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year Closing balance of the year 

Capital premium 10,561,560 1,189,172 (1,748,373) 10,002,359 

Others 2,140,716 737,985 (1,073,040) 1,805,661 

Total 12,702,276 1,927,157 (2,821,413) 11,808,020 

2021 (restated) 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year Closing balance of the year 

Capital premium 9,856,991 741,084 (36,515) 10,561,560 

Others 1,567,853 1,002,312 (429,449) 2,140,716 

Total 11,424,844 1,743,396 (465,964) 12,702,276  

> Note: The change of the capital stock premium in 2022 is mainly due to the unlocking of the third batch of the third phase Restricted stock and the first batch of the fourth phase Restricted stock on December 26, 2022 and December 23, 2022 respectively (the change of the capital stock premium in 2021 is mainly due to the unlocking of the second batch of the third phase Restricted stock on December 27, 2021) (as described in Note XI), and the impact of business combination under the same control. Changes in other capital reserves are mainly caused by changes in equity of the investee other than comprehensive income and profit distribution accounted for by the Equity method and the current share based payment included in shareholders’ equity.

48.  Other comprehensive income 

Accumulated balance of other comprehensive income attributable to owners of the parent in the consolidated balance sheet: 2022 

1 January 2022 Increase/ decrease 31 December 2022 

Remeasurement gains or losses of a defined benefit plan (242,214) 6,956 (235,258) 

Change in the fair value of other equity investments (1,122,227) (223,662) (1,345,889) 

Other comprehensive income of the investee accounted for under the equity method which will be reclassified to profit or loss subsequently (925,600) (567,030) (1,492,630) 

Change in the fair value of other debt investments (19,426) (34,170) (53,596) 

Exchange differences on translation of foreign currency financial statements 1,696,215 (522,591) 1,173,624 

Total (613,252) (1,340,497) (1,953,749) 

2021 

1 January 2021 Increase/ decrease 31 December 2021 

Remeasurement gains or losses of a defined benefit plan (243,903) 1,689 (242,214) Change in the fair value of other equity investments (828,927) (293,300) (1,122,227) Other comprehensive income of the investee accounted for under the equity method which will be reclassified to profit or loss subsequently (892,534) (33,066) (925,600) Change in the fair value of other debt investments (16,246) (3,180) (19,426) Exchange differences on translation of foreign currency financial statements 802,209 894,006 1,696,215 Total (1,179,401) 566,149 (613,252) 246 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 48.  Other comprehensive income (continued) 

Amount of other comprehensive income: 2022 

Before tax Less: Reclassification of other comprehensive income to profit or loss Less: Income tax Attributable to owners of the parent Attributable to non-controlling interests 

Other comprehensive income that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Remeasurement gains or losses of a defined benefit plan 7,120 – – 6,956 164 

Change in the fair value of other equity investments (170,004) 97,017 (32,664) (223,662) (10,695) 

Other comprehensive income that May be reclassified to profit or loss Other comprehensive income of the investee accounted for under the equity method which will be reclassified to profit or loss (1,350,340) – – (567,030) (783,310) 

Change in the fair value of other debt investments (61,518) – – (34,170) (27,348) 

Exchange differences on translation of foreign currency financial statements (1,286,713) – – (522,591) (764,122) 

Total (2,861,455) 97,017 (32,664) (1,340,497) (1,585,311) 

2021 

Before tax Less: Reclassification of other comprehensive income to profit or loss Less: Income tax Attributable to owners of the parent Attributable to non-controlling interests 

Other comprehensive income that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Remeasurement gains or losses of a defined benefit plan 1,500 – – 1,689 (189) Change in the fair value of other equity investments (609,635) (174,201) (139,806) (293,300) (2,328) Other comprehensive income that May be reclassified to profit or loss Other comprehensive income of the investee accounted for under the equity method which will be reclassified to profit or loss 325,437 – – (33,066) 358,503 Change in the fair value of other debt investments (5,912) – – (3,180) (2,732) Exchange differences on translation of foreign currency financial statements 342,734 – – 894,006 (551,272) Total 54,124 (174,201) (139,806) 566,149 (198,018) 

49.  Special reserve 

2022 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year Closing balance of the year 

Safety production funds 123,239 42,910,562 (42,728,625) 305,176 

2021 (restated) 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Decrease during the year Closing balance of the year 

Safety production funds 136,273 31,638,108 (31,651,142) 123,239 247 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 50.  Surplus reserve 

2022 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Closing balance of the year 

Statutory surplus reserve 12,843,667 1,505,458 14,349,125 

2021 

Opening balance of the year Increase during the year Closing balance of the year 

Statutory surplus reserve 10,101,632 2,742,035 12,843,667 

According to the provisions of the Company Law and the Company’s Articles of Association, the Company appropriates 10% of the net profit to the statutory surplus reserve. Where the accumulated amount of the surplus reserve reaches 50% or more of the Company’s registered capital, further appropriation is not required. When approved, the statutory surplus reserve can be used to make up for accumulated losses or converted to the paid-in capital. 

51.  Retained earnings 2022 2021 (restated) 

Retained earnings at the beginning of the year before adjustment 270,081,501 231,953,228 Adjustments 1 (Note 1) 285,950 117,218 Adjustments 2 (Note 2) – (672,735) Retained earnings at the beginning of the year after adjustment 270,367,451 231,397,711 Net profit attributable to owners of the parent 50,950,301 51,548,576 Other comprehensive income included in the previous year 97,017 (174,201) Impact on changes in shareholding ratios of subsidiaries (1,293,073) –Others 203,872 15,786 Less: Appropriation for statutory surplus reserve (Note V. 50) 1,505,458 2,742,035 Ordinary share dividends payable (Note 3) 10,485,215 9,006,272 Dividends payable to other equity holders (Note 4) 317,300 314,300 Appropriation to general reserve (Note 5) 443,450 357,814 Retained earnings at the end of year 307,574,145 270,367,451 248 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 51.  Retained earnings (continued) 

Note 1:  In 2022, China Construction Seventh Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of the group, completed the business combination under the common control of China Construction Seventh Bureau Sixth Construction Co., Ltd.(hereinafter referred to as “China Construction Seventh Bureau Sixth Company”). In addition, China Construction Development Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of the group, completed the business combination under the common control of China Construction Ecological Environment Group Co., Ltd.(hereinafter referred to as “China Construction Ecological Environment”). Due to the fact that China Construction Ecological Environment Group Co., Ltd. and China Construction Seventh Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of the group, jointly control Liyang China Construction Water Co., Ltd., and China Construction Ecological Environment and China Construction Installation Group Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of the group, jointly control China Construction Taixing Water Co., Ltd., after the combination under the common control mentioned above, both companies are included in the scope of the group consolidation. China Construction Seventh Bureau Sixth Construction Co., Ltd., China Construction Ecological Environment Group Co., Ltd., Liyang China Construction Water Co., Ltd., China Construction Taixing Water Co., Ltd. are deemed to have existed since the controlling shareholder began to take the control, and the retained earnings at the beginning of 2022 have been retroactively increased by RMB285,950 thousand (2021: RMB117,218 thousand). Note 2:  In 2021, due to the change of accounting policy, the retained earning at the beginning of the year was reduced by RMB672,735 thousand. Note 3:  According to the resolution at the General Meeting of Shareholders dated 13 May 2022, the Company proposed acash dividend of RMB0.25 (before tax) per share to the shareholders on 31 December 2022, multiplied by the number which resulted in the total amount of RMB10.485 billion (2021: RMB9.006 billion) of shares of 41.941 billion before the implementation of the profit distribution plan. Note 4:  As stated in Note V. 46, according to the resolution of the General Meeting of Shareholders on 13 May, 2022, the Company’s payment of 2021 cash dividends to ordinary shareholders was one of the mandatory interest payment events stipulated in the perpetual bond clauses of the 2022 three-phase medium-term notes (total RMB1,000,000 thousand), which required the Company to pay the dividends on the most recent perpetual bond interest date (the first phase of the 2020 mid-term notes is 3 April 2023, the second phase of medium-term notes is 13 April 2023, and the third phase of 2020 mid-term notes is 20 April 2023). Therefore, the Company accrued a total dividend of RMB317,300 thousand on perpetual bonds in 2022 (2021: RMB314,300 thousand). Note 5:  Appropriation to general reserve China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of the company: In accordance with the requirements of the Administrative Measures for the Provision of Reserves of Financial Enterprises (Cai Jin [2012] No. 20), financial institutions (including financial companies) should provide general risk reserve for assets bearing risks and losses at the balance sheet date. The general reserve shall be appropriated from net profit as profit distribution with an appropriation ratio not lower than 1.5% of risk assets at the end of year. If it’s difficult for financial institutions to appropriate 1.5% general reserve at one time, it can also be made in years but principally not more than 5 years. The general risk reserve of China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. in 2022 was RMB513,822 thousand, of which the amount attributable to shareholders of the parent company was RMB411,057 thousand. It was fully accrued on 31 December 2022. China State Construction Commercial Factoring Co., Ltd.and Shenzhen Wanrong Factoring Co., Ltd. the subsidiaries of the company: According to the “Notice of the General Office of the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission on Strengthening the Supervision and Management of Commercial Factoring Enterprises” issued by the General Office of the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission (issued by the Office of the China Banking and Insurance Regulatory Commission[2019]No. 205), China State Construction Commercial Factoring Co., Ltd. and Shenzhen Wanrong Factoring Co., Ltd. accrued the risk reserve. The general risk reserve is when the financing factoring funds are overdue, bad or in the event of unforeseen risks, in order to maintain the funds for the normal operation of the enterprise, the risk reserve should not be less than 1% of the balance at the end of the financial factoring business. The general risk reserve of China State Construction Commercial Factoring Co., Ltd. and Shenzhen Wanrong Factoring Co., Ltd. on 31 December 2022 was RMB32,393 thousand. It was fully accrued on 31 December 2022. 

52.  Revenue and cost of sales 2022 2021 (restated) revenue cost revenue cost 

Revenue from main operations 2,046,879,464 1,833,011,813 1,889,150,539 1,675,628,702 

Revenue from other operations 8,172,606 7,170,568 3,555,768 2,338,942 

Total 2,055,052,070 1,840,182,381 1,892,706,307 1,677,967,644 249 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 52.  Revenue and cost of sales (continued) 

Revenue is as follows: 

2022 2021 (restated) 

Revenue from contracts with customers 2,048,406,726 1,885,506,373 Rentals 6,645,344 7,199,934 Total 2,055,052,070 1,892,706,307 

For breakdown of operating income by main operating regions and main product types, please refer to Note XIV. 1. Revenue is as follows: 2022 

Building construction engineering Infrastructure construction and investment Real estate development and investment Prospecting and design Others Total 

Revenue from main operations 1,239,221,344 488,963,911 281,747,260 10,242,691 26,704,258 2,046,879,464 

Revenue recognised at a point of time – – 248,025,072 – 14,934,573 262,959,645 

Revenue recognised over time 1,239,221,344 488,963,911 28,929,783 10,242,691 11,182,852 1,778,540,581 

Rentals – – 4,792,405 – 586,833 5,379,238 

Revenue from other operations – – – – 8,172,606 8,172,606 

Including: Rentals – – – – 1,266,106 1,266,106 

Total 1,239,221,344 488,963,911 281,747,260 10,242,691 34,876,864 2,055,052,070 

2021 (restated) 

Building construction engineering Infrastructure construction and investment Real estate development and investment Prospecting and design Others Total 

Revenue from main operations 1,121,922,218 404,323,453 330,888,573 9,969,165 22,047,130 1,889,150,539 

Revenue recognised at a point of time – – 299,825,687 – 11,540,560 311,366,247 

Revenue recognised over time 1,121,922,218 404,323,453 25,916,015 9,969,165 9,472,812 1,571,603,663 

Rentals – – 5,146,871 – 1,033,758 6,180,629 

Revenue from other operations – – – – 3,555,768 3,555,768 

Including: Rentals – – – – 1,019,305 1,019,305 

Total 1,121,922,218 404,323,453 330,888,573 9,969,165 25,602,898 1,892,706,307 As of 31 December 2022, part of the Group’s project contracting business is still in the process of operation, and the remaining performance obligations is related to the progress of the corresponding contract, and will be recognised as revenue according to the progress of performance in the future performance period. 250 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 52.  Revenue and cost of sales (continued) 

The revenue recognised in the current year included in the carrying amount of contract liabilities at the beginning of the year is as follows: 

2022 2021 (restated) 

Advances for sale of properties 157,604,351 169,777,705 Amount due to customers for contract work 80,183,632 67,138,438 Advances for projects 56,475,805 46,288,529 Others 4,464,783 2,139,071 Total 298,728,571 285,343,743 

53.  Taxes and surcharges 2022 2021 (restated) 

Land appreciation tax 5,608,989 9,180,571 Urban maintenance and construction tax 1,810,667 1,894,281 Educational surcharge 947,523 903,544 Others 3,388,038 2,809,281 Total 11,755,217 14,787,677 251 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 54.  Selling and distribution expenses 2022 2021 

Operating expenses 2,854,043 2,390,638 Advertising and communication fees 2,054,746 1,993,368 Employee benefits 902,227 1,158,717 Others 732,614 633,963 Total 6,543,630 6,176,686 

55.  General and administrative expenses 2022 2021 (restated) 

Employee benefits 23,618,262 23,425,119 Office and travelling expenses 2,094,143 2,537,505 Rental and property management fees 1,978,734 2,256,370 Depreciation and amortisation 2,231,884 2,102,447 Service fees of specialist agency 1,017,657 1,001,545 Others 3,056,099 3,318,278 Total 33,996,779 34,641,264 

56.  Research and development expenses 2022 2021 (restated) 

Materials, fuels and power of consumption 34,460,059 27,459,569 Employee benefits 10,774,034 8,193,413 Maintenance and lease expenses 2,196,685 2,128,905 Others 2,322,458 2,237,866 Total 49,753,236 40,019,753 

57.  Finance expenses 2022 2021 (restated) 

Interest expenses 30,106,722 25,084,855 Less: Interest income (3,913,677) (3,196,953) Less: Capitalised amount of interest (12,211,301) (11,061,683) Commission charges 2,224,397 2,319,174 Exchange Gains or losses 3,343,780 (2,017,420) Others 123,841 166,345 Total 19,673,762 11,294,318 

The Group capitalizes the borrowing costs incurred for the acquisition, construction or production of assets that meet the capitalization conditions. The capitalized amount of borrowing costs in 2022 was RMB12,211,301 thousand (2021: RMB11,061,683 thousand), which is included inventory, construction in progress, and intangible assets. 252 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 58.  Other income 2022 2021 (restated) Related to income/ assets 

Government rewards 209,820 178,199 related to income Research Subsidies 54,200 175,771 related to assets and income Additional deduction for value-added tax 74,999 78,112 related to income Refund of Surcharge on individual 

income tax 64,859 53,224 related to income Tax return 301,663 51,115 related to income Government appropriation 55,279 47,834 related to income Others 348,001 188,624 related to assets and income Total 1,108,821 772,879 

59.  Investment income 2022 2021 (restated) 

Long-term equity investment income under the equity method 4,459,665 4,924,548 Investment losses from disposal of financial assets measured at amortized cost (2,153,251) (1,968,990) Investment income from disposal of long-term equity investments 385,929 84,330 Investment income from disposal of financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 18,539 1,331 Investment income from financial assets held for trading 12,823 14,232 Investment income obtained during the holding period of debt investments 1,633,982 987,185 Dividend income from other equity instruments 106,433 200,717 Investment income from other debt investments 22,875 50,443 Investment income from transactions through a step-by-step business combination 1,251,160 172,237 Others (62,632) 237,339 Total 5,675,523 4,703,372 

60.  Losses arising from changes in fair value 2022 2021 

Financial assets measured at fair value through profit or loss Investment in debt instrument held for trading 3,044 (4,106) Investment in equity instrument held for trading (23,671) 6,263 Financial liabilities measured at fair value through profit or loss Others (95,670) (238,750) Total (116,297) (236,593) 253 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 61.  Credit impairment losses 2022 2021 (restated) 

Reversal/(Loss) from impairment of notes receivable 419,046 (502,016) Loss from impairment of account receivable (6,719,860) (8,228,627) Loss from impairment of other receivables (998,707) (742,343) (Loss)/Reversal from impairment of other current assets (737,087) 587,650 Loss from impairment of long-term receivables (381,514) (298,974) Others (173,782) (28,442) Total (8,591,904) (9,212,752) 

62.  Asset impairment losses 2022 2021 (restated) 

Loss from impairment of inventories (2,219,430) (10,343) Loss from impairment of contract assets (2,273,730) (3,275,950) Loss from impairment of intangible assets (434,159) –Loss from impairment of goodwill – (34) Others (28,493) (134,143) Total (4,955,812) (3,420,470) 

63.  Non-operating income 2022 2021 (restated) Non-recurring profit or loss in 2022 

Accounts payable exemption 168,841 146,683 168,841 Government grants not related to the ordinary course of business 152,551 118,073 152,551 Liquidated damages 209,133 149,974 209,133 Gains on penalties and fines 103,186 83,189 103,186 Gains from damage and retirement of non-current assets 10,933 47,739 10,933 The cost of business merger is less than the fair value of the identifiable net assets of the merged party that should be enjoyed at the time of merger (Note VI. 1) 

1,236,618 – 1,236,618 Others 437,017 286,983 437,017 Total 2,318,279 832,641 2,318,279 254 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 63.  Non-operating income (continued) 

Details of government grants: 

2022 2021 Related to income/assets 

Steady growth award from Social Security Bureau (China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau South China Construction Co., Ltd.) 

12,225 – related to income Steady growth award in the construction industry awards (China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Group (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd.) 

10,000 – related to income Steady growth award in the construction industry awards (China State Construction Technology Group Co., Ltd.) 10,000 10,000 related to income Steady growth award in the construction industry awards (China Construction Science and Industry Co., Ltd.) 10,000 – related to income Compensation for demolition (Southwest Co., Ltd. of China West Construction) – 10,345 related to income Steady growth award in the construction industry awards (China Construction Fourth Bureau Fifth Construction Engineering Co., Ltd.) 

8,000 8,353 related to income Others 102,326 89,375 related to assets 

and income Total 152,551 118,073 

64.  Non-operating expenses 2022 2021 (restated) Non-recurring profit or loss in 2022 

(Reversal)/Provision Litigation Estimated Liabilities (319,936) 142,125 (319,936) Public welfare donations 162,680 29,989 162,680 Liquidated damages 58,406 52,161 58,406 Loss on damage and retirement of non-current assets 44,235 42,049 44,235 Late fees 20,429 39,757 20,429 Forfeiture loss 148,155 47,379 148,155 Others 101,961 193,448 101,961 Total 215,930 546,908 215,930 

65.  Expenses by nature 

The supplemental information for the total amount of cost of sales, selling and distribution expenses, general and administrative expenses, and research and development expenses which categorised by nature is as follows: 

2022 2021 (restated) 

Subcontracting cost 587,100,251 529,492,428 Consumed raw materials 508,097,282 429,165,109 Labor expenditure 293,169,966 264,542,759 Changes in inventories of finished goods and work in progress 217,259,901 250,144,727 Other construction cost 170,342,182 145,892,068 Employee benefits 97,859,885 86,806,296 Cost of sales from other products 32,520,196 30,237,186 Depreciation and amortization expenses 13,301,922 11,955,813 Others 10,824,441 10,568,961 Total 1,930,476,026 1,758,805,347 255 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 66.  Income tax expenses 2022 2021 (restated) 

Current tax 21,176,403 26,365,580 Deferred tax (1,552,731) (3,198,787) Total 19,623,672 23,166,793 

The reconciliation between income tax expenses and profit before income taxes is as follows: 

2022 2021 (restated) 

Profit before income tax 88,835,435 101,038,185 Tax at the applicable (25%) tax rate 22,208,859 25,259,546 Effect of preferential tax rates for certain subsidiaries (4,468,135) (3,244,662) Income not subjected to tax (2,028,276) (2,007,641) Weighted deduction of expenditure on research (1,613,290) (1,455,051) Expenses not deductible for tax 4,168,884 2,787,692 Unrecognised deductible losses 1,553,276 1,599,855 Use of deductible losses from prior periods (382,789) (288,341) Utilization of deductible losses for which no deferred tax assets was recognised in prior periods (64,578) (400,124) Deferred tax assets not recognised 1,131,382 1,033,855 Deductible temporary differences resulting from rehearsal or recognition of previously unrecognised deferred tax assets in current periods 

(677,667) (642,751) Adjustments of tax expenses for prior periods (203,994) 524,415 Tax expenses at the Group’s effective tax rate 19,623,672 23,166,793 

67.  Earnings per share 2022 RMB/share 2021 RMB/share (restated) 

Basic earnings per share Continuing operations 1.23 1.25 Diluted earnings per share Continuing operations 1.23 1.25 

The basic earnings per share is calculated based on the net profit for the year attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Company and the weighted average number of outstanding ordinary shares during the year. The numerator of the diluted earnings per share is determined based on the current net profit attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Company after adjusting the following factors: (1) the interest of the diluted potential ordinary shares that have been recognised as expenses in the current period; (2) the income or expenses of dilution potential ordinary that will be generated when the shares are converted; and (3) the income tax impact related to the above adjustments. The denominator of the diluted earnings per share is equal to the sum of the following two items: (1) the weighted average number of issued ordinary shares of the parent company in the basic earnings per share; and (2) the increase of the weighted average number of ordinary shares, assuming the conversion of dilutive potential ordinary shares into ordinary shares. When calculating the weighted average of the number of ordinary shares increased by the conversion of diluted potential ordinary shares into issued ordinary shares, the diluted potential ordinary shares issued in the previous period are assumed to be converted at the beginning of the current period; the current diluted potential ordinary shares issued, assuming the conversion on the issue date. 256 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 67.  Earnings per share (continued) 

The calculation of basic earnings per share is as follows: 

2022 2021 (restated) 

Revenue Net profit attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Company 50,950,301 51,548,576 Less: The effect of other equity instruments dividends (Note 1) (317,300) (314,300) The effect of restricted shares (Note 2) (268,361) (275,451) 

50,364,640 50,958,825 Shares Weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding (in units of 1,000 shares) (Note 3) 40,836,893 40,623,354 Basic earnings per share (RMB/share) 1.23 1.25 Note 1:  In accordance with the relevant clauses and regulations of perpetual bonds as stated in Note V. 46, in calculating the basic earnings per share, the dividends of other equity instruments included in the net profit attributable to shareholders of the parent company is deducted. The accrued dividends of perpetual bonds with a value date of 3 April 2020 amounted to RMB132 million in 2022, The accrued dividends of perpetual bonds with a value date of 13 April 2020 amounted to RMB93 million in 2022, The accrued dividends of perpetual bonds with a value date of 20 April 2020 amounted to RMB92 million In 2022, the above was RMB317 million in total. (2021: RMB314 million). Note 2:  As stated in Note XI, the granting of the third batch of restricted shares to the third batch incentive targets in accordance with the third batch incentive plan on 26 December 2018. On December 23, 2020, the grant of restricted stocks for the fourth phase of incentive objects will be completed in accordance with the fourth batch incentive plan. In accordance with the relevant stipulations in Explanation of Accounting Standards for Business Enterprises No.7 issued by the Ministry of Finance in 2015, the Company deducted net profits attributable to restricted shares, which are expected to be unlocked in the future from net profits attributable to shareholders of the Company in calculating the basic earnings per share. The net profits attributable to restricted shares which are expected to be unlocked in the future was about RMB270 million and RMB280 million in 2022 and 2021 respectively. Note 3:  As stated in Note XI, in accordance with the regulations of the third batch incentive plans and the fourth batch incentive plan, whether the unlocked shares granted could be listed and circulated depended on whether the restricted shares met the unlocking conditions at the unlocking date. Therefore, the impacted amount of the restricted shares not yet meeting the unlocking conditions and those invalid restricted shares were deducted from weighted average number of outstanding ordinary shares in calculating the basic earnings per share. 

The calculation of diluted earnings per share is as follows: 

2022 2021 (restated) 

Net profit attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Company after adjustment 50,364,640 50,958,825 Dilutive potential common shares will generate gains upon conversion 268,361 –Consolidated net profit attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Company used for calculating diluted earnings per share 50,633,001 50,958,825 Weighted average of the Company’s outstanding ordinary shares (in units of 1,000 shares) 40,836,893 40,623,354 Dilution effect the weighted average number of common shares 289,593 –Weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding used for calculating diluted earnings per share (in units of 1,000 shares) 41,126,486 40,623,354 Diluted earnings per share (RMB/share) 1.23 1.25 

In 2022, the restricted shares outstanding and the share options issued by the company have dilutive effects in calculating the earnings per share. The restricted shares outstanding and the share options issued by the Company’s subsidiary China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. have no dilutive effects in calculating the earnings per share. However, the convertible bond issued by the Company’s subsidiary China Overseas Holdings Limited has anti-dilutive effects on consolidated net profit attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Company.(In 2021, the restricted shares outstanding and the share options issued by the company have anti-dilutive effects in calculating the earnings per share. The restricted shares outstanding and the share options issued by the Company’s subsidiary China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. have no dilutive effects in calculating the earnings per share. However, the convertible bond issued by the Company’s subsidiary China Overseas Holdings Limited has anti-dilutive effects on consolidated net profit attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Company.) 257 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 68.  Notes to the consolidated cash flow statement 2022 2021 (restated) 

Cash receipts relating to other operating activities Receivables, Taxes withheld and Construction reward 2,569,959 4,682,704 Decrease of restricted cash – 4,031,787 Deposits and warrant received and returned 6,104,099 2,947,102 Increase of deposits absorbed by China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. – 2,280,693 Interest income 1,527,306 1,211,986 Other receivables received and returned 1,948,288 824,225 Others 2,942,919 2,179,783 Total 15,092,571 18,158,280 Cash payments relating to other operating activities Other payables paid to third party 13,205,907 17,210,083 Deposits and warrant paid and refunded to third party 3,827,351 6,812,124 Increase of restricted cash 4,258,904 –Decrease of deposits absorbed by China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. 921,269 –Others 9,388,348 8,247,731 Total 31,601,779 32,269,938 Cash receipts relating to other investing activities Loans to co-operative corporation and projects 2,489,995 4,257,246 Loans from related parties 10,436,394 2,428,316 Fixed deposits of which maturity is more than three months 7,943,299 –Entrusted loan 2,299,327 2,353,105 Total 23,169,015 9,038,667 Cash payments relating to other investing activities Loans to related parties 5,167,040 6,960,943 Payment to co-operative corporation and projects 3,311,099 5,266,974 Payment of fixed deposits which would mature after three months – 1,973,683 Total 8,478,139 14,201,600 Cash receipts relating to other financing activities Obtaining loans from related parties and third parties 16,783,523 16,056,412 Equity transactions with non-controlling interests 345,553 –Total 17,129,076 16,056,412 Cash payments relating to other financing activities Cash paid for redemption of other equity instruments 8,835,161 26,349,347 Rental payment 2,201,104 1,713,265 Repayment of related parties and third-party loans 2,610,164 3,385,330 Purchase of minority interests from subsidiaries 69,520 226,163 Repurchase of unlocked restricted stock 45,671 57,399 Total 13,761,620 31,731,504 258 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 69.  Supplementary information to the consolidated cash flow statement 

(1)  Supplementary information to the consolidated cash flow statement 

Reconciliation from net profit to cash flows from operating activities: 

2022 2021 (restated) 

Net profit 69,211,763 77,871,392 Add: Asset impairment losses 4,955,812 3,420,470 Credit impairment losses 8,591,904 9,212,752 Depreciation of fixed assets 6,816,574 6,452,330 Depreciation of right of use assets 2,175,197 1,974,467 Depreciation of investment properties 3,239,402 2,546,986 Amortisation of intangible assets 625,533 546,827 Amortisation of long-term prepaid expenses 445,216 435,203 Profit from disposal of fixed assets, intangible assets and other long-term assets (432,388) (332,741) Losses arising from changes in fair value 116,297 236,593 Finance expenses 19,031,891 10,188,706 Investment income (5,675,523) (4,703,372) Increase in deferred tax assets (2,060,060) (3,959,306) Increase in deferred tax liabilities 507,329 760,519 Increase in inventories (48,448,760) (38,694,935) (Increase)/Decrease of restricted cash (4,258,904) 4,031,787 Increase in operating receivables (133,010,586) (107,101,948) Increase in operating payables 83,052,911 51,116,942 Others (1,054,681) (13,034) Net cash flows from operating activities 3,828,927 13,989,638 

Changes in cash and cash equivalents: 

2022 2021 (restated) 

Closing balance of cash 313,000,191 302,070,251 Less: Opening balance of cash 302,070,251 268,449,090 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 10,929,940 33,621,161 259 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 69.  Supplementary information to the consolidated cash flow statement (continued) 

(2)  Cash and cash equivalents 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Cash Including: Cash on hand 128,867 79,733 Cash at bank that can be readily drawn on demand 312,847,563 301,381,338 Other cash that can be readily drawn on demand 23,761 609,180 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 313,000,191 302,070,251 

70.  Assets with restricted ownership or right to use 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Cash and bank balances 21,538,911 17,280,007 Note 1 Notes receivable 64,736 14,210 Note 2 Accounts receivable 2,107,710 3,447,139 Note 2 Inventories 38,888,815 20,644,043 Note 2 Contract assets 66,492,011 44,033,881 Note 2 Investment properties 20,345,263 22,816,049 Note 2 Fixed assets 961,405 376,335 Note 2 Construction in progress 394,568 154,397 Note 2 Intangible assets 9,990,438 7,790,450 Note 2 Long-term receivables 64,249,109 69,767,268 Note 2 Total 225,032,966 186,323,779 Note 1:  Cash and bank balances with restricted ownership or use rights mainly include reserves with Central Bank, deposits for bank acceptance notes, guarantee deposits, pre-sale supervision fund, mortgage deposits and salary deposit for migrant workers. As of 31 December 2022, the balance of restricted cash and bank balances was RMB21,538,911 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB17,280,007 thousand). Note 2:  At 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the Group pledged or mortgaged notes receivable, accounts receivable, inventories, contract assets (including non-current parts), investment properties, fixed assets, construction in progress, intangible assets and long-term receivables(Including the portion due within one year) to banks for borrowings. 260 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 71.  The foreign currency monetary items 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Amount in foreign currency Exchange rate Amount in RMB Amount in foreign currency Exchange rate Amount in RMB 

Cash and Bank balance HKD 12,970,388 0.8933 11,586,448 13,850,756 0.8176 11,324,378 USD 1,419,367 6.9646 9,885,323 1,746,202 6.3757 11,133,260 SGD 375,400 5.1831 1,945,736 439,739 4.7179 2,074,645 DZD 27,734,076 0.0501 1,389,477 36,648,301 0.0457 1,674,827 MOP 1,761,206 0.8586 1,512,171 1,823,866 0.7913 1,443,225 EUR 158,717 7.4229 1,178,140 170,400 7.2197 1,230,237 GBP 14,617 8.3941 122,697 30,166 8.6064 259,621 Others N/A N/A 10,405,477 N/A N/A 9,435,174 Total 38,025,469 38,575,367 Accounts receivable USD 694,510 6.9646 4,836,984 720,599 6.3757 4,594,323 HKD 3,452,403 0.8933 3,084,032 3,468,104 0.8176 2,835,522 MOP 444,303 0.8586 381,479 2,246,852 0.7913 1,777,934 AED 559,288 1.8966 1,060,746 524,749 1.7361 911,017 XAF 86,455,146 0.0113 976,943 66,483,656 0.0110 731,320 DZD 14,853,535 0.0501 744,162 9,871,289 0.0457 451,118 SGD 100,718 5.1831 522,031 85,282 4.7179 402,352 Others N/A N/A 2,769,397 N/A N/A 1,705,151 Total 14,375,774 13,408,737 Other receivables USD 312,804 6.9646 2,178,555 337,090 6.3757 2,149,185 AED 931,547 1.8966 1,766,772 664,797 1.7361 1,154,154 HKD 226,084 0.8933 201,961 449,018 0.8176 367,117 XAF 9,777,604 0.0113 110,487 8,843,779 0.011 97,282 Others N/A N/A 2,358,860 N/A N/A 870,605 Total 6,616,635 4,638,343 Current portion of non-current assets USD 129 6.9646 898 5 6.3757 32 Others N/A N/A 2,546 N/A N/A 1,122 Total 3,444 1,154 Debt investments HKD 12,285,702 0.8933 10,974,818 10,874,686 0.8176 8,891,143 EUR 2,634 7.4229 19,552 2,634 7.2197 19,017 Total 10,994,370 8,910,160 261 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Amount in foreign currency Exchange rate Amount in RMB Amount in foreign currency Exchange rate Amount in RMB 

Long-term receivables HKD 369,352 0.8933 329,942 481,637 0.8176 393,786 USD 13,651 6.9646 95,074 14,901 6.3757 95,004 Others N/A N/A 4,811 N/A N/A 1,905 Total 429,827 490,695 Short-term borrowings USD 300,700 6.9646 2,094,255 447,916 6.3757 2,855,778 Others N/A N/A 1,051,738 N/A N/A 1,226,546 Total 3,145,993 4,082,324 Accounts payable HKD 11,021,139 0.8933 9,845,183 6,586,379 0.8176 5,385,023 USD 800,459 6.9646 5,574,877 581,849 6.3757 3,709,695 AED 725,549 1.8966 1,376,076 1,528,236 1.7361 2,653,171 SGD 436,296 5.1831 2,261,366 442,090 4.7179 2,085,736 DZD 36,423,705 0.0501 1,824,828 45,579,136 0.0457 2,082,967 MOP 2,552,370 0.8586 2,191,465 1,974,260 0.7913 1,562,232 PKR 988,872 0.0305 30,161 1,211,455 0.0361 43,734 Others N/A N/A 6,063,746 N/A N/A 5,160,719 Total 29,167,702 22,683,277 Other payables USD 757,263 6.9646 5,274,034 341,370 6.3757 2,176,473 AED 737,179 1.8966 1,398,134 415,999 1.7361 722,216 AUD 18,853 4.622 87,139 65,028 4.6220 300,559 HKD 383,865 0.8933 342,907 229,488 0.8176 187,629 XFA 6,755,348 0.0113 76,335 6,709,947 0.0110 73,809 PKR 190,710 0.0305 5,817 1,376,596 0.0361 49,695 Others N/A N/A 1,642,222 N/A N/A 1,024,773 Total 8,826,588 4,535,154 Current portion of non-current Liabilities HKD 1,479,861 0.8933 1,321,960 1,293,597 0.8176 1,057,645 USD 723,680 6.9646 5,040,142 312 6.3757 1,989 Others N/A N/A 115,386 N/A N/A 379,612 Total 6,477,488 1,439,246 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 71.  The foreign currency monetary items (continued) 262 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Amount in foreign currency Exchange rate Amount in RMB Amount in foreign currency Exchange rate Amount in RMB 

Long-term borrowings HKD 103,807,169 0.8933 92,730,944 95,587,695 0.8176 78,152,499 USD 1,046,873 6.9646 7,291,052 756,548 6.3757 4,823,523 GBP 100,000 8.3941 839,410 200,000 8.6064 1,721,280 SGD 66,300 5.1831 343,640 142,100 4.7179 670,414 Others N/A N/A 1,375,188 N/A N/A 1,826,105 Total 102,580,234 87,193,821 Bonds payable USD 6,012,341 6.9646 41,873,550 8,251,933 6.3757 52,611,849 HKD 2,025,304 0.8933 1,809,204 2,080,319 0.8176 1,700,869 Total 43,682,754 54,312,718 Long-term payables AED 629,799 1.8966 1,194,477 612,993 1.7361 1,064,217 HKD 2,842,825 0.8933 2,539,496 1,258,233 0.8176 1,028,731 MOP 1,029 0.8586 883 614,989 0.7913 486,641 SGD 14,796 5.1831 76,689 69,599 4.7179 328,361 Others N/A N/A 287,604 N/A N/A 248,247 Total 4,099,149 3,156,197 Other non-current liabilities USD – 6.9646 – 708,664 6.3757 4,518,229 Others N/A N/A 57,615 N/A N/A 585,174 Total 57,615 5,103,403 

# V.  Notes to the consolidated financial statements (continued) 71.  The foreign currency monetary items (continued) 263 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# VI.  Changes of consolidation scope 1.  Business combination not under common control 

In 2022, the main subjects newly included in the merger scope of the Group through the merger of enterprises not under the same control are as follows: The subsidiary of our group, Guangdong Zhonghai Real Estate Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as “Guangdong Zhonghai”), acquired 53.33% equity of Guangzhou Lihe Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as “Guangzhou Lihe”) for cash of RMB3,668,412 thousand. The purchase date is determined to be January 27, 2022. Guangdong Zhonghai originally held 20.00% equity in Guangzhou Lihe, obtained 26.66% equity in Guangzhou Lihe held by Agile Real Estate Holdings Ltd. for RMB1,833,869 thousand, and obtained 26.67% equity in Guangzhou Lihe held by Shimao Group Holdings Co., Ltd. for RMB1,834,543 thousand. After the completion of the above-mentioned equity acquisition, Guangdong Zhonghai held a total of 73.33% equity in Guangzhou Lihe, which belongs to a merger of enterprises not under the same control. The fair value and carrying amount of the assets and liabilities of Guangzhou Lihe at the balance sheet date of the consolidation date and the previous accounting period is as follows: 

27 January 2022 27 January 2022 Fair value Carrying amounts 

Cash and bank balances 5,224,952 5,224,952 

Accounts receivable 8,822 8,822 

Prepayments 186 186 

Other receivables 1,846,088 1,846,088 

Inventories 24,224,943 12,514,702 

Other current assets 309,507 309,507 

Investment properties 406,305 406,305 

Fixed assets 67,723 67,723 

Construction in progress 447 447 

Right of use assets 211 211 

Intangible assets 95 95 

Long-term prepaid expenses 3,290 3,290 

Deferred tax assets 568,469 568,469 

Accounts payable (1,045,613) (1,045,613) 

Advances from customers (66) (66) 

Contract liabilities (12,323,574) (12,323,574) 

Employee benefits payable (14,282) (14,282) 

Taxes and surcharges payable (1,411,902) (1,411,902) 

Other payables (155,544) (155,544) 

Long-term borrowings (3,057,900) (3,057,900) 

Deferred tax liabilities (5,454,438) –

Lease liability (214) (214) 

Fair value of identifiable net assets at the consolidation date 9,197,505 2,941,702 

Less: Non-controlling interests 2,458,999 

Add:  Consolidated difference (included in current profit and loss) 

(Note V,63) (1,236,618) 

Acquisition consideration (Note) 5,501,888                   

> Note: This amount includes the cash payment of RMB3,668,412 thousand paid by the Group in the enterprise merger and RMB1,833,476 thousand in fair value added of 20.00% equity of Guangzhou Lihe held by the Group prior to the purchase date determined according to the assessed.

264 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# VI.  Changes of consolidation scope (continued) 1.  Business combination not under common control (continued) 

The operating results and cash flows of Guangzhou Lihe from the date of purchase to the end of the current year are as below: 

27 January 2022 to 31 December 2022 

Revenue 7,074,667 Profit 1,780,659 Net cash flow (1,194,344) 

Net cash received from acquiring subsidiaries 

2022 

Acquiring prices from subsidiaries 5,501,888 Cash and cash equivalents paid for acquiring subsidiaries 3,668,412 Less: Cash and cash equivalents held by subsidiaries 5,224,952 Net cash received from acquiring subsidiaries (1,556,540) 

2.  Business combination under common control 

In November 2022, the Group’s subsidiary China State Construction Seventh Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. acquired 100% of the equity of China Construction Seventh Bureau Sixth Construction Co., Ltd. from CSCEC for RMB10,152 thousand in cash. In December 2022, the Group’s subsidiary China State Construction Development Corporation acquired 100% of the equity of China Construction Ecological Environment for RMB1,706,285 thousand in cash from the Group’s subsidiary, CSCEC Innovation Investment Co., Ltd. Since both parties involved in the business combination are controlled by the Group and the control is not temporary, the business combination is under common control, and the date of the combination is determined to be November 30, 2022 and December 31, 2022, which is the date on which the merging party actually obtains control over the merged party. CSCEC Ecological Environment and China State Construction Seventh Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. have joint control on Liyang China Construction Water Co., Ltd.; China Construction Ecological Environment and China Construction Industrial & Energy Engineering Group Co., Ltd. have joint control on China Construction Taixing Water Co., Ltd. Thus the two companies are included in 2022’s consolidated range. 

1 January 2022 to the combining date 2021 

Revenue 1,223,548 2,080,338 Net Profit 62,546 179,595 Net cash flow 267,559 (597,685) 265 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# VI.  Changes of consolidation scope (continued) 2.  Business combination under common control (continued) 

The carrying amount of the assets and liabilities of above mentioned at the balance sheet date of the consolidation date and the previous accounting period is as follows: 

Combining date 31 December 2021 

Cash and bank balances 1,278,106 1,147,723 Accounts receivable 718,834 566,949 Accounts receivable financing 230 4,000 Prepayments 10,135 38,790 Other receivables 154,332 34,315 Inventories 6,728 5,960 Contract assets 39,934 43,512 Current portion of non-current assets 20,184 98,221 Other current assets 133,316 590,268 Long-term receivables 93,444 112,916 Long-term equity investments 627,274 580,602 Fixed assets 24,227 24,787 Right of use assets 7,801 11,057 Construction in progress 648 –Intangible assets 1,927,790 1,894,471 Long-term prepaid expenses 27,102 11,809 Deferred tax assets 8,554 2,854 Other non-current assets 4,171,821 3,964,033 Notes payable (134,538) (164,977) Accounts payable (1,227,406) (1,477,737) Advances from customers (1) (3,430) Contract liabilities (310,589) (324,351) Employee benefits payable (2,357) (5,085) Taxes and surcharges payable (25,113) (11,700) Other payables (258,000) (107,246) Current portion of non-current liabilities (156,192) (129,062) Other current liabilities (167,914) (205,663) Long-term borrowings (4,324,363) (4,040,852) Lease liability (3,644) (7,061) Long-term payables (107,513) (96,718) Provisions (7,740) (2,793) Deferred tax Liability (3,732) (3,828) Other non-current liabilities (3,912) (3,096) Total 2,517,446 2,548,668 Less: Non-controlling interests 374,334 

Add: Consolidated difference (included in equity) 38,414 

Consolidation consideration 2,181,526 

Including: Cash 1,716,437 

The carrying amount of the original shareholding 465,089 266 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# VI.  Changes of consolidation scope (continued) 3.  Disposal of subsidiaries 

The entities which were excluded from the consolidated scope due to disposal of subsidiaries in 2022 were not significant to the Group. 

# VII.  Interests in other entities 1.  Interests in subsidiaries 

Significant subsidiaries obtained through incorporation: 

Main operation Location Place of registration Nature of business Registered capital Shareholding Percentage (%) Direct Indirect 

The significant subsidiaries acquired through establishing or investment China Overseas Holdings Limited Hong Kong Hong Kong Investment RMB31.03 billion 100.00 –China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. Hong Kong Hong Kong Real Estate Investment and Development HKD1.095 billion – 56.09 China State Construction Engineering Corporation International Operations Hong Kong Cayman Islands Construction and Installation HKD1.5 billion – 64.81 China Overseas Property Holdings Ltd. Hong Kong Cayman Islands Property Management HKD0.03 billion – 61.18 China Construction First Group Corporation Limited Beijing Beijing Construction and Installation RMB10 billion 100.00 –China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. Beijing Beijing Construction and Installation RMB10 billion 100.00 –China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. Wuhan, Hubei Wuhan, Hubei Construction and Installation RMB5.09 billion 100.00 –China Construction Fourth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd. Guangzhou, Guangdong Guangzhou, Guangdong Construction and Installation RMB8 billion 100.00 –China Construction Fifth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd. Changsha, Hunan Changsha, Hunan Construction and Installation RMB10 billion 100.00 –China Construction Sixth Engineering Division Corp., Ltd. Tianjin Tianjin Construction and Installation RMB4.28 billion 100.00 –China Construction Seventh Engineering Division. Corp., Ltd. Zhengzhou, Henan Zhengzhou, Henan Construction and Installation RMB6 billion 100.00 –China Construction Eighth Engineering Division. Corp., Ltd. Shanghai Shanghai Construction and Installation RMB15.22 billion 100.00 –China Architecture Southwest Design & Research Institute Co., Ltd. Chengdu, Sichuan Chengdu, Sichuan Prospecting, design, etc. RMB0.38 billion 100.00 –China Construction Decoration Group Co., Ltd. Beijing Beijing Industrial Decoration RMB1 billion 50.00 50.00 China Construction Fangcheng Investment & Development Group Co., Ltd. Beijing Beijing Infrastructure Construction RMB5 billion 100.00 –The significant subsidiaries acquired through a business combination not involving under common control China State Construction Development Holdings Limited (Note) Hong Kong Cayman Islands Construction and Installation HKD0.1 billion – 45.87 China Construction Harbour and Channel Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. Shanghai Shanghai Infrastructure Construction RMB1.33 billion 70.00 –The significant subsidiaries acquired through a business combination involving entities under common control CSCEC Xinjiang Construction & Engineering (Group) Co., Ltd. Wulumuqi, Xinjiang Wulumuqi, Xinjiang Construction and Installation RMB3.50 billion 85.00 –China West Construction Group Co., Ltd. Chengdu, Sichuan Wulumuqi, Xinjiang Construction Materials RMB1.26 billion 12.29 45.50 China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. Beijing Beijing Finance RMB15 billion 80.00 –Note:  The Group holds 45.87% of shares of China State Construction Development Holdings Limited. The board of directors has the rights to determine the relevant activities of China State Construction Development Holdings Limited. The Group holds 70.78% of voting rights of China State Construction Development Holdings Limited according to the proportion of the board of directors. 267 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# VII.  Interests in other entities (continued) 1.  Interests in subsidiaries (continued) 

Significant subsidiaries involving non-controlling interest: 2022 

Shareholding of Non-controlling Interest Non-controlling Interest Dividend attributable to the non-controlling shareholders Non-controlling Interest 

China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. 43.91% 7,200,821 5,951,964 143,816,129 

China State Construction Engineering 

Corporation International Operations 35.19% 2,834,275 677,638 25,746,863 

China West Construction Group Co., Ltd. 42.21% 232,397 44,974 4,035,785 

China State Construction Finance 

Co., Ltd. 20.00% 206,270 70,549 3,738,677 

2021 

Shareholding of Non-controlling Interest Non-controlling Interest Dividend attributable to the non-controlling shareholders Non-controlling Interest 

China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. 43.91% 15,377,344 7,104,596 137,957,690 China State Construction Engineering 

Corporation International Operations 35.19% 3,333,804 571,069 22,891,500 China West Construction Group Co., Ltd. 42.21% 356,573 43,743 3,864,031 China State Construction Finance 

Co., Ltd. 20.00% 165,158 51,401 2,603,107 

The summarised financial information of the above subsidiaries which progress necessary adjustments in accordance with the company’s accounting policies is set out below. The amounts disclosed are before inter-company eliminations: 2022 

China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. China State Construction Engineering Corporation International Operations China West Construction Group Co., Ltd. China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. 

Current Assets 659,772,495 110,165,259 28,292,472 24,558,631 

Non-current Assets 167,187,742 86,996,275 5,011,372 73,239,120 

Total Assets 826,960,237 197,161,534 33,303,844 97,797,751 

Current Liabilities 273,749,836 86,716,348 20,487,515 79,088,247 

Non-current Liabilities 246,330,011 53,478,908 2,384,844 16,117 

Total Liabilities 520,079,847 140,195,256 22,872,359 79,104,364 

Revenue 186,308,872 90,078,412 24,856,131 3,105,349 

Net Profit 18,460,185 7,550,380 715,148 1,031,350 

Total Comprehensive Income 21,277,627 3,678,380 717,830 1,030,600 

Cash flow (used in)/from operating 

activities (10,641,457) 183,348 309,158 (13,542,076) 268 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# VII.  Interests in other entities (continued) 1.  Interests in subsidiaries (continued) 

Significant subsidiaries involving non-controlling interest: (continued) The summarised financial information of the above subsidiaries which progress necessary adjustments in accordance with the company’s accounting policies is set out below. The amounts disclosed are before inter-company eliminations: (continued) 2021 

China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. China State Construction Engineering Corporation International Operations China West Construction Group Co., Ltd. China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. 

Current Assets 650,738,501 89,672,924 25,737,654 31,805,914 Non-current Assets 145,495,211 84,834,856 4,282,066 75,580,342 Total Assets 796,233,712 174,507,780 30,019,720 107,386,256 Current Liabilities 291,712,440 72,265,836 17,254,341 92,345,397 Non-current Liabilities 204,848,409 50,527,516 1,306,980 2,025,326 Total Liabilities 496,560,849 122,793,352 18,561,321 94,370,723 Revenue 242,731,528 64,103,628 26,926,362 2,908,125 Net Profit 31,836,381 6,267,375 980,921 825,789 Total Comprehensive Income 32,656,812 8,354,971 978,284 857,139 Cash flow from/(used in) operating 

activities 22,573,932 (455,532) 403,807 (12,452,501) 

Perpetual bonds of subsidiaries are as follows: As of 31 December 2022, the balance of perpetual bonds and renewable loans issued by Company’s subsidiaries (hereinafter collectively referred to as the “subsidiary perpetual bonds”) amounted to RMB65,217,933 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB73,992,903 thousand). The perpetual bonds of these subsidiaries exist for a long time, and the subsidiaries of the Company can decide whether to redeem and repay them. Unless there is a compulsory interest payment event that can be determined and controlled to occur by the Company’s subsidiary, on each interest payment date, the Company’s subsidiaries can choose to postpone the current interest and all deferred interest to the next interest payment date and is not subject to any restrictions on the number of deferred interest payments. The Group accounted for these perpetual bonds as non-controlling shareholders’ equity. Debt-to-equity swaps of subsidiaries are as follows: In December 2019, some of the Company’s subsidiaries entered into capital increase agreements and shareholder agreements with a number of third-party investors. In accordance with the Capital Increase Agreement and the Shareholder Agreement (collectively referred to as the “Agreement”), third-party investors increase their capital in cash to the subsidiaries of such subsidiaries (hereinafter referred to as “the underlying company”), and upon completion of the capital increase, the shareholding of the Company’s subsidiaries in the underlying company decreases, but there is no loss of control over the underlying company. The agreement stipulates that the profit distribution of the underlying company shall be determined by the shareholders’ meeting, that the exit method of the third-party investor shall be agreed with the controlling shareholder of the target company, and that the controlling shareholder of the target company shall have the right to acquire or designate other parties to acquire the shares of the target company held by the third party investor after the expiration of a certain period (“investment period”) from the date of payment of the investment price. In the event of a specific situation or the expiry of the investment period of the underlying company, a third-party investor may make a request to the subsidiary of the Company to acquire the shares of the underlying company held by the Company’s subsidiaries, and if the subsidiary of the Company does not choose to acquire such shares, the annual expected dividend ratio will up to until the agreed upper limit of the dividend ratio. However, if the shareholders of the underlying company will not pay dividends it do not constitute a breach of contract; A third party investor can transfer all or part of its equity interest in the underlying company to any third part or increase the voting rights of third-party investors in the shareholders’ meeting or board of directors of the underlying company in order to achieve the joint control of the underlying company with the Company’s subsidiaries. The above-mentioned arrangement does not constitute a contractual obligation of the Company or its subsidiaries to deliver cash or other financial assets to other parties or to exchange financial assets or financial liabilities with other parties under potential adverse conditions, and the Company shall therefore account for such capital increases as the equity of the underlying company. The relevant provisions in the 2020 and 2021 Capital Increase Agreement and the Shareholders’ Agreement are consistent with these provisions. As of 31 December 2022, the total amount of debt-to-equity swaps by third-party investors in the underlying company was RMB31,540,525 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB31,962,831 thousand), and there was no new investment amount in the current period. 269 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# VII.  Interests in other entities (continued) 2.  Interests in joint ventures and associates Main operation location Place of registration Nature of business Registered capital Percentage of Shares(%) Accounting treatment Direct Indirect 

Associates China Overseas Grand Oceans Group Limited Hong Kong Hong Kong Real Estate Investment and Development 5,579,100 – 39.63 Equity method 

As an important associated company of the Group, The summarised financial information in respect of China Overseas Grand Oceans Group Limited (hereinafter referred to as “China Overseas Grand Oceans”) adjusted for any differences in accounting policies and reconciled to the carrying amount in the financial statements is as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Current Assets 172,725,660 190,642,582 Including: Cash and cash equivalents 19,433,181 19,876,023 Non-current Assets 8,056,171 8,143,839 Total Assets 180,781,831 198,786,421 Current Liabilities 105,287,362 127,586,335 Non-current Liabilities 38,093,317 35,443,827 Total Liabilities 143,380,679 163,030,162 Non-controlling Interests 7,458,956 7,028,370 Attributable to shareholders of the Company 29,942,196 28,727,889 Net assets calculated by the percentage of shares holding 11,866,092 11,008,526 Book value of investment 11,866,092 11,008,526 The fair value of investment in associated companies that have publicly quoted prices 4,208,043 5,194,936 

2022 2021 

Revenue 57,492,018 53,830,471 Income tax expenses (2,922,587) (4,504,664) Net Profit 3,056,124 5,644,902 Other Comprehensive Income (1,642,515) 555,319 Total Comprehensive Income 1,413,609 6,200,221 Dividends received 413,767 384,708 270 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# VII.  Interests in other entities (continued) 2.  Interests in joint ventures and associates (continued) 

Except for China Overseas Grand Oceans, the Group has no single significant joint ventures and associates. The following table shows the summary financial information of the non-significant joint ventures and associates of the Group: 

2022 2021 (restated) 

Joint Ventures Total book value of investment 52,136,879 48,773,476 Subtotals by the percentage of share holding Net Profit (Note 1) 1,868,780 1,560,118 Other Comprehensive Income (Note 1) (614,559) 63,412 Total Comprehensive Income 1,254,221 1,623,530 Associates Total book value of investment 47,099,180 41,072,384 Subtotals by the percentage of share holding Net Profit (Note 1) 1,342,366 1,429,050 Other Comprehensive Income (Note 1) (192,592) 49,226 Total Comprehensive Income 1,149,774 1,478,276 Note 1:  Both the net profit and other comprehensive income have considered the fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities at the time the investment is obtained and the adjustment effects of the unified accounting policy. 

3.  Interests in consolidated structured entities 

As at 31 December 2022 the main consolidated structured entities which set up by the Group’s subsidiary China State Construction Fund (BEIJING) Management Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as “China Construction Fund”) amounted to RMB12,738,963 thousand, and the Group’s subscribed amount is RMB4,576,093 thousand. As at 31 December 2022, the Group’s paid-in amount is RMB3,069,015 thousand and other parties is RMB1,908,978 thousand. The Group classified other parties’ paid-in amount as non-controlling interests. The Group has no obligation and intention to provide financial supporting to these structured entities. 

4.  Interests in non-consolidated structured entities 

As at 31 December 2022, the non-consolidated structured entities China Construction Fund participated in is amounted to RMB35,653,022 thousand, and the Group’s subscribed amount is RMB8,585,387 thousand and other parties is RMB27,067,635 thousand. The Group has no control power over these entities, thus The Group doesn’t consolidate them. As at 31 December 2022, the Group’s paid-in amount is RMB4,896,515 thousand and classified as long-term equity investments. The largest risk exposure of the Group is the paid-in amount as at the balance sheet date. The Group has no obligation and intention to provide financial supporting to these structured entities. 271 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# VIII.  Financial instruments and related risks 1.  Financial instruments by category 

Carrying amounts of each category of financial instruments at the balance sheet date are as follows: 31 December 2022 Financial assets 

Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss Financial assets at amortised cost Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income Total Required by the standard Required by the standard Designated 

Cash and bank balances – 335,254,102 – – 335,254,102 

Financial assets held 

for trading 20,153 – – – 20,153 

Notes receivable – 6,390,924 – – 6,390,924 

Accounts receivable – 210,431,620 – – 210,431,620 

Accounts receivable financing – – 4,658,182 – 4,658,182 

Other receivables – 73,584,067 – – 73,584,067 

Current portion of 

non-current assets – 48,649,881 – – 48,649,881 

Other current assets – 18,583,651 – 1,730,559 20,314,210 

Debt investments – 22,545,039 – – 22,545,039 

Other debt investments – – 272,924 – 272,924 

Long-term receivables – 109,091,602 – – 109,091,602 

Investments in other 

equity instruments – – – 4,610,471 4,610,471 

Other non-current 

financial assets 1,565,153 – – – 1,565,153 

Total 1,585,306 824,530,886 4,931,106 6,341,030 837,388,328 

Financial liabilities 

Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss Financial liabilities at amortised cost Total Required by the standard 

Short-term borrowings – 78,154,159 78,154,159 

Notes payable – 10,303,981 10,303,981 

Accounts payable – 585,744,273 585,744,273 

Other payables – 137,554,165 137,554,165 

Current portion of non-current 

liabilities 4,967,342 110,822,751 115,790,093 

Other current liabilities – 3,071,922 3,071,922 

Long-term borrowings – 398,970,893 398,970,893 

Bonds payable – 103,797,195 103,797,195 

Long-term payables – 14,992,672 14,992,672 

Other non-current liabilities – 2,333,865 2,333,865 

Total 4,967,342 1,445,745,876 1,450,713,218 272 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# VIII.  Financial instruments and related risks (continued) 1.  Financial instruments by category (continued) 

Carrying amounts of each category of financial instruments at the balance sheet date are as follows: (continued) 31 December 2021 (Restated) Financial assets 

Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss Financial assets at amortised cost Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income Total Required by the standard Required by the standard Designated 

Cash and bank balances – 328,008,557 – – 328,008,557 

Financial assets held 

for trading 71,597 – – – 71,597 

Notes receivable – 17,745,605 – – 17,745,605 

Accounts receivable – 180,598,582 – – 180,598,582 

Accounts receivable 

financing – – 3,773,078 – 3,773,078 

Other receivables – 60,981,694 – – 60,981,694 

Current portion of non-current assets – 43,425,014 142,945 – 43,567,959 

Other current assets – 18,518,162 – 2,218,083 20,736,245 

Debt investments – 20,945,330 – – 20,945,330 

Other debt investments – – 264,083 – 264,083 

Long-term receivables – 103,423,119 – – 103,423,119 

Investments in other 

equity instruments – – – 5,062,186 5,062,186 

Other non-current 

financial assets 1,559,354 – – – 1,559,354 

Total 1,630,951 773,646,063 4,180,106 7,280,269 786,737,389 Financial liabilities 

Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss Financial liabilities at amortised cost Total Required by the standard 

Short-term borrowings – 59,945,832 59,945,832 

Notes payable – 7,707,393 7,707,393 

Accounts payable – 517,203,003 517,203,003 

Other payables – 126,743,319 126,743,319 

Current portion of non-current 

liabilities – 79,202,742 79,202,742 

Other current liabilities – 5,993,191 5,993,191 

Long-term borrowings – 338,776,755 338,776,755 

Bonds payable – 99,460,750 99,460,750 

Long-term payables – 16,585,992 16,585,992 

Other non-current liabilities 4,488,392 1,485,882 5,974,274 

Total 4,488,392 1,253,104,859 1,257,593,251 273 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# VIII.  Financial instrument and related risk (continued) 2.  Transfer of financial assets 

Transferred financial assets that are not derecognised in their entirety 

As at 31 December 2022, the book value of bank acceptance and commercial acceptance bills approved and discounted by the Group was RMB4,307,599 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB9,801,914 thousand). In the view of the Group, the Group retains almost all of its risks and remuneration, including the risk of default associated with it, and therefore continues to fully recognise it and the settled accounts payable or short-term borrowings associated with it. After endorsement or discount, the Group no longer reserves the right to use it, including the right to sell, transfer or pledge it to other third parties. As of 31 December 2022, the Group’s book value of its settled accounts payable or short-term borrowings received totalled RMB4,307,599 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB9,801,914 thousand). 

T r a n s f e r r e d f i n a n c i a l a s s e t s t h a t a r e d e r e c o g n i s e d i n t h e i r e n t i r e t y i n w h i c h continuing involvement exists 

As of 31 December 2022, the book value of the Group’s endorsed and discounted but not yet due bank acceptance bill was RMB1,246,298 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB1,415,666 thousand). On 31 December 2022, its maturity date is 1 to 12 months. According to the relevant provisions of the “Negotiable Instruments Law”, if the acceptance bank refuses to pay, its holder has the right to claim against the group (“continue involvement”). The Group believes that the group has transferred almost all of its risks and rewards, therefore, the book value of its and related settled accounts payable is derecognised. The maximum loss and undiscounted cash flow of continued involvement and repurchase is equal to its book value. The Group believes that the continued involvement in fair value is not significant. During the year ended 31 December 2022, the Group did not recognise gains or losses on the transfer date. There was no income or expenses recognised in the current year and accumulatively due to the Group’s continued involvement in the derecognised financial assets. 

3.  Financial instrument risks 

The Group’s activities expose it to a variety of financial risks: mainly include credit risk, liquidity risk and market risk (including interest rate risk, currency risk and equity instrument price risk). The Group’s financial instrument mainly includes cash and bank balances, equity investments, debt investments, loans, bills receivable and accounts receivable, receivables financing, bills payable, accounts payable, bonds payable and convertible bonds. The risks related to the financial instruments, and the risk management strategies adopted by the Group to reduce these risks are as follows. The Board of Directors is responsible for planning and establishing the Group’s risk management structure, formulating the Group’s risk management policies and related guidelines, and supervising the implementation of risk management measures. The Group has formulated risk management policies to identify and analyze the risks faced by the Group. These risk management policies specify specific risks, covering market risk, credit risk and liquidity risk management. The Group regularly assesses changes in the market environment and the Group ’s operating activities to decide whether to update the risk management policies and systems. The risk management of the Group is carried out by the Risk Management Committee in accordance with the policies approved by the Board of Directors. The Risk Management Committee identifies, evaluates and avoids related risks through close cooperation with other business departments of the Group. The internal audit department of the Group conducts regular audits on risk management controls and procedures, and reports the audit results to the audit committee of the Group. T h e G r o u p d i v e r s i f i e s t h e r i s k o f f i n a n c i a l i n s t r u m e n t s t h r o u g h a p p r o p r i a t e d i v e r s i f i e d investment and business portfolios, and formulates corresponding risk management policies to reduce the risk of concentration in any single industry, specific region or specific counterparty. 

Credit risk 

The Group trades only with recognised and creditworthy customers. It is the Group’s policy that all customers who wish to trade on credit terms are subject to credit verification procedures. I n a d d i t i o n , r e c e i v a b l e a n d c o n t r a c t a s s e t s balances are monitored on an ongoing basis to ensure that the Group’s exposure to bad debts is not significant. For transactions that are not denominated in the functional currency of the relevant operating unit, the Group does not offer credit terms without the specific approval of the Department of Credit Control in the Group. Since the counterparties of monetary funds, bank acceptance bills receivable are banks with good reputations and high credit ratings, these financial instruments have low credit risks. Other financial assets of the Group include notes receivable, accounts receivable, financial assets held for trading, other receivables, debt investments, long-term receivable, other debt investments, other equity instrument investments, and other non-current financial assets. The credit risk of these financial assets stems from the default of the counterparty. The maximum risk exposure is equal to the book value of these instruments. 274 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# VIII.  Financial instrument and related risk (continued) 3.  Financial instrument risks (continued) 

Credit risk (continued) 

The maximum credit risk exposure that the Group faces on each balance sheet date is the total amount collected from customers minus the amount of impairment allowances. The Group also faces credit risks due to the provision of financial guarantees, as disclosed in Note XII 2 for details. Since the Group only conducts transactions with recognised and reputable third parties, there is no need for collateral. Credit risk is centralized and managed according to customers/counterparties, geographic regions and industries. Because the Group’s accounts receivable customer base is relatively wide. Therefore, there is no significant concentration of credit risk within the Group. 

The judgment criteria for the significant increase of credit risk 

The Group evaluates on each balance sheet date whether the credit risk of relevant financial instruments has increased significantly since the initial recognition. When determining whether the credit risk has increased significantly since the initial recognition, the Group considers whether it is necessary to pay unnecessary additional costs or efforts can be made to obtain reasonable and based information, including qualitative and quantitative analysis based on the historical data of the Group, external credit risk ratings, and forward-looking information. Based on a single financial instrument or a combination of financial instruments with similar credit risk characteristics, the Group determines the change in the risk of default during the expected life of the financial instrument by comparing the risk of default on the balance sheet date of the financial instrument with the risk of default on the initial recognition date. When one or more of the following quantitative and qualitative standards are triggered, the Group believes that the credit risk of financial instruments has increased significantly: (1)  The quantitative standard is mainly that the probability of default in the remaining lifetime of the reporting day has increased b y m o r e t h a n a c e r t a i n p e r c e n t a g e compared with the initial confirmation; (2)  The qualitative standards are mainly the major adverse changes in the debtor’s business or financial situation, the list of early warning customers, etc. 

Definition of credit-impaired assets 

In order to determine whether credit impairment has occurred, the standard used by the Group is consistent with the internal credit risk management objectives for relevant financial instruments, while considering quantitative and qualitative indicators. The main consideration when the Group assesses whether a debtor has credit impairment The following factors: (1)  The issuer or debtor has major financial difficulties; (2)  The debtor breached the contract, such as defaulting or overdue payment of interest or principal; (3)  The creditor, out of economic or contractual considerations related to the debtor’s financial difficulties, gives the debtor aconcession that the debtor would not make under any other circumstances; (4)  The debtor is likely to go bankrupt or undergo other financial restructuring; (5)  The issuer or debtor’s financial difficulties caused the disappearance of the active market for the financial asset; (6)  A financial asset is purchased or originated at a significant discount, and the discount reflects the fact that credit losses have occurred. The credit impairment of financial assets may be caused by a combination of multiple events, and may not be caused by a separately identifiable event. 

The exposure to credit risk 

As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the exposure to credit risk of notes receivable, accounts receivable, accounts receivable financing, other receivable, contract assets, debt investments and long-term receivable refers to Note V. 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 12 and 13. 275 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# VIII.  Financial instrument and related risk (continued) 3.  Financial instrument risks (continued) 

Liquidity risk 

The Group uses circular liquidity planning tools to manage the risk of funding shortfalls. The facility takes into account both the maturity date of its financial instruments and the expected cash flows from the Group’s operations. The objective of the Group is to maintain a balance between sustainability and flexibility in financing through the use of a variety of financing instruments. As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the Group’s financial liabilities were mainly due within one year. The tables below summarise the maturity profile of the Group’s financial liabilities and other liabilities based on contractual undiscounted payments and earliest payment date required by related parties for the maximum amount under financial guarantee contracts: 31 December 2022 

Within 1 year 1 to 2 years 2 to 5 years Over 5 years Total 

Short-term borrowings 79,184,430 – – – 79,184,430 

Notes payable 10,303,981 – – – 10,303,981 

Accounts payable 585,744,273 – – – 585,744,273 

Other payables 137,554,165 – – – 137,554,165 

Other current liabilities 3,082,674 – – – 3,082,674 

Long-term borrowings 77,240,840 132,854,090 191,488,381 123,394,857 524,978,168 

Bonds payable 45,041,972 20,468,708 60,921,558 59,426,818 185,859,056 

Lease liabilities 2,347,216 1,540,322 2,129,693 2,017,605 8,034,836 

Long-term payables 14,523,373 9,934,264 4,934,431 85,847 29,477,915 

Other non-current liabilities 4,980,549 2,669,891 – – 7,650,440 

Financial guarantee contracts 124,091,982 4,855,343 9,039,133 1,193,323 139,179,781 

Total 1,084,095,455 172,322,618 268,513,196 186,118,450 1,711,049,719 

31 December 2021 (restated) 

Within 1 year 1 to 2 years 2 to 5 years Over 5 years Total 

Short-term borrowings 60,998,969 – – – 60,998,969 Notes payable 7,707,393 – – – 7,707,393 Accounts payable 517,203,003 – – – 517,203,003 Other payables 126,743,319 – – – 126,743,319 Other current liabilities 6,014,777 – – – 6,014,777 Long-term borrowings 66,989,434 98,126,665 187,573,792 117,027,733 469,717,624 Bonds payable 18,556,512 29,741,003 37,919,699 55,434,197 141,651,411 Lease liabilities 2,201,673 1,486,402 1,471,570 1,421,182 6,580,827 Long-term payables 11,124,782 13,096,052 4,019,691 111,285 28,351,810 Other non-current liabilities – – 6,860,021 – 6,860,021 Financial guarantee contracts 95,770,704 2,235,150 5,660,405 3,500,000 107,166,259 Total 913,310,566 144,685,272 243,505,178 177,494,397 1,478,995,413 Note:  The above-mentioned long-term borrowings, bonds payable, lease liabilities and long-term payables and other non-current liabilities all include the parts due within one year. 276 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# VIII.  Financial instrument and related risk (continued) 3.  Financial instrument risks (continued) 

Market risk Interest rate risk The Group’s interest rate risk arises from interest bearing borrowings including borrowings, bonds payable. Financial liabilities issued at floating rates expose the Group to cash flow interest rate risk. Financial liabilities issued at fixed rates expose the Group to fair value interest rate risk. The Group manages interest costs by maintaining an appropriate mix of fixed and variable rate debt. As at 31 December 2022, the Group’s interest bearing borrowings with fixed rates amounted t o R M B314,850,545 t h o u s a n d (31 D e c e m b e r 2021: RMB251,065,768 thousand), and floating rates interest bearing borrowings amounted to RMB377,089,607 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB331,916,930 thousand). The Group’s finance department at its headquarters continuously monitors the interest rate position of the Group. Increases in interest rates will increase the cost of new borrowings and the interest expenses with respect to the Group’s outstanding floating rate borrowings, which could have a material adverse effect on the Group’s financial position. The management of the Group makes decisions with reference to the latest market conditions. The Group may enter into interest rate swap agreements to mitigate its exposure to interest rate risk. For 2022 and 2021 the Group did not enter into any significant interest rate swap agreements. A s a t 31 D e c e m b e r 2022, i f t h e b o r r o w i n g interest rate calculated at floating interest rate had been 50 basis points higher/lower, with all other variables held constant, the Group’s net profit would have been decreased/increased by approximately RMB1,384 million (31 December 2021: approximately RMB1,238 million.) Currency risk The Group’s major operational activities are carried out in Mainland China and a majority of the transactions is denominated in RMB. The Group’s confirmed foreign currency assets and liabilities and future foreign currency transactions (foreign currency assets and liabilities and foreign currency transactions are mainly denominated in US dollars and HK dollars) are subject to foreign exchange risks. The Group’s finance department at its headquarters is responsible for monitoring the foreign currency transactions and the scale of foreign currency assets and liabilities to minimize foreign exchange risks;. The Group may consider entering into forward exchange contracts or currency swap contracts to mitigate the foreign exchange risk. During 2022 and 2021, the Group did not enter into any significant forward exchange contracts or currency swap contracts. As at 31 December 2022, for Group’s all kinds of foreign currency financial assets and foreign currency financial liabilities, if RMB appreciation or devaluation against foreign currency were 10%, other factors remain unchanged, the Group would increase or decrease by approximately RMB9.916 b i l l i o n ( 3 1 D e c e m b e r 2 0 2 1 : a p p r o x i m a t e l y RMB8.962 billion). Equity instrument price risk The Group’s equity instrument price risk mainly arises from various types of equity instrument investments, and there is a risk of changes in equity instrument prices. As at 31 December 2022, if the expected price of various types of equity instrument investments of the Group increased or decreased by 10% and other factors remained unchanged, the Group’s net profit would increase or decrease by approximately R M B131,275 t h o u s a n d (31 D e c e m b e r 2021: a p p r o x i m a t e l y R M B130,903 t h o u s a n d ) , o t h e r comprehensive income would increase or decrease by approximately RMB508,823 thousand (31 D e c e m b e r 2021: a p p r o x i m a t e l y R M B576,662 thousand). 

4.  Capital management 

The primary objectives of the Group’s capital management are to safeguard the Group’s ability to continue as a going concern and to maintain healthy capital ratios in order to support business development and maximize shareholder value. The Group manages its capital structure and makes adjustments to it in light of changes in economic conditions and the risk profile of related assets. To maintain or adjust the capital structure, the Group may adjust the dividend payment to owners, return capital to owners or issue new shares. The Group is not subject to external mandatory capital requirements. No changes in the objectives, policies or processes for managing capital were made in 2022 and 2021. 277 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# VIII.  Financial instrument and related risk (continued) 4.  Capital management (continued) 

The Group’s total capital is the shareholders’ equity shown in the consolidated balance sheet. The Group uses the gearing ratio to monitor its capital. The debt to assets ratio refers to the consolidated balance sheet total liabilities divided by total assets. The debt to assets ratio of the Group at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021 was as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Total liabilities 1,972,516,396 1,753,642,804 Total assets 2,652,903,306 2,395,321,862 Debt to assets ratio 74.35% 73.21% 

# IX.  Disclosure of fair value 1.  Assets and liabilities measured at fair value 

31 December 2022 

Fair value measurement using Total Quoted prices in active markets (Level 1) Significant observable inputs (Level 2) Significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) 

Recurring fair value measurements Financial assets held for trading Equity investments 20,153 – – 20,153 

Accounts receivables financing – – 4,658,182 4,658,182 

Other current assets Investment in listed equity instrument 1,730,559 – – 1,730,559 

Other non-current financial assets Investment in stock – – 35,510 35,510 

Investment in fund – – 1,529,643 1,529,643 

Other investment in debenture instrument 272,924 – – 272,924 

Other investment in equity instrument Investment in listed equity instrument 300,867 – – 300,867 

Investment in non-listed equity instrument – – 4,309,604 4,309,604 

Total financial assets 2,324,503 – 10,532,939 12,857,442 

Recurring fair value measurements Other non-current liabilities – 4,967,342 – 4,967,342 

Total financial liabilities – 4,967,342 – 4,967,342 278 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# IX.  Disclosure of fair value (continued) 1.  Assets and liabilities measured at fair value (continued) 

31 December 2021 (restated) 

Fair value measurement using Total Quoted prices in active markets (Level 1) Significant observable inputs (Level 2) Significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) 

Recurring fair value measurements Financial assets held for trading Debt investments 47,864 – – 47,864 Equity investments 23,733 – – 23,733 Accounts receivable financing – – 3,773,078 3,773,078 Other current assets Investment in listed equity instrument 2,218,083 – – 2,218,083 Other non-current financial assets Investment in stock – – 35,510 35,510 Investment in fund – – 1,523,844 1,523,844 Non-current assets due within one year 142,945 – – 142,945 Other investment in debt investments 264,083 – – 264,083 Other investment in equity instrument Investment in listed equity instrument 1,204,980 – – 1,204,980 Investment in non-listed equity instrument – – 3,857,206 3,857,206 Total financial assets 3,901,688 – 9,189,638 13,091,326 Recurring fair value measurements Other non-current liabilities – 4,488,392 – 4,488,392 Total financial liabilities – 4,488,392 – 4,488,392 279 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# IX.  Disclosure of fair value (continued) 2.  Valuation of fair value 

Fair value of financial instruments 

The illustration below is the disclosure on comparison between the fair value and the carrying amount for each class of financial assets and financial liabilities of the Group, except for lease liabilities and financial instruments where the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value is insignificant: 

Carrying amounts Fair value 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Bonds payable 103,797,195 99,460,750 110,255,924 103,766,312 

The fair value of bonds payable quoted in an active market is determined at the quoted market price, and categorised within Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy. The fair value of bonds payable not quoted in an active market is the present value of the contractually determined stream of future cash flows discounted at the rate of interest applied at that time by the market to instruments of comparable credit status and providing substantially the same cash flows on the same terms, and categorised within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. Management has assessed that the fair value of cash and bank balances, notes receivable, accounts receivable, other receivables, Short-term borrowings, notes payable, accounts payable and other payables. Given the short term maturities, the fair value approximate to the carrying value. The Group’s finance department headed by the person in charge of the accounting institution is responsible for determining the policies and procedures for the fair value measurement of financial instruments. The person in charge of the accounting institution reports directly to the person in charge of accounting work and the audit committee. At each reporting date, the finance department analyses the movements in the value of financial instruments and determines the major inputs applied in the valuation. The valuation is reviewed and approved by the person in charge of accounting work. The fair value of the financial assets and liabilities is included at the amount at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties, other than in a forced or liquidation sale. The following methods and assumptions were used to estimate the fair value. Long-term receivables, long-term borrowings, debt investments, bonds payable, etc., adopt the future cash flow discount method to determine the fair value, and use the market yield of other financial instruments with similar contractual terms, credit risks and remaining maturity as the discount rate. As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the fair value of long-term receivables, long-term borrowings and debt investments approximated to the carrying amount. The default risk of long-term borrowings was evaluated as insignificant. The fair value of listed equity instrument investment is determined at the market price. For investment in unlisted equity instruments, valuation models such as market-comparable company models and discounted cash flow models are used to estimate fair value, For the market-comparable company models, the market method is used to estimate the fair value based on unobservable market prices or interest rate assumptions. The Group needs to identify comparable listed companies based on industry, size, leverage and strategy and calculate appropriate market multipliers such as enterprise value multiplier, price-to-book multiplier and price-to-earnings multiplier for each identified comparable listed company. Adjustments are made according to enterprise-specific facts and circumstances, taking into account factors such as liquidity and size differences with comparable listed companies. For the discounted cash flow model, the discounted valuation model is used to estimate the fair value according to the unobservable market price or interest rate assumption. The Group is required to provide estimates of expected future cash flows, including expected future dividends and disposal income. The Group believes that the fair value and its changes estimated by valuation techniques are reasonable and are the most appropriate value on the balance sheet date. 

3.  Unobservable inputs 

The valuation models used are mainly discounted cash flow models and market-comparable company models. The input value of valuation techniques mainly include future cash flows, price-to-book ratio and price-earnings ratio of companies of the same category. 280 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# IX.  Disclosure of fair value (continued) 4.  Reconciliation of fair value measurements 

Reconciliation of recurring fair value measurements within Level 3 is as follows: 2022 

Opening balance of the year Total gains or losses during the year Purchases Sales Closing balance of the year Changes in unrealised gains or losses included in profit or loss for assets held at end of the year Included in profit or loss Included in other comprehensive income 

Accounts receivable financing 3,773,078 – – 4,117,244 (3,232,140) 4,658,182 –

Other non-current financial assets Investment in stock 35,510 – – – – 35,510 –

Investment in fund 1,523,844 9,855 – 30,600 – 1,529,643 (24,801) 

Other investment in equity instrument Investment in non-listed equity instrument equity instrument 3,857,206 46,095 349,615 231,104 (128,321) 4,309,604 –

Total 9,189,638 55,950 349,615 4,378,948 (3,360,461) 10,532,939 (24,801) 

2021 

Opening balance of the year Total gains or losses during the year Purchases Sales Closing balance of the year Changes in unrealised gains or losses included in profit or loss for assets held at end of the year Included in profit or loss Included in other comprehensive income 

Accounts receivable financing 3,791,162 – – 5,146,850 (5,164,934) 3,773,078 –Other non-current financial assets Investment in stock 35,510 – – – – 35,510 –Investment in fund 300,000 7,349 – 1,408,105 (190,065) 1,523,844 5,804 Other investment in equity instrument Investment in non-listed equity instrument equity instrument 4,508,545 127,320 214,345 498,550 (1,364,234) 3,857,206 –Total 8,635,217 134,669 214,345 7,053,505 (6,719,233) 9,189,638 5,804 

For recurring fair value measurements categorised within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy, gains and losses included in profit or loss that relate to financial assets and non-financial assets are as follows: 

2022 Profit or loss related to financial assets Profit or loss related to non-financial assets 

Total realised gains included in profit or loss 55,950 –

Changes in unrealised losses included in profit or loss for assets held at end of year (24,801) –2021 Profit or loss related to financial assets Profit or loss related to non-financial assets 

Total realised gains included in profit or loss 134,669 –Changes in unrealised losses included in profit or loss for assets held at end of year 5,804 –281 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# IX.  Disclosure of fair value (continued) 5.  Fair value level conversion 

During the year 2022 and 2021, the fair value level of the equity instrument or debt investment continuously measured at fair value has no change. 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions 1.  Parent Registered address Nature of business Registered capital (RMB) Proportion of ownership interest in the Company Proportion of voting power in the Company 

CSCEC Beijing Investment holding 10 billion 56.35% 56.35% 

The Company’s ultimate controlling party is State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council. 

2.  Subsidiaries 

The company’s important subsidiaries refer to Note VII. 1. 

3.  Joint ventures and associates 

Except the general information and other related information of joint ventures and associates set out in Note VII. 2, the situation of joint ventures and associated enterprises that have transactions with the group is listed as follows: 

Main place of business Place of registration Nature of business Strategic to group activities Shareholding ratio (%) 

Joint Ventures (Note 3) CSCEC (Tangshan Caofeidian) Engineering Construction Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hebei, China Hebei, China Infrastructure construction business No 90.00 Cangzhou Bohai New Area China Construction Port Construction Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hebei, China Hebei, China Infrastructure construction business No 90.00 Liupanshui urban pipe gallery construction and Development Investment Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guizhou, China Guizhou, China Infrastructure construction business No 80.00 CSCEC Haijia (Foshan) Investment Construction Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Other business No 80.00 CSCEC Zhanjiang Avenue Investment and Construction Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Infrastructure construction business No 70.10 Anhui Bengwu Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Anhui, China Anhui, China Infrastructure construction business No 70.00 China Construction International (Xiangyang) Construction Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hubei, China Hubei, China Housing construction business No 70.00 Yinchuan Shenyang Road Underground Comprehensive Pipe Gallery Construction Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Ningxia, China Ningxia, China Infrastructure construction business No 70.00 Jingyu Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hong Kong, China Hong Kong, China Other business No 70.00 Chongqing Zhongjian Hailong Liangjiang Construction Technology Co., LTD. (Note 1) Chongqing, China Chongqing, China Housing construction business No 70.00 Guizhou Leirong Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guizhou, China Guizhou, China Infrastructure construction business No 68.90 Dazhou Dahuan Construction Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Sichuan, China Sichuan, China Infrastructure construction business No 65.89 Urumqi Zhongcheng Silk Road Sports Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Xinjiang, China Xinjiang, China Other business No 65.34 282 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

Main place of business Place of registration Nature of business Strategic to group activities Shareholding ratio (%) 

Joint Ventures (continued) (Note 3) Changsha Zhongjian International Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hunan, China Hunan, China Infrastructure construction business No 65.00 Xuancheng Haijia Lancheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Anhui, China Anhui, China Real estate investment and development business No 65.00 Nanjing Yangtze River Second Bridge Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Infrastructure construction business No 65.00 Shenzhen Shenzhen-Shantou Special Cooperation Zone Zhongpu Infrastructure Investment Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Infrastructure construction business No 64.00 Liuzhou China Construction Science and Industry Exhibition Operation Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangxi, China Guangxi, China Architectural decoration, decoration and other construction industries No 63.49 Wuhan Pinlian Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hubei, China Hubei, China Business service industry No 63.20 Putian Haijia Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Fujian, China Fujian, China Infrastructure construction business No 60.00 Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guizhou, China Guizhou, China Infrastructure construction business No 60.00 Zunyi South Ring Expressway Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guizhou, China Guizhou, China Infrastructure construction business No 60.00 Guangzhou Zhongjian Tiantou Investment Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 60.00 Construction Technology Jingmen Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hubei, China Hubei, China Other business No 60.00 China Construction Technology Hubei Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hubei, China Hubei, China Non-metallic mineral products industry No 60.00 Shandong China Overseas Huachuang Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shandong, China Shandong, China Real estate investment and development business No 60.00 Hengshui CECSC Hangang Expressway Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hebei, China Hebei, China Public facilities management No 59.93 Jingmen China Construction 207 Highway Construction Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 52.00 Zhaotong Zhongjian Construction Investment Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Yunnan, China Yunnan, China Infrastructure construction business No 51.00 Liuan Haijia Lancheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Anhui, China Anhui, China Real estate investment and development business No 51.00 Changsha CSCEC International High-speed Railway West Industrial City Investment Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hunan, China Hunan, China Infrastructure construction business No 51.00 Xiangtan Haijia Construction Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hunan, China Hunan, China Infrastructure construction business No 51.00 Wuhan Hongtai Hongli CSCEC Yipin Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hubei, China Hubei, China Real estate investment and development business No 51.00 CSCEC Roads and Bridges Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hebei, China Hebei, China Infrastructure construction business No 51.00 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 3.  Joint ventures and associates (continued) 283 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Main place of business Place of registration Nature of business Strategic to group activities Shareholding ratio (%) 

Joint Ventures (continued) (Note 3) CSCEC Third Engineering Bureau Shengshi Jingzhou Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hubei, China Hubei, China Real estate investment and development business No 51.00 Beijing Yipin Haikai Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Beijing, China Beijing, China Business service industry No 51.00 Guangzhou Xinghong Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 51.00 Foshan China Construction Yipin Pengyue Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 51.00 Guangdong Haichao Technology Industry Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Other business No 51.00 Hengyang Lingsheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hunan, China Hunan, China Real estate investment and development business No 51.00 China Overseas South Airlines Construction and Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 51.00 Nanjing China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Lishui Development Area Affordable Housing Investment Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Housing construction business No 51.00 Leading Investment Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Jiangsu, China Hong Kong, China Real estate investment and development business No 51.00 Beijing Xingying Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Beijing, China Beijing, China Real estate investment and development business No 51.00 Wuxi Zhonghai Taihu New City Property Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Real estate investment and development business No 51.00 Tianjin Chuangqing Investment Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Tianjin, China Tianjin, China Other business No 51.00 Dongguan Zhonghai Century City Education Technology Development Co., Ltd. Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Other business No 50.00 Guangzhou CSCEC Green Financial Holding Construction Investment Co., Ltd. Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Wuhan CSCEC Yipin Zhaoying Real Estate Co., Ltd. Wuhan, China Wuhan, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Ezhou Chuanggu Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Guangzhou XingLv Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 CSCEC Dacheng Construction Co., Ltd. Beijing, China Beijing, China Housing construction business No 50.00 Xiamen International Trade Conference Center Co., Ltd. Fujian, China Fujian, China Other business No 50.00 Xing Chuang Enterprises LTD. Hong Kong, China Hong Kong, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Guiheng Investments Co., Ltd. Chongqing, China Hong Kong, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Xinggui Investment Co., Ltd. Zhejiang, China Hong Kong, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Sunrise JV Limited Hong Kong, China Hong Kong, China Other business No 50.00 Xi’an Jiarun Rongcheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. Shaanxi, China Shaanxi, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 3.  Joint ventures and associates (continued) 284 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

Main place of business Place of registration Nature of business Strategic to group activities Shareholding ratio (%) 

Joint Ventures (continued) (Note 3) Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. Fujian, China Fujian, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Qingdao Haijie Real Estate Co., Ltd. Shandong, China Shandong, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Xi’an Hehui Xingshang Real Estate Co., Ltd. Shaanxi, China Shaanxi, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 China Resources Land Real Estate (Taiyuan) Development Co., Ltd. Shanxi, China Shanxi, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Jiangmen Pengjiang Tianque Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Quanzhou Taiwan Business Investment Zone China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Haiwan Avenue Investment Co., Ltd. Fujian, China Fujian, China Infrastructure construction business No 50.00 China Overseas Polytec Real Estate (Foshan) Co., Ltd. Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Zhongshan Kaixuan City Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Chengdu Langxin Real Estate Co., Ltd. Sichuan, China Sichuan, China Realty industry No 50.00 Harbin Runzhi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Heilongjiang, China Heilongjiang, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Changchun Hairun Rongcheng Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Jilin, China Jilin, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Shanghai Linbo Haihui City Construction Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shanghai, China Shanghai, China Infrastructure construction business No 49.00 Changsha Yida Chuangzhi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hunan, China Hunan, China Real estate investment and development business No 49.00 Yunnan Airport Construction and Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Yunnan, China Yunnan, China Infrastructure construction business No 49.00 Foshan Construction investment China Construction Yipin Real estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 49.00 Shanghai Lingang New Area Jingang Dongjiu Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shanghai, China Shanghai, China Real estate investment and development business No 49.00 Xi’an Chuxin investment and Construction Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shaanxi, China Shaanxi, China Infrastructure construction business No 49.00 Suzhou Dongfu Yongxu Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Real estate investment and development business No 49.00 Nanjing Kangyuan Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Infrastructure construction business No 49.00 Chongqing Qingneng Yuehe Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Chongqing, China Chongqing, China Real estate investment and development business No 49.00 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 3.  Joint ventures and associates (continued) 285 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Main place of business Place of registration Nature of business Strategic to group activities Shareholding ratio (%) 

Joint Ventures (continued) (Note 3) Dalian CSCEC Sponge City Construction Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Liaoning, China Liaoning, China Infrastructure construction business No 49.00 Zhongshan Shenshui Environmental Water Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Other business No 48.98 Chongqing CSCEC Erhengxian Infrastructure Construction Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Chongqing, China Chongqing, China Infrastructure construction business No 46.77 Xuzhou Metro Line Three Investment Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Infrastructure construction business No 44.44 Suzhou Wujiang Taihai Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Real estate investment and development business No 44.00 Yili CSCEC Highway Construction and Operation Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Xinjiang, China Xinjiang, China Infrastructure construction business No 40.00 Zhangzhou Chengjia Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Fujian, China Fujian, China Realty industry No 40.00 Xiangyang Loop Line Speed Improvement Construction Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 39.00 Guigang Nine Roads and Two Bridges Construction Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangxi, China Guangxi, China Infrastructure construction business No 37.57 Mianyang CSCEC Kefa Guanlang road investment and Construction Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Sichuan, China Sichuan, China Housing construction business No 37.18 Shantou CSCEC New Urbanization Investment Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Infrastructure construction business No 36.77 Beijing Nanyue Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Beijing, China Beijing, China Real estate investment and development business No 35.00 Top Colour Development Limited (Note 1) Hong Kong, China Hong Kong, China Real estate investment and development business No 34.00 Tianjin Chuangliang Investment Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Tianjin, China Tianjin, China Other business No 34.00 Beijing Chenxing International Exhibition Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Beijing, China Beijing, China Other business No 33.33 TEDA Group Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hong Kong, China Hong Kong, China Infrastructure construction business No 33.33 Dongguan Jiafang Real Estate Development Co., LTD. (Note 1) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 32.50 Cangzhou CSCEC Bohai investment Logistics Park Construction Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hebei, China Hebei, China Infrastructure construction business No 30.00 Clear Elegant Limited (Note 1) Hong Kong, China Hong Kong, China Real estate investment and development business No 30.00 Luminous Dream Limited (Note 1) Hong Kong, China Hong Kong, China Infrastructure construction business No 30.00 Yantai Zhongda Xinhong Science Education Investment Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shandong, China Shandong, China Other business No 29.33 CSCEC (Tianjin) Railroad Transportation Investment Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Tianjin, China Tianjin, China Infrastructure construction business No 25.40 Guangzhou SuiHai Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 25.00 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 3.  Joint ventures and associates (continued) 286 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

Main place of business Place of registration Nature of business Strategic to group activities Shareholding ratio (%) 

Joint Ventures (continued) (Note 3) Shanghai Chenggang Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shanghai, China Shanghai, China Real estate investment and development business No 25.00 Liuzhou CSCEC Science and Technology Cultural Tourism Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Guangxi, China Guangxi, China Other business No 25.00 Tongxiang Haoli Enterprise Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Zhejiang, China Zhejiang, China Other business No 25.00 CSCEC Xi’an Infrastructure Construction Investment Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shaanxi, China Shaanxi, China Infrastructure construction business No 22.50 CSCEC New Urbanization (Xinjiang)Investment Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Xinjiang, China Xinjiang, China Infrastructure construction business No 20.00 Gainable Development Limited (Note 1) Hong Kong, China Hong Kong, China Real estate investment and development business No 20.00 Xiamen Yongjingwan Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Fujian, China Fujian, China Real estate investment and development business No 20.00 Beijing Zhonghai Excellent Urban and Rural Construction Investment Fund (Note 1) Beijing, China Beijing, China Public facilities management No 18.09 Qingdao Fangchen Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shandong, China Shandong, China Real estate investment and development business No 18.00 Qingdao Maozhang Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shandong, China Shandong, China Real estate investment and development business No 18.00 Marble Edge Limited (Note 1) Hong Kong, China Hong Kong, China Real estate investment and development business No 18.00 Qingdao Tengmao Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shandong, China Shandong, China Real estate investment and development business No 18.00 Qingdao Caimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shandong, China Shandong, China Real estate investment and development business No 18.00 Qingdao Fangchuan Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shandong, China Shandong, China Real estate investment and development business No 18.00 Qingdao Songmao Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shandong, China Shandong, China Real estate investment and development business No 18.00 Qingdao Fanghui Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shandong, China Shandong, China Real estate investment and development business No 18.00 Sanya Bihai Jincheng Business Management Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Hainan, China Hainan, China Real estate investment and development business No 17.00 Zhangzhou Binbei Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Fujian, China Fujian, China Real estate investment and development business No 15.00 Tianjin Shunji Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Tianjin, China Tianjin, China Real estate investment and development business No 12.50 Rizhao CSCEC Transportation Service Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Shandong, China Shandong, China Infrastructure construction business No 5.00 Nanjing CSCEC Gubei City Development Co., Ltd. (Note 1) Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Infrastructure construction business No 5.00 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 3.  Joint ventures and associates (continued) 287 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Main place of business Place of registration Nature of business Strategic to group activities Shareholding ratio (%) 

Associates (Note 3) Liuzhou China Construction Steel Structure Dongcheng Exhibition Construction Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Guangxi, China Guangxi, China Infrastructure construction business No 63.49 Hengshui China Construction HaYuan Project Management Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Hebei, China Hebei, China Other business No 60.00 Liyang Zhongjian Sangde Environmental Governance Co., LTD. (Note 2) Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Ecological protection and environmental governance industry No 54.00 Wuhan Chongjiang Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Hubei, China Hubei, China Real estate investment and development business No 51.00 Jinan Zhiying Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Shandong, China Shandong, China Realty industry No 50.00 Liupanshui Dongda Highway Investment and Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Guizhou, China Guizhou, China Infrastructure construction business No 50.00 Jiangmen Pengjiang Area Hebang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 50.00 Wuhan Optics Valley Science Island Construction and Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 50.00 Putian CSCEC Mulan Construction Development Co., Ltd. Fujian, China Fujian, China Infrastructure construction business No 49.90 Grand Dunman Pte Ltd. Singapore Singapore Real estate investment and development business No 49.00 Haizhou Investment Co., Ltd. Hong Kong, China Hong Kong, China Other business No 49.00 Beijing Hengyi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Beijing, China Beijing, China Real estate investment and development business No 49.00 Shanghai Jiasheng Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Shanghai, China Shanghai, China Real estate investment and development business No 49.00 Urumqi Linkong Construction Infrastructure Co., Ltd. Xinjiang, China Xinjiang, China Other business No 49.00 Beijing Jianyan Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Beijing, China Beijing, China Real estate investment and development business No 49.00 Yunnan Huali Expressway investment and Development Co., Ltd. Yunnan, China Yunnan, China Infrastructure construction business No 46.00 Chongqing Jinke Zhaoji Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Chongqing, China Chongqing, China Real estate investment and development business No 45.00 China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Xianning Big Continent Lake Ecological Construction and Operation Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 45.00 Sichuan West Construction Zhonghe Machinery Co., Ltd. Sichuan, China Sichuan, China Other business No 44.44 CSCEC Xi’an Chanba Ecological Region Construction Investment Co., Ltd. Shaanxi, China Shaanxi, China Infrastructure construction business No 44.00 Anhui Guoyuan Investment Co., Ltd. Anhui, China Anhui, China Other business No 42.73 China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Yichang City Pipe Corridor Construction and Operation Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 41.29 Sanmenxia National Road 310 South Transplanted Project Construction Co., Ltd. Henan, China Henan, China Infrastructure construction business No 40.00 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 3.  Joint ventures and associates (continued) 288 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

Main place of business Place of registration Nature of business Strategic to group activities Shareholding ratio (%) 

Associates (continued) (Note 3) Zhongshan Public Utilities Sanlianwei Watershed Governance Co., Ltd. Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Wholesale business No 40.00 China State Construction Wuhan Yangsigang Road and Bridge Construction and Operation Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 40.00 Beijing Jinliang Xingye Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Beijing, China Beijing, China Real estate investment and development business No 40.00 Fuqing CSCEC Ronghai Construction and Development Co., Ltd. Fujian, China Fujian, China Real estate investment and development business No 40.00 Zhijiang Jianxin Municipal Engineering Construction Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Housing construction business No 40.00 Suining East Lake Bishui Environmental Investment Construction Co, Ltd. Sichuan, China Sichuan, China Other business No 39.00 Qingdao China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Education Development Co., Ltd. Shandong, China Shandong, China Other business No 38.65 Anhui Guoyuan Trust Co., Ltd. Anhui, China Anhui, China Other business No 36.63 China Construction Haoyun Co., Ltd. Hebei, China Hebei, China Other business No 35.00 Wuhan Binjiang Infrastructure Construction and Development Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 35.00 Guangzhou Fuchuang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 34.00 Suzhou Fuyuan Real Estate Co., Ltd. Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Real estate investment and development business No 34.00 Shanghai Fuda Real Estate Co., Ltd. Shanghai, China Shanghai, China Real estate investment and development business No 34.00 Tianjin Zhonghai Haixin Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 4) Tianjin, China Tianjin, China Real estate investment and development business No 34.00 Nantong City Ring Road Expressway Co., Ltd. Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Housing construction business No 33.00 Changsha Xirong Real Estate Co., Ltd. Hunan, China Hunan, China Real estate investment and development business No 33.00 Beijing Rongzhu Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Beijing, China Beijing, China Real estate investment and development business No 33.00 Nanjing Guancheng Hengrui Real Estate Co., Ltd. Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Real estate investment and development business No 33.00 Nanjing AnjuJianhe Construction Technology Co., Ltd. Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Real estate investment and development business No 33.00 Putian Puyang University Construction Co., Ltd. Fujian, China Fujian, China Housing construction business No 32.90 Vanlink Company Limited Shandong, China Shandong, China Real estate investment and development business No 32.14 Southwest Section of Wuhan Metropolitan Area Circle Line Investment Management Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 31.83 Guangxi Nanbin Highway Construction and Development Co., Ltd. Guangxi, China Guangxi, China Infrastructure construction business No 31.50 Hong Kong and Kowloon Concrete Co., Ltd. Hong Kong, China Hong Kong, China Sales materials No 31.50 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 3.  Joint ventures and associates (continued) 289 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Main place of business Place of registration Nature of business Strategic to group activities Shareholding ratio (%) 

Associates (continued) (Note 3) Zhuzhou China Overseas Grand Oceans Real Estate Co., Ltd. Hunan, China Hunan, China Real estate investment and development business No 30.00 Xiamen Haitou Construction Technology Co., Ltd. Fujian, China Fujian, China Other business No 30.00 Jinyu Jiaxing Nanjing Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Real estate investment and development business No 30.00 Shandong CSCEC Zhongli Equipment Leasing Co., Ltd. Shandong, China Shandong, China Leasing business No 30.00 Sichuan West Construction shantui Logistics Co., Ltd. Sichuan, China Sichuan, China Other business No 30.00 Beijing CSCEC Runtong Electromechanic Engineering Co., Ltd. Beijing, China Beijing, China Housing construction business No 30.00 Shandong Zhongcheng Machinery Leasing Co., Ltd. Shandong, China Shandong, China Leasing business No 30.00 Shandong CSCEC Material Equipment Co., Ltd. Shandong, China Shandong, China Other business No 30.00 Dongguan Jiangpan New City Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 30.00 Nanjing Jinlingyi Cultural Tourism Development Co., Ltd. Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Other business No 30.00 CSCEC Xi’an City Construction Investment Co., Ltd. Shaanxi, China Shaanxi, China Infrastructure construction business No 30.00 Wuhan CSCEC Wudi Development Construction Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Other business No 30.00 Wuhan Wuyang Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 30.00 Jingdezhen Taoyangli Scenic Spot Tourism Development Co., Ltd. Jiangxi, China Jiangxi, China Infrastructure construction business No 30.00 Shenzhen Zhaohang Real Estate Co., Ltd. Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Realty industry No 30.00 Xiamen Yueqin Real Estate Co., Ltd. Fujian, China Fujian, China Real estate investment and development business No 30.00 Xianyi International Co., Ltd. Hong Kong, China Hong Kong, China Other business No 30.00 Fuzhou Modern Logistics City Investment Construction Development Co., Ltd. Fujian, China Fujian, China Real estate investment and development business No 30.00 Zhuzhou China Overseas Real Estate Co., Ltd. Hunan, China Hunan, China Real estate investment and development business No 30.00 Zhuzhou Zhonghai Commercial Development Co., Ltd. Hong Kong, China Hong Kong, China Real estate investment and development business No 30.00 Yantai Yuanxin Zhongda Investment Co., Ltd. Shandong, China Shandong, China Other business No 28.00 Chongqing Derun Yipin Environmental Governance Co., Ltd. Chongqing, China Chongqing, China Infrastructure construction business No 26.91 Zhengzhou Public Zhongcheng Roads and Bridges Construction Management Co., Ltd. Henan, China Henan, China Infrastructure construction business No 25.00 Zhongge Yongmao (Suzhou) Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. (Note 5) Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Real estate investment and development business No 25.00 Luzhou Yangtze River Second Bridge Construction Co., Ltd. Sichuan, China Sichuan, China Infrastructure construction business No 24.35 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 3.  Joint ventures and associates (continued) 290 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

Main place of business Place of registration Nature of business Strategic to group activities Shareholding ratio (%) 

Associates (continued) (Note 3) Xiamen International Exhibition Center Co., Ltd. Fujian, China Fujian, China Other business No 24.00 Guangzhou Fangbai Intercity Rail Transit Co., Ltd. Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Railway transportation No 23.93 CCCC Jijiao Expressway Investment Development Co., Ltd. Hebei, China Hebei, China Infrastructure construction business No 21.03 Zhangzhou China Merchants Steamship Company Economic Technology Area CSCEC Infrastructure Investment Development Co., Ltd. (Note 5) Fujian, China Fujian, China Infrastructure construction business No 20.10 Fernvale Lane Pte Ltd. Singapore Singapore Real estate investment and development business No 20.00 Suzhou Junda National Highway 206 Construction Co., Ltd. Anhui, China Anhui, China Housing construction business No 20.00 China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Jingzhou Huanchang Lake Construction Operation Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 20.00 Xinjiang CSCEC City Construction Investment Co., Ltd. Xinjiang, China Xinjiang, China Infrastructure construction business No 20.00 Hubei Transportation Investment Xiangyang North Expressway Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 20.00 Guangzhou Zengcheng Run Yu Real Estate Co., Ltd. Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 20.00 Dongguan Songrun Real Estate Co., Ltd. Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Realty industry No 20.00 Wuhan Chenzhan Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Real estate investment and development business No 20.00 Jinmao Investment (Changsha) Co., Ltd. Hunan, China Hunan, China Real estate investment and development business No 20.00 Nanjing CSCEC Travel Construction Investment Co., Ltd. Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Infrastructure construction business No 20.00 Ezhou CSCEC Yipin Lanyue Real Estate Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Real estate investment and development business No 20.00 Sichuan Dehui Expressway Co., Ltd. Sichuan, China Sichuan, China Housing construction business No 20.00 Liuzhou CSCEC Steel Structure Ecological Garden Construction Co., Ltd. Guangxi, China Guangxi, China Infrastructure construction business No 20.00 Xi’an Chufeng Construction Co., Ltd. Shaanxi, China Shaanxi, China Infrastructure construction business No 20.00 Guangzhou Lihe Real Estate Development Co., LTD. (Note 5) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 20.00 Wuhan Chenfa Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Hubei, China Hubei, China Real estate investment and development business No 20.00 Chengdu Chuantou Airport Construction Co., Ltd. Sichuan, China Sichuan, China Infrastructure construction business No 20.00 Zhangzhou Zhanyuan Environmental Technology Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Fujian, China Fujian, China Other business No 19.00 Fuyang Three Gorges Phase I Water Environment Comprehensive Treatment Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Anhui, China Anhui, China Infrastructure construction business No 19.00 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 3.  Joint ventures and associates (continued) 291 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Main place of business Place of registration Nature of business Strategic to group activities Shareholding ratio (%) 

Associates (continued) (Note 3) Wuhan Transportation Investment Tongxiu High-speed Construction Management Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 18.98 Fujian Minxin Environmental Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Fujian, China Fujian, China Infrastructure construction business No 18.00 Guizhou Jianxin Water Environment Industry Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Guizhou, China Guizhou, China Ecological protection and environmental governance industry No 17.56 Shucheng Sanxia Phase I Comprehensive Water Environment Treatment Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Anhui, China Anhui, China Infrastructure construction business No 17.00 Xuzhou Line 1 Rail Transit Investment and Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Infrastructure construction business No 16.69 Guangzhou lvrong Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Real estate investment and development business No 16.66 Rizhao CSCEC Eighth Engineering Bureau Transportation Service Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Shandong, China Shandong, China Infrastructure construction business No 15.66 Hangzhou City Investment Wulin Investment Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Zhejiang, China Zhejiang, China Infrastructure construction business No 15.00 Wenzhou China Construction Science and Industry Olympic Sports Project Management Co., LTD. (Note 2) Zhejiang, China Zhejiang, China Business service industry No 15.00 Baoding CSCEC Xingye Investment Co., Ltd. (Note 5) Hebei, China Hebei, China Infrastructure construction business No 15.00 Wuhan Sanxia Jiangnan Water Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 14.50 Rizhao China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau culture and Technology Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Shandong, China Shandong, China Infrastructure construction business No 14.00 Qingdao China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Airport City Construction Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Shandong, China Shandong, China Real estate investment and development business No 13.00 Jiangsu Susu Industrial Park Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Real estate investment and development business No 11.00 Wuhan Huangpi Three Gorges Water Environment Comprehensive Treatment Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Hubei, China Hubei, China Other business No 10.00 Urumqi Linkong CSCEC Airport Construction Operation Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Xinjiang, China Xinjiang, China Infrastructure construction business No 10.00 Wuhan Zhongjian Yipin Zhaoli Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Hubei, China Hubei, China Real estate investment and development business No 10.00 Jinjiang Zhongyun Sports Construction Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Fujian, China Fujian, China Infrastructure construction business No 10.00 Xinyu Ring Road Construction Investment Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Jiangxi, China Jiangxi, China Infrastructure construction business No 10.00 Taizhou Luqiao Xindao Investment and Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Zhejiang, China Zhejiang, China Other business No 10.00 Chongqing Chengtou Chaotianmen Project Management Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Chongqing, China Chongqing, China Business service industry No 10.00 Guizhou Wengma Railway North-South Extension Line Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Guizhou, China Guizhou, China Other business No 9.93 CSCEC Wuhan Huangxiao River Airport River Environment Comprehensive Treatment Construction Operation Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Hubei, China Hubei, China Infrastructure construction business No 9.70 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 3.  Joint ventures and associates (continued) 292 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

Main place of business Place of registration Nature of business Strategic to group activities Shareholding ratio (%) 

Associates (continued) (Note 3) Panzhihua China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Government Service Center Construction Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Sichuan, China Sichuan, China Infrastructure construction business No 9.00 Jizheng High Speed Railway Limited (Note 2) Shandong, China Shandong, China Infrastructure construction business No 7.73 Jiqing Express Railroad Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Shandong, China Shandong, China Infrastructure construction business No 7.21 Dongfang Anzhen (Beijing) Hospital Management Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Beijing, China Beijing, China Other business No 5.98 Qingdao CSCEC Eighth Engineering Bureau City Investment and Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Shandong, China Shandong, China Other business No 5.96 Foshan Urban Rail Transit Line 3 Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Infrastructure construction business No 5.59 Shanwei Yuehai Qingyuan Environmental Protection Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Guangdong, China Guangdong, China Other business No 5.00 Putian Jiangkou Suanxi CSCEC Strait Infrastructure Investment Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Fujian, China Fujian, China Real estate investment and development business No 5.00 Hebei Chenghong Pipelines Engineering Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Hebei, China Hebei, China Infrastructure construction business No 5.00 Weihai CSCEC Eighth Engineering Bureau Construction Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Shandong, China Shandong, China Infrastructure construction business No 4.99 Shangqiu New Voyage Development and Construction Management Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Henan, China Henan, China Infrastructure construction business No 4.16 Deyang Hongbo Construction Investment Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Sichuan, China Sichuan, China Business service industry No 3.00 Zhangzhou Yingzhi Construction and Development Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Fujian, China Fujian, China Infrastructure construction business No 3.00 Pingxiang Jianyu Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Jiangxi, China Jiangxi, China Housing construction business No 2.00 Chengdu Changtou Dongjin Construction Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Sichuan, China Sichuan, China Infrastructure construction business No 1.00 Chongqing Water Affairs Shatian Environmental Governance Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Chongqing, China Chongqing, China Other business No 1.00 Hebei Xiong’an Citizen Service Center Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Hebei, China Hebei, China Infrastructure construction business No 1.00 Xiangshui Huachen Yuanheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. (Note 2) Jiangsu, China Jiangsu, China Infrastructure construction business No 1.00 Note 1:  The Group’s shareholding ratio in some of the aforementioned joint ventures is less than 50% or more than 50%. Major business decisions made by the board of directors of these companies or similar institutions can only be approved after the unanimous consent of all investors; or according to the provisions of the articles of association of these companies, major business decisions must be approved by representatives of more than two-thirds of the voting rights. These decisions can be passed only if the Group and other shareholders agree unanimously. The Group has no substantial control over these companies, so these companies are accounted for as joint ventures. Note 2:  For invested companies with a shareholding ratio of less than 20%, the Group has the right to participate in their business decision-making by appointing directors to the board of directors of these companies, and has a significant influence; for invested companies with a shareholding ratio of not less than 50%, According to the provisions of the articles of association of these companies on the decision-making mechanism for major operations and financial decisions, they cannot be controlled or jointly controlled, but the Group can only exercise significant influence. Therefore, these companies are accounted for as associates. Note 3:  The aforementioned joint ventures include joint ventures and their subsidiaries, and associates include associates and their subsidiaries. Note 4:  Due to the disposal of the equity of these companies this year, these companies were excluded from the scope of the consolidation and became associates since 31 December 2022. Note 5:  Due to the acquisition of partial equity in these companies this year, these companies were changed from joint ventures to companies within the scope of consolidation on December 31, 2022. 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 3.  Joint ventures and associates (continued) 293 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 4.  Other related parties Relationship with the group 

CSCEC Scimee Sci.&Tech. Co., Ltd. Controlled by the same parent company China Construction Aluminum New materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. Controlled by the same parent company Beijing Zhongyi Chengjian Property Management Co., Ltd. Controlled by the same parent company CSCEC Electronic Commerce Co., Ltd. Controlled by the same parent company Beijing Hongde Materials Co., Ltd. Controlled by the same parent company China Construction Asset Management Co., Ltd. Controlled by the same parent company CSCEC Innovation Investment Co., Ltd. (formerly known as “Beijing CSCEC Qiming Enterprise Management Co., Ltd.”) Controlled by the same parent company China State Construction Property Management Co., Ltd. Controlled by the same parent company Chengdu CSCEC Minjiang River Construction Engineering Investment Co., Ltd. Controlled by the same parent company China Construction Aluminum New materials Co., Ltd. Controlled by the same parent company CSCEC Science and Technology Innovation (Shanghai) Investment Co., Ltd. Controlled by the same parent company China Automobile Trade Co., Ltd. Controlled by the same parent company Shanggang group Ruitai Development Co., Ltd. Controlled by another shareholder of a subsidiary of the Group Shanghai International Port (Group) Co., Ltd. Controlled by another shareholder of a subsidiary of the Group 

5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties 

(1)  Related party goods and services transactions Purchase of goods and accepting services from related parties 

Nature of the transaction 2022 2021 (restated) 

CSCEC Electronic Commerce Co., Ltd. Purchase of goods 2,866,041 3,310,968 Hong Kong and Kowloon Concrete Co., Ltd. Purchase of goods 383,113 269,087 Anhui Guoyuan Investment Co., Ltd. Purchase of goods 163,463 –Sichuan West Construction Zhonghe Machinery Co., Ltd. Accepting services 63,385 –Sichuan West Construction shantui Logistics Co., Ltd. Accepting services 50,459 –China Construction Aluminum New materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. Purchase of goods 15,989 15,180 Others Purchase of goods and Accepting services 

63,307 836,198 Total 3,605,757 4,431,433 294 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties (continued) 

(2)  Contract engineering and projects sub-contracted out Contract engineering 

Nature of the transaction 2022 2021 (restated) 

Guizhou Leirong Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 3,344,392 2,326,635 Jiqing Express Railroad Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 3,265,944 3,500,436 Urumqi Zhongcheng Silk Road Sports Management Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 2,749,687 285,152 CCCC Jijiao Expressway Investment Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 2,484,973 1,990,892 Nantong City Ring Road Expressway Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 2,215,543 775,731 CSCEC (Tianjin) Railroad Transportation Investment Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 2,123,936 1,535,154 Urumqi Linkong CSCEC Airport Construction Operation Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 1,656,706 1,073,089 CSCEC Wuhan Huangxiao River Airport River Environment Comprehensive Treatment Construction Operation Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 1,282,355 1,599,339 Sichuan Dehui Expressway Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 1,166,903 549,487 CSCEC Xi’an Chanba Ecological Region Construction Investment Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 1,162,921 1,232,120 Shanwei Yuehai Qingyuan Environmental Protection Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 1,093,119 924,102 CSCEC Xi’an City Construction Investment Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 1,051,999 2,541,844 Yunnan Huali Expressway Investment and Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 991,750 1,376,716 Hangzhou City Investment Wulin Investment Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 958,421 824,411 Wuhan CSCEC Wudi Development Construction Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 957,856 974,487 Xiamen International Trade Conference Center Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 900,079 –Yantai Zhongda Xinhong Science Education Investment Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 854,038 157,815 Xiamen International Exhibition Center Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 808,927 986,151 Beijing Chenxing International Exhibition Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 799,690 –Hengshui CECSC Hangang Expressway Management Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 783,862 48,497 Urumqi Linkong Construction Infrastructure Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 783,786 1,259,057 Guangzhou Fangbai Intercity Rail Transit Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 762,787 –Shanghai International Port (Group) Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 717,475 453,617 Chongqing CSCEC Erhengxian Infrastructure Construction Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 709,533 517,499 Qingdao China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Airport City Construction Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 697,607 156,848 Hebei Chenghong Pipelines Engineering Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 630,861 627,884 Yantai Yuanxin Zhongda Investment Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 608,114 –Xi’an Chufeng Construction Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 589,151 84,198 Shanggang group Ruitai Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 580,062 561,041 Xiangyang Loop Line Speed Improvement Construction Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 572,184 431,532 Wenzhou China Construction Science and Industry Olympic Sports Project Management Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 546,665 –Foshan Urban Rail Transit Line 3 Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 538,280 –Shanghai Chenggang Real Estate Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 534,755 25,041 Luzhou Yangtze River Second Bridge Construction Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 514,176 –295 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Nature of the transaction 2022 2021 (restated) 

Zhuzhou China Overseas Grand Oceans Real Estate Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 504,646 348,276 Sanmenxia National Road 310 South Transplanted Project Construction Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 470,473 921,736 Guangzhou Fuchuang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 463,648 875,129 Anhui Bengwu Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 454,449 1,379,443 Hengshui China Construction HaYuan Project Management Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 434,572 139,808 CSCEC New Urbanization (Xinjiang)Investment Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 432,136 592,665 Nanjing China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Lishui Development Area Affordable Housing Investment Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 421,748 642,689 Jingmen China Construction 207 Highway Construction Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 417,663 283,089 Wuhan Huangpi Three Gorges Water Environment Comprehensive Treatment Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 413,138 67,743 Jiangsu Susu Industrial Park Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 411,363 –Beijing Jianyan Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 408,318 346,280 Deyang Hongbo Construction Investment Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 391,665 –Jizheng High Speed Railway Limited Contract engineering 378,328 –Wuhan Hongtai Hongli CSCEC Yipin Real Estate Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 367,821 395,799 Zhongshan Public Utilities Sanlianwei Watershed Governance Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 344,951 –Shanghai Linbo Haihui City Construction Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 330,684 101,322 Wuhan Optics Valley Science Island Construction and Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 330,446 –Changsha Zhongjian International Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 328,707 144,693 Foshan China Construction Yipin Pengyue Real Estate Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 327,198 131,425 Weihai CSCEC Eighth Engineering Bureau Construction Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 326,602 300,603 Chengdu Changtou Dongjin Construction Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 315,140 629,615 Quanzhou Taiwan Business Investment Zone China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Haiwan Avenue Investment Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 311,051 480,725 Liuzhou CSCEC Science and Technology Cultural Tourism Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 309,864 4,805 Guigang Nine Roads and Two Bridges Construction Management Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 308,640 248,453 Putian CSCEC Mulan Construction Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 297,317 298,728 Guangzhou XingLv Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 293,604 292,856 Nanjing CSCEC Travel Construction Investment Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 293,423 156,117 Wuhan Wuyang Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 289,113 988,311 Shantou CSCEC New Urbanization Investment Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 287,469 1,899,333 China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Jingzhou Huanchang Lake Construction Operation Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 287,410 322,544 Chongqing Water Affairs Shatian Environmental Governance Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 285,879 222,923 CSCEC Third Engineering Bureau Shengshi Jingzhou Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 281,435 220,476 Xiangshui Huachen Yuanheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 281,411 7,662 Fuqing CSCEC Ronghai Construction and Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 277,708 130,036 Shanghai Lingang New Area Jingang Dongjiu Real Estate Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 275,647 166,780 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties (continued) 

(2)  Contract engineering and projects sub-contracted out (continued) Contract engineering (continued) 296 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

Nature of the transaction 2022 2021 (restated) 

Jingdezhen Taoyangli Scenic Spot Tourism Development Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 271,157 –China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Xianning Big Continent Lake ecological construction and Operation Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 271,101 135,604 Xi’an Chuxin investment and Construction Co., Ltd. Contract engineering 269,831 319,372 Others Contract engineering 17,088,871 29,842,249 Total 69,693,164 69,856,064 Projects sub-contracted out 

Nature of the transaction 2022 2021 (restated) 

Yunnan Airport Construction and Development Co., Ltd. Projects sub-contracted out 228,920 –CSCEC Roads and Bridges Co., Ltd. Projects sub-contracted out 133,887 1,830 CSCEC Dacheng Construction Co., Ltd. Projects sub-contracted out 116,961 560,499 Others Projects sub-contracted out 140,040 131,919 Total 619,808 694,248 (3)  Related party leasing As lessor 

Types of leased assets 2022 2021 (restated) 

CSCEC Electronic Commerce Co., Ltd. Buildings 1,379 639 CSCEC Scimee Sci.&Tech. Co., Ltd. Buildings 321 68 China State Construction Property Management Co., Ltd. Buildings 248 495 Beijing Zhongyi Chengjian Property Management Co., Ltd. Motor vehicles 83 108 China Construction Aluminum New materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. Buildings 83 4,241 Others Buildings – 591 Total 2,114 6,142 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties (continued) 

(2)  Contract engineering and projects sub-contracted out (continued) Contract engineering (continued) 297 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties (continued) 

(3)  Related party leasing (continued) As lessee 

2022 

Types of leased assets Simplified management of leased costs for short-term leased and low-value leased assets Paid rent Interest expense accepted on rental obligations Increased use of legal remedies 

China Overseas Grand Oceans Buildings – 230,517 7,942 –

Shandong Zhongcheng Machinery Leasing Co., Ltd. Machinery equipment 183,447 189,149 462 –

Shandong CSCEC Zhongli Equipment Leasing Co., Ltd. Machinery equipment 117,401 114,095 9 –

China Construction Aluminum New materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. Buildings and Materials 76,013 63,264 673 27,503 

Beijing Zhongyi Chengjian Property Management Co., Ltd. Buildings 950 7,495 977 1,373 

Shanghai International Port (Group) Co., Ltd. Buildings 675 6,587 618 –

China Construction Asset Management Co., Ltd. Buildings 5,732 6,010 – –

Shandong CSCEC Material Equipment Co., Ltd. Machinery equipment 5,522 3,560 – –

Hebei Xiong’an Citizen Service Center Co., Ltd. Buildings – 605 5 654 

Changsha Zhongjian International Development Co., Ltd. Buildings – 509 70 –

Beijing Hongde Materials Co., Ltd. Buildings – – 31 –

Others Buildings and leasing – 56,322 2,299 10,140 

Total 389,740 678,113 13,086 39,670 

2021 (restated) 

Types of leased assets Simplified management of leased costs for short-term leased and low-value leased assets Paid rent Interest expense accepted on rental obligations Increased use of legal remedies 

Shandong Zhongcheng Machinery Leasing Co., Ltd. Machinery equipment 148,504 157,657 1,169 13,511 China Construction Aluminum New materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. Materials 80,423 54,862 140 –Sichuan West Construction shantui Logistics Co., Ltd. Transport equipment 63,114 70,205 – –Sichuan West Construction zhonghe Machinery Co., Ltd. Transport equipment 49,976 47,423 – –Beijing Zhongyi Chengjian Property Management Co., Ltd. Buildings 374 18,915 1,804 –Others Buildings etc 18,989 37,425 3,034 46,547 Total 361,380 386,487 6,147 60,058 298 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties (continued) 

(4)  Related party guarantee Offering guarantee to related parties 

As of December 31, 2022, the balance of related party guarantees provided by the Group is: 

Amount of guarantee Starting date of guarantee Maturity date of guarantee Whether the guarantee has been fulfilled 

Zhuzhou China Overseas Grand Oceans Real Estate Co., Ltd. 210,000 September 29, 2021 September 28, 2026 NO 

Zhuzhou China Overseas Grand Oceans Real Estate Co., Ltd. 32,700 March 31, 2022 September 28, 2027 NO 

Chongqing Zhongjian Hailong Liangjiang Construction Technology Co., Ltd. 97,300 October 29, 2021 October 29, 2031 NO 

Chongqing Zhongjian Hailong Liangjiang Construction Technology Co., Ltd. 11,088 January 27, 2022 May 10, 2023 NO 

Chongqing Jiayi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 345,000 March 15, 2022 March 15, 2027 NO 

Chongqing Jiayi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 121,300 November 20, 2020 November 20, 2025 NO 

Changsha Yida Chuangzhi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 173,460 April 20, 2020 April 20, 2026 NO 

Suzhou Fuyuan Real Estate Co., Ltd. 204,000 January 5, 2022 January 4, 2028 NO 

Suzhou Fuyuan Real Estate Co., Ltd. 195,500 December 29, 2020 May 31, 2024 NO 

Suzhou Dongfu Yongxu Real Estate Co., Ltd. 98,000 January 17, 2022 December 18, 2024 NO 

Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 259,459 January 24, 2022 December 13, 2024 NO 

Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 186,049 January 21, 2022 December 16, 2024 NO 

Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 90,277 January 7, 2022 December 20, 2024 NO 

Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 28,380 December 14, 2021 December 13, 2024 NO 

Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 13,936 December 17, 2021 December 16, 2024 NO 

Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 9,704 December 20, 2021 December 20, 2024 NO 

Qingdao Haijie Real Estate Co., Ltd. 49,923 January 13, 2022 June 7, 2024 NO 

Guangzhou Fuchuang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 799,000 August 5, 2021 December 30, 2024 NO 

Guangzhou Fuchuang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 510,000 December 28, 2021 January 6, 2030 NO 

Guangzhou bizhen Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 72,857 December 11, 2018 December 8, 2023 NO 

Guangdong Haichao Technology Industry Development Co., Ltd. 39,163 October 31, 2022 October 31, 2041 NO 

Wuhan Optics Valley Science Island Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 150,000 September 13, 2022 September 15, 2040 NO 

Ultra Keen Holdings Limited 1,745,958 November 11, 2020 October 30, 2025 NO 

Ultra Keen Holdings Limited 215,642 January 31, 2022 October 30, 2025 NO 

Marble Edge Investments Limited 810,475 June 1, 2020 December 1, 2024 NO 

Marble Edge Investments Limited 143,568 May 12, 2022 December 1, 2024 NO 

Infinite Sun Limited 1,119,148 December 4, 2019 December 4, 2024 NO 

Infinite Sun Limited 257,145 January 25, 2022 December 4, 2024 NO 

Dragon Star H.K. Investments Limited 928,534 July 27, 2020 January 27, 2025 NO 

Dragon Star H.K. Investments Limited 125,569 January 17, 2022 January 27, 2025 NO 

Asia Power Development Limited 1,199,970 May 27, 2022 May 27, 2026 NO 

Grand Ample Ltd. 932,254 June 22, 2021 June 22, 2024 NO 

Grand Ample Ltd. 156,026 January 10, 2022 June 22, 2024 NO 

Fernvale Lane Pte Ltd. 147,500 June 4, 2020 March 3, 2025 NO 

Total 11,478,885 299 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties (continued) 

(4)  Related party guarantee (continued) Offering guarantee to related parties (continued) 

As of December 31, 2021, the balance of related party guarantees provided by the Group is: 

Amount of guarantee Starting date of guarantee Maturity date of guarantee Whether the guarantee has been fulfilled 

Chongqing Jiayi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 128,800 November 20, 2020 November 20, 2025 No 

Chongqing Jiayi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 22,500 February 9, 2021 March 15, 2022 No 

Chongqing Jiayi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 39,850 March 16, 2017 March 15, 2022 No 

Chongqing Jiayi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 135,150 April 14, 2017 March 15, 2022 No 

Chongqing Jiayi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 175,000 July 5, 2017 March 15, 2022 No 

Qingdao Haijie Real Estate Co., Ltd. 78,862 June 7, 2021 June 7, 2024 No 

Guangzhou bizhen Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 173,000 December 11, 2018 December 8, 2023 No 

Guangzhou Lihe Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 1,000 April 22, 2019 April 21, 2022 No 

Guangzhou Lihe Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 162,000 June 29, 2020 June 28, 2023 No 

Infinite Sun Limited 1,067,861 December 4, 2019 December 4, 2024 No 

Marble Edge Investments Limited 773,348 June 1, 2020 December 1, 2024 No 

Dragon Star H.K. Investments Limited 885,973 July 27, 2020 January 27, 2025 No 

Ultra Keen Holdings Limited 1,665,899 November 11, 2020 October 30, 2025 No 

Grand Ample Ltd. 1,059,660 June 22, 2021 June 22, 2024 No 

Guangzhou Fuchuang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 1,113,500 August 5, 2021 December 30, 2024 No 

Suzhou Dongfu Yongxu Real Estate Co., Ltd. 49,000 December 19, 2021 December 18, 2024 No 

Zhongge Yongmao (Suzhou) Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 173,250 April 10, 2021 April 9, 2024 No 

Suzhou Fuyuan Real Estate Co., Ltd. 564,400 December 29, 2020 May 31, 2024 No 

Total 8,269,053 300 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties (continued) 

(5)  Inter bank loan of related parties Capital borrowings 

2022 

Borrowing amount Starting date Ending date 

CSCEC 336,000 August 22, 2022 August 21, 2025 

Qingdao Haijie Real Estate Co., Ltd. 210,000 September 27, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 159,771 December 31, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 106,700 November 25, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Guiheng Investments Co., Ltd. 75,000 October 13, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Guiheng Investments Co., Ltd. 50,000 March 9, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Xi’an Hehui Xingshang Real Estate Co., Ltd. 40,000 September 19, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Jinmao Investment (Changsha) Co., Ltd. 36,000 March 29, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

China Overseas Polytec Real Estate (Foshan) Co., Ltd. 34,056 December 14, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Sanya Bihai Jincheng Business Management Co., Ltd. 34,000 December 27, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Sanya Bihai Jincheng Business Management Co., Ltd. 25,500 June 29, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Sunrise JV Limited 26,543 January 1, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Xing Chuang Enterprises LTD. 24,000 December 20, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Xinggui Investment Co., Ltd. 23,000 January 28, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Xing Chuang Enterprises LTD. 20,750 January 24, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

China Resources Land Real Estate (Taiyuan) Development Co., Ltd. 10,000 January 21, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Zhongshan Kaixuan City Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 3,500 December 29, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Total 1,214,820 

2021 

Borrowing amount Starting date Ending date 

CSCEC 1,400,000 July 23, 2021 July 23, 2022 

CSCEC 60,000 July 26, 2021 July 26, 2024 

Guangzhou Lihe Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 640,000 June 25, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Sanya Bihai Jincheng Business Management Co., Ltd. 255,000 February 28, 2021 December 31, 2021 

China Overseas South Airlines Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 153,000 June 9, 2021 June 9, 2022 

Qingdao tengmao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 138,376 April 12, 2021 April 11, 2022 

Xi’an Jiarun Rongcheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. 100,000 August 27, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Dongguan Jiangpan New City Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 51,000 February 4, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Qingdao Caimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 26,532 April 12, 2021 April 11, 2022 

Qingdao Fangchuan Real Estate Co., Ltd. 24,300 April 12, 2021 April 11, 2022 

Qingdao Fangchen Real Estate Co., Ltd. 19,800 April 12, 2021 April 11, 2022 

Zhangzhou Binbei Real Estate Co., Ltd. 18,000 January 5, 2021 December 31, 2022 

Wuxi Zhonghai Taihu New City Property Co., Ltd. 3,308 January 29, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

China Overseas South Airlines Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 154 December 1, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Guangzhou SuiHai Real Estate Co., Ltd. 53 January 31, 2021 December 31, 2022 

Total 2,889,523 301 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties (continued) 

(5)  Inter bank loan of related parties (continued) Fund lent 

2022 

Loan amount Starting date Ending date 

CSCEC 2,000,000 October 21, 2022 October 20, 2023 

Wuhan Pinlian Real Estate Co., Ltd. 1,769,350 May 25, 2022 December 31, 2023 

Shenzhen Zhaohang Real Estate Co., Ltd. 1,541,700 September 1, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Beijing Yipin Haikai Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 1,438,200 September 18, 2022 December 31, 2023 

Wuhan Chongjiang Real Estate Co., Ltd. 1,317,075 January 21, 2022 December 31, 2023 

Xiamen Yueqin Real Estate Co., Ltd. 825,527 November 10, 2022 August 30, 2025 

Chengdu Langxin Real Estate Co., Ltd. 741,929 July 1, 2022 June 30, 2025 

Anhui Bengwu Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 495,642 December 15, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Xuancheng Haijia Lancheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. 317,691 July 7, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Guangzhou Zengcheng Run Yu Real Estate Co., Ltd. 230,000 July 1, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Dongguan Songrun Real Estate Co., Ltd. 223,960 December 16, 2022 June 14, 2023 

Guangzhou SuiHai Real Estate Co., Ltd. 220,000 March 15, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Guangzhou XingLv Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 100,000 September 22, 2022 March 21, 2023 

Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 73,604 December 19, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 36,000 December 20, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 30,000 January 18, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Vanlink Company Limited 60,750 December 26, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Vanlink Company Limited 20,780 December 26, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

China Construction International (Xiangyang) Construction Co., Ltd. 51,000 December 18, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Putian CSCEC Mulan Construction Development Co., Ltd. 44,000 September 25, 2022 March 26, 2023 

Putian CSCEC Mulan Construction Development Co., Ltd. 20,000 September 11, 2022 March 17, 2023 

CSCEC Xi’an Infrastructure Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 40,000 December 13, 2022 May 31, 2023 

Wuhan Chenzhan Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 36,000 November 18, 2022 November 17, 2023 

Wuhan Chenzhan Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 8,000 June 28, 2022 June 27, 2023 

Wuhan Chenzhan Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 3,600 November 1, 2022 October 31, 2023 

Wuhan Chenzhan Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 2,800 April 2, 2022 April 1, 2023 

Zhengzhou Public Zhongcheng Roads and Bridges Construction Management Co., Ltd. 34,113 September 13, 2022 March 13, 2023 

Guangzhou CSCEC Green Financial Holding Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 33,000 July 26, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Guangzhou CSCEC Green Financial Holding Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 22,120 July 26, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

TEDA Group Co., Ltd. 32,218 December 29, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Liupanshui urban pipe gallery construction and Development Investment Co., Ltd. 28,075 June 21, 2022 December 20, 2023 

Mianyang CSCEC Kefa Guanlang road investment and Construction Co., Ltd. 23,500 December 20, 2022 December 19, 2023 

Mianyang CSCEC Kefa Guanlang road investment and Construction Co., Ltd. 22,500 September 20, 2022 September 19, 2023 

Mianyang CSCEC Kefa Guanlang road investment and Construction Co., Ltd. 5,000 November 18, 2022 November 17, 2023 302 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

Loan amount Starting date Ending date 

Shanghai Linbo Haihui City Construction Development Co., Ltd. 23,000 December 19, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Xinjiang CSCEC City Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 20,000 December 13, 2022 June 12, 2023 

Putian Jiangkou Suanxi CSCEC Strait Infrastructure Investment Development Co., Ltd. 10,400 September 25, 2022 March 27, 2023 

Wuhan Chenfa Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 8,400 April 28, 2022 April 27, 2023 

Beijing Xingying Real Estate Co., Ltd. 8,370 May 16, 2022 December 21, 2023 

Wuhan CSCEC Yipin Zhaoying Real Estate Co., Ltd. 7,658 August 3, 2022 December 31, 2023 

CSCEC (Tangshan Caofeidian) Engineering Construction Co., Ltd. 3,400 September 13, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Xianyi International Co., Ltd. 3,213 March 31, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

CSCEC Third Engineering Bureau Shengshi Jingzhou Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 1,916 January 17, 2022 December 31, 2023 

Top Colour Development Limited 29 May 16, 2022 No fixed maturity date 

Total 11,934,520 

2021 

Loan amount Starting date Ending date 

CSCEC 3,500,000 October 11, 2021 October 10, 2022 

CSCEC 1,200,000 August 13, 2021 August 12, 2022 

Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 2,960,240 December 10, 2021 December 10, 2024 

Jingyu Co., Ltd. 2,535,141 January 1, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Harbin Runzhi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 2,405,000 November 18, 2021 November 18, 2026 

Foshan China Construction Yipin Pengyue Real Estate Co., Ltd. 1,489,756 January 1, 2021 December 31, 2023 

Wuhan Chongjiang Real Estate Co., Ltd. 1,196,296 June 23, 2021 December 31, 2023 

Changchun Hairun Rongcheng Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 1,138,350 March 15, 2021 February 19, 2024 

Guangzhou Xinghong Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 1,048,148 December 11, 2021 December 10, 2023 

Beijing Xingying Real Estate Co., Ltd. 839,755 January 27, 2021 December 31, 2023 

Zhuzhou China Overseas Real Estate Co., Ltd. 676,388 April 1, 2021 March 30, 2024 

Xuancheng Haijia Lancheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. 493,151 March 23, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Top Colour Development Limited 488,434 December 1, 2021 March 31, 2022 

Suzhou Wujiang Taihai Real Estate Co., Ltd. 476,929 June 23, 2021 June 22, 2023 

Ezhou CSCEC Yipin Lanyue Real Estate Co., Ltd. 461,865 January 1, 2021 December 31, 2023 

Guangzhou Fuchuang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 330,580 January 7, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Foshan Construction investment China Construction Yipin Real estate Co., Ltd. 211,969 January 1, 2021 December 31, 2023 

Chongqing CSCEC Erhengxian Infrastructure Construction Co., Ltd. 196,000 July 3, 2021 November 30, 2022 

Baoding CSCEC Xingye Investment Co., Ltd. 180,250 April 6, 2021 December 31, 2021 

Guangzhou XingLv Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 177,868 January 11, 2021 December 12, 2022 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties (continued) 

(5)  Inter bank loan of related parties (continued) Fund lent (continued) 

2022 (continued) 303 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

Loan amount Starting date Ending date 

CSCEC Xi’an Infrastructure Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 105,000 July 22, 2021 July 22, 2022 

Changsha Yida Chuangzhi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 97,173 March 31, 2021 February 6, 2022 

Putian CSCEC Mulan Construction Development Co., Ltd. 71,000 August 30, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Chongqing Qingneng Yuehe Real Estate Co., Ltd. 67,620 April 20, 2021 August 21, 2022 

Jiangmen Pengjiang Area Hebang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 65,000 April 27, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Zhuzhou Zhonghai Commercial Development Co., Ltd. 60,121 April 1, 2021 March 30, 2024 

Putian Puyang University Construction Co., Ltd. 59,419 January 7, 2021 March 8, 2034 

Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 49,412 December 17, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 38,400 December 17, 2021 December 31, 2022 

Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 37,650 April 2, 2021 June 30, 2023 

Dalian CSCEC Sponge City Construction Development Co., Ltd. 45,000 January 7, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Changsha Xirong Real Estate Co., Ltd. 42,570 September 3, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Xiamen Yongjingwan Real Estate Co., Ltd. 37,400 March 8, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Guangzhou Lihe Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 35,965 May 31, 2021 November 30, 2022 

Liupanshui urban pipe gallery construction and Development Investment Co., Ltd. 33,800 June 28, 2021 December 19, 2022 

Wuhan Zhongjian Yipin Zhaoli Real Estate Co., Ltd. 32,828 January 1, 2021 December 31, 2023 

Jinjiang Zhongyun Sports Construction Development Co., Ltd. 32,000 June 18, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Jinjiang Zhongyun Sports Construction Development Co., Ltd. 19,000 September 19, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Jinjiang Zhongyun Sports Construction Development Co., Ltd. 14,000 February 2, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Jinjiang Zhongyun Sports Construction Development Co., Ltd. 13,000 January 12, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Jinjiang Zhongyun Sports Construction Development Co., Ltd. 13,000 March 19, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Jinjiang Zhongyun Sports Construction Development Co., Ltd. 4,500 January 12, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

China Construction Aluminum New materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. 30,000 March 29, 2021 March 28, 2022 

China Construction Aluminum New materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. 10,000 May 26, 2021 May 25, 2022 

China Construction Aluminum New materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. 10,000 June 29, 2021 June 28, 2022 

Wuhan Chenfa Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 28,000 April 30, 2021 October 30, 2022 

Wuhan Chenzhan Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 27,200 April 30, 2021 December 20, 2022 

CSCEC Third Engineering Bureau Shengshi Jingzhou Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 26,290 May 1, 2021 December 31, 2022 

Clear Elegant Limited 26,061 January 31, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Cscec Scimee Sci.&Tech. Co., Ltd. 26,000 May 11, 2021 May 10, 2022 

Cscec Scimee Sci.&Tech. Co., Ltd. 20,000 June 15, 2021 June 14, 2022 

Zhengzhou Public Zhongcheng Roads and Bridges Construction Management Co., Ltd. 22,495 March 10, 2021 March 10, 2022 

Shanghai Linbo Haihui City Construction Development Co., Ltd. 20,000 February 16, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Chongqing Zhongjian Hailong Liangjiang Construction Technology Co., Ltd. 19,643 March 31, 2021 September 19, 2023 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties (continued) 

(5)  Inter bank loan of related parties (continued) Fund lent (continued) 

2021 (continued) 304 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

Loan amount Starting date Ending date 

Marble Edge Limited 18,375 January 4, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Beijing Rongzhu Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 17,257 December 31, 2021 December 31, 2023 

Putian Jiangkou Suanxi CSCEC Strait Infrastructure Investment Development Co., Ltd. 12,580 January 22, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Dongfang Anzhen (Beijing) Hospital Management Co., Ltd. 9,306 March 25, 2021 December 14, 2039 

TEDA Group Co., Ltd. 8,135 January 11, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Zhangzhou China Merchants Steamship Company Economic Technology Area CSCEC Infrastructure Investment Development Co., Ltd. 

8,000 March 26, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Nanjing Guancheng Hengrui Real Estate Co., Ltd. 6,600 January 1, 2021 December 31, 2021 

Nanjing AnjuJianhe Construction Technology Co., Ltd. 6,000 January 28, 2021 January 28, 2024 

Nanjing China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Lishui Development Area Affordable Housing Investment Co., Ltd. 5,500 January 6, 2021 January 29, 2021 

Luminous Dream Limited 4,385 January 31, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

China Overseas Polytec Real Estate (Foshan) Co., Ltd. 3,662 December 1, 2021 March 31, 2022 

Dongguan Jiafang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 2,458 July 1, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Zhijiang Jianxin Municipal Engineering Construction Co., Ltd. 2,150 June 30, 2021 March 17, 2022 

Liuan Haijia Lancheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. 456 January 13, 2021 No fixed maturity date 

Total 23,350,531 

(6)  A takes deposits 

2022 

1 January 2022 Increase in the current year Decrease in the current year 31 December 2022 

CSCEC Electronic Commerce Co., Ltd. 1,933,025 6,651,708 (6,666,458) 1,918,275 

CSCEC 364,014 16,747,724 (16,858,815) 252,923 

Qingdao China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Education Development Co., Ltd. – 223,293 (45,743) 177,550 

Weihai CSCEC Eighth Engineering Bureau Construction Development Co., Ltd. – 390,360 (223,207) 167,153 

CSCEC New Urbanization (Xinjiang)Investment Co., Ltd. – 140,127 – 140,127 

CSCEC Innovation Investment Co., Ltd. (formerly known as “Beijing CSCEC Qiming Enterprise Management Co., Ltd.”) 85,553 148,690 (139,604) 94,639 

Rizhao China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau culture and Technology Development Co., Ltd. – 90,156 (23,000) 67,156 

Chengdu CSCEC Minjiang River Construction Engineering Investment Co., Ltd. 75,542 757 (9,895) 66,404 

China Construction Aluminum New materials Co., Ltd. 44,026 74,604 (85,811) 32,819 

CSCEC science and technology innovation (Shanghai) Investment Co., Ltd. 67,693 242 (37,824) 30,111 

China Construction Aluminum New materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. 15,276 232,277 (219,351) 28,202 

Rizhao CSCEC Transportation Service Co., Ltd. – 21,000 – 21,000 X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties (continued) 

(5)  Inter bank loan of related parties (continued) Fund lent (continued) 

2021 (continued) 305 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

1 January 2022 Increase in the current year Decrease in the current year 31 December 2022 

Beijing Zhongyi Chengjian Property Management Co., Ltd. 3,465 35,997 (23,237) 16,225 

Qingdao CSCEC Eighth Engineering Bureau City Investment and Development Co., Ltd. – 89,147 (74,308) 14,839 

Nanjing CSCEC Travel Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 721,071 57,160 (768,717) 9,514 

Qingdao China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Airport City Construction Development Co., Ltd. – 110,039 (103,479) 6,560 

Cscec Scimee Sci.&Tech. Co., Ltd. 28,210 169,613 (191,806) 6,017 

Nanjing CSCEC Gubei City Development Co., Ltd. 569,449 85,952 (653,812) 1,589 

China Construction Asset Management Co., Ltd. 5,875 21 (5,000) 896 

CSCEC Dacheng Construction Co., Ltd. 578 2 (157) 423 

China Automobile Trade Co., Ltd. 484 152 (400) 236 

China Construction Haoyun Co., Ltd. 78,903 36 (78,903) 36 

Guangzhou Fuchuang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 25 400,000 (400,000) 25 

Chongqing CSCEC Erhengxian Infrastructure Construction Co., Ltd. 2 – – 2

Total 3,993,191 25,669,057 (26,609,527) 3,052,721 

2021 (restated) 

1 January 2021 Increase in the current year Decrease in the current year 31 December 2021 

CSCEC Electronic Commerce Co., Ltd. 1,292,341 4,567,765 (3,927,081) 1,933,025 Nanjing CSCEC Travel Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 297 933,503 (212,729) 721,071 Nanjing CSCEC Gubei City Development Co., Ltd. 172 729,476 (160,199) 569,449 CSCEC 234,682 24,669,702 (24,540,370) 364,014 CSCEC Innovation Investment Co., Ltd. (formerly known as “Beijing CSCEC Qiming Enterprise Management Co., Ltd.”) 75,732 582,246 (572,425) 85,553 China Construction Haoyun Co., Ltd. 595 100,147 (21,839) 78,903 Chengdu CSCEC Minjiang River Construction Engineering Investment Co., Ltd. 9,521 80,170 (14,149) 75,542 CSCEC science and technology innovation (Shanghai) Investment Co., Ltd. – 91,239 (23,546) 67,693 China Construction Aluminum New materials Co., Ltd. 4,554 107,312 (67,840) 44,026 Cscec Scimee Sci.&Tech. Co., Ltd. 2,000 147,646 (121,436) 28,210 China Construction Aluminum New materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. 11,358 256,391 (252,473) 15,276 China Construction Asset Management Co., Ltd. 5,848 27 – 5,875 Beijing Zhongyi Chengjian Property Management Co., Ltd. – 16,095 (12,630) 3,465 CSCEC Dacheng Construction Co., Ltd. 365 17,388 (17,175) 578 China Automobile Trade Co., Ltd. 182 402 (100) 484 Guangzhou Fuchuang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. – 400,025 (400,000) 25 Chongqing CSCEC Erhengxian Infrastructure Construction Co., Ltd. – 20,625 (20,623) 2Total 1,637,647 32,720,159 (30,364,615) 3,993,191 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties (continued) 

(6)  A takes deposits (continued) 

2022 (continued) 306 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 5.  Major transactions between the Group and its related parties (continued) 

(7)  Transfer of related parties assets 

Nature of the transaction 2022 2021 

China Overseas Grand Oceans Trade mark use right 171,800 165,200 (8)  Other related parties transactions 

2022 2021 

Key management’s remuneration 7,779 10,953 

The credit line of the Finance Company to the Group’s affiliates as of December 31, 2022 is RMB19,700,000 thousand (December 31, 2021: RMB22,770,000 thousand), the used credit line is RMB2,633,110 thousand (December 31, 2021: RMB6,291,667 thousand), and the unused credit line is RMB17,066,890 thousand. (December 31, 2021: RMB16,478,333 thousand). As of December 31, 2022, the amount of performance guarantee provided by the Finance Company to the group’s affiliated parties is RMB427,013 thousand. (December 31, 2021: RMB997,929 thousand). In 2022, the total service fee charged by the Finance Company for providing other financial services to the group’s affiliated parties is RMB4,542 thousand. (December 31, 2021: RMB2,974 thousand). In 2022, the Group completed the merger of several companies under the same control, which constitutes related party transaction of the Group. For details, please refer to Notes VI. 2. 

6.  Commitments of related parties 

The following are the commitments of related parties that have been contracted at the balance sheet date and do not have to be set out on the balance sheet: 

Providing construction services 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

CSCEC (Tianjin) Railroad Transportation Investment Development Co., Ltd. 11,721,271 12,450,541 Fuzhou Modern Logistics City Investment Construction Development Co., Ltd. 10,937,415 –Nanjing CSCEC Travel Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 5,713,337 7,202,326 Jiqing Express Railroad Co., Ltd. 5,514,999 7,341,021 Nantong City Ring Road Expressway Co., Ltd. 4,517,040 –Guangxi Nanbin Highway Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 3,972,023 4,872,764 Nanjing Jinlingyi Cultural Tourism Development Co., Ltd. 3,572,774 3,823,407 Putian CSCEC Mulan Construction Development Co., Ltd. 3,158,824 3,456,141 Urumqi Linkong CSCEC Airport Construction Operation Co., Ltd. 2,871,982 2,953,709 Hengshui CECSC Hangang Expressway Management Co., Ltd. 2,854,870 –Wuhan Binjiang Infrastructure Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 2,839,640 2,923,438 Taizhou Luqiao Xindao Investment and Development Co., Ltd. 2,530,817 344,501 CSCEC Xi’an Infrastructure Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 2,168,799 2,333,025 Zhaotong Zhongjian Construction Investment Development Co., Ltd. 1,912,638 1,907,262 307 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Shanghai Lingang New Area Jingang Dongjiu Real Estate Co., Ltd. 1,871,146 1,613,015 Guizhou Leirong Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 1,681,598 5,023,796 Guangzhou Xinghong Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 1,680,981 1,823,330 Chongqing Chengtou Chaotianmen Project Management Co., Ltd. 1,578,514 1,620,946 Nanjing Kangyuan Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 1,504,459 2,324,671 Changsha CSCEC International High-speed Railway West Industrial City Investment Co., Ltd. 1,345,914 2,469,282 Xiamen International Trade Conference Center Co., Ltd. 1,313,786 126,440 CCCC Jijiao Expressway Investment Development Co., Ltd. 1,286,284 5,165,760 China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Jingzhou Huanchang Lake Construction Operation Co., Ltd. 1,207,596 1,466,559 Guangzhou Fangbai Intercity Rail Transit Co., Ltd. 1,191,923 2,760,346 Hangzhou City Investment Wulin Investment Development Co., Ltd. 1,189,136 2,260,170 Rizhao CSCEC Eighth Engineering Bureau Transportation Service Co., Ltd. 1,177,467 1,320,753 Guangzhou XingLv Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 1,176,458 1,396,714 Xiamen International Exhibition Center Co., Ltd. 1,175,548 1,074,904 Foshan China Construction Yipin Pengyue Real Estate Co., Ltd. 1,165,560 1,366,524 Anhui Bengwu Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 1,157,794 1,164,467 CSCEC Xi’an Chanba Ecological Region Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 1,115,069 75,430 Fuqing CSCEC Ronghai Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 1,092,905 1,370,613 Zhijiang Jianxin Municipal Engineering Construction Co., Ltd. 1,065,024 1,130,431 China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Xianning Big Continent Lake ecological construction and Operation Co., Ltd. 1,032,541 1,306,357 Jiangsu Susu Industrial Park Development Co., Ltd. 976,637 1,388,000 China Construction International (Xiangyang) Construction Co., Ltd. 970,017 1,011,844 Jingyu Co., Ltd. 933,557 1,139,846 Southwest Section of Wuhan Metropolitan Area Circle Line Investment Management Co., Ltd. 917,431 193,557 CSCEC Xi’an City Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 889,587 1,742,144 Chongqing Derun Yipin Environmental Governance Co., Ltd. 859,258 –CSCEC Third Engineering Bureau Shengshi Jingzhou Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 854,332 1,308,401 Wuhan Chongjiang Real Estate Co., Ltd. 852,434 –Chengdu Chuantou Airport Construction Co., Ltd. 826,500 903,852 Guigang Nine Roads and Two Bridges Construction Management Co., Ltd. 823,694 1,481,295 Fuyang Three Gorges Phase I Water Environment Comprehensive Treatment Co., Ltd. 785,093 –Zhangzhou Zhanyuan Environmental Technology Co., Ltd. 751,417 777,452 Shucheng Sanxia Phase I Comprehensive Water Environment Treatment Co., Ltd. 748,378 –Xi’an Chufeng Construction Co., Ltd. 694,793 720,292 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 6.  Commitments of related parties (continued) 

The following are the commitments of related parties that have been contracted at the balance sheet date and do not have to be set out on the balance sheet: (continued) 

Providing construction services (continued) 308 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Yantai Zhongda Xinhong Science Education Investment Co., Ltd. 679,507 1,907,969 Fujian Minxin Environmental Development Co., Ltd. 659,040 880,691 Guangdong Haichao Technology Industry Development Co., Ltd. 624,936 –Sichuan Dehui Expressway Co., Ltd. 607,519 2,081,383 Zhuzhou China Overseas Real Estate Co., Ltd. 589,634 1,140,299 Wuhan Transportation Investment Tongxiu High-speed Construction Management Co., Ltd. 566,101 917,431 Luzhou Yangtze River Second Bridge Construction Co., Ltd. 540,443 1,054,619 Shantou CSCEC New Urbanization Investment Co., Ltd. 536,750 –CSCEC Wuhan Huangxiao River Airport River Environment Comprehensive Treatment Construction Operation Co., Ltd. 522,322 1,352,720 Wuhan Optics Valley Science Island Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 494,416 –Putian Puyang University Construction Co., Ltd. 440,834 152,752 Changsha Yida Chuangzhi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 438,171 527,158 Pingxiang Jianyu Real Estate Co., Ltd. 426,605 459,259 Xinyu Ring Road Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 426,293 2,415,947 Liuzhou CSCEC Steel Structure Ecological Garden Construction Co., Ltd. 424,665 458,142 Urumqi Zhongcheng Silk Road Sports Management Co., Ltd. 409,473 368,285 Beijing Xingying Real Estate Co., Ltd. 401,375 662,294 Zhangzhou Yingzhi Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 384,953 397,764 Others 12,740,327 50,485,698 Total 124,092,624 162,397,737 

7.  Amounts due from related parties 

(1)  Notes receivable 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Carrying amount Impairment allowance Carrying amount Impairment allowance 

Qingdao Fangchen Real Estate Co., Ltd. 31,352 (125) 267 (1) 

Qingdao Maozhang Real Estate Co., Ltd. 25,602 (102) 3,000 (12) 

Qingdao Fanghui Real Estate Co., Ltd. 23,171 (93) 1,737 (7) 

Others 500 (2) 259,759 (692) 

Total 80,625 (322) 264,763 (712) 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 6.  Commitments of related parties (continued) 

The following are the commitments of related parties that have been contracted at the balance sheet date and do not have to be set out on the balance sheet: (continued) 

Providing construction services (continued) 309 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 7.  Amounts due from related parties (continued) 

(2)  Accounts receivable 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Carrying amount Impairment allowance Carrying amount Impairment allowance 

Anhui Bengwu Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 571,291 (25,926) 119,507 (6,187) 

CSCEC Xi’an Chanba Ecological Region Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 536,526 (43,141) 443,816 (16,858) 

CSCEC New Urbanization (Xinjiang) Investment Co., Ltd. 510,773 (57,945) 694,566 (39,453) 

Chengdu Changtou Dongjin Construction Co., Ltd. 438,838 (8,777) 424,417 (8,488) 

Zhaotong Zhongjian Construction Investment Development Co., Ltd. 411,404 (115,971) 440,186 (132,056) 

CSCEC Xi’an Infrastructure Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 400,091 (86,290) 529,992 (95,982) 

Jiqing Express Railroad Co., Ltd. 387,259 (19,942) 240,048 (12,520) 

CSCEC (Tangshan Caofeidian) Engineering Construction Co., Ltd. 364,027 (91,155) 689,697 (44,486) 

Guizhou Leirong Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 328,296 (139) 1,395,835 (62,370) 

Xuzhou Line 1 Rail Transit Investment and Development Co., LTD. 300,613 (111,745) 304,528 (56,996) 

Shanggang group Ruitai Development Co., Ltd. 287,542 (63,419) 282,172 (55,379) 

Zhuzhou China Overseas Grand Oceans Real Estate Co., Ltd. 272,770 – – –

China Overseas Grand Oceans 266,278 – – –

Shanwei Yuehai Qingyuan Environmental Protection Co., Ltd. 265,463 (13,814) 160,230 (6,182) 

CSCEC (Tianjin) Railroad Transportation Investment Development Co., Ltd. 236,794 (10,954) 2,611 (202) 

Shanghai Linbo Haihui City Construction Development Co., Ltd. 233,845 – 110,441 –

China Construction International (Xiangyang) Construction Co., Ltd. 207,232 – 234,716 –

Putian Haijia Real Estate Co., Ltd. 200,917 – 178,016 –

Liuan Haijia Lancheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. 194,381 (90) 60,499 (30) 

Mianyang CSCEC Kefa Guanlang road investment and Construction Co., Ltd. 181,477 (12,679) 61,395 (3,388) 

Zhongshan Shenshui Environmental Water Co., Ltd. 180,592 (16,559) 172,560 (7,765) 

Changsha CSCEC International High-speed Railway West Industrial City Investment Co., Ltd. 178,297 (426) 1,997 –

Xi’an Chufeng Construction Co., Ltd. 166,553 (91,124) 1,096 (49) 

Cangzhou Bohai New Area China Construction Port Construction Management Co., Ltd. 131,499 (65,750) 131,499 (65,750) 

Changsha Yida Chuangzhi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 128,351 – – –

Qingdao China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Airport City Construction Development Co., Ltd. 113,294 (5,098) – –

Chongqing Water Affairs Shatian Environmental Governance Co., Ltd. 111,769 (7,119) 68,924 (3,102) 

Shanghai International Port (Group) Co., Ltd. 105,042 (10,552) 86,016 (7,009) 

Liupanshui urban pipe gallery construction and Development Investment Co., Ltd. 101,284 (30,385) 209,819 (56,330) 

Changsha Zhongjian International Development Co., Ltd. 99,408 (15) 190,767 –

Cangzhou CSCEC Bohai investment Logistics Park Construction Development Co., Ltd. 96,521 (38,608) 146,521 (29,304) 

Foshan Urban Rail Transit Line 3 Development Co., Ltd. 88,000 (7,503) – –

Xiangtan Haijia Construction Co., Ltd. 86,926 – 90,146 –

Shantou CSCEC New Urbanization Investment Co., Ltd. 85,402 (3,843) 199,051 (8,957) 

Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 85,349 (3,556) 15,029 (676) 310 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Carrying amount Impairment allowance Carrying amount Impairment allowance 

Wuhan Huangpi Three Gorges Water Environment Comprehensive Treatment Co., Ltd. 83,428 (3,754) 16,337 (735) 

Yunnan Airport Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 79,008 (3,555) – –

Zunyi South Ring Expressway Development Co., Ltd. 75,966 – – –

Chongqing CSCEC Erhengxian Infrastructure Construction Co., Ltd. 74,296 (1,486) 7,669 (153) 

Liyang Zhongjian Sangde Environmental Governance Co., LTD. 67,960 (3,064) 3,010 (304) 

Zhongshan Public Utilities Sanlianwei Watershed Governance Co., Ltd. 66,199 (2,979) – –

Wuhan Hongtai Hongli CSCEC Yipin Real Estate Co., Ltd. 61,151 (2,603) 128,355 (5,778) 

Others 1,669,871 (170,607) 3,793,648 (401,319) 

Total 10,531,983 (1,130,573) 11,635,116 (1,127,808) 

(3)  Other receivables 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Carrying amount Impairment allowance Carrying amount Impairment allowance 

Guangzhou Zhongjian Tiantou Investment Real Estate Co., LTD. 999,138 (39,966) – –

Guangzhou Fuchuang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 848,634 (33,964) 926,360 (36,807) 

Jinan Zhiying Real Estate Co., LTD. 580,318 (1,010) – –

Suzhou Fuyuan Real Estate Co., Ltd. 541,971 (40,931) 626,726 (40,275) 

Grand Dunman Pte Ltd. 532,513 – – –

Panzhihua China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Government Service Center Construction Development Co., Ltd. 302,412 (3,071) 98,289 (98) 

Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 142,968 (8,857) 76,868 (3,134) 

Liupanshui urban pipe gallery construction and Development Investment Co., Ltd. 134,197 (16,135) 58,453 (3,165) 

Fernvale Lane Pte Ltd. 116,776 – – –

Urumqi Linkong CSCEC Airport Construction Operation Co., Ltd. 81,488 (6,357) 57,981 (4,085) 

Suzhou Junda National Highway 206 Construction Co., Ltd. 75,004 (15,976) 91,804 (13,566) 

Xiamen Haitou Construction Technology Co., Ltd. 74,250 (10,020) 74,250 (5,198) 

Dongguan Zhonghai Century City Education Technology Development Co., Ltd. 69,064 (12,859) 108,986 (13,717) 

Shanghai Fuda Real Estate Co., Ltd. 68,393 (2,736) – –

Guangxi Nanbin Highway Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 63,051 (2,522) – –

Shantou CSCEC New Urbanization Investment Co., Ltd. 55,626 (21,276) 53,365 (15,894) 

CCCC Jijiao Expressway Investment Development Co., Ltd. 51,858 (2,170) 64,408 (3,751) 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 7.  Amounts due from related parties (continued) 

(2)  Accounts receivable (continued) 311 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Carrying amount Impairment allowance Carrying amount Impairment allowance 

Guangzhou CSCEC Green Financial Holding Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 50,351 (1,511) – –

Rizhao CSCEC Transportation Service Co., Ltd. 50,000 (15,000) 50,000 (10,000) 

China Construction Asset Management Co., Ltd. 47,665 – – –

Shangqiu New Voyage Development and Construction Management Co., LTD. 47,412 (2,939) 28,321 (1,133) 

Wuhan Chongjiang Real Estate Co., Ltd. 46,234 (3,657) 45,194 (1,808) 

Putian CSCEC Mulan Construction Development Co., Ltd. 45,504 (1,921) – –

CSCEC Roads and Bridges Co., Ltd. 39,299 (7,434) 48,044 (6,905) 

CSCEC Third Engineering Bureau Shengshi Jingzhou Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 34,657 (2,677) 32,741 (1,310) 

Zhengzhou Public Zhongcheng Roads and Bridges Construction Management Co., Ltd. 34,113 (1,023) – –

Construction Technology Jingmen Co., Ltd. 28,737 (1,409) 62,135 (2,485) 

Jingmen China Construction 207 Highway Construction Co., Ltd. 18,720 (749) – –

Hengshui CECSC Hangang Expressway Management Co., Ltd. 18,378 (1,312) 18,350 (734) 

Liuzhou China Construction Science and Industry Exhibition Operation Management Co., Ltd. 18,311 (1,895) – –

Beijing Yipin Haikai Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 17,790 (705) – –

Wuhan CSCEC Yipin Zhaoying Real Estate Co., Ltd. 17,461 (715) 23,989 (960) 

Ezhou Chuanggu Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 17,328 (999) 11,163 (447) 

Cangzhou CSCEC Bohai investment Logistics Park Construction Development Co., Ltd. 16,805 (962) 10,751 (418) 

Yili CSCEC Highway Construction and Operation Co., Ltd. 15,234 (1,776) – –

Guangzhou XingLv Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 11,621 (491) 13,824 (680) 

Putian Jiangkou Suanxi CSCEC Strait Infrastructure Investment Development Co., Ltd. 11,400 (228) 1,000 (20) 

Zhangzhou Chengjia Real Estate Co., Ltd. 9,742 (1,290) – –

CSCEC Dacheng Construction Co., Ltd. 8,995 (360) 5,236 (209) 

Guangzhou Xinghong Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 8,951 (289) 3,966 (159) 

Guizhou Jianxin Water Environment Industry Co., Ltd. 8,820 (2,646) 8,820 (1,764) 

Liupanshui Dongda Highway Investment and Development Co., Ltd. 8,768 (1,128) 8,795 (611) 

CSCEC Electronic Commerce Co., Ltd. 7,916 – 7,383 –

Others 215,778 (17,810) 3,043,751 (225,984) 

Total 5,593,651 (288,776) 5,660,953 (395,317) 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 7.  Amounts due from related parties (continued) 

(3)  Other receivables (continued) 312 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# X.  Related party relationships and transactions (continued) 7.  Amounts due from related parties (continued) 

(4)  Contract assets 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Carrying amount Impairment allowance Carrying amount Impairment allowance 

Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 913,324 (3,681) 1,017,703 (4,230) 

Sanmenxia National Road 310 South Transplanted Project Construction Co., Ltd. 623,463 (3,117) 441,281 (5,013) 

Hebei Chenghong Pipelines Engineering Co., Ltd. 515,392 (5,241) 36,399 (6,612) 

Wuhan Sanxia Jiangnan Water Co., LTD. 262,095 (1,310) – –

Mianyang CSCEC Kefa Guanlang road investment and Construction Co., Ltd. 218,223 (1,113) 244,406 (1,280) 

Guizhou Leirong Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 214,557 (2,666) 1,346 (904) 

Zhongshan Public Utilities Sanlianwei Watershed Governance Co., Ltd. 185,399 (1,352) – –

Jiqing Express Railroad Co., Ltd. 156,022 (715) 155,296 (1,008) 

Zunyi South Ring Expressway Development Co., Ltd. 150,607 (1,101) 272,121 (1,105) 

Foshan Urban Rail Transit Line 3 Development Co., Ltd. 149,899 (668) – –

China Construction Haoyun Co., Ltd. 139,238 (603) 137,018 (570) 

Panzhihua China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Government Service Center Construction Development Co., Ltd. 135,092 (490) 7,265 (87) 

Foshan China Construction Yipin Pengyue Real Estate Co., Ltd. 126,234 (631) 29,590 (148) 

Shanggang group Ruitai Development Co., Ltd. 122,490 (506) 52,430 (359) 

Cangzhou CSCEC Bohai investment Logistics Park Construction Development Co., Ltd. 117,254 (515) 48,197 (206) 

Hebei Xiong’an Citizen Service Center Co., Ltd. 107,728 (511) 473,475 (2,367) 

Guizhou Wengma Railway North-South Extension Line Co., Ltd. 104,846 (825) 14,955 (434) 

Zhongshan Shenshui Environmental Water Co., Ltd. 102,955 (515) 38,912 (195) 

China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Jingzhou Huanchang Lake Construction Operation Co., Ltd. 101,239 (398) 489 (489) 

CSCEC Wuhan Huangxiao River Airport River Environment Comprehensive Treatment Construction Operation Co., Ltd. 98,059 (1,148) 89,824 (4,082) 

Suzhou Junda National Highway 206 Construction Co., Ltd. 94,902 (771) 116,043 (864) 

Wuhan Huangpi Three Gorges Water Environment Comprehensive Treatment Co., Ltd. 93,690 (468) – –

Yunnan Huali Expressway investment and Development Co., Ltd. 91,271 (456) 793 (793) 

CSCEC New Urbanization (Xinjiang)Investment Co., Ltd. 84,440 (375) 156,622 (643) 

Xiamen International Trade Conference Center Co., Ltd. 82,395 (412) – –

China State Construction Wuhan Yangsigang Road and Bridge Construction and Operation Co., Ltd. 79,576 (270) 239 (239) 

Xinjiang CSCEC City Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 75,382 (358) 25,491 (268) 

Yinchuan Shenyang Road Underground Comprehensive Pipe Gallery Construction Management Co., Ltd. 73,022 (365) 80,934 (284) 

Hubei Transportation Investment Xiangyang North Expressway Co., Ltd. 70,835 (354) 5,543 (258) 

CSCEC Zhanjiang Avenue Investment and Construction Co., Ltd. 60,604 (406) 6,174 (147) 

Jingmen China Construction 207 Highway Construction Co., Ltd. 60,038 (448) 938 (41) 

Others 2,059,195 (136,722) 4,333,357 (118,595) 

Total 7,469,466 (168,511) 7,786,841 (151,221) 313 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# X.  Related party relationships and transaction (continued) 7.  Amounts due from related parties (continued) 

(5)  Other current assets 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Carrying amount Impairment allowance Carrying amount Impairment allowance 

CSCEC 2,001,833 (58,800) 4,700,000 (138,180) 

Tianjin Chuangqing Investment Management Co., Ltd. 985,195 (488,783) 334,050 –

Harbin Runzhi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 922,982 – 2,414,941 –

China Overseas Grand Oceans 826,536 – 564,887 –

Xinggui Investment Co., Ltd. 813,259 – 756,929 –

Xuancheng Haijia Lancheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. 810,842 – 493,151 –

Chengdu Langxin Real Estate Co., Ltd. 758,359 – – –

Tongxiang Haoli Enterprise Management Co., Ltd. 659,340 (364,776) 1,613,446 –

Shenzhen Zhaohang Real Estate Co., Ltd. 651,076 – – –

Suzhou Wujiang Taihai Real Estate Co., Ltd. 648,641 – 476,929 –

CSCEC Xi’an Infrastructure Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 614,480 (102,446) 574,480 (64,183) 

Changchun Hairun Rongcheng Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 587,220 – 538,350 –

Anhui Bengwu Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 495,642 – – –

Tianjin Chuangliang Investment Management Co., Ltd. 449,216 (301,420) 449,216 –

Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 311,276 – 237,672 –

Jinjiang Zhongyun Sports Construction Development Co., Ltd. 301,000 – 307,000 –

Jinyu Jiaxing Nanjing Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 300,000 (14,400) 300,000 (14,400) 

Top Colour Development Limited 284,587 – 488,767 –

Tianjin Zhonghai Haixin Real Estate Co., Ltd. 260,817 – – –

Tianjin Shunji Real Estate Co., Ltd. 242,668 (104,781) 263,668 (68,934) 

Guangzhou Zengcheng Run Yu Real Estate Co., Ltd. 230,000 – – –

Dongguan Songrun Real Estate Co., Ltd. 223,960 – – –

Guangzhou SuiHai Real Estate Co., Ltd. 170,065 – – –

Others 1,516,957 (183,937) 6,361,461 (148,902) 

Total 15,065,951 (1,619,343) 20,874,947 (434,599) 

(6)  Long-term receivables 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) Carrying amount Impairment allowance Carrying amount Impairment allowance 

Cscec Scimee Sci.&Tech. Co., Ltd. 9,614 – – –

Sanmenxia National Road 310 South Transplanted Project 

Construction Co., Ltd. 6,000 (1,800) 6,000 (1,020) 

China Construction Aluminum New materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. 5,680 – – –

Beijing Zhongyi Chengjian Property Management Co., Ltd. 612 – 612 –

Others 224 (47) 8,441 (477) 

Total 22,130 (1,847) 15,053 (1,497) 314 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# X.  Related party relationships and transaction (continued) 7.  Amounts due from related parties (continued) 

(7)  Debt Investments 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Carrying amount Impairment allowance Carrying amount Impairment allowance 

Clear Elegant Limited 2,770,274 – 2,501,150 –

Jingyu Co., Ltd. 1,779,975 – 2,554,260 –

Luminous Dream Limited 1,768,486 – 1,597,323 –

TEDA Group Co., Ltd. 1,698,808 – 1,537,081 –

Wuhan Pinlian Real Estate Co., Ltd. 1,584,031 – – –

Gainable Development Limited 1,470,089 – 1,327,138 –

Beijing Yipin Haikai Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 1,438,200 – – –

Wuhan Chongjiang Real Estate Co., Ltd. 1,406,671 – 1,196,296 –

Marble Edge Limited 1,361,826 – 1,229,560 –

Guangzhou Xinghong Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 921,263 (921) 1,044,183 (1,044) 

Vanlink Company Limited 748,800 – 748,800 –

Beijing Nanyue Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 729,714 – 729,714 –

Guangzhou SuiHai Real Estate Co., Ltd. 683,750 – 683,750 –

Xing Chuang Enterprises Ltd. 609,273 – 609,273 –

Foshan China Construction Yipin Pengyue Real Estate Co., Ltd. 513,725 – 1,054,814 –

Ezhou Chuanggu Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 510,565 – 510,565 –

Zhuzhou China Overseas Grand Oceans Real Estate Co., Ltd. 473,879 – – –

Guiheng Investments Co., Ltd. 324,074 – 324,074 –

Changsha Yida Chuangzhi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 288,835 – 288,835 –

Beijing Jinliang Xingye Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 282,102 – 506,102 –

CSCEC Xi’an Infrastructure Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 269,148 (2,691) 269,863 (2,699) 

Wuhan CSCEC Yipin Zhaoying Real Estate Co., Ltd. 266,860 (88,222) 296,860 –

Dazhou Dahuan Construction Management Co., Ltd. 228,720 – 296,146 –

Jiangmen Pengjiang Area Hebang Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 221,126 – 221,126 –

Xiangtan Haijia Construction Co., Ltd. 212,216 – – –

Guangzhou Zengcheng Run Yu Real Estate Co., Ltd. 195,600 – 195,600 –

Foshan Construction investment China Construction Yipin Real estate Co., Ltd. 186,200 – 211,969 –

Haizhou Investment Co., Ltd. 186,119 – – –

Wuhan Chenzhan Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 178,054 – 178,576 –

Others 1,696,797 (6,941) 4,287,044 (7,268) 

Total 25,005,180 (98,775) 24,400,102 (11,011)  

> Note: As at 31 December 2022, the entrusted loan amounted RMB269,148 thousand lent to a joint venture of the Group, China State Construction Xi’an Infrastructure Construction Investment Co., Ltd. (31 December 2021: RMB269,863 thousand) and China State Construction Xi’an Urban Construction Investment Co., Ltd., an associate of the Group, amounted RMB88,719 thousand (31 December 2021: RMB89,869 thousand), are presented in the entrusted loans of Note V. 12.

315 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# X.  Related party relationships and transaction (continued) 8.  Payables to related parties 

(1)  Accounts payable 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

CSCEC Electronic Commerce Co., Ltd. 1,110,503 1,114,339 CSCEC Roads and Bridges Co., Ltd. 356,942 170,129 CSCEC Dacheng Construction Co., Ltd. 260,633 180,735 Anhui Guoyuan Investment Co., Ltd. 142,091 9,057 Shandong CSCEC Zhongli Equipment Leasing Co., Ltd. 116,558 88,481 China Construction Aluminum New Materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. 107,714 73,426 Cscec Scimee Sci.&Tech. Co., Ltd. 105,353 46,822 China Overseas Grand Oceans 37,268 9,776 Sichuan West Construction Zhonghe Machinery Co., Ltd. 37,095 24,213 Guangdong Haichao Technology Industry Development Co., Ltd. 32,081 –China Construction Technology Hubei Co., LTD. 31,692 –Sichuan West Construction Shantui Logistics Co., Ltd. 30,201 38,598 Beijing CSCEC Runtong Electromechanic Engineering Co., Ltd. 29,201 46,546 Shandong Zhongcheng Machinery Leasing Co., Ltd. 27,598 21,965 Shandong CSCEC Material Equipment Co., Ltd. 24,587 32,562 Others 116,424 246,351 Total 2,565,941 2,103,000 (2)  Other Payables 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

CSCEC Innovation Investment Co., Ltd. (formerly known as “Beijing CSCEC Qiming Enterprise Management Co., Ltd.”) 1,927,355 104,980 Xinggui Investment Co., Ltd. 1,260,000 1,237,000 Sunrise JV Limited 997,707 895,521 Xing Chuang Enterprises LTD. 805,750 761,000 Chongqing CSCEC Erhengxian Infrastructure Construction Co., Ltd. 555,218 357,586 Chongqing Jinke Zhaoji Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 549,762 600,750 CSCEC Haijia (Foshan) Investment Construction Co., Ltd. 413,888 413,888 China Overseas Grand Oceans 400,944 –Nanjing CSCEC Gubei City Development Co., Ltd. 394,403 –Hengyang Lingsheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. 373,269 390,429 Nanjing CSCEC Travel Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 369,717 14,845 Wuhan Hongtai Hongli CSCEC Yipin Real Estate Co., Ltd. 312,922 197,182 316 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# X.  Related party relationships and transaction (continued) 8.  Payables to related parties (continued) 

(2)  Other Payables (continued) 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

China Overseas South Airlines Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 303,508 153,154 Xi’an Jiarun Rongcheng Real Estate Co., Ltd. 297,394 812,433 Shantou CSCEC New Urbanization Investment Co., Ltd. 294,985 –Guiheng Investments Co., Ltd. 280,050 150,000 Xiamen Haimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 266,471 –Qingdao Haijie Real Estate Co., Ltd. 260,000 843,760 Nanjing China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Lishui Development Area Affordable Housing Investment Co., Ltd. 245,600 151,800 Qingdao tengmao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 234,758 277,993 Beijing Hengyi Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 231,104 245,505 Shenzhen Shenzhen-Shantou Special Cooperation Zone Zhongpu Infrastructure Investment Co., Ltd. 230,618 232,106 Guangzhou lvrong Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 217,413 217,413 Shanghai Jiasheng Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 205,761 467,408 China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Xianning Big Continent Lake ecological construction and Operation Co., Ltd. 168,644 2,252 Beijing Zhonghai Excellent Urban and Rural Construction Investment Fund 132,389 132,389 Nanjing Yangtze River Second Bridge Co., Ltd. 128,286 148,025 Leading Investment Co., Ltd. 124,499 594,150 Qingdao Caimao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 120,150 111,704 Anhui Guoyuan Trust Co., Ltd. 119,000 –Rizhao CSCEC Eighth Engineering Bureau Transportation Service Co., Ltd. 111,725 61,535 Ezhou CSCEC Yipin Lanyue Real Estate Co., Ltd. 105,577 –Xi’an Hehui Xingshang Real Estate Co., Ltd. 105,190 183,765 China Resources Land Real Estate (Taiyuan) Development Co., Ltd. 105,000 115,000 China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Yichang City Pipe Corridor Construction and Operation Co., Ltd. 104,279 803 Qingdao Fangchuan Real Estate Co., Ltd. 91,577 85,856 Vanlink Company Limited 86,922 –Xinyu Ring Road Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 86,339 122,384 Shandong China Overseas Huachuang Real Estate Co., Ltd. 83,026 83,026 Dongguan Jiangpan New City Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 81,000 93,000 Jiangmen Pengjiang Tianque Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 78,124 78,124 Qingdao Songmao Real Estate Co., Ltd. 74,704 69,062 Wuhan CSCEC Yipin Zhaoying Real Estate Co., Ltd. 69,908 –CSCEC Roads and Bridges Co., Ltd. 65,959 44,094 Qingdao Fangchen Real Estate Co., Ltd. 64,769 60,789 Others 1,469,864 2,625,162 Total 15,005,528 13,135,873 317 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# X.  Related party relationships and transaction (continued) 8.  Payables to related parties (continued) 

(3)  Contract Liabilities 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

CCCC Jijiao Expressway Investment Development Co., Ltd. 770,321 710,474 Hengshui CECSC Hangang Expressway Management Co., Ltd. 587,414 65,386 Shanghai Chenggang Real Estate Co., Ltd. 505,664 602,956 Urumqi Linkong Construction Infrastructure Co., Ltd. 428,356 61,109 CSCEC Xi’an Infrastructure Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 417,227 392,820 Guangzhou Fangbai Intercity Rail Transit Co., Ltd. 279,455 –Yantai Zhongda Xinhong Science Education Investment Co., Ltd. 261,422 151,861 Hangzhou City Investment Wulin Investment Development Co., Ltd. 247,105 133,581 Urumqi Linkong CSCEC Airport Construction Operation Co., Ltd. 201,829 630,831 Shanghai Lingang New Area Jingang Dongjiu Real Estate Co., Ltd. 196,828 68,677 Sichuan Dehui Expressway Co., Ltd. 187,840 70,919 Wenzhou China Construction Science and Industry Olympic Sports Project Management Co., Ltd. 173,656 318,859 CSCEC Xi’an Chanba Ecological Region Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 168,030 508,398 Nanjing Jinlingyi Cultural Tourism Development Co., Ltd. 163,915 –Liuzhou China Construction Steel Structure Dongcheng Exhibition Construction Co., Ltd. 152,083 229,625 Liuzhou CSCEC Steel Structure Ecological Garden Construction Co., Ltd. 132,541 25 Shanghai International Port (Group) Co., Ltd. 130,199 142,346 CSCEC Third Engineering Bureau Shengshi Jingzhou Real Estate Development Co., Ltd. 126,095 –Hebei Chenghong Pipelines Engineering Co., Ltd. 125,171 14,139 Suining East Lake Bishui Environmental Investment Construction Co, Ltd. 116,836 176,073 Chongqing CSCEC Erhengxian Infrastructure Construction Co., Ltd. 115,904 58,462 Yantai Yuanxin Zhongda Investment Co., Ltd. 110,073 –Zhaotong Zhongjian Construction Investment Development Co., Ltd. 104,366 104,366 Zhangzhou Zhanyuan Environmental Technology Co., Ltd. 102,454 178,925 Xuzhou Metro Line Three Investment Development Co., Ltd. 98,763 88,212 Xuzhou Line 1 Rail Transit Investment and Development Co., Ltd. 96,017 159,763 Chongqing Derun Yipin Environmental Governance Co., Ltd. 86,978 –Others 1,155,928 5,771,126 Total 7,242,470 10,638,933 318 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# X.  Related party relationships and transaction (continued) 8.  Payables to related parties (continued) 

(4)  Lease liabilities 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

China Overseas Grand Oceans 93,582 326,403 China Construction Aluminum New materials Chengdu Co., Ltd. 22,104 15,491 Beijing Zhongyi Chengjian Property Management Co., Ltd. 21,570 34,716 Shanghai International Port (Group) Co., Ltd. 13,639 19,825 Shandong CSCEC Zhongli Equipment Leasing Co., Ltd. 1,337 –Others 2,260 148,802 Total 154,492 545,237 (5)  Entrusted loans 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

CSCEC 2,398,638 3,481,106 Jinmao Investment (Changsha) Co., Ltd. 765,000 729,000 Total 3,163,638 4,210,106 (6)  Long-term Payables 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Sunrise JV Limited 2,400,000 2,400,000 Others 135,133 55,409 Total 2,535,133 2,455,409 (7)  Other non-current liabilities 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

China State Construction Engineering Corporation – 400,000 

# XI.  Share-based payment 1.  Overview 2022 2021 

Number of restricted shares unlocked 485,023,600 190,784,000 Number of restricted shares forfeited 13,735,000 16,903,667 The remaining term of the contract of the outstanding stock options at the end of the year 2.0 3.0 

2022 2021 

Total amount of employee services in exchange for share based payment 746,275 836,446 319 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# XI.  Share-based payment (continued) 1.  Overview (continued) 

The equity-settled share-based payment is as follows: 

2022 2021 

Accumulated amount of equity-settled share-based payment in capital surplus 3,263,171 2,516,896 Total expenses recognised in equity-settled share-based payment 746,275 836,446 

2.  Share-based payment plan 

(a)  Share-based payment by the Company 

(1)  In accordance with the authorisation of the third extraordinary General Meeting of Shareholders held on 3 December 2018, the Company held the 15th meeting of the second session of the Board of Directors on 26 December 2018, and the Board of Directors approved the resolution of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited. Granted Third Batch Restricted Shares Incentive Plan (A share) (“the third batch Incentive Plan”), in which the Company was approved to grant the restricted shares incentive to 2,081 targets (“the third batch Incentive Targets”). From 4 December 2018 to 21 December 2018, the Company completed the repurchase of 599,910,000 shares (“the third batch of Restricted Shares”) in total from secondary market and completed the granting to the third batch Incentive Targets on 26 December 2018 (“the third batch grant day”). The third batch Incentive Targets’ purchase price is RMB3.468 per share and the limited sales period is 2 years. If the unlock condition of the restricted shares prescribed by the plan is met, the third batch Incentive Targets can unlock the shares with the upper limit of 1/3, 1/3 and 1/3 of the granted shares on 26 December 2020 (the first batch of Phase III), 26 December 2021 (the second batch of Phase III) and 26 December 2022 (the third batch of Phase III) respectively. In accordance with the authorisation of the third extraordinary General Meeting of Shareholders held on 7 December 2020, the Company held the 50th meeting of the second session of the Board of Directors on 23 December 2020, and the Board of Directors approved the resolution of China State Construction Engineering Corporation Limited. Granted Fourth Batch Restricted Shares Incentive Plan (A share) (“the fourth batch Incentive Plan”), in which the Company was approved to grant the restricted shares incentive to 2,765 targets (“the fourth batch Incentive Targets”). From 30 October 2020 to 14 December 2020, the Company completed the repurchase of 912,036,000 shares (“the fourth batch of Restricted Shares”) in total from secondary market and completed the granting to the fourth batch Incentive Targets on 23 December 2020 (“the fourth batch grant day”). The fourth batch Incentive Targets’ purchase price is RMB3.06 per share and the limited sales period is 2 years. If the unlock condition of the restricted shares prescribed by the plan is met, the fourth batch Incentive Targets can unlock the shares with the upper limit of 1/3, 1/3 and 1/3 of the granted shares on 23 December 2022 (the first batch of Phase IV), 23 December 2023 (the second batch of Phase IV) and 23 December 2024 (the third batch of Phase IV) respectively. If the business achievement or individual performance fail to meet the unlock condition, the unlocked restricted shares will be repurchased by the Company at the grant price and with no interests. (2)  The market price of the third batch of Restricted Shares was RMB5.58 per share at the third batch grant date. The price paid by the third batch Incentive Targets was RMB3.468 per share, based on which, the fair value of the third batch of Restricted Shares granted this time was determined to be RMB2.2112 per share at the third batch grant date. The market price of the fourth batch of Restricted Shares was RMB5.00 per share at the fourth batch grant date. The price paid by the fourth batch Incentive Targets was RMB3.06 per share, based on which, the fair value of the fourth batch of Restricted Shares granted this time was determined to be RMB1.94 per share at the fourth batch grant date. (3)  In 2021, there are total 190,784,000 shares has been unlocked due to the second batch of Phase III meet the unlock condition, and the treasury stock decreased by RMB661,639 thousand. (4)  In 2022, there are total 485,023,600 shares has been unlocked due to the third batch of Phase III and the first batch of Phase IV meet the unlock condition, and the treasury stock decreased by RMB1,559,638 thousand. 320 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# XI.  Share-based payment (continued) 2.  Share-based payment plan (continued) 

(a)  Share-based payment by the Company (continued) 

(5)  Increase/decrease of restricted shares in the reporting period 

2022 2021 

Number of restricted shares at the beginning of the year 1,100,642,936 1,308,330,603 Number of restricted shares granted in current year – –Number of restricted shares unlocked in current year (485,023,600) (190,784,000) Number of restricted shares forfeited in current year (13,735,000) (16,903,667) Number of restricted shares at the end of the year 601,884,336 1,100,642,936 

(6)  The impact on the Company’s financial position and operating results from restricted shares is as follows: 

2022 2021 

Total expenses recognised in equity-settled share-based payment 746,275 836,446 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Accumulated amount of equity-settled share-based payment in capital surplus 3,263,171 2,516,896 (b)  Share Option Schemes by China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. 

On 29 June 2018, China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. offered to grant share options (the “Share Options”) to certain eligible persons (collectively, the “Grantees”), to subscribe for a total of 107,320,000 shares, subject to acceptance of the Grantees, under the share option scheme adopted by China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. on 11 June 2018 with a term of 6 years. Out of the 107,320,000 Share Options granted, a total of 2,000,000 Share Options were granted to directors of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. The exercise price is HKD$25.85 per share. The Share Options granted will vest on 29 June 2020, 29 June 2021 and 29 June 2022 respectively. On 24 November 2020, China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. offered to grant share options (the “Share Options”) to certain eligible persons (collectively, the “Grantees”), to subscribe for a total of 285,840,000 shares, subject to acceptance of the Grantees, under the share option scheme adopted by China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. on 11 June 2018 with a term of 6 years. Out of the 285,840,000 Share Options granted, a total of 6,300,000 Share Options were granted to directors of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. The exercise price is HKD$18.724 per share. The Share Options granted will vest on 24 November 2022, 24 November 2023 and 24 November 2024 respectively. On 11 November 2021, China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. offered to grant share options (the “Share Options”) to certain eligible persons (collectively, the “Grantees”), to subscribe for a total of 7,130,000 shares, subject to acceptance of the Grantees, under the share option scheme adopted by China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. on 11 June 2018 with a term of 6 years. Out of the 7,130,000 Share Options granted, a total of 1,600,000 Share Options were granted to directors of China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. The exercise price is HKD$18.7 per share. The Share Options granted will vest on 11 November 2023, 11 November 2024 and 11 November 2025 respectively. As at 31 December 2022, 326,112,500 share options were granted for the plan (31 December 2021: 370,280,000). The fair value of the Share Options was determined by the Binomial Options Pricing Model. For the year ended 31 December 2022, the relevant cost was RMB128,840 thousand arising from staff services (For the year ended 31 December 2021: RMB114,517 thousand). Due to failure to meet non-market performance conditions, China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. cancelled the stock option plan that expires on November 24, 2022, and offset the related expenses confirmed during the waiting period of the previous year of RMB226,334 thousand. 321 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# XII.  Commitments and Contingencies 1.  Commitments 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Contracted, but not provided for Capital commitments 

Purchase and construction of non-current assets 6,886,875 7,698,367 

Investment commitments 16,745,497 11,641,851 Total 23,632,372 19,340,218 

2.  Contingencies 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Contingent liabilities arising from pending litigations or arbitrations 9,274,297 5,371,906 Note 1 Contingent liabilities arising from the provision of guarantees 139,179,781 107,166,259 Note 2 Total 148,454,078 112,538,165 Note 1:  As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, pending litigations in which the Group was the defending party are listed as follows: 

31 December 2022 Disputed value 31 December 2021 Disputed value 

China Construction Seventh Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. 1,452,639 799,364 CSCEC Xinjiang Construction & Engineering (Group) Co., Ltd. 1,363,088 448,721 China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. 1,301,941 1,010,268 China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. 1,029,208 363,393 China Overseas Holdings Limited 873,937 702,778 The Company 688,382 404,812 China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. 566,038 115,869 China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. 481,320 121,157 China Construction Design and Research Institute Co., Ltd. 381,237 189,475 China Construction Decoration Group Ltd. 313,727 160,067 China Construction Fourth Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. 234,224 390,000 Jilin Zhongjian Construction Engineering Co., Ltd. (Consolidated) 200,931 201,401 China Construction Southwest Investigation & Design Institute Co., Ltd. 140,953 36,890 China Construction Northeast design and Research Institute Co., Ltd. 69,022 –China Construction Harbour and Channel Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. 67,150 67,150 China Construction Communications Engineering Group Co., Ltd. 60,926 135,160 China Construction First Group Corporation Limited 25,390 83,257 China Construction Science & Technology Group Co., Ltd. 21,957 16,843 China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. 2,018 30,200 China State Construction Development Corporation 209 209 China Construction (Siping) Infrastructure Development Co., Ltd. – 1,050 China Construction Railway Construction Co., Ltd. – 83,183 China Construction Fangcheng Investment & Development Group Co., Ltd. – 10,659 Total 9,274,297 5,371,906 322 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# XII.  Commitments and Contingencies (continued) 2.  Contingencies (continued)   

> Note 1: The above pending litigations are mostly related with project quality, progress payment, financing etc. Please refer to Note V. 42 for the progress of litigation matters at 31 December 2022 and the confirmed losses of judgment results, and relevant liabilities are not recognised for the event that the potential obligations generated do not meet the conditions for the recognition of provisions for other liabilities and charges. Note 2: As at 31 December 2022 and 31 December 2021, the Group’s external guarantees are listed as follows:

31 December 2022 Guarantee amount 31 December 2021 Guarantee amount 

Mortgage guarantee provided to property owners (Note) 124,008,036 95,397,206 Guarantees for bank loan 15,171,745 11,769,053 Total 139,179,781 107,166,259 Note:  The Group provides guarantees to property owners and property owners pledge the houses they have bought when taking loans from banks. For the year of 2022 and for the year of 2021, there was no significant breach of contract from commodity house buyers and the Group considers the risk associated with the guarantee obligation is immaterial. 

# XIII.  Events after the balance sheet date 

1.  After the balance sheet date, the bonds issued by the subsidiaries of the Group are as follows: 

Issuer Type of bond Value in issue Issuance date Interest rate (%) 

China Construction First Group Corporation Limited Ultra short-term financing bonds 3,000,000 10 January 2023 2.05 China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. Ultra short-term financing bonds 3,000,000 10 April 2023 2.23 China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. Ultra short-term financing bonds 2,000,000 17 January 2023 1.97 China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. Ultra short-term financing bonds 5,000,000 10 February 2023 1.98 China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. Ultra short-term financing bonds 1,000,000 16 March 2023 2.47 China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. Ultra short-term financing bonds 1,000,000 14 March 2023 2.30 China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. Ultra short-term financing bonds 500,000 05 January 2023 1.86 China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. Ultra short-term financing bonds 500,000 06 January 2023 1.83 China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. Ultra short-term financing bonds 500,000 28 February 2023 2.02 China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Co., Ltd. Ultra short-term financing bonds 500,000 09 March 2023 1.79 China Construction Communications Engineering Group Co., Ltd. Ultra short-term financing bonds 300,000 01 March 2023 3.20 China Construction Communications Engineering Group Co., Ltd. Ultra short-term financing bonds 300,000 02 March 2023 3.20 China Construction Fangcheng Investment & Development Group Co., Ltd. Corporate bonds 800,000 27 March 2023 3.38 

2.  Pursuant to the resolution proposed by the Board of Directors on April 17 2023, the Company distributes a cash dividend of RMB2.527 (including tax) for every 10 ordinary shares to all ordinary shareholders on the basis of 41,934,432,844 shares as at the date of disclosure, and the dividends total to approximately RMB10.597 billion. In the event of any change in the total share capital of the Company before the date of registration of the dividend distribution, it is proposed to maintain the same distribution ratio per share but to adjust the total distribution accordingly. The details of the adjustment will be disclosed separately. The proposal for the distribution of dividends is yet to be approved by the shareholders of the Company in general meeting and is not recognised in this financial statement. 323 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# XIV.  Other important matters 1.  Segment reporting 

Operating segments 

For management purpose, the Group is organised into business units based on their products and has five reportable operating segments as follows: (1)  Building construction engineering; (2)  Infrastructure construction and investment; (3)  Real estate development and investment; (4)  Prospecting and design; (5)  Others. Management monitors the results of its operating segments separately for the purpose of making decisions about resource allocation and performance assessment. Segment performance is evaluated based on the profit or loss of reportable segment. The intersegment transactions are transacted with reference to the prices used for transactions made to third parties at then prevailing market prices. 2022 

2022 Building construction engineering Infrastructure construction and investment Real estate development and investment Prospecting and design Others Unallocated Elimination Total 

Revenue from external 1,239,221,344 488,963,911 281,747,260 10,242,691 34,876,864 – – 2,055,052,070 

Revenue from inter-segment 25,860,175 4,534,449 297,369 520,869 3,817,280 – (35,030,142) –

Total revenue 1,265,081,519 493,498,360 282,044,629 10,763,560 38,694,144 – (35,030,142) 2,055,052,070 

Cost of goods sold (1,164,411,378) (441,893,060) (228,551,609) (8,522,205) (30,475,497) – 33,671,368 (1,840,182,381) 

Credit impairment losses (4,842,913) (1,845,095) (1,045,196) (240,511) (618,189) – – (8,591,904) 

Asset impairment (losses)/reversal (1,843,599) (818,053) (2,301,033) (2,326) 9,199 – – (4,955,812) 

Depreciation and amortisation (6,089,598) (1,589,966) (3,417,183) (297,052) (1,908,123) – – (13,301,922) 

Profit/(losses) before income taxes 31,891,933 23,885,206 34,647,283 274,941 (587,643) (959,379) (316,906) 88,835,435 

Less: Income tax expenses (19,623,672) 

Net profit 69,211,763 

Total segment assets 672,588,416 586,882,827 1,126,811,611 15,806,723 345,107,914 116,580,786 (210,874,971) 2,652,903,306 

Total segment liabilities 479,379,971 466,744,096 573,661,326 8,721,083 294,033,724 322,802,505 (172,826,309) 1,972,516,396 324 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# XIV.  Other important matters (continued) 1.  Segment reporting (continued) 

Operating segments (continued) 

2021 (restated) 

2021 Building construction engineering Infrastructure construction and investment Real estate development and investment Prospecting and design Others Unallocated Elimination Total 

Revenue from external 1,121,922,218 404,323,453 330,888,573 9,969,165 25,602,898 – – 1,892,706,307 Revenue from inter-segment 25,163,690 6,794,436 54,713 839,204 2,716,729 – (35,568,772) –Total revenue 1,147,085,908 411,117,889 330,943,286 10,808,369 28,319,627 – (35,568,772) 1,892,706,307 Cost of goods sold (1,057,399,772) (367,959,096) (261,228,798) (8,532,540) (19,302,698) – 36,455,260 (1,677,967,644) Credit impairment (losses)/reversal (5,917,362) (2,557,590) (179,082) (119,908) (439,630) 820 – (9,212,752) Asset impairment (losses)/reversal (2,556,164) (867,869) (14,421) 52 17,890 42 – (3,420,470) Depreciation and amortisation (5,995,756) (1,757,857) (2,717,780) (140,496) (1,321,135) (22,789) – (11,955,813) Profit/(losses) before income taxes 24,498,840 19,178,272 57,018,178 325,572 (136,499) (732,666) 886,488 101,038,185 Less: Income tax expenses (23,166,793) Net profit 77,871,392 Total segment assets 573,379,255 518,372,779 1,008,692,914 14,787,442 325,227,566 168,624,263 (213,762,357) 2,395,321,862 Total segment liabilities 372,504,940 384,591,854 541,434,348 8,729,656 276,074,213 347,090,370 (176,782,577) 1,753,642,804 Other information Information about products and services 

Revenue from external customers 

2022 2021 (restated) 

Building construction engineering 1,239,221,344 1,121,922,218 Infrastructure construction and investment 488,963,911 404,323,453 Real estate development and investment 281,747,260 330,888,573 Prospecting and design 10,242,691 9,969,165 Others 34,876,864 25,602,898 Total 2,055,052,070 1,892,706,307 325 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# XIV.  Other important matters (continued) 1.  Segment reporting (continued) 

Other information (continued) Geographic information 

Revenue from external customers 

2022 2021 (restated) 

Mainland China 1,947,083,949 1,803,422,524 In other countries/geographical regions 107,968,121 89,283,783 Total 2,055,052,070 1,892,706,307 

The revenue information above is based on the locations of the customers. Non-current assets 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Mainland China 478,797,089 401,421,227 In other countries/geographical regions 29,292,553 27,777,932 Total 508,089,642 429,199,159 

The non-current asset information above is based on the locations of the assets and excludes financial assets, long-term equity investments and deferred tax assets. 

Information about a major customer 

The Group does not rely on one or several major customers. 

2.  Leases 

(1)  As lessor 

The Group has entered into operating leases on some of its houses and buildings, and the lease term is 1-10 years. All leases include a clause to enable revision of the rental charge on an annual basis according to prevailing market conditions. For the year ended 31 December 2022, the rental income recognised by the Group on those houses and buildings was RMB6,084,162 thousand (For the year ended 31 December 2021: RMB7,072,059 thousand). Details of the underlying houses and buildings are disclosed in Note V.17 Investment properties. The Group has also entered into operating leases on idle machinery equipment and transportation equipment, and the lease term is 1-5 years. The rental income recognised by the Group this year was RMB561,182 thousand (For the year ended 31 December 2021: RMB127,875 thousand). 326 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# XIV.  Other important matters (continued) 2.  Leases (continued) 

(1)  As lessor (continued) Operating leases 

The profit or loss relating to operating leases is as follows: 

2022 2021 (restated) 

Lease income 6,645,344 7,199,934 

The Group had total future minimum lease receivables under non-cancellable leases with its tenants falling due as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 (restated) 

Within 1 year, inclusive 4,818,292 5,030,862 1 to 2 years, inclusive 3,373,994 3,593,388 2 to 3 years, inclusive 2,300,724 2,264,292 3 to 4 years, inclusive 1,388,674 1,320,694 4 to 5 years, inclusive 921,223 916,194 Over 5 years 2,754,140 2,383,293 Total 15,557,047 15,508,723 

For fixed assets leased out under operating leases, refer to Note V.18. 

(2)  As lessee 

2022 2021 (restated) 

Interest expense on lease liabilities 250,049 229,044 Expenses relating to short-term leases accounting for applying practical expedients 2,275,187 2,974,938 Expenses relating to leases of low-value assets accounted for applying practical expedients (other than short-term leases) 34,550 79,531 Total cash outflow for leases 4,440,111 3,946,789 

The Group has lease contracts for various items of houses and buildings, machinery, transportation equipment and other equipment used in its operations. Leases of houses and buildings and machinery generally have lease terms of 1 to 10 years, while those of transportation equipment and other equipment generally have lease terms of 0.5 to 3 years. Generally, the Group is restricted from assigning and subleasing the underlying assets and some contracts require the Group to maintain certain financial ratios. 

Other information relating to leases 

For right-of-use assets, refer to Notes V. 20; For simplified treatment of short-term leases and leases of low-value assets, refer to Notes III. 30; For lease liabilities, refer to Notes V. 39 and Notes VIII. 3. 

3.  Comparative Data 

As noted in Notes VI. 2, the Group completed the business combination under common control over China Construction Seventh Bureau Sixth Construction Co., Ltd., China Construction Ecological Environment Group Co., Ltd., Liyang China Construction Water Co., Ltd. and China Construction Taixing Water Co. Ltd. during the year and, as such, the comparative data in the Group’s consolidated financial statements have also been restated to include the financial position, results of operations and cash flows of the merged parties to meet the presentation and accounting requirements for the current year. 327 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# XV.  Notes to the Company’s financial statements 1.  Accounts receivable 

The aging of accounts receivable is analysed as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Within 1 year 16,519,421 16,318,061 1-2 years 3,987,642 4,169,538 2-3 years 2,571,275 5,119,409 3-4 years 3,293,582 818,940 4-5 years 535,765 1,779,880 Over 5 years 959,443 700,609 Sub-total 27,867,128 28,906,437 Less: Impairment allowance (3,121,268) (3,833,019) Total 24,745,860 25,073,418 

Accounts receivable and impairment allowance are disclosed by category: 

31 December 2022 Carrying amount Impairment allowance Amount Ratio (%) Amount Ratio (%) 

Impairment allowance individually accrued 12,233,023 43.90 1,240,427 10.14 

Impairment allowance accrued by credit risk portfolio 15,634,105 56.10 1,880,841 12.03 

Total 27,867,128 100.00 3,121,268 11.20 31 December 2021 Carrying amount Impairment allowance Amount Ratio (%) Amount Ratio (%) 

Impairment allowance individually accrued 12,953,045 44.81 2,221,590 17.15 Impairment allowance accrued by credit risk portfolio 15,953,392 55.19 1,611,429 10.10 Total 28,906,437 100.00 3,833,019 13.26 

As at 31 December 2022, impairment allowance of accounts receivable individually accrued is as follows: 

Amount Impairment Expected credit losses ratio Reasons 

Company 1 1,182,525 147,816 12.50% Recovery possibility 

Company 2 428,897 85,779 20.00% Recovery possibility 

Company 3 388,858 173,125 44.52% Recovery possibility 

Company 4 382,186 114,656 30.00% Recovery possibility 

Company 5 346,870 25,502 7.35% Recovery possibility 

Others 9,503,687 693,549 7.30% Recovery possibility 

Total 12,233,023 1,240,427 328 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# XV.  Notes to the Company’s financial statements (continued) 1.  Accounts receivable (continued) 

As at 31 December 2021, impairment allowance of accounts receivable individually accrued is as follows: 

Amount Impairment Expected credit losses ratio Reasons 

Company 1 1,745,526 1,265,992 72.53% Recovery possibility Company 2 1,303,425 162,928 12.50% Recovery possibility Company 3 521,137 104,227 20.00% Recovery possibility Company 4 440,186 132,056 30.00% Recovery possibility Company 5 388,858 97,908 25.18% Recovery possibility Others 8,553,913 458,479 5.36% Recovery possibility Total 12,953,045 2,221,590 

The accounts receivable with impairment allowance accrued by credit risk portfolio are as follows: Portfolio 1: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Estimated gross carrying amount at default Expected credit losses ratio (%) Lifetime expected credit losses Estimated gross carrying amount at default Expected credit losses ratio (%) Lifetime expected credit losses 

Within 1 year 4,160,029 2.00 83,201 3,473,185 2.00 69,464 1-2 years 434,769 5.00 21,738 496,293 5.00 24,815 2-3 years 376,838 15.00 56,526 585,091 15.00 87,764 3-4 years 420,158 30.00 126,048 265,397 30.00 79,619 4-5 years 232,485 45.00 104,618 1,353 45.00 608 Over 5 years 14,080 100.00 14,080 14,080 100.00 14,080 Total 5,638,359 406,211 4,835,399 276,350 

Portfolio 2: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Estimated gross carrying amount at default Expected credit losses ratio (%) Lifetime expected credit losses Estimated gross carrying amount at default Expected credit losses ratio (%) Lifetime expected credit losses 

Within 1 year 1,494,011 6.00 89,641 1,068,470 6.00 64,108 1-2 years 56,214 12.00 6,745 176,046 12.00 21,126 2-3 years 9,189 25.00 2,297 186,034 25.00 46,509 3-4 years 144,453 45.00 65,004 54,530 45.00 24,538 4-5 years 54,067 70.00 37,847 – 70.00 –Total 1,757,934 201,534 1,485,080 156,281 329 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# XV.  Notes to the Company’s financial statements (continued) 1.  Accounts receivable (continued) 

The accounts receivable with impairment allowance accrued by credit risk portfolio are as follows: (continued) Portfolio 3: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 Estimated gross carrying amount at default Expected credit losses ratio (%) Lifetime expected credit losses Estimated gross carrying amount at default Expected credit losses ratio (%) Lifetime expected credit losses 

Within 1 year 4,548,289 4.50 204,673 5,928,486 4.50 266,782 1-2 years 1,560,132 10.00 156,013 1,191,448 10.00 119,145 2-3 years 635,784 20.00 127,157 1,916,500 20.00 383,300 3-4 years 1,113,073 40.00 445,229 303,888 40.00 121,555 4-5 years 115,743 65.00 75,233 13,071 65.00 8,496 Over 5 years 264,791 100.00 264,791 279,520 100.00 279,520 Total 8,237,812 1,273,096 9,632,913 1,178,798 

Impairment allowance of accounts receivable are as follows: 2022 

Opening balance Provision Reversal Other movements Closing balance 3,833,019 1,661,543 (857,581) (1,515,713) 3,121,268 

2021 

Opening balance Provision Reversal Other movements Closing balance 

2,311,807 2,384,840 (833,184) (30,444) 3,833,019 

The important reversal amounts in 2022 are listed as follows: 

Reason for reversal/ collection Basis for the impairment allowance Amount of reversal/ collection Way of collection 

Company 1 Accounts receivable of project collected Collectively accrued 103,976 Cash Company 2 Accounts receivable of project collected Collectively accrued 82,341 Cash Company 3 Accounts receivable of project collected Collectively accrued 69,748 Cash Company 4 Accounts receivable of project collected Collectively accrued 50,961 Cash Company 5 Accounts receivable of project collected Collectively accrued 30,543 Cash Others Accounts receivable of project collected, etc. Individually and collectively accrued 520,012 Cash or Reversal Total 857,581 

As at 31 December 2022, the five largest accounts receivable due to customers are as follows: 

Amount Amount of impairment allowance % of total accounts receivable 

Total amount of the five largest accounts receivable 4,072,185 289,996 14.61% 

As at 31 December 2021, the five largest accounts receivable due to customers are as follows: 

Amount Amount of impairment allowance % of total accounts receivable 

Total amount of the five largest accounts receivable 5,901,707 1,611,639 20.42% 330 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# XV.  Notes to the Company’s financial statements (continued) 2.  Other receivables 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Dividend receivables 312,462 351,212 Other receivables 24,269,896 19,432,417 Total 24,582,358 19,783,629 

The ageing analysis of other receivables is as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Within 1 year 20,447,154 15,567,458 1-2 years 2,199,734 2,956,523 2-3 years 1,000,594 1,092,107 3-4 years 867,661 620,528 4-5 years 581,479 20,969 Over 5 years 254,353 241,295 Sub-total 25,350,975 20,498,880 Less: Impairment allowance (768,617) (715,251) Total 24,582,358 19,783,629 

Natures of other receivables are as follows: 

31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Receivables from related parties 22,805,505 18,433,010 Dividends receivable 312,462 351,212 Deposits and petty cash receivable 682,653 690,048 Others 1,550,355 1,024,610 Sub-total 25,350,975 20,498,880 Less: Impairment allowance (768,617) (715,251) Total 24,582,358 19,783,629 

Changes in impairment allowance recognised for the 12-month expected credit losses and lifetime expected credit losses on other receivables are as follows: 2022 

Stage 1 12-month expected credit losses Stage 3 Credit losses of credit-impaired financial assets (Lifetime-expected credit losses) Total 

Opening balance 35,339 679,912 715,251 

Accrual 22,003 56,347 78,350 

Reversal (9,329) (14,671) (24,000) 

Other movements (1,039) 55 (984) 

Closing Balance 46,974 721,643 768,617 331 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# XV.  Notes to the Company’s financial statements (continued) 2.  Other receivables (continued) 

Changes in impairment allowance recognised for the 12-month expected credit losses and lifetime expected credit losses on other receivables are as follows: (continued) 2021 

Stage 1 12-month expected credit losses Stage 3 Credit losses of credit-impaired financial assets (Lifetime-expected credit losses) Total 

Opening balance 21,586 672,905 694,491 Changes due to the opening balance (14,805) 14,805 –Accrual 39,714 10,574 50,288 Reversal (9,729) (18,536) (28,265) Other movements (1,427) 164 (1,263) Closing Balance 35,339 679,912 715,251 

The important reversal amounts for the year ended 31 December 2022 are listed as follows: 

Reason for reversal/ collection Basis for the impairment allowance Amount of reversal/ collection Way of collection 

Company 1 Receivable collected Combination of credit risk characteristics 5,003 Cash 

Company 2 Receivable collected Combination of credit risk characteristics 2,710 Cash 

Company 3 Receivable collected Combination of credit risk characteristics 2,498 Cash 

Company 4 Receivable collected Combination of credit risk characteristics 2,387 Cash 

Company 5 Receivable collected Combination of credit risk characteristics 1,409 Cash 

Others Receivable collected, etc. Combination of credit risk characteristics 9,993 Cash or Reversal 

Total 24,000 

As at 31 December 2022, other receivables from the five largest customers are as follows: 

Closing Balance % of total balance Relation to the Company Ageing Impairment allowance 

Company 1 1,441,000 5.68 Due from Related parties Within 1 year –

Company 2 1,352,179 5.33 Due from Related parties Within 1 year –

Company 3 1,055,149 4.16 Due from Related parties Within 1 year –

Company 4 954,508 3.77 Due from Related parties Within 1 year –

Company 5 863,919 3.41 Due from Related parties Within 1 year –

Total 5,666,755 22.35 –

As at 31 December 2021, other receivables from the five largest customers are as follows: 

Closing Balance % of total balance Relation to the Company Ageing Impairment allowance 

Company 1 1,491,177 7.27 Due from Related parties Within 1 year –Company 2 1,080,752 5.27 Due from Related parties Within 1 year –Company 3 1,080,568 5.27 Due from Related parties Within 3 years –Company 4 1,006,667 4.91 Due from Related parties Within 1 year –Company 5 694,081 3.39 Due from Related parties Within 2 years –Total 5,353,245 26.11 –332 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# XV.  Notes to the Company’s financial statements (continued) 3 Long-term equity investments 31 December 2022 31 December 2021 

Subsidiaries 204,568,115 194,654,437 – Subsidiaries under direct control (1) 197,505,387 187,822,538 – Subsidiaries under indirect control (2) 7,062,728 6,831,899 Joint ventures (3) 7,304,375 6,760,732 Associates (4) 6,166,106 5,560,626 Sub-total 218,038,596 206,975,795 Less: Impairment allowance (1,114,938) (1,114,938) Total 216,923,658 205,860,857 (1)  Subsidiaries under direct control 

2022 

Opening balance Current year movements Closing balance Cash dividend declared 

China Overseas Holdings Limited 49,444,328 – 49,444,328 5,677,630 

China Construction First Group Corporation Limited 7,576,219 – 7,576,219 908,810 

China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. 10,209,149 – 10,209,149 1,071,590 

China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Ltd. 6,271,354 1,521,183 7,792,537 2,322,510 

China Construction Fourth Engineering Bureau Ltd. 5,199,701 – 5,199,701 286,832 

China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Ltd. 10,395,789 – 10,395,789 1,111,374 

China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Ltd. 4,277,946 – 4,277,946 132,741 

China Construction Seventh Engineering Bureau Ltd. 6,006,530 – 6,006,530 503,470 

China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Ltd. 15,589,151 268,000 15,857,151 2,399,490 

China Construction Fangcheng Investment & Development Co., Ltd. 5,851,624 – 5,851,624 456,660 

Shenzhen China Overseas Investment Management Co., Ltd. 301,537 – 301,537 –

China Construction Infrastructure Co., Ltd. 11,194,030 – 11,194,030 4,200 

China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. 7,924,554 4,000,000 11,924,554 282,197 

China Construction America, Inc. 3,976,853 – 3,976,853 –

China State Construction Development Co., Ltd. 1,790,637 – 1,790,637 52,000 

China Construction Liupanshui Infrastructure Investment and Development Co., Ltd. 800,000 – 800,000 –

China State Construction Thailand Co., Ltd. 656,107 – 656,107 5,393 

CSCEC Xinjiang Construction & Engineering (Group) Co., Ltd. 2,881,906 88,000 2,969,906 57,200 

China Construction (South Pacific) Development Co Pte Ltd 596,630 200,000 796,630 45,510 

China Construction Decoration Group Ltd. 548,375 – 548,375 1,410 

China Construction Capital Holdings Limited 8,305,000 – 8,305,000 253,630 

China State Railway Investment Construction Group Co., Ltd. 1,673,183 (1,473,183) 200,000 –

China Construction Silu Construction Investment Company Limited 2,500,000 200,000 2,700,000 200,000 

China Construction Changjiang Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 1,036,096 – 1,036,096 –

China Construction North Investment Co., Ltd. 947,821 167,262 1,115,083 –

China Construction Overseas Co., Ltd. 400,000 (400,000) – –

China Construction Science & Technology Group Co., Ltd. 1,700,000 40,000 1,740,000 77,680 

China Construction Communications Engineering Group Co., Ltd. 1,279,000 – 1,279,000 40,148 

China State Construction International Holdings Limited 1,600,000 1,400,000 3,000,000 –

Others 16,889,018 3,671,587 20,560,605 471,240 

Total 187,822,538 9,682,849 197,505,387 16,361,715 333 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# XV.  Notes to the Company’s financial statements (continued) 3 Long-term equity investments (continued) 

(1)  Subsidiaries under direct control (continued) 

2021 

Opening balance Current year movements Closing balance Cash dividend declared 

China Overseas Holdings Limited 49,444,328 – 49,444,328 5,000,000 China Construction First Group Corporation Limited 7,576,219 – 7,576,219 1,245,175 China Construction Second Engineering Bureau Ltd. 5,209,149 5,000,000 10,209,149 6,046,085 China Construction Third Engineering Bureau Ltd. 6,271,354 – 6,271,354 1,978,819 China Construction Fourth Engineering Bureau Ltd. 5,199,701 – 5,199,701 296,749 China Construction Fifth Engineering Bureau Ltd. 6,413,789 3,982,000 10,395,789 5,182,800 China Construction Sixth Engineering Bureau Ltd. 4,277,946 – 4,277,946 120,830 China Construction Seventh Engineering Bureau Ltd. 6,006,530 – 6,006,530 618,750 China Construction Eighth Engineering Bureau Ltd. 10,139,151 5,450,000 15,589,151 6,010,240 China Construction Fangcheng Investment & Development Co., Ltd. 5,851,624 – 5,851,624 1,328,500 Shenzhen China Overseas Investment Management Co., Ltd. 301,537 – 301,537 –China Construction Infrastructure Co., Ltd. 11,194,030 – 11,194,030 830 China State Construction Finance Co., Ltd. 7,924,554 – 7,924,554 205,605 China Construction America, Inc. 3,976,853 – 3,976,853 –China State Construction Development Co., Ltd. 1,790,637 – 1,790,637 20,490 China Construction Liupanshui Infrastructure Investment and Development Co., Ltd. 800,000 – 800,000 –China State Construction Thailand Co., Ltd. 656,107 – 656,107 –CSCEC Xinjiang Construction & Engineering (Group) Co., Ltd. 2,881,906 – 2,881,906 158,660 China Construction (South Pacific) Development Co Pte Ltd 520,630 76,000 596,630 42,440 China Construction Decoration Group Ltd. 548,375 – 548,375 32,310 China Construction Capital Holding Co., Ltd. 8,305,000 – 8,305,000 221,860 China State Railway Investment Construction Group Co., Ltd. 1,673,183 – 1,673,183 –China Construction Silu Construction Investment Company Limited 1,500,000 1,000,000 2,500,000 –China Construction Changjiang Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 1,036,096 – 1,036,096 –China Construction North Investment Co., Ltd. 903,981 43,840 947,821 –China Construction Overseas Co., Ltd. 400,000 – 400,000 –China Construction Science & Technology Group Co., Ltd. 1,700,000 – 1,700,000 61,180 China Construction Communications Engineering Group Co., Ltd. – 1,279,000 1,279,000 53,600 Others 14,285,578 4,203,440 18,489,018 911,147 Total 166,788,258 21,034,280 187,822,538 29,536,070 334 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# XV.  Notes to the Company’s financial statements (continued) 3 Long-term equity investments (continued) 

(2)  Subsidiaries under indirect control 

2022 

Opening balance Current year movements Closing balance Cash dividend declared 

China West Construction Group Co., Ltd. 942,264 – 942,264 14,739 

China Construction Industrial & Energy Engineering Group Co., Ltd. 837,305 – 837,305 6,080 

China Construction Science and Industry Corporation Ltd. 739,664 – 739,664 63,145 

Hangzhou China Construction Guobo Property Investment Co., Ltd. 668,432 – 668,432 –

CSCEC Strait Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 300,000 – 300,000 –

China Construction Tunnel Construction Co., Ltd. 300,000 – 300,000 –

China Construction Electric Power Construction Co., Ltd. 230,000 – 230,000 –

Foshan China State Construction Transportation Joint Investment Co., Ltd. 4,800 – 4,800 –

Shanghai China Construction Overseas Development Co., Ltd. 100,000 – 100,000 –

CSCEC Underground Space Co., Ltd. 100,000 – 100,000 –

China Construction Bridge Co., Ltd. 300,000 – 300,000 –

Shanxi China Construction Infrastructure Construction and Operation Co., Ltd. 438,600 173,400 612,000 –

Others 1,870,834 57,429 1,928,263 –

Total 6,831,899 230,829 7,062,728 83,964 

2021 

Opening balance Current year movements Closing balance Cash dividend declared 

China Construction Communications Engineering Group Co., Ltd. 1,279,000 (1,279,000) – –

China West Construction Group Co., Ltd. 942,264 – 942,264 13,963 

China Construction Industrial & Energy Engineering Group Co., Ltd. 837,305 – 837,305 17,922 

China Construction Science and Industry Corporation Ltd. 739,664 – 739,664 60,280 

Hangzhou China Construction Guobo Property Investment Co., Ltd. 668,432 – 668,432 –

CSCEC Strait Construction and Development Co., Ltd. 300,000 – 300,000 –

China Construction Tunnel Construction Co., Ltd. 300,000 – 300,000 –

China Construction Electric Power Construction Co., Ltd. 230,000 – 230,000 –

Foshan China State Construction Transportation Joint Investment Co., Ltd. 4,800 – 4,800 –

China Construction Overseas Development (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. 100,000 – 100,000 –

CSCEC Underground Space Co., Ltd. 100,000 – 100,000 –

China Construction Wuhan Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 60,000 (60,000) – –

China Construction Bridge Co., Ltd. 300,000 – 300,000 –

Others 2,079,457 229,977 2,309,434 14,169 

Total 7,940,922 (1,109,023) 6,831,899 106,334 335 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# XV.  Notes to the Company’s financial statements (continued) 3.  Long-term equity investments (continued) 

(3)  Joint ventures 

2022 

Opening Balance Movement during the period Closing Balance Increase/ (Decrease) in investment Investment income/(losses) under equity method Other comprehensive income adjustment Others 

CSCEC Zhaotong Construction Investment Development Co., Ltd. 512,388 – 1,546 – – 513,934 

CSCEC Road & Bridge Group Co., Ltd. 456,865 – 13,713 (173) – 470,405 

Zhengzhou China Construction Shenzhen Rail Transit Co., Ltd. 1,028,458 – 31,825 – 244,607 1,304,890 

Changsha China Construction Chengtou Pipe Gallery Development Investment Co., Ltd. 324,145 – 4,074 – – 328,219 

CSCEC Zhanjiang Avenue Investment and Construction Co., Ltd. 498,664 26,295 2,231 – – 527,190 

ASEC CIMENT SPA 225,584 – (210) – 21,747 247,121 

Yinchuan Shenyang Road Underground Comprehensive Pipe Gallery Construction Management Co., Ltd. 218,303 – 7,035 – – 225,338 

CSCEC (Tianjin) Railroad Transportation Investment Development Co., Ltd. 460,784 195,805 – – 359,185 1,015,774 

Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 226,271 – (10,812) – – 215,459 

Dalian CSCEC Haimian City Construction Development Co., Ltd. 237,893 (78,926) 19,253 – – 178,220 

Xuzhou Metro Line Three Investment Development Co., Ltd. 745,184 – 21,809 – (380,993) 386,000 

CSCEC Dacheng Construction Co., Ltd. 148,638 – 26,756 – (10,000) 165,394 

Others 1,677,555 261,482 35,481 – (248,087) 1,726,431 

Total 6,760,732 404,656 152,701 (173) (13,541) 7,304,375 

2021 

Opening Balance Movement during the year Closing Balance Increase/ (Decrease) in investment Investment income/(losses) under equity method Other comprehensive income adjustment Distribution of dividends Others 

CSCEC Zhaotong Construction Investment Development Co., Ltd. 511,373 – 1,015 – – – 512,388 China Construction Chengdu Rail Transit Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 425,007 (424,500) 17 – – – 524 CSCEC Road & Bridge Group Co., Ltd. 439,554 – 17,938 (627) – – 456,865 Zhengzhou China Construction Shenzhen Rail Transit Co., Ltd. 1,029,089 – (631) – – – 1,028,458 Changsha China Construction Chengtou Pipe Gallery Development Investment Co., Ltd. 323,461 – 3,853 – (3,169) – 324,145 CSCEC Zhanjiang Avenue Investment and Construction Co., Ltd. 369,813 116,934 20 – – 11,897 498,664 ASEC CIMENT SPA 243,777 – (55) (18,138) – – 225,584 Yinchuan Shenyang Road Underground Comprehensive Pipe Gallery Construction Management Co., Ltd. 268,484 – (50,181) – – – 218,303 CSCEC (Tianjin) Railroad Transportation Investment Development Co., Ltd. 460,784 – – – – – 460,784 Guizhou Zhengxi Expressway Investment Management Co., Ltd. 229,220 – (2,949) – – – 226,271 Dalian CSCEC Haimian City Construction Development Co., Ltd. 231,613 – 6,280 – – – 237,893 Xuzhou Metro Line Three Investment Development Co., Ltd. 386,000 359,184 – – – – 745,184 CSCEC Dacheng Construction Co., Ltd. 147,076 – 1,562 – – – 148,638 Qinghai Zhengping Jiaxi Highway Construction Co., Ltd. 294,000 (294,000) 7,865 – – (7,865) –Others 1,060,960 615,067 10,817 – (11,613) 1,800 1,677,031 Total 6,420,211 372,685 (4,449) (18,765) (14,782) 5,832 6,760,732 336 Notes to the financial statements Unit: RMB’000 

# XV.  Notes to the Company’s financial statements (continued) 3.  Long-term equity investments (continued) 

(4)  Associates 

2022 

Opening balance Movement during the period Closing balance Increase/ (Decrease) in investment Investment income/ (losses) under equity method Distribution of dividends 

CCCC Jijiao Expressway Investment & Development Co., Ltd. 1,650,377 296,304 (27,078) – 1,919,603 

Yunnan Huali Expressway Investment & Development Co., Ltd. 1,561,094 – 22,671 – 1,583,765 

Xuzhou Line 1 Rail Transit Investment and Development Co. Ltd. 100,000 – 101,097 (101,097) 100,000 

Sanmenxia National Road 310 South Transplanted Project Construction Co., Ltd. 631,614 – (88,553) – 543,061 

Anhui Province Yuehuang Expressway Co., Ltd. 224,000 (224,000) – – –

Liyang Zhongjian Sangde Environmental Governance Co., Ltd. 147,877 – 10,791 – 158,668 

Cangzhou Development Zone BAIC Industrial Park Investment Center (limited partnership) 28,261 – 1,806 (2,524) 27,543 

Xinyu Ring Road Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 60,000 – (13) – 59,987 

Taizhou Road & Bridge Xindao Investment and Development Co., Ltd. 19,425 – (186) – 19,239 

Zhangzhou Zhanyuan Environmental Technology Co., Ltd. 75,965 – 6,629 – 82,594 

Others 1,062,013 505,181 98,060 6,392 1,671,646 

Total 5,560,626 577,485 125,224 (97,229) 6,166,106 

2021 

Opening balance Movement during the year Closing balance Increase/ (Decrease) in investment Investment income/(losses) under equity method Distribution of dividends Others 

CCCC Jijiao Expressway Investment & Development Co., Ltd. 1,662,658 95,000 (107,281) – – 1,650,377 

Yunnan Huali Expressway Investment & Development Co., Ltd. 1,185,000 376,094 – – – 1,561,094 

Xuzhou Line 1 Rail Transit Investment and Development Co., Ltd. 465,000 (365,000) 2 (2) – 100,000 

Sanmenxia National Road 310 South Transplanted Project Construction Co., Ltd. 664,335 – (32,721) – – 631,614 

Anhui Province Yuehuang Expressway Co., Ltd. 224,000 – – – – 224,000 

Shenzhen-Shantou Special Cooperation Zone Harbour City Investment & Construction Co., Ltd. 95,174 (88,947) 6,271 (12,498) – –

Liyang Zhongjian Sangde Environmental Governance Co., Ltd. 146,140 – 1,737 – – 147,877 

Cangzhou Development Zone BAIC Industrial Park Investment Center (limited partnership) 28,967 – 1,818 (2,524) – 28,261 

Xinyu Ring Road Construction Investment Co., Ltd. 60,000 – – – – 60,000 

Taizhou Road & Bridge Xindao Investment and Development Co., Ltd. 19,595 – (170) – – 19,425 

Shijiazhuang Jiaotou Jinshi Expressway Construction Management Co., Ltd. 19,600 – (19,600) – – –

Zhangzhou Zhanyuan Environmental Technology Co., Ltd. 75,965 – – – – 75,965 

Others 48,035 1,016,023 (1,159) – (886) 1,062,013 

Total 4,694,469 1,033,170 (151,103) (15,024) (886) 5,560,626 337 CHINA STATE CONSTRUCTION ENGINEERING CORPORATION LIMITED2022 ANNUAL REPORT 

# XV.  Notes to the Company’s financial statements (continued) 4.  Revenue and cost of sales 2022 2021 Revenue Cost Revenue Cost 

Revenue from main operations 72,624,168 68,628,630 86,025,210 81,635,154 

Revenue from other operations 45,861 28,539 36,257 26,524 

Total 72,670,029 68,657,169 86,061,467 81,661,678 Revenue is shown as follows: 

2022 2021 

Revenue from contracts with customers 72,632,164 86,023,894 Rentals 37,865 37,573 Total 72,670,029 86,061,467 

As at 31 December 2022, the transaction price allocated to the unfulfilled or partially unfulfilled performance obligations is related to the progress of the corresponding contract, and will be recognised as revenue according to the progress of performance in the future performance period. The breakdown of revenue generated by the contract with customers is as follows: 

2022 2021 

Timing of revenue recognition Recognise revenue at a point in time 293,379 268,852 Others 293,379 268,852 Recognise revenue over time 72,338,785 85,755,042 Housing construction project 17,004,703 16,826,977 Infrastructure construction and investment 55,303,351 68,909,981 Others 30,731 18,084 Total 72,632,164 86,023,894 

5.  Investment income 2022 2021 

Investment income from disposal of long-term equity investments under cost method 16,445,679 29,642,404 Investment income/(losses) from disposal of long-term equity investments under equity method 277,925 (155,552) Investment losses from disposal of financial assets measured at amortized cost (2,510) (1,073) Investment income from disposal of long-term equity investments 43,853 –Losses on arrangement (40,897) –Investment income obtained during the holding period of the held for trading financial assets 6,855 1,546 Investment income from debt investments 314,808 428,457 Investment income from other equity instrument investments 42,061 55,838 Total 17,087,774 29,971,620 

The company has no major restrictions on the repatriation of investment income. 338 Supplementary Information 

# SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION 

2022  Unit: RMB’000 

# 1.  Statement of non-recurring profit or loss 2022 

Gains from disposal of non-current assets, including the write-off portion of the provision for impairment of assets 432,388 

Government grants recognised into the current profits and losses 1,049,139 

The investment cost of the enterprise to obtain the subsidiary is less than the income generated by the fair value of the identifiable net assets of the investee at the time of obtaining the investment. 

1,236,618 

Income from step-realized business combination 1,251,160 

In addition to the normal operation of the company’s effective hedging business, profits or losses from changes in fair value of financial assets held for trading and financial liabilities held for trading and investment losses from disposal of financial assets held for trading, financial liabilities held for trading, and other debt investments 

(84,935) 

Interest income from loans to non-financial corporations 469,261 

Reversal of the provision on receivables and contract assets for impairment on an individual basis 3,326,302 

The current net profit before the merger date of subsidiaries acquired through business combination under the same control 50,362 

Other non-operating income and expenses than the above items 746,481 

Other profit or loss items that meet the definition of non recurring profit or loss (4,430) 

Sub-total 8,472,346 

Impact on income tax (1,253,512) 

Sub-total 7,218,834 

Impact on non-controlling interests (after tax) (1,502,397) 

Total 5,716,437 

The Group’s recognition of non-recurring profit or loss items shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of “Explanatory Notice of Corporate Information Disclosure of Public Securities Offering No. 1 – Non-recurring Profit or Loss” (CSRC Announcement No. [2008]43). 

# 2.  Return on net assets and earnings per share 

2022 

Weighted average return on net assets (%) Earnings per share (RMB/Share) Basic Diluted 

Net profit attributable to the Company’s ordinary shareholders 13.94 1.23 1.23 

Net profit attributable to the Company’s ordinary shareholders after deducting non-recurring profit or loss 

12.42 1.07 1.07 

2021 

Weighted average return on net assets (%) Earnings per share (RMB/Share) Basic Diluted 

Net profit attributable to the Company’s ordinary shareholders 15.90 1.25 1.25 Net profit attributable to the Company’s ordinary shareholders after deducting non-recurring profit or loss 15.34 1.17 1.17 Back Cover Photo: CSWADI Lakeside Design Headquarters 

China Construction Fortune International Center, Building 3, Courtyard 5, Anding Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing Postal code: 100029 Tel: 86 10 8649 8888 E-mail: ir@cscec.com Website: www.cscec.com @CSCECNEWS 

@CSCECNews
