Title: Forskningsrapport

URL Source: https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1744882/FULLTEXT01.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 21 Mar 2023 09:29:41 GMT

Markdown Content:
SAFETY AND TRANSPORT 

# FIRE SAFE TRANSPORT 

# Electric Vehicle Fire Safety in Enclosed 

# Spaces 

# Jonna Hynynen, Maria Quant, Roshni Pramanik, Anna 

# Olofsson, Ying Zhen Li, Magnus Arvidson, Petra 

# Andersson   

> RISE Report 2023:42 © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# Electric Vehicle Fire Safety in Enclosed 

# Spaces 

# Jonna Hynynen, Maria Quant, Roshni Pramanik, Anna 

# Olofsson, Ying Zhen Li, Magnus Arvidson, Petra 

# Andersson 1 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# Abstract 

## Electrical Vehicle Fire Safety in Enclosed Spaces 

Lately, c oncerns regarding fires in electric vehicles in enclosed spaces such as in road 

tunnels and parking garages have been raised and there are indications that parking of 

electric vehicles may be prohibited in some spaces . For the success of electromobility and 

the transition from fossil to renewable fuels, it is important to understand the risks and 

consequences of fires in electric vehicles and to provide technical solutions if necessary, 

so as not to hinder the widespread adoption of electric vehicles .

In this work , a literature review on fires in vehicles has been conducted . The focus was 

on fires in enclosed spaces involving electric vehicles . A comprehensive risk assessment 

of electric vehicle fire s was pe rformed using systematic hazard identification . In 

addition, a workshop with representatives from three Swedish fire and rescue service s

was carried out to evaluate the emergency res cue sheets /response guides .

The main conclusions ar e; That statistics regarding vehicle fires need to be improved, as 

of today the root causes of fire s are missing in the data , which could potentially result in 

non -fact based regulations; The data studied in this work does not imply that fire s in 

electric vehicles are more common than fires in internal combustion engine vehicles; 

Fires in electric vehicles and internal combustion engine vehicles are similar in regards 

to the fire intensity and peak heat release rates .

The most effective risk reductions measures on vehicle level , to decrease the number of 

fires in EVs , could not be defined based on that relevant data on the root causes of fires 

in EVs are currently not publicly accessible. The most effective risk reduction measures ,

to limit fire spread, on infrastructure level were the use of fire sprinkler systems, fire 

detection systems (early detection) and increased distance between parked vehicles .

Key words: Electric vehicle, fire safety, enclosed space , parking garage , ve hicle fire ,

field experience, hazard identification 

Cover photo: Anna Olofsson, RISE. P ublic parking garage in Sweden with charging 

station for electrical vehicles .

RISE Research Institutes of Sweden AB 

RISE Report : 2023:42 

ISBN: 978 -91 -89757 -90 -5

2023 2 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# Content 

Abstract ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  1

Content ................................ ................................ ................................ ......  2

Summary ................................ ................................ ................................ ...  3

1 Introduction ................................ ................................ .........................  5

1.1  Background ................................ ................................ ................................ ......... 5

1.2  Objectives ................................ ................................ ................................ ............ 5

1.3  Method ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  6

2 Literature Study ................................ ................................ ...................  8

2.1  Vehicle Fires ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  8

2.2  Enclosed Spaces ................................ ................................ ................................  17 

2.3  Vehicle Fire Incidents in Enclosed Spaces ................................ .......................  18 

2.4  Existing Fire Protection Requirements ................................ ............................  21 

2.5  Field Experience in Enclosed Spaces using Sprinkler Systems .......................  28 

3 Risk Assessment ................................ ................................ .................  31 

3.1  Risk Evaluation Criteria ................................ ................................ ....................  31 

3.2  HAZID Workshops ................................ ................................ ..........................  32 

3.3  Firefighting Practises ................................ ................................ ........................ 37 

4 Workshop with the Fire and Rescue Services ................................ .....  38 

4.1  Workshop Discussions ................................ ................................ .....................  40 

5 Conclusion ................................ ................................ ..........................  41 

5.1  Literature Study ................................ ................................ ................................  41 

5.2 Risk Assessment  ................................ ................................ ..............................  43 

5.3 Current and Proposed Risk Reduction Measures ................................ ............  43 

5.4  Firefighting Tactics ................................ ................................ ..........................  44 

6 References ................................ ................................ .........................  46 

Appendix A. Data on vehicle fires ................................ ................................  1

Appendix B. HAZID Workshops ................................ ................................ ..  13 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# Summary 

Concerns regarding new risks of fire s in electric vehicles (EVs) compared to internal 

combustion engine vehicles (ICEVs) have been raised lately. The concerns primarily 

relate to fires in enclosed spaces such as parking garages and road tunnels. Consequently ,

there are indications that some stakeholders want to prohibit EVs from underground 

parking garages. For the success of electromobility and the transition from fossil -to 

re newable -fuels, it is important to understand the risks and consequences of fires in EVs 

and provide technical solutions if necessary, so as not to hinder the widespread adoption. 

It is also vital that non -fact -based discriminatory treatment of EVs is preve nted. 

This work has investigat ed the risk s and consequences of fires in EVs with a focus on 

enclosed spaces such as parking garages and tunnels. The overall goal was to identify 

differences and similarities between fires in EVs and ICEVs and to propose measure s to 

prevent and mitigate fires in enclosed spaces both at infrastructure and vehicle level . The 

conclusions and proposed measures have been based on all par ts of the study , which 

included a literature study, a risk assessment based on hazard identification workshops 

(HAZID) as well as a workshop with personnel from fire and rescue service s.

In the literature review , data was collected from three main sources : statistics, scientific 

journals, and reports along with media reports . The statistics regarding the cause of fire 

in EVs are limited and many cases are reported as “Unknown”. The lack of knowledge 

regarding the root causes of EV fires may contribute to d iscriminatory treatment of EVs. 

The HAZID workshops were conducted according to ISO 31000:2018, including hazard 

and risk scenario identification, comparative risk ranking, and risk evaluation. The risk 

assessment contained scenario descriptions of how the risk can materialize and 

considered possible mode s of operation of the vehicle. The influence of t he operation 

mode on the inciden t and its outcome were also considered . A total of four HAZID 

workshop sessions were performed .

Furthermore , emergency response guide s/rescue sheet s were evaluated together with 

representatives from the Swedish fire a nd rescue services . This was accomplished by 

sending out a survey as well as through a workshop. Discussions during the workshop 

pointed out that material and the thickness of reinforced parts used in vehicles should 

be s tated in the emergency response guides/rescue sheets . Among the attending recuse 

service personnel , there was a desire to increase the use of sprinkler system s, or at least 

stand pipe systems, in parking garages. Finally, a large part of the workshop was 

dedicated to discussions regarding the electrical safety of EVs du ring rescue operations. 

Two anecdotal accounts of electrical shock related to EVs , and rescue operations were 

shared. 

The main conclusions and proposed effective measures from the study are highlighted 

below. It is , however, important to keep in mind that in 2022 the number of EVs 

compared to ICEVs on the roads is still very low , and EVs are relatively new. Therefore, 

the impact of an aging and growing EV fleet on the fire safety and number of incidents is 

unknown .4 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

The main conclusions from the literature review are listed below: 

• The sparse data available does not indicate that EV fires are more likely than 

fires in ICEVs, rather the contrary by a factor of 8 - 10. 

• Fires in EVs share similarities with fires in ICEVs, such as peak heat release rate 

and total heat release . However, w hile thermal runaway in EVs is difficult to 

extinguish, ICEV fires pose the hazard of a high intensity pool fire which can 

easily spread .

• Case studies and statistics on incidents in enclosed spaces (such as tunnels and 

enclosed parking garages ) for EVs are currently very limited. 

• Charging should be performed using the right equipment . Unavailability of 

charging stations in certain type of garages might lead to that drivers will use 

non -adequate equipment to charge their vehicles, which could potentially 

increase the fire risk. 

• Sprinkler system design in accordance with EN 12845:2015+A1:2019 for 

parking garages is adequate, based on field experience and large -scale tests, for 

passenger vehicles (including both ICEVs and EVs). 

The considered most effective risk reduction measures to prevent fire spread in enclosed 

spaces are listed below: 

• Early fire det ection either through fixed detection systems or /and through 

vehicle integrated smart system s

• Sprinkler systems in enclosed parking garages 

• Increase d distance between pa rked vehicles (wider parking spots) and increased 

ceiling heights of parking garages .

The most effective risk reductions measures at a vehicle level , to decrease the number of 

EV fires, could not be established due to lack of data on the root causes of fire .5 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# 1 Introduction 

This study was performed by RISE Research Institutes of Sweden on behalf of European 

Automobile Manufacturers ’ Association (ACEA ).

# 1.1 Background 

Vehicle fires release toxic smoke which besides causing an environmental damage pose 

risk to human health . In addition, vehicle fires can cause structural damage to 

infrastructure and the consequence can be severe , depending on factors such as location 

and fire spread. One recent example of a such a n incident occurred at Stavanger airport 

in 2020, where a car park partly collapsed due to a fire incident . The incident had huge 

financial consequence s, since the airport had to be shut down , in addition to the lost 

parking structure and several hundred damaged vehicles. [1] 

Full scale vehicle fire tests show that the re are minor differences between fires in 

electrical vehicles (EVs) and internal combustion engine vehicles (ICEVs ) regarding the 

produced effluent s. However , the intensity of the fire and quantity of emissions will 

depend on parameters such as th e type and size of vehicle. [2] Knowledge regarding 

similarities and difference s between fires in E Vs and ICEVs is of great interest since E Vs

are predicted to dominate the market in the future. In 2021, the sales of EVs around the 

world doubled compared to the previous year. As the number of E Vs is increasing , the 

number of fires involving E Vs are also expected to increase. 

Today , commercial E Vs are all powered by a class of batteries called lithium -ion batteries 

(LIBs) . LIBs can enter an unstable state called thermal runa way due to external or 

internal factors such as excessive heating or mechanical damage . During thermal 

runaway, the temperature inside the battery increases rapidly and toxic and flammable 

gases are generated from chemical reactions in the cells . In many cases, the gases 

released from the ruptured cells will also ignite. Fires that start in the traction battery of 

an EV are rare, but once thermal runaway and fire has started in the traction battery , it 

is difficult to extinguish. One reason is that the battery packs are usually well protected 

and hard to reach with the fire suppressant .

During the past years, concerns regarding elevated risks of fire s in EVs compared to 

ICEVs have been raised. The concerns primarily relate to fires in enclosed spaces such as 

parking garages and tunnels. Consequently , there are indications that some stakeholders 

for example want to prohibit E Vs to park in underground parking garages . For the 

success of electromobilit y and the transition from fossil fuels to renewable fuels, it is 

important that misconceptions related to fires in E Vs do not hinder the widespread 

adoption. It is also vital that non -fact -based discriminatory treatment of EVs is 

prevented .

# 1.2 Objectives 

In this study, the overall objective was to investigate the risk of fire of EVs, with a focus 

on enclosed spaces such as parking garages and road tunnels. One goal was t o identify 

potential similarities and differences between fires in EVs and ICEVs. Another goal was 

to propose appropriate risk reduction measures to improve fire safety for EV fires , based 6 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

on the risk assessment methodology . Additionally, a goal was to evaluate the 

requirements on emergency rescue sheet and response guide s in the ISO 17840. 

# 1.3 Method 

Different methods ha ve been used throughout the study. The methods used included a

literature review, data collection, data analysi s, numerical fire simulation, risk 

assessment and a workshop regarding the emergency rescue sheet /response guide s.

# Data Collection 

Field data were collected from three main type of sources :

• statistics 

• scientific articles and r eports 

• media reports 

The statistics were collected from the civil contingency agenc ies in Sweden (MSB) ,

Norway (DSB) , and Denmark (BRS) . Additionally, statistics from US A, U nited Kingdom 

and China were included . Statistics and data from full -scale vehicle fire te sts can be found 

in Appendix A.

Reports and scientific articles were collected by a literature search in the digital scientific 

archive (DiVA) and by visiting homepages of scientific journals along with screening 

reference lists in relevant reports. Presentations and publications from the biannual 

conferences Fires in Vehicles ( FIVE ) and International Symposium on Tunnel Safety and 

Security (ISTSS ) were examined, and relevant contributions were added to the data 

collection. Articles from news papers and media reports were collected by searching 

through several search engines on the web ( Google, Google Scholar , and Bing ). Searches 

at various homepages of newspapers were also performed and relevant articles were 

added to the data list. 

# Data Anal ysis 

The collected data were analysed , and a comparison was made in terms of number of 

occurrence of fires for E Vs and ICEVs . The intensity and size of fire were also compared .

In cases where several vehicles were involved in the fire, the spread was evaluated in 

terms of whether it was affected by the energy carrier (EV or ICEV). Other consequences 

of the fire event such as emissions and jet -flames were also noted . In addition , fires in 

enclo sed spaces and existing fire safety requirements were analysed and discussed. 

# Simulations 

To facilitate the risk assessment related to gas explosion s, previous numerical data 

were collected from published articles , and one additional simulation was performed .

More details can be found in the section regarding explosions. 7 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# Risk Assessment 

A risk assessment was performed by utilizing systematic hazard identification (HAZID) 

workshops followed by ranking of selected fire scenarios (according to I SO 31000 ). The 

risk assessment was based on the aforementioned literature study and engineering 

judgement from experts within RISE. The risk assessment included three step s: hazard 

identification, comparative risk ranking, and risk evaluation . The risk assessment 

included scenario descriptions of how the risk can occur and considered poss ible mode s

of operation of the vehicle . Furthermore , it was included how the mode s could influence 

the incident . The workshops considered the fire development, the surroundings where 

the fire occurs , and the possible outcome s of the fire with and without mitigating 

measures. 

A total of four HAZID workshop sessions were performed , each dedicated to a specific 

theme. In addition, two more sessions were carried out, dedicated to introduction and 

debriefing. Each session lasted for 3.5 – 4 hours and th ey were conducted online . A 

facilitator le d and underlined the scope of each session, and a scribe role was assigned 

for document ation . During the introduction session, the scope was defined and 

exemplified , along with descriptions of important terms and assumptions . During the 

first session, unwanted events for the four themes were defined, as documented in 

Appendix B, Table A1. Each of the four following HAZID workshop sessions then used 

these events as starting point for identification of factors affecting the unwanted event, 

current and potential safety measures, as well as differences between EV and ICEVs. 

Based on the HAZID and literature study, risk reduction measures were proposed . Before 

the final debriefing session, all the experts had the possibility to revisit the 

documentation (Microsoft Excel sheets) produced during the HAZID sessions , to add 

comments, reflections, and further insights. The risks of the unwanted events were then 

rated, and t he effectiveness of the risk reduction measures were evaluated in terms of 

mitigated consequences of the scenarios considered in the HAZID sessions. The 

outcome s and proposed risk reduction measures from the HAZID s are presented in 

section 3 and the documentation from the sessions is presented in Appendix B .

# Workshop with the S wedish Fire and Rescue Services 

The requirements in the emergency rescue sheet and response guide s ( ISO 17840 series )

were studied and discussed in a workshop involving representatives from three Swedish 

fire and rescue services . Representatives from Räddningstjänst Syd, Södra Älvsborgs 

räddningstjänstförbun d and räddningstjänsten Luleå were present during the workshop .

Prior to the workshop , a questionnaire was sent out, using Utkiken newsletter , to the fire 

and rescue services in Sweden . Utkiken is a web -based platform that connects ov er one 

hundred fire and rescue services in Sweden. Utkiken collects relevant information for the 

fire and rescue services and connects over one hundred fire and rescue services in 

Sweden. The goal with the questionnaire and the workshop was to identify if any 

information is missing in the emergency rescue sheet and response guides . A summary 

of the workshop is presented in section 4.8 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# 2 Literature Study 

This section presents the collected data and anal yses of the collected data. The number 

of vehicle fires, root causes of these fires, fire intensity and risk of fire spread have been 

analysed. Additionally, other consequences of vehicle fires (secondary effects) such as 

emissions, extinguishing water con tamination , jet flames and gas explosions are also 

covered in this section. Lastly, a brief overview of existing fire protection regulations and 

field experiences from enclosed fires is included .

Reflections from the data collection and data analysis is later used in combination with 

result from the hazard identification workshops to reflect upon the risk of fire of E Vs and 

to propose appropriate risk reduction measures. 

# 2.1 Vehicle Fires 

The occurrence of vehicle fire s and vehicle fire incident s found in literature ha s been 

analysed from the collected data. Since the total number of E Vs is lower compared to 

ICEVs , the statistic al data available are still limited. Furthermore, i n many databases the 

energy carrier of the vehicle is not specif ied , thus fires in E Vs and ICEVs cannot be 

distinguished. Additionally, reported data does not state if the energy carrier ( i.e. 

battery) caused or was involved in the fire or not . In this section , statistics from Norway, 

Sweden, Denmark, The United States (US) and Chin a are presented. 

Up to date, Norway is the country with the highest proportion of E Vs, with 17.3% of the 

passenger car fleet consist ing of E Vs at the beginning of 2020. [3] The Norwegian 

directorate for civil protection (DSB) has studied the fire occurrence of EVs and ICEVs ;

data is presented in Figure 1. The total number of vehicle fires between 2016 and March 

20 22 is higher for ICEVs than for E Vs ( Figure 1b ), but no accoun t has been taken to the 

higher proportion of ICEVs .

Figure 1. a) Total number of vehicle fires in Norway between 2016 – 2021 and b) total number of 

passenger vehicle fires in Norway between 2016 and March 2022, divided by the type of energy 

carrier .2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021  

> 0
> 200
> 400
> 600
> 800
> 1000
> 1200
> 1400
> Total number of vehicle fires
> Year 0,3% 1,7%
> 12,5%
> 0,8%
> 2,3%
> 82,5%
> Petrol/diesel EV PHEV Gas Other Unknown

a)  b) 9 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

Considering only the data for ICEV and EV fires in Figure 1 b, E Vs represent 2.7% of the 

ICEV and EV fires , while they represented 17.3% of the passenger car fleet at the end of 

the data period. This indicates about a factor 8 lower relative fire frequency of EV than 

of ICEV. Interestingly, the total number of vehicle fir es also shows a slightly declining 

trend from 2018 and forward. However, this trend might not be due to an increasing 

proportion of E Vs but due the Covid pandemic (2020 – 2021), which might have affected 

the number of vehicle fires due to the increased num ber of people working from home 

and less travels made using passenger vehicles. [4] 

In Sweden , the statistics regarding vehicle fires are collected by the Swedish civil 

contingency a gency (MSB). MSB collects data in the IDA database [5] from all incidents 

that the fire and rescue services attend . A comparison of the relative frequency of ICEV 

and EV , including plug -in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs), fires is presented in Table 1 .

The relative frequency of EV fires is lower than for ICEV s with a factor of about ten less 

frequent. One should keep in mind that the EV fleet is younger than the compared ICEV 

fleet.  There are some limitations in the data collected from IDA, namely that the energy 

carrier is not always specified and that fires initiated “during charging” may also include 

charging of the 12 V battery of an ICEV. 

The proportion of fires reported for electric transportations has increased from 2018 to 

2021, most of these fires (78.2%) can be attributed to scooters, kick -bikes, hoverboards 

and electrical bicycles/motorbikes (see Figure 2 ). 

Table 1. Total number of passenger vehicles in Sweden (2018 – 2020) and the total number of 

fires per energy carrier [6] 

Year 

Number of 

EVs and 

PHEV s

Number of 

EVs and 

PHEV s fires 

Relative 

frequency of 

fires 

Number of 

ICEVs 

Number 

of ICEV 

fires 

Relative 

frequency 

of fires 

2018  156 500  8 5 x10 -5 4 900 000  3800  80 x10 -5

2019  21 4 500  6 2 x10 -5 4 900 000  3400  70 x10 -5

2020  308 500  20  6 x10 -5 4 950 000  3400  70 x10 -5

Figure 2. a) Fires in electric transportations in Sweden (2018 – 2021) and b) divided by the type of 

transportation. [6] 2018 2019 2020 2021  

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Total number of fires in electric transportations
> Year 24%
> 21,8%
> 23,3%
> 9,2%
> 21,8% EV Motorbike/moped Bike Scooter/kickbike Hoverboard

a)  b) 10  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

In the statistics from Denmark, fires in charging stations and in the traction battery are 

identifiable together and the total number of fires are presented in Table 2 . In the Danish 

statistics, the overall number of fires related to fires in power installations in buildings 

has increase d compared to previous years (data studied from 2013). Most of these fires 

can be attributed to fires in cables but an increase is also seen for fires in charging 

stations and in the traction battery ( Table 2 ). 

In the US, the national fire protection association (NFPA) reports fire statistics, including 

vehicle fires. [7,8] The US had a total of 1.4 million fires in 2020 and 15% of these were 

in vehicles (12% in highway vehicles, i.e. 173 000 fires , with 580 deaths and 1500 

injuries ). The vehicle fires were responsible for 18% of the deaths and 11% of injuries. In 

2020, NFPA stated that “While hybrid and electric vehicles hav e become more common, 

existing data collection systems have not yet adequately captured the frequency of fires 

involving these specific vehicles .” [7] 

Additionally, the model year of the vehicles involved in fires (that occurred in 2018) have 

also been studied by NFPA. Fires due to technical malfunction are more common for 

vehicles around/or older than 15 years. For newer vehicles (only a couple of years old), 

collis ion incidents are the most common cause of fire.                            

> Table 2. Fires in charging stations and vehicle batteries in Denmark per year , number in brackets
> indicate the total number of fires reported for power installations
> Year
> Number of f ires in charging
> stations a nd vehicle batteries
> in power installations
> Buildings
> Number of f ires in charging
> stations and vehicle batteries
> in power installations
> Open spaces
> 2016 2(1 46 )0 (66)
> 2017 1(1 46 )0 (79)
> 2018 4(208 )1(82)
> 2019 2(222) 2(101)
> 2020 10 (294) 10 (129)
> 2021 7(285) 7(138)

Data on 10 0 vehicle fire incidents , see Appendix A, Table A2, involving 122 EVs and 

PHEVs , were analysed . [6,9] Most of the reported fires occurred when the vehicle was 

parked ( 47.5%) or parked and charging (21.3%), see Figure 3 . A similar trend was also 

observed in data collected by the ALBERO project , [10] where 66 /113 (58%) of the 

identified EV and PHEV fire incidents had occurred when the vehicle s were parked or 

parked and charging. This might suggest that parked as well as parked and charging 

vehicles propose an increase d probability of fire. However, to be able to draw this 

conclusion, t he time that EV s are driven compared to the time that they are parked or 

parked and charging need s to be eva luated . Such statistics could potentially be retrieved 

from vehicle manufacturers. Furthermore , a s seen in Figure 3 b the origin of fire ( fire root 

cause) is to a large extent reported as unknown. The large uncertainty of the root causes 

of fire may hamper the development of appropriate risk reduction measures at a vehicle 

level .11 

© RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

Figure 3. Data on 100 reported EV/PHEV fire incident s, involving a total of 122 vehicles , including 

where the incident occurred and the fire root cause . The smaller area (5%) in the charging slice 

represents fires external ly ignited while charging (faulty installation, extension cable , wall socket 

etc.). 

Limited statistics from China were retrieved in this project . Vehicle fire s reported for the 

first quarter of 2022 are presented in Figure 4. The data does not distinguish E Vs, but 

they state that out of the total 19 000 vehicle fires, 0.33% were reported for alternative 

fuel vehicles , [11] these also include gas vehicles . The data analysed does not reveal where 

the fire incident occurred, neither did it report fires related to collisions or the origin of 

fire . The most common fire origin was electric faults, but the connection to E Vs for these 

fir es is un known. 

Figure 4. Vehicle fire causes reported for the first quarter of 2022 , China . [11] 11,5%  

> 21,4%
> 15,3% 23,5%
> 28,3%
> Fire caused by electricity Careless use of fire Were left behind in fire Smoking Spontaneous/playing with fire

Fire causes for vehicle fires, China 14,8% 

> 54,1%
> 18,9%
> 12,3%
> Driveline Vehicle External fire Unknown

Origin/Seat of Fire 15,6% 

> 5,7%
> 9,8%
> 21,3%
> 47,5%
> Parked Charging During drive Crash Unknown

Mode - Where was the incident 

> 5%
> 16,3%

a)  b) 12  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

The main conclusion from the available data is that EV fires are not more likely than f ires 

in ICEVs, rather the contrary by a factor of 8 - 10 . However, as E Vs are still relatively new 

and few , it might be that the number of EV fires will increase as the fleet becomes larger 

and as the fleet age s. Recommendations on more detailed statistics are encouraged ,

especially regarding the root causes of f ires , as well as if the traction battery was involved 

or not in the fire. In addition, the energy carrier is normally not reported in statistics of 

vehicle fires , which makes statistical studies difficult. 

# Fire Causes 

In this study , for the HAZID workshop , fire causes have b een divided into four 

subcategories. 

• arson 

• fires related to the energy carrier (fuel tank or traction battery) 

• other parts in the vehicle (e.g. , engine compartment, wheels) 

• external factors 

Arson includes all intentional fires . This sub category of fire cause is independent of the 

type of vehicle and the scenario is difficult to predict and prevent. The subcategory , fire 

related to energy carrier includes the petrol tank for ICEVs and the traction battery for 

EVs. The third category, o ther parts in the vehicle , includes fires starting at any other 

part of the vehicle , e.g ., en gine compartment, brakes or 12 V battery. Finally, external 

factors are fires resulting from for example faulty equipment, extension cables , charging 

stations , not including parts of the vehicle itself. 

Regarding the likelihood of fire causes , the subcategories arson and external factors 

should be similar whether t he vehicle is an EV or an ICEV . Fires ca uses related to the 

energy carrier will vary if the car is an ICEV or EV. 

# Intensity of Fire 

To compare similarities and differences between fires in ICEVs and EVs, l iterature values 

of t he peak heat release rate (HRR) and the total heat release (THR) were collected (see 

Appendix A for references ) and are presented in Figure 5.

A vehicle fire typically lasts for 60 – 90 min, h as a peak HRR in the range of 1.5 – 10 MW 

and an average THR of 5.9 GJ. [2] The total chemical energy available in a vehicle will 

vary depending on the vehicle type and size , and on the materials used to manufacture 

the vehicle. For example, the trend towards heavier vehicles and use of m ore plastic 

[12,13] in vehicle production will increase the chemical energ y (total available fire 

energy ). This is also visible in Figure 5 if comparing the peak HRR and THR for ICEV (1), 

that represents vehicles manufactured before year 2000, to ICEV (2), that represents 

vehicles manufactured after year 2000. 

The collected data shows that there are no significant differences between ICEVs a nd 

EVs regarding the peak HRR (maximum intensity of the fire) or the THR (total energy 

combusted) .13  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

Figure 5. a) Peak HRR and b) THR for ICEV s, PHEV s and BEV s. ICEV (1) represents vehicles 

manufactured before year 2000 and ICEV (2) vehicles manufactured after year 2000. References 

can be found in Appendix A.

# The Probability of Fire Spread 

Current design requirements and recommendations for parking garages assume that the 

fire will not spread between adjacent vehicles. However, i ncident reports indicate the fire 

can spread from one vehicle to the next vehicle in e.g., a parking garage fire . Additionally, 

regulations regarding fire detection systems varies between different jurisdictions . It is 

sometimes assumed that people will notice the fire and alert the fire and rescue service 

or to extinguish the fire with a handheld extinguisher. Previous experience s on parking 

garage fires show that this is not the case . On the c ontrary, it usually takes a long time 

before a fire is detected , which leads to a delay of the arrival of the fire and rescue service. 

The probability of fire spread in enclosed spaces is affected by three main factors :

• distance between parked vehicles 

• material used to manufacture the vehicle s

• ceiling height of the enclosed space 

The distance between parked vehicles will depend on the size of the vehicle , the size of 

the parking spot , as well as of the occupancy of the pa rking garage , i.e. the density of the 

parked vehicles . Fire and heat can spread through direct flame/plume contact and 

through radiation. A shorter distance between the parked vehicles increases the 

probability for direct plume / flame contact. Additionally , t oday’s vehicles are generally 

wider than the ir previous models . For example, a BMW 3 series was 1.6 m wide in 1992 

and 2.03 m wide in 2019 . For an increase in width , from 1.6 m to 2.0 m, the distance 

between two vehicles is reduced from 0.9 m to 0.5 m . The radiation is inversely 

proportional to the distance squared and consequently, the radiation will increase with 

a factor of ~ 4. The width of the parking spot will also affect the distance between parked 

vehicles . In Sweden , a park ing spot is generally 2.5 m wide. ICEV (1) ICEV (2) PHEV BEV    

> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> Peak HRR (MW)
> Vehicle type ICEV (1) ICEV (2) PHEV BEV
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> THR (GJ)
> Vehicle type

a)  b) 14  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

The material used to manufactur e the vehicles will also affect the fire scenario . For 

example, the increased use of plastics will increase the fire load and available chemical 

energy. When vehicle fire requirements were developed in the 1950s, hardly any plastics 

were used in vehicles. In 1970 , 6% of the total vehicle weight was contributed by plastics, 

and in 20 20 it had increased to 18% . [13] This might result in an offset in the fire safety 

requirements in relation to the vehicles used today. Additionally, t he mass and height of 

passenger vehicles has also increased since the 1990’s. [14] The distance between the 

vehicle and the ceiling in the enclosed space will also have an impact on the fire spread .

A l ow ceiling height (or increased height of the vehicle) will increase th e radiation from 

the ceiling down towards the vehicles and therefore increase the risk of fire spread .

The mentioned f actors that enable fire to spread are similar for E Vs and ICEVs. One 

additional risk with ICEVs is the possibility of liquid pool fires . L iquid pool fires can 

result from rupture of the petrol or diesel tank , due to for example external heating. 

Liquid pool fires may increase the fire spread and the extent will depend on the amount 

of fuel, the incline of the floor ing and drains adjacent to the vehicle. One case of liquid 

pool fire spread was found in the literature review and is presented in more detail in 

section 2. 3, Fire Incidents in Parking Garages .

For E Vs the possibility of jet flames from the battery pack could potentially contribute to 

the fire spread . Jet flames are commonly deflected underneath the vehicle and could 

potentially reach a neighbouring vehicle and cause ignition. However, to the best of our 

knowledge, specific studies of this phenomenon have not yet been performed. Gehandler 

and Lönnermark [15] studied jet flames from the thermally activated pressure relief 

devic e (TPRD ) of compressed natural gas (CNG ) tanks for vehicles. The resulting jet 

flames were 1 – 10 m long depending on design of the TPRD and the incident radiation 

at 12 m was rather low, 2 kW m-2. Jet flame resulting from an EV are substantially s horter 

in length and duration , as noticed during vehicle fire tests performed at RISE. 

# Other Consequences of Fire 

Other consequences of vehicle fire s are further elaborated in the following sections. 

Secondary effects include fire emissions, contaminated extinguishing water , explosion s

and that the vehicle start s to move during a rescue operation .

Emissions 

Emissions from vehicle fires contains a variety of toxic gases such as carbon monoxide, 

hydrogen cyanide, volatile organic compounds, polyaromatic hydrocarbons, hydrogen 

halides, and metals along with soot particulates. [2,16] These effluents are found in all 

vehicle fires (both for ICEVs and E Vs) and are a direct danger to first responders since 

inhal ation of these gases and compounds can be fatal. 

Comparison of emissions from EV and ICEV fires show that hydrogen fluoride , together 

with some specific metals (such as nickel, cobalt, lithium , and manganese , depending on 

the battery chemistries ) are found in somewhat higher concentrations in the combustion 

gases from EVs than from ICEV s. [2] 

In a previous RISE project, “Fire in new energy carriers on deck , BREND 2.0 ”, [17,18] it 

was found that the danger of the combustion gases , in an enclosed space, pose d no 

practical difference between EV and ICEV fires . Th ese results were based on computer 15  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

simulations , where the fractional effective dose (FED) of asphyxiants and the fractional 

effective concentration (FEC) of irritants were modelled in a ro -ro space . Another 

conclusion from the conducted simulations was that ventilation was important when it 

came to the magnitude of the FED and FEC. Values exceeding 0.3 (design value 

equivalent to when 11 % of the general population will be incapacitated by exposure [19] )

were found at all heights in the enclosed space model (without ventilation) , while only 

exceeding 0.3 at the ceiling height in the open space model . It is important to bear in 

mind that all vehicle fires, regardless energ y carrier, pose a danger to human health due 

to the toxic emissions formed. 

Extinguishing Water 

Preliminary results from studies performed at RISE in the project “Investigation of fire 

extinguishing water from vehicle fires , ETOX -2”, show that the fire extinguishing water 

was highly toxic towards aquatic species, for both ICEVs and EVs. The extinguishing 

water collected from the ICEV fire test was somewhat worse than the water collected 

from the EV fire test. However, per - and polyfluo roalkyl substances ( PFAS ) were found 

in higher concentrations for the LIB tested. Further studies on the existing PFAS 

substances in LIBs or LIB fires are currently very limited which indicates a need to 

further validation of these findings. 

Explosions 

In case of thermal runaway, the traction battery will vent gases . T o a large extent these 

gases consist of carbon dioxide, hydrogen, carbon monoxide and various hydrocarbons .

[20 ] The volumetric percentage of hydrogen in the vent ed gas varies from a few percent 

up to 30% , depending on cell chemistry and state of charge . [20 ,21 ] Hydrogen is a highly 

flammable gas , with a wide flammab ility range and a great laminar flame speed. Thi s

poses a potential risk of gas cloud explosion in enclosed spaces . Additionally , the risk of 

a gas explosion will be affected by the ventilation conditions and the release scenario. 

Gas explosions related to large battery energy storage systems have been reported , for 

example, an explosion on a ferry with battery propulsion [22 ] and in a stationary battery 

energy storage system . [23 ] No reports on explosions due to accumulation of battery vent 

gases from E Vs have been found. The risk of flammable gas clouds is less probable for 

diesel, petrol , and ethanol vehicles, whilst the risk for gas powered vehicles (if there is a 

leak) is higher. 

In work by Li , [21 ] a numerical model was developed to obtain blast wave pressures ,

resulting from the explosion of a hydrogen gas cloud , in a 50 m 2 tunnel. The peak blast 

wave overpressure as a function of the distance from the cloud centre , for various 

quantities of hydrogen mixed with air in the tunnel , is presented in Figure 6 . The 

pressure drops rapidly around 20 m from the cloud centre and attenuates slowly along 

the tunnel. The simulation using 1 kg of hydrogen was performed for this study , whilst 

the other simulations were retrieved from work by Li . [21 ]16       

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 050 100 150 200 250
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Peak blast wave overpressrue (kPa)
> Distance from the cloud center (m)
> 1 kg H2 2 kg H2 4 kg H2 6 kg H2

Figure 6. The blast pressure as a function of distance for various quantities of hydrogen gas 

stoichiometrically mixed with air in a tunnel. 

The total amount of vent gas formed , can be estimated to ~ 0.5 L Wh -1. [24 ] This indicates 

that a 100 kWh LIB could potentially release ~ 50 kg of gas. The total concentration of 

hydrogen could therefore be ~ 1.4 kg (1 – 2 kg). For 1.4 kg of hydrogen , the peak blast 

pressure would end up between 14 – 20 kPa , at a distance of 20 – 50 m (see Figure 6 ).

Notice that the contribution of other vent gases is not considered and may affect the 

outcome of the numerical model. 

For trucks that carry larger batter y packs , the explosion hazards could be severe, and 

should be addressed. Further more , the distribution of hydrogen and location of ignition 

will influence the explosion hazard . The distribution of hydrogen gas is affected by the 

release pattern, geometry of the enclosed space and ventilation conditions .

Vehicle Start s to Move 

A vehicl e that starts to move during a rescue operation could potentially result in crush 

injuries and is a risk to the firefighters and car passengers . This risk is present for both 

ICEVs and E Vs. Firefighters that attend a vehicle fire usually block the wheels of the 

vehicle before they intervene . Which will d ecreas e the risk that the vehicle would 

unintentionally start moving . For E Vs, that generally are quieter than ICEVs, there could 

potentially be difficulties to assess if the engine is on or off , especially if the surrounding s

are noisy. 

# Fire -Fighting Practises 

Recommendations on how to manage vehicle fires in ro -ro spaces onboard ships were 

developed in the RISE project “Fire in new energy carriers on deck BREND 2.0 ”. [18, 25 ]

EVs, H 2 and CNG vehicles were included in the study. Conclusions from this study were 

that the initial fire in all type of passenger vehicle fires should be handled in a similar 

way, regardless of energy carrier. In fact, liquid fuels (such as petrol and diesel) are more 

likely to initiate or contribute to the fire at an early stage (e.g ., liquid pool fires) than the 17  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

alternative fuels. Here, an offensive tactic could be effective, but the personnel that fights 

the fire needs to be prepared for the fuel -dependent h azards that may occur. 

Regarding firefighting intervention, it was concluded that the chance for a successful 

intervention was higher during the initial fire development for alternative fuel vehicles, 

given early detection and trained and prepared crew. In itial intervention could be 

conducted by an unprotected person, a fixed firefighting system (FFFS) or by the fire 

team onboard. 

The preceding project “Fire -fighting of alternative fuel vehicles in ro -ro spaces , BREND ”

investigated methods and equipment fo r firefighting with alternative fuel vehicles in ro -

ro spaces . [26 ,27 ] Further investigations have been made in the project “l egislative 

assessment for hazards of fire and innovat ions in ro -ro ship environment, LASH FIRE ”

by conducting full scale fire tests on electric cars with LIBs . In some of the tests , different 

tools and methods for firefighting were evaluated, for example vehicle fire blanket 

(Figure 7 ), handheld devices for cooling and boundary cooling fognail. One of the main 

con clusions from the drills in LASH FIRE was that drills are very important, to get the 

crew familiar with the different tools used. 

Recommendations for firefighting interventions can also be found in the TUSC 

handbook. [28 ] The recommendations found in the TUSC handbook focus on fire 

interventions in the construction phase of a tunnel/underground construction, but a 

general conclusion from this handbook is that the development of smoke is one of the 

major challenges with fires in enclosed spaces. The smoke is accumulated in the tunnel 

which makes evacuation and intervention more difficult compared to a fire incident 

above ground.          

> Figure 7.Fire figh ters applying a vehicle fire blanket during the fire drills in the LASH FIRE pro ject .
> Photo by Anna Olofsson, RISE.

# 2.2 Enclosed Spaces 

The enclosed spaces considered within this study include parking garages and road 

tunnels. Parking garages are further divided into “enclosed parking garage” and “open 

parking garage”. An “enclosed parki ng garage” is defined as an enclosed building or 

structure, built above or below ground, where vehicles can ingress/egress only through 

opening (s). In addition, these spaces require mechanical ventilation. An “open parking 18  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

garage” is fully or partly built above ground and is naturally ventilated. The code 

definitions varies but typically, an open parking garage should have uniformly 

distributed openin gs on two or more sides with a total open area of at least 20 – 50 % of 

the perimeter wall area of each floor level. 

Road tunnels considered within this study are divided into bi -directional or 

unidirectional tunnels, where the ventilation system can have either longitudinal or 

transvers e ventilation ( Figure 8). For a longitudinal ventilation system , air flows from 

one end to the other , while for a transverse ventilation system the air flows are 

transversely transferred from one side to the other through s upply and exhaust fans. For 

a semi -transverse system, only supply fans or exhaust fans are in operation. Notice that 

the locations of supply and exhaust ducts may be different to the sch ematic drawing 

(Fig ure 8), e.g ., both ducts may be placed at the upper part of the tunnel .

Figure 8. Schematic images of a tunnel with ( top ) longitudinal ventilation , sideview, and ( bottom )

transverse (not vertical) ventilation , top view ; t aken from reference [29 ].

# 2.3 Vehicle Fire Incidents in Enclosed Spaces 

Vehicle fires in enclosed spaces are further describe d below , divided into fires in parking 

garages and fires in road tunnels. 

# Fire Incidents in Parking Garages 

The number of fires in parking garages in Sweden between 2005 – 20 19 are presented in 

Figure 9. The number of fires show a small increase over the years ; the reason behind 

this increase is unknown. Additionally, three accident investigations of underground 

parking garage fires in Sweden have been studied in detail. A con clusion drawn from 

these investigations is that the environment for the fire and rescue service attending 

underground car park fires is harsh , especially due to thick smoke and long access routes. 

All three reports indicate that structural damages were fou nd (concrete spalling) which 

could potentially impose a great danger. In work by Terlouw, [14] where statistics on car 

park fires and spread between vehicles were covered, the fires developed beyond the first 

vehicle in 42% of the incidents studied . T erlouw also note d that major structural damage 

was common and concluded that t he fire will most likely spread much faster in an open 

car park compared to an underground garage due to the availability of air as well as wind. 

[14] tunnel jet fans Contaminant / heat exhaust duct exhaust duct supply duct supply duct Contaminant / heat 19     

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden
> Figure 9 . Number of fires in parking garages in Sweden between 2005 –2019. References can be
> found in Appendix A .

Statistics on car park fires in the UK are presented in Figure 10 . The data indicates that 

the total number of fires is higher for multi -story parkin g garages above ground than for 

underground parking garages. The extent of damage was although similar for the two 

groups. The reason for the l arge extent of damage in 2014/15 could not be found ( Figure 

10 b). For 2017/18 the large extent of damage could be coupled to the fire at King’s Dock, 

Liverpool , which resulted in 1 400 destroyed vehicles, and took 36 hours for the fire and 

rescue service to control. The car park was an open car park consisting of six floors, with 

natural ventilation. According to the fire investigation, the fire started in a Range Rover 

(ICEV ) and spread to nearby cars . After ~ 1.5 hours the fire spread to another floor 

through the drainage system (liquid pool fire). The structure was completely damaged 

but did not collapse. 

Another major car park fire is the fire at Stavanger airport in Norway. [1] The fire brook 

out in an Opel Zafira (ICEV) on the 7 th of January 2020 and the vehicle was parked on 

the ground floor. Not long after the fire started , it spread to over 10 vehicles and 

subsequently also to the first floor. Accident investigat ions show that the wind conditions 

aided in the rapid fire spread. After approximately 2 hours, parts of the car park 

collapsed. The incident at Stavanger airport resulted in a huge financial loss since the 

airport had to be shut down and several hundred vehicles were damage d. 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120
> 140
> Fires in parking garages
> Year

20  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

Figure 10 . a) Number of parking garage fires in UK between 2012 – 2020 and b) average extent of 

damage in m 2 for green – multi -story garages, yellow – underground garages and grey – “other”. 

Reference can be found in Appendix 1. 

# Fire Incidents in Tunnels 

A study from PIARC presents tunne l fire statistics from 12 countries. [30 ] The statistics 

show that the fire rate of heavy goods vehicles ( HGVs ) appears to be higher than for other 

types of vehicles, and the ratio lies between 1 and 4. 

Fire statistics from Austria show that most fires (90%) are caused by vehicle defects and 

around 10% of the fires were caused by collisions. The rate of fires caused by vehicle 

defects was 3 – 6 times higher for HGVs than for passenger vehicles based on Au stralian 

and French data, and 1.5 – 2 times in Norway. 

Casey [31 ] analysed fire incidents from 16 Australian urban road tunnels, equipped with 

low -pressure water -based fire suppression system. Vehicle defects were pointed out as 

the key cause of fires and the portion of fires caused by collision was even lower than 

reported in the statistics from Austria. Unknown causes of fire were reported for 28% of 

the incidents. For tunnel fire incidents, where the tunnel was equipped with a fire 

suppression system , the time from fire detection to re -opening of the tunnel was less than 

4.2 hours (except for the Burnley tunnel incident in 2007). [32 ] This could be regarded 

as a positive sign for installation of water -based fire suppression systems in tunnels. 

Bai et al. [33 ] analysed 156 tunnel fire incidents, mostly incidents i n China , which 

resulted in the statistics on fire origin and cause in Figure 1 1. They concluded that a 

majority of tunnel fires in China occur in summer; tunnel fire accidents are more 

frequent in economically developed areas in China as well as in the mountainous areas 

in western China ; long tunnels and very long tunnels experience more fire accidents ,

which occur mostly at tunnel entrance/exit (within 200 m from portals); most tunnel 

fires are caused by spontaneous combustion of vehicles (vehicle defects) and traffic 

accidents; consequences of tunnel fires include casualties, vehicle damage, damages to 

tunnel structure and facilities , and traffic interruption. Around 36% of the fire inc idents 

were caused by a traffic accident (or collision). For vehicle fires caused by vehicle defects, 

the locations of ignition sources mostly involve the engine and tires .2012/13 

> 2013/14
> 2014/15
> 2015/16
> 2016/17
> 2017/18
> 2018/19
> 2019/20
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Number of parking garage fires in UK
> Year 2012/13
> 2013/14
> 2014/15
> 2015/16
> 2016/17
> 2017/18
> 2018/19
> 2019/20
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> 250
> 300
> 350
> 400
> 450
> Average extent of damage (m 2)
> Year

a)  b) 21  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

Figure 11 . Reason for fire and origin of fire from 156 tunnel fire incidents, data taken from reference 

[33 ]

Major Fire Incidents in Tunnels 

Major fire incidents (before 2015) with catastrophic consequences in road tunnels w ere 

reported by Ingason et al. [29 ]. Most of these catastrophic fire incidents in road tunnels 

were caused by collision involving at least one HGV (or tanker). Ventilation was found to 

be a key influencing factor, as it plays a role in how the flame spreads over the initial 

vehicle(s) and tow ards neighbouring vehicles. 

Tunnel Fire Incidents Related to Electric Vehicles 

Fire incidents related to EVs in road tunnels are scarce . A plausible reason for this could 

be that EVs still represent a small number of the overall passenger vehicle fleet. Some 

incidents related to EVs are described briefly below. 

On 26 July 2022, a Tesla Model 3 caught fire in a tunnel in China. The car wa s destroyed, 

and the tunnel became full of sooty smoke on the downstream side. The driver reported 

that debris/parts from the wheels of a truck ahead of the vehicle detached and hit the 

vehicle chassis. [34 ]

On 26 Aug 2022, an electric bus caught fire while driving in Wusong tunnel in Tongling, 

China. Fortunately, there were only two passengers on the bus, and they were evacuated 

safely. The fire was extinguished by a fixed fire suppression system on the vehic le, 

probably desig ned for such purpose . The operator of the bus mentioned that such 

incidents have occurred several times. [35 ]

# 2.4 Existing Fire Protection Requirements 

Rules and regulations regarding the fire safety in parking garages and tunnels varies 

between countries and are extensive . In the following sections a brief overview of some 

of the requirements for fire protection in road tunnels and parking garages are presented. 

Additionally , existing requirements for charging infrastructure is fur ther described .4,5%   

> 35,9%
> 5,1%
> 54,5%
> Spontaneous combustion of vehicle Spontaneous combustion of goods Traffic incident Other 2,4% 2,4% 3,5%
> 9,4%
> 41,2%
> 41,2%
> Engine Tire Fuel tank Wiring Air conditioning Battery

Reason for fire  Origin of fire 22  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# Re quirements for Road Tunnel s

Swedish requirements for fire protection of road tunnels can be found in The Swedish 

Transport Administration document regarding construction of tunnels, TDOK 

2016:0231 (“Krav Tunnelbyggande”) [36 ] and in law 2006:418 regarding safety in road 

tunnels. [37 ] The law is ratified through The Swedish Transport Agency’s regulation on 

safety in road tunnels TSFS 2019:93 . [38 ]

According to TDOK 2016:023 1 tunnels shall be divided into a Tunnel Class: TC, TB, or 

TA , where the tunnel class TA comes with the most requirements. The classification is 

dependent on the tunnel length and the dimension ed year -round traffic. A tunnel in class 

TA shall have a shutdown option, fire detection system, evacuation alarm, variable lane 

signals, camera surveillance , alarms for security and traffic incidents, traffic control 

system, traffic information system, traffic management system, monitoring functions 

and enhanced fire protection. However , TDOK 2016:02 31 gives the construct ion 

contractor option s to make certain changes and additions to specified requirements . The 

extent of fire protection measures in a road tunnel shall be based on an investigation of 

the tunnel's safety in use , which shall be done duri ng an early phase of the design .

Above -mentioned requirements are based on Swedish regulations and 

recommendations. International regulations for fire protection and life safety for road 

tunnels can be found in the National Fire Protection Agency standard NFPA 502 

Standard for Road Tunnels, Bridges, and Other Limited Access Highways . [39 ] In NFPA 

502 , tunnels are categorized in a different way compared to in Sweden with, tunnels less 

than 90 meters (category X) to tunnels with a length of 1000 me ter or longer (category 

D) . Category B, C and D need to meet all the requirements in the standard. According to 

NFPA 502 , tunnels in category B, C and D shall have at least two independent means for 

detection and localization of the fire. An a utomatic fire detection system shall be 

installed. 

Tunnel Construction 

For tunnels in Sweden where the main load -bearing system consis ts of surrounding rock, 

no verification of the load -bearing capacity in case of fire is required. The load -bearing 

capacity of tunnels that may flood in the event of fire (submerged tunnels) or cause 

nearby buildings to collapse (overlays) must be verified by testing or calculation . The fire 

intensity in tests and calculations shall be according to the standardized hydrocarbon 

time -tem perature curve in SS -EN 1363 -2:1999. [40 ] The duration of the fire exposure 

shall be at least 180 minutes (3 kap. 10 §, TSFS 2019:93). According to the inter nationally 

recognized NFPA 502 standard , protection of structural elements in a tunnel shall be 

designed to prevent progressive collapse of primary structural elements. For this 

purpose, another time -temperature curve is referenced, namely Rijkswaterstaa t, which 

is more severe than the hydrocarbon curve used in the Swedish regulation . The 

functional requirements for structural elements according to NFPA 502 are , in addition 

to life safety, (1) to support fire fighter accessibility (2) to minimize economic impact ,

and (3) to mitigate structural damage. 

Construction parts that form the boundary between a traffic space and a space that is 

part of an evacuation route shall be des igned to at least withstand the standard/cellulosic 23  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

time -temperature curve (less intense than the hydrocarbon curve) for 60 minutes (3 kap. 

§12, TSFS 2019:93). 

In tunnels where transportation of dangerous goods is permitted, there must be a 

drainage syste m that can lead away flammable or toxic liquids. The drainage system must 

prevent fire, flammable liquids, and toxic liquids from spreading in the tunnel tube and 

between the tunnel tubes (3 kap. 21 §, TSFS 2019:93). 

Tunnel Ventilation 

For tunnel s longer t han 1000 meters and with a traffic flow 1 higher than 4000 , there are 

requirements for mechanical ventilation (3 kap. 15 §, TSFS 2019:93). Transverse or semi 

transverse ventilation should be used in tunnels with bi -directional flow and in tunnels 

where dense queuing is expected. If longitudinal ventilation is used in these tunnels, a 

risk analysis must be carried out and be the base for if/which risk reducing measures 

need to be applied (3 kap. 15 §, TSFS 2019:93). The ventilation syste m in these tunnels 

sha ll be able to direct the gases emitted from a fire and the exhaust system shall be 

functionable in fire scenarios. This means that the equipment used should withstands 

temperatures that can be expected from fire gases. 

In accordance with NFPA 502, emergency ventilation systems shall be developed to use 

the tunnel ventilation system as much as possible. The purpose of the emergency 

ventilation system is to remov e and co ntrol smoke and hot gases from fires in the tunnel. 

Rescue Operation and Evacuation 

Regarding accessibility for the fire and r escue service, it is stated in the Swedish 

requirements that " A tunnel must be designed so that the emergency services are given 

the opportunity to carry out efforts to save life, property and the environment " ( B.3.8 

TDOK 2016:0231). Additionally, a ccording to the Swedish Law Safety on road tunnels 

(2006:418 , 12 § ), it is required that the operator of tunnels longer than 500 meters to has 

a yearly safety practice (involving the fire and rescue services, the Police Authority , and 

the tunnel operator safety coordinator ).

Emergency phone s and handheld fire extinguishers sha ll be available in tunnels. The 

distance between fire hydrants must be a maximum of 250 meters (3 kap. 35 §, TSFS 

2019:93). According to NFPA 502 , the distances between portable extinguishers shall 

not exceed 90 meters. Fire hydrants must be arranged near the tunnel mouths. 

The distance between evacuation routes shall not exceed 500 meters , which is in line 

with the allowable distance defined in European Directive on minimum safety 

requirements and mentioned in PIARC Road Tunnels Manual . [41 ] PIARC highlights the 

importance of self -rescue of people in a tunnel fire incident. To mitigating the 

consequences of the incident , people need a quick access to a safe zone, which is not 

affected by smoke .

Sprinkler System Design in Road Tunnels 

In most countries , installation of fixed firefight ing systems (FFFS ) is not specified by 

national tunnel regulations . Therefore, these installation s could be considered as an      

> 1Traffic flow is defined in T SFS 2019:93 as: dimensioning year -round traffic with vehicles ,
> calculated per tunnel tube .

24  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

additional safety measure to handle specific risks or to compensate for insufficiencies in 

tunnel d esign and /or other fire safety equipment. Road tunnels in Australia, New 

Zealand, and Japan ( for certain length and traffic flow) however , require installation of 

water -based fire protection systems. 

There are no European standards for the design and installation of sprinkler systems in 

road tunnels, but PIARC has published practices and recommendations for FFFS in road 

tunnels. [42 ] According to the recommendations by PIARC, there is no single 

deter ministic method for determining the water application rate for a FFFS, as this is a 

choice combining current practice, large -scale testing and/or engineering analysis. It is 

also argued that the water application rate depends on the fire protection objecti ves. In 

some countries, such as Japan, the water application rate is pre -defined and varies from 

2.5 – 12 mm min -1. [42 ]

According to NFPA 502, a fire hazard analysis shall be conducted to determine both the 

design parameters of a water based FF FS and th e type of fire detection and activation 

scheme to be employed. The fire hazard analysis should address the anticipated vehicle 

types, their content, ease of ignition and re -ignition of fuels, anticipated fire growth rate, 

anticipated maximum heat release r ate of a fire and expected fire duration time. 

In a report by the Federal Highway Association , visits to several tunnels in Australia and 

New Zealand were made to study the use of FFFS s. [43 ] The water application rate was 

typically 10 mm min -1 in new tunnels (with zone lengths of ~ 25 – 30 m) and in tunnels 

retrofitted with FFFS, the water application rate was ~ 6.5 mm min -1. Detection of 

incidents typically relie d on a closed -circuit television (CCTV) camera system with b oth 

trained operators and automatic video incident detection (AVID). For all tunnels visited ,

heat detection system s were used as back -up. The AVID systems or the operator viewing 

the CCTV were the first to detect stopped vehicle s or fire s. Typically, a spacing of about 

60 m between cameras was desired to enable the identification of the location and nature 

of the incident. Several incidents were documented where the operation of the FFFS 

controlled or extinguished fires in passenger cars o r trucks. 

The Swedish recommendation for fire protection measures in road tunnels (TSFS 

2019:93 ), recognizes the use of FFFS. If such a system is installed, an evaluation shall be 

made to determine the impact on the : drainage system , stratification of the air in the 

tunnel cross -section in the event of a fire , the ventilation system , the tunnel’s monitoring 

and control system , as well as the ir relationship with the fire detection and alarm 

systems. 

# Requ irements for Parking Garages 

Swedish requirements for fire protection of parking garages can be found in the national 

Building Code (BFS 2011 with amendments until BFS 2020:4 ). Fire protection of 

buildings in Sweden has its ba sis in the type of building and what the building will be 

used for. Buildings are divided into building classes based on the protection needs of the 

building. These n eeds shall consider fire scenario s, possible consequences of a fire and 

the complexity of the building ( e.g ., number of floors and function of the building). 

Garages with more than 3 floors give the highest class ification and hence stricter 

requirements . The building code also utilizes alternative design , which means that fire 

protection can be analytically designed using for example computer simulations to verify 

the level of fire protection. 25  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

In NFPA 88A, Standard for Parking Structures, [44 ] requirements for parking structures 

are included . NFPA 88A is used internationally and therefore provide an international 

outlook on fire protection of parking garages. Requirements from NFPA 88A are 

described further in the coming sections. 

Garage Construction 

According to BFS 2011:6 (amendments BFS 2020:4), [45 ] garages must be designed so 

that the risk of fire or explosion due to the presence of flammable or explosive gases is 

limited. Garages addressed in the Swedish building Code are those larger than 50 m 2. In 

the Swedish building code , it is stated that f or parking garages with large floor area and 

parking garages with more than 2 floors are required to design the fire protection with 

performance -based design. This means that the complexity of the structure and of the 

fire protection may be high and needs to be validated through a specific assessment. It is 

therefore difficult to state gener ic fire protection requ irements fo r parking garages. Four 

criteria shall be particularly considered in the assessment: 

• if external extinguishing intervention cannot be carried out 

• if internal rescue intervention can be complicated 

• if the feared consequence in case of collapse is very large 

• if the evacuation process can be associated with great difficulties 

The fire load in a parking garage for passenger cars is generall y assumed to be 800 MJ 

m-2. Construction parts that form the boundary between the garage and other spaces 

should be designed to withstand the passage of flames, fume, toxic gases, radiant heat, 

and temperature for a period of 60 minutes (EI60) while expose d to the 

standard/cellulosic time -temperature curve. Parking garages (also applied for other 

large buildings ) cannot cover too large floor areas due to the risk of fire spread . This is 

normally assessed by evaluating the need for fire compartmentation and/ or a sprinkler 

system. From the Swedish building code , it is listed that without a fire detection system 

or an automatic firefighting system ( i.e. a sprinkler system ) the area can be 1250 m2.

According to NFPA 88A (2023) open parking garages are permitted to be of unlimited 

area if both of the following conditions are met: 

1) the height does not exceed 25 m 

2) the horizontal distance from any point on any parking level to an exterior wall 

opening on a street, an alley, a courtyard, or other similar perm anent open space 

does not exceed 60 m. 

Garage Ventilation 

Open parking garages are naturally ventilated through openings uniformly distributed 

in the perimeter of each floor. Open parking garages are not required to have mechanical 

ventilation according to NFPA 88A (2023). Mechanical ventilation is however required 

for enclosed car parks. The capacity shall be 300 l min 1 per m 2 of floor area. This capacity 

shall be maintained during normal operation. 

Rescue Operation and Evacuation 

Generally, parking garages must be designed to allow satisfactory evacuation in case of 

fire. The same is valid for rescue operations, parking garages must be designed so that 

rescue operation can be carried out with satisfactory safety .26  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

Regarding evacuation , it is often ordinary evacuation routes, such as doors and staircases 

that shall be used as escape routes. They are often designed for the number of people that 

will use them. A parking garage intended for various sorts of public events where many 

people are expe cted to park/pick up their cars at the same time needs to have larger 

dimension s.

Sprinkler System Requirements for Parking Garages 

Some jurisdictions require sprinkler systems in enclosed parking garages , whilst those 

that meet the code definition of ‘open’ traditionally have not been required to be 

sprinklered. The newest 2023 edition of NFPA 88A, Standard for Parking Structures, 

requires sprinklers in all parking structures, including open parking garage s. The 2021 

version of the International Building Code (IBC) has also included more stringent 

requirements that now require open parking garages greater than 48,000 ft 2 (4 460 m2)

to have a sprinkler system. [46 ]

In September 2022, the Dutch government i ntroduced a regulation that require s, with 

some exemptions, automatic sprinklers to be installed in parking garages larger than 

1 000 m 2 (equal to about 40 cars) and which are below “sleeping risks ” (residential 

buildings ). The new requirement has been introduced because modern cars present a 

greater fire load and because fires more readily extend to multiple vehicles before the fire 

and rescue service can intervene . [47 ,48 ] In June 2022, the Belgian government 

published a law introducing requirements for sprinklers to be fitted in large underground 

parking garage. [49 ]

Sprinkler System Design in Parking Garages 

EN 12845:2015+A1:20 20 [50 ] provide the minimum requirements for the design and 

installation of automatic sprinkler systems. Fire hazards similar to “ car parks ” fall under 

the classification Ordinary Hazard Group 2 (OH2). A wet -pipe or pre -action system 

should be designed for a water discha rge density of 5 mm min -1 and an area of operation 

of 144 m2 (whereas a dry -pipe system should be designed for 180 m2).

Wet -pipe systems are designed for applications where the temperature is maintained 

above freezing and employ sprinklers attached to a pi ping system containing water under 

pressure. 

Dry -pipe systems are used in spaces subject to freezing temperatures. These systems 

employ automatic sprinklers attached to a piping system containing air or Nitrogen 

under pressure. The activation of one or mo re sprinkler permits the water pressure to 

open a valve, known as the dry -pipe valve. The water then flows into the pipework and 

out of the opened sprinklers. There is a time delay of up to 60 s from the activation of the 

first sprinkler until water i s dis charg ed . Pre -action systems are similar to a dry -pipe 

systems; however, water is also held back by an electronically operated valve connected 

to a fire detection system. Pre -action systems are commonly used for areas where there 

is a danger of serious wate r damage because of impact or broken piping. 

NFPA 13 provides the minimum requirements for the design and installation of 

automatic fire sprinkler systems. [51 ] In the 2019 edition of NFPA 13 the hazard 

“Automobile parking and showrooms” is classified as Ordinary Hazard Group 1 (OH1). 

However, in the 2022 edition of NFPA 13 “ Automobile showrooms ” is classified as OH1 

and “Automobile parking garages” is classified as Ordinary Hazard Group 2 (OH2). The 27  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

reason for the reclassification is a conce rn that the hazard classifications in the 2019 

edition were inadequate. Automobile design has continuously been evolving and now 

modern vehicles contain significantly more plastics than older cars, hybrid/electric drive 

cars pose a different risk and the d istance between cars is close in parking garage, which 

promotes fire spread. [52 ]

The wet -pipe system design for automobile parking garages is 8.1 mm min -1 over an area 

of operation of 140 m2 per NFPA 13 (2022) , which results in a minimum total water 

de mand of at least 1 134 l min -1. This is 58 % higher than the minimum total water 

demand of 720 l min -1 in EN 12845:2015+A1:2019 and 33 % higher than the minimum 

total water demand of 854 l min -1 for an OH1 design. 

The European Fire Sprinkler Network (EFSN) has published a position paper on 

sprinkler systems in parking garages that holds EVs . [53 ] The paper concludes that 

sprinkler systems can prevent fire spread between vehicles, and that this also applies to 

EVs . The fire and rescue service can then approach the scene to complete the fire 

extinguishment. The position of EFSN is also that the design hazard category should 

remain OH2 under EN 12845, in the absence of evidence that this hazard classification 

does not provide adequate fire protection. 

# Directives Regarding Charging Infrastructure 

According to Directive 2014/94/EU [54 ] “Member States should ensure that recharging 

points accessible to the public are built up with adequate coverage, to enable EVs to 

circulate at least in urban/suburban agglomerations and other densely populated areas, 

and, where appropriate, within networks determined by the Member States. The number 

of recharging points should be established considering the number of EVs estimate d to 

be registered by the end of 2020 in each Member State.” The directive says that one 

charging point per 10 EVs would be appropriate. 

“Recharging points accessible to the public should be installed, in particular at public 

transport stations, such as p ort passenger terminals, airports or railway stations. Private 

owners of electric vehicles depend to a large extent on access to recharging points in 

collective parking lots, such as in apartment blocks and office and business locations. 

Public authorities should take measures to assist users of such vehicles by ensuring that 

the appropriate infrastructure with sufficient electric vehicle recharging points is 

provided by site developers and managers.” 

This directive will in many cases mean that there will b e a large introduction of newly 

installed charging possibilities. In Sweden, Boverket (BFS 2021 :2) [55 ] has stat ed that 

parking lots of more than 10 spots, within a heated building, or immediately adjacent to 

a heated building, with a building permit iss ued later than March 2021 should be 

equipped with charging infrastructure for EVs. From 2025, this will also be applied 

retroactively for buildings with more than 20 parking spots . In many cases, one charging 

possibility per parking lot is anticipated. BFS 2021:2 states the type of connector that 

should be used and accessibility for disabled people but not much more. 

Charging stations needs to fulfil the EU Directive 2014 /35 /EU , so called Low Voltage 

Directive (LVD). [56 ] The LVD requires that the chargi ng station should be safe against 

electric shock and fire. In the LVD, it is up to the producer to certify that the product 

meets these requirements. In general, there is no specific requirement that needs to be 28  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

fulfilled , but for many products the producers tend to reach some consensus what needs 

to be fulfilled in form of certain standards etc. This can include harmonized standards 

such as EN IEC 61851 -1. [57 ]

Currently there are no requirement s on inspection s of chargi ng stations. One could 

expect that over time, these can be prone to computer viruses, cyber -attacks, but also 

that cables and connectors will get damaged/worn or corroded over time . Damaged 

equipment could result in low contact and thus heat produced, whic h could potentially 

increase the risk of fire. For consumer safety, regular inspections of charging stations 

and validation of charging meters needs to be developed and could be a route for 

improving the safety. These measures are especially useful for pub lic charging, when 

pay ing to charge your vehicle , for example charging in public parking garages .

# 2.5 Field Experience in Enclosed Spaces using 

# Sprinkler Systems 

In the following sections field experiences regarding fires and sprinkler systems in road 

tunnels and in en closed spaces , such as underground parking garages , are summarized .

# Fire Suppression Tests in Road Tunnels 

There have been many small - and large -scale fire suppression tests exploring system type 

and sy stem design for road tunnels. A history of large -scale tunnel fire suppression tests 

was given by Li and Ingason. [58 ] Small - and intermediate -scale tunnel fire suppression 

tests were also reported by Ingason et al. [29 ] A few examples are given below. 

Water mist systems have been promoted as an alternative to traditional water spray 

systems and in recent years several extensive large -scale tests have been conducted. The 

tests show that the systems' advantages are primarily through cooling of hot gases and 

preventing the spread of fire to neighbouring vehicles. [59 ]

Large orifice water spray sidewall nozzles may be used to reduce the number of nozzles 

installed and to reduce the system operating pressure. A deluge system concept was 

tested in five large -scale fire tests with an additional test that incorporated automatic 

sprinklers. [60 ] The fire protection objective of the system was to prevent fire spread to 

a target positioned 5 m downstream of the fire and to ensure that the fire did not exceed 

30 MW in size. These objectives were met in all the tests conducted. 

# Field Experience of Sprinkler Systems in Road Tunnels 

There are some field experiences with FFFS in road tunnels, such as the fire in the 

Burnley tunnel in Melbourne, Australia on 23 March 2007. The accident occurred when 

a truck stopped in the slow lane due to a puncture d tire . The tunnel control centre 

activated a closed lane signal and reduced the tunnel speed limit. Despite this action, a 

series of collisions occurred . One of th e trucks involved in the incident burst into flames 

causing a large fire and explosions. [32 ] The fire size was limited to less than 20 MW 

thanks to rapid operation of the deluge water spray system. 

Japan’s first water spray system was installed in the Kobotoke Tunnel on the Chuo 

Expressway in 1968. Between 1989 and 2012, 4 – 21 fire accidents occurred each year ,29  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

resulting in a total of 283 fires. Of the total number of tunnel fire accidents, 132 were in 

AA grade tunnels, i.e. tunnels with the highest sa fety measures. Water spray systems 

were used 75 times, 55 times during vehicle malfunction fires and 20 times for accident 

induced fires. Application of water started on average 5.4 minutes after the fire initiated ,

the average spray time was 24.7 minutes, and the average time taken for the fire and 

rescue service to arrive was 24.8 minutes. [61 ]

Based on field experience and fire tests it appears that the sprinkler systems are adequate 

to control fire s in both passenger cars and HGVs . Large -scale fire tests show that the 

advantages of deluge water mist systems are primarily through cooling of hot gases and 

preventing the spread of fire to neighbouring vehicles. Independent of the type of system, 

the des ign is typically based on fires in HGVs . The system design is thereby concluded to 

be adequate also for passenger cars. Electric buses and trucks may pose a fire challenge 

like , or in excess of that in regular buses or trucks, but no systematic research on this ha s

been identified. 

# Experience of Sprinkler Systems in Parking Garages 

There have been several projects simulating fire in parking garages and in ro -ro spaces 

on ships to evaluate the fire sprinkler performance. Fire test and sprinkler experience in 

parking garages are further described in theses sections. 

Fire Tests Simulating Fi res in Enclosed Spaces 

In 2007 and 2008, BRE in United Kingdom conducted several multi -vehicle full car fire 

tests in a parking garage mock -up , having a floor area of 12 x 6 m and a ceiling height of 

2.9 m. [62 ] The report concludes that the sprinklers are effective in limiting a fire to a 

single car, which supports findings reported verbally by the fire and rescue service s.

In 2009, BRE perfor med a single automatic sprinkler test , using a two -car stacker 

configuration. [63 ] It was concluded that automatic sprinklers at the ceiling contained 

the fire to the lower car ; it allowed some spread to the vehicle above but prevented it from 

becoming f ully involved. 

VdS Schadenverhütung has published several fire test methods for water mist fire 

protection systems. The test results from assignment tests at RISE are usually 

proprietary, but some test results have been published with permission from the c lient. 

[59 ] For these tests, the ceiling height was 3.0 m, and the cars were manufactured in the 

late 1990s. The average gas temperature at the ceiling was at most ~ 150 °C. The surface 

temperatures on the part of the body facing the centremost car on bo th target cars were 

measured with four thermocouples welded to the steel body. The average surface 

temperature at the bodies of the adjacent cars peaked at ~ 100 °C. Several test series 

show that water mist is comparable in performance to traditional sprinkler systems, 

although the distance between the nozzles is often higher and water flow rates lower. 

RISE h as also conducted sprinkler tests in the project “Legislative assessment for safety 

hazards of fire and innovations in ro -ro ship environment ” (LASH FIRE) [64 ] with the 

aim of developing sprinkler system design and installation guidelines for ro -ro vehicle 

spaces on maritime vehicle carriers. [65 ] Thes e spaces differ from underground parking 

garages in some respects : the number of vehicles per square meter is higher, larger 

vehicles are found in some areas and the ceiling heights are typically lower. The 30  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

large -scale performance validation tests proved that a system is activate d at an early 

stage with few operating sprinklers, fire spread between vehicles is prevented or delayed 

and ceiling gas temperatures are reduced. 

RISE ha s also conducted fire suppression tests in the LASH FIRE project comparing 

ICE Vs with EVs. Questions have arisen whether the manually operated water spray 

deluge systems (denoted ‘drencher systems’) on board ro -ro cargo ships are able to 

control a fire in an electric vehicle and if the design of the system in terms of water flow 

rat es needs to be increased. The results from the large -scale test s with ICEVs and EVs 

have not yet been officially published in any report but have been presented at the 

Conference of fire safety at sea (CFIS) 2022. The overall conclusion from the tests was 

that a fire in a n EV does not seem to be more challenging to control than a fire in an ICEV 

for the drencher system design given in current international recommendations. 

Field Experience of Sprinkler in Parking Garages 

A total of 3 096 parking garage fires (in buildings ) were reported in United Kingdom 

during 1994 – 2005. [62 ] Of these, 1 592 (51.4 %) fires started in a vehicle. In 162 of the 

fires, an automatic sprinkler system was present , Figure 12 . In 61 (37.7%) of the fires, the 

sprinkler system did not activate , probably since the fire was too small or that the fire 

was extinguished by fire and rescue services actions. In the fires where the sprinkler 

system activated, it can be concluded that the fir e was extinguished or controlled in 

almost all cases (Figure 12 ).  

> Figure 12 . Parking garage fires in United Kingdom (1994 –2005) where a sprinkler system was
> installed (activated or not during the fire) and the outcome of the fire.

There are some recent ly reported cases with fires in sprinklered parking garages that 

involves EVs. In the first case , an EV fire was started deliberately on September 1, 2020 ,

in the Netherlands. The sprinkler system controlled the fire, which did not spread to the 

battery pa ck. The parking garage and other vehicles were undamaged. [66 ]

Shortly after 3 am on November 21 , 2021, there was a fire in the underground parking 

garage Marienplatzgarage in Ravensburg, Germany. According to initial information, an 

EV parked on the first level and connected to a charging station was probably the cause 

of the fire. “The sprinkler system and other fire protection devices worked extremely 

well”, according to the press spokesman for the Ravensburg rescue service. Three other 

vehicles, two charging stations, several lights and cables and the concrete ceiling w ere 

damaged by the heat. 31  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

In 2014, there was a serious fire in the same underground parking garage, whic h resulted 

in closure for six years and a restoration for several million euro. The garage was 

reopened in 2020, now fitted with an automatic sprinkler system. [67 ] Overall, the 

property damage was estimated to €370,000 and the value of the damage d vehic les to 

€120,000. [68 ]

The overall conclusion is that the sprinkler system design in accordance with 

EN 12845:2015+A1:2019 for parking garages is adequate, based on field experience and 

large -scale fire tests. It is expected that a sprinkler system can pr event fire spread 

between vehicles. Based on fire tests, fire sprinkler suppression tests and a limited 

number of actual fires in sprinklered parking garages, it is likely that this conclusion also 

applies to fires involving EVs (passenger cars). 

# 3 Risk Asse ssment 

Experts from various fields of expertise participated during the HAZID workshop 

sessions . Experts with in -depth knowledge and experience from fire safety, fire 

protection, first response manual intervention, fire engineering, tunnel safety, material 

chemistry, chemical engineering, emissions from vehicle fires , battery fire safety, 

laboratory fi re testing and vehicle risk assessment , participated in the HAZID workshop 

sessions .

During the workshop sessions , risk s were investigated from different perspectives , by 

identification of unwanted events , possible secondary effects , and respective failure 

pathways . The workshop sessions also included a comparative risk ranking of the risks 

identified . Finally, t he currently existing safety measures were addressed , and potential 

additional safety measures were identified . Special considerations were given to 

potential preventive and mitigative actions for vehicle s, for infrastructure and for manual 

intervention /first response. 

# 3.1 Risk Evaluation Criteria 

For risk evaluation, several criteria were di scussed . While the most common risk 

evaluation criteria are likelihood of event and severity of consequence of unwanted 

events, there may be several other criteria which gives a more holistic picture of the 

hazard and its associated risk , for example: the fire development , size of fire and fire 

spread ; type and s ize of vehicle ; size and state of charge of the LIB and the d istance to 

other vehicles and c eiling height in the enclosed space . Additionally, the interplay 

between the aforementioned factors and the surrounding environment might also affect 

the outcome of a hazard and its associated risk. 

A q ualitative approach was chosen to evaluate unwanted events under each HAZID 

theme. For like lihood of occurrence, special emphasis was given to the likelihood of 

occurrence of fire spread. Followed by this, it was matched against the severity of 

consequence. The s everity of consequence was determined by a cumulative ranking 

based on extent of fir e spread together with damage to the infrastructure. For example ,

if the unwanted event was an EV fire arising from a collision in a tunnel, then the 

likelihood that the fire spread s to adjacent vehicles was discussed with respect to the 

impact of the consequence on the load bearing infrastructure, casualties caused, 32  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

unavailability of the tunnel etc. The scales of likelihood and severity of consequence that 

were used for estimations during the HAZIDs are presented in Appendix B.

# 3.2 HAZID Workshops 

The inputs considered for the HAZID workshops were derived prim arily from the 

literature stud y. The assumptions and definitions for “enclosed spaces” are described in 

section 2.2. Four different HAZID session with different theme s were carried out .

1) Arson 

2) Collison of EVs in tunnels 

3) EV fires in enclosed car parks when the origin of fire is external . Vehicle is parked 

or parked and charging .

4) EV fires in enclosed car parks when the origin of fire is the vehicle . Vehicle is 

parked or parked and charging .

In all HAZID sessions , the starting point for the discussion s was based on the 

surrounding environment , the origin of the fire and the mode o f the vehicle .

# HAZID Theme 1: Ar son 

The first theme considered was arson. The s urrounding environment considered was 

multiple carports , open and enclosed parking garages . This was done to be able to make 

a comparison o f the severity of consequence s, effect of the fire spread due to either open 

or enclosed spaces , ceiling hei ghts , available FFFS systems in public garages both open 

and closed , and relevant safety measures between EV and ICEV scenarios . Origin of fire 

in the arson theme by default implied an external source . The m ode of operation that was 

considered relevant for th is theme was a parked vehicle . Road tunnels were excluded 

from this part since the event of arson in a road tunnel is unlikely. 

Discussion 

At present there are no requirement s to in stall ventilation, fire detection, or sprinkler 

system s in carports . However, there is a requirement on safety distance for adjacent 

buildings to a carport. The discussions indicated a need to further investigate if sprinkler 

systems and/or fire detection systems could be beneficial for carports to reduce fire risks 

in the future , where the latter would probably be easie st to implement . Sprinkler systems 

and fire detection systems are regarded as risk reduction measures for infrastructure. 

Additio nally , these measures will have positive effect s on the first response , since such 

infrastructure risk reduction measures will likely reduce the response time by earlier 

detection, and/or early -stage containment of fire reducing the fire spread etc. 

For open and enclosed parking garages, the re are requirements for fire protection 

systems , but the y vary , between countries and depending on the size of the parking 

garage , in terms of unit area or vehicle capacity . N o other significant difference was 

identif ied in terms of the overall risk of an arson fire. Both were assessed as high -risk 

events with medium to high likelihood of fire spread and medium to high severity of 

consequence .

According to the statistics analysed, o pen parking garages may be subjected to a high er 

risk of fire spread , due to the exposure of wind conditions . On the other hand, closed 33  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

parking garages are subjected to higher risk of toxicity from smoke , which makes them 

more challenging and complex for the rescue operation s.

Risk Reduction Measures 

Potential risk reduction measure s particularly for infrastructure were discussed. This 

mainly included the need for installation of fixed systems , such as sprinkler systems, 

ventilation systems , particularly for enclosed underground parking garages, and fire 

detection systems. Additionally, reducing the size of fire cells was discussed as a measure 

to mitigate severe outcomes. All these measures are well -known and are applied for some 

types of parking garages already. Additionally , jet fans were brought up as an example to 

reduce smoke in evacuation routes . Negative effects of jet fans are the high speed which 

can influence the fire scenario and thus the fire spread .

# HAZID Theme 2: Collison of EVs in Tunnels 

The second theme considered was collision of EVs in tunnels. For the s urrounding 

environment , different types of tunnels were considered : unidirectional tunnel and bi -

directional tunnel. Various types of ventilation systems in the tunnels were also 

considered, namely, longitudinal ventilation and transverse or semi transverse 

ventilation. The o rigin of fire in this theme was the energy carrier or other parts of the 

vehicle (e.g., brakes, engine , cabin ). An o rigin of fire external to the vehicle was not 

considered relevant. The m ode of operation , that was considered for the discussion , was 

active driv ing of the vehicle. Clearly, th e fire spread, toxic emission of gases, gas 

explosion, impact on the load bearing infrastructure and availability of the tunnel were 

relevant factors affecting the consequences in this theme. 

Discussion 

Fire spread to multiple vehicles after a collision in a tunnel was estimated to be a low 

likelihood event, although high in severity and therefore was assessed as medium to 

high -risk event. Typical risk factors considered were prevailing ventilation conditions, 

length of the tunnel and whether it is a unidirectional or bidirectional traffic flow. In a 

unidirectional tunnel, less severe collisions are mor e likely as all vehicles are driving in 

the same direction , compared to bi -directional tunnel s where head -on collisions are 

possible. Most collisions , however, do not lead to fire and there are no highlighted 

differences in relative frequency of fire in case of collision between EV and ICEV. 

Typical risk factors considered were passenger injury, unavailability of the tunnel, 

prevailing ventilation conditions, extent of damage to load bearing structures and 

accessibility of the tunnel. 

Anothe r distinct unwanted event considered under this the me was fire during active 

drive when the EV is being driven in a tunnel or in an enclosed parking space . The 

likelihood of an EV catching fire during active driving through a tunnel was estimated as 

a low likelihood event . The l ikelihood between EV and ICEV may vary since brakes and 

the engine compartment are designed differently. These events indicate a higher 

likelihood for ICEVs , but statistics for EVs are still scarce. 

The likelihood of explosion follow ing a collision , caused by accumulated flammable 

gases , was ranked very low in terms of likel ihood of event , whilst the severity was ranked 34  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

high. The reflection was that if the EV ha s a high state of charge , it increases the 

probability of immediate ignition and thus no explosion .

Risk Reduction Measures 

The focus of the discussion was on potential risk reduction measure s to mitigate the 

severity of outcome s from a collision followed by an explosion. 

When FFFS are instal led in tunnels , the drainage of sprinkler water needs to be 

considered in the design . However, i n work by Held et al., the effect of thermal runaway 

on the contamination of infrastructure was investigated . The decontamination after an 

EV fire was not considered more difficult or costly compared to after an ICEV fire, neither 

did they experience any corrosion on the infrastructure . [69 ]

Escape routes, portable fire extinguishers and emergency telephones wer e highlighted as 

risk reduction measures both from a tactical as well as an infrastructure perspective. 

Explosion hazards related to vented gas from the traction battery are no t covered clear ly 

in the legal requirements. Further simulations or modelling wo rk could be beneficial. 

Another clear mitigation measure is surveillance that detects interruption or sudden stop 

in traffic flow. In many big cities and in longer tunnels with high occupancy , th ese 

measures exist . Further investigations on the need for legal requirement related to 

surveillance in tunnels was highlighted. 

# HAZID Theme 3: EV Fires in Enclosed Car Parks , When the 

# Origin of Fire is External . V ehicle is Parked or Parked and 

# Charging .

The third theme considered was EV fires in enclosed underground car parks when the 

vehicle is parked or parked and charging. Here the origin of fire considered is external. 

According to the literature study the origin of fire in enclosed parking garages , when the 

vehicle is parked and charging , is mostly unknown due to incomplete data . The fire 

external to the veh icle, include d fires in charging stations, electrical sockets, external 

charging adapters, in other adjacent parked vehicles or fires related to other stored 

material (such as tyres, garbage etc.) . To allow for a more comprehensive discussion, EV 

fires in above ground car parks when the vehicle is parked or parked and charging was 

also co nsidered .

Discussion 

In open and enclosed parking garages, the fire spread depends on the capacity and 

occupancy of the parking garage . The estimated li kelihood of a fire to initiate in a vehicle 

due to an external fire was judged low . According to the literature study , the data 

regarding this topic related to EV is limited but in some cases the root cause has been 

attributed to a non -compliant assembly of powertrain (home built) .

A higher likelihood of fire was found for other 2 -3-wheeler light electric vehicles (such as 

kick bikes, electric bike s etc.) . The consequence of such fire was ranked low. However, 

the fire may spread to an EV if the light electric vehicle is parked or parked and charging 

in the garage adjace nt to an EV . A potential risk reduction measures to prevent and 35  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

mitigate the event is to not allow charging or storage of light electric vehicles adjacent to 

EVs .

An other unwanted event identified was fire in adjacent storage rooms (rubber tyres, 

garbage etc.). This wa s estimated as a high -risk event , owing to the severity due to the 

increased amount of chemical energy. The likelihood of such event was estimated as low 

for larger public car parks where storage is commonly not allowed but medium likelihood 

for small park ing garages (such as car parks connected to housing cooperatives) . Lack of 

awareness was attributed as one of the main causes behind these kinds of unwanted 

events. 

Furthermore, f ire in an electrical socket or adjacent electrical installation was identifi ed 

as a medium risk event , owing to the risk of fire spread to EVs when they are parked and 

charging. Non -compliant connectors, poor quality cables, lack of maintenance of 

electrical installations and sockets were identified as common causes of fire .

Risk Reduction Measures 

A potential risk reduction measure is better awareness o n the need for maintenance of 

electrical installations . This could be achieved by routine inspections . In addition, design 

guidance which enforces design compatibility, which does not allow incompatible 

charging equipment to be connected to EVs. 

From an infrastructure perspective, i nstallation of sprinklers and/or fire detection 

system was discussed and se en as the most effective measure , especially for enclosed 

parking garages. A less costly solution could be to introduc e fire curtains for 

compartmentali sation of parking garages. For fire localisation, drones or robots could be 

used, especially in enclosed parking garages, to ensure safer firefighter accessibility. 

Drones or robots powered by thermal imaging could be regarded as an effective 

complementary tactical measure in fire detection and localisation. 

Furthermore, to prevent fires in enclosed spaces , parking garages should not be used as 

storage or garbage holds .

# HAZID Theme 4: EV Fires in Enclosed Car Park s, When the 

# Origin of Fire is the Vehicle . Vehicle is Parked or Parked and 

# Charging. 

The final theme considered was EV fires in enclosed parking spaces when the origin of 

fire was the vehicle. The mode considered here was a parked or parked and charging 

vehicle . According to the literature study the data is still limited . Fire in EV s, explosion s,

arcing , flooding of vehicles due to extreme weather events were some of the unwanted 

events that were discussed within this theme .

Discussion 

Fire s that origin and spread from one EV to an adjacent EV , while it is parked and 

charging in an enclosed car park , can be severe depending on the extent of the fire spread. 

As highlighted in the HAZID , it is likely to find several parked vehicles in an enclosed car 

park but comparatively less likely to find several vehicles that are parked as well as 36  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

charging . Even if parking spaces for charging are often grouped together , it is still 

relatively much more common with parking spaces without charging capability .

Despite th at the data is still limited, the likelihood of fires in EVs while parked and parked 

& charging were assumed to be similar t o that of EV fires during active drive. 

The unwanted event of an explosion of an EV while it is parked and charging , was rated 

low i n likelihood of occurrence but was deemed as a high severity event. It was also noted 

that explosion related to EV fires overall has not been well defined in accident reports or 

accident literature. 

Th e unwanted event where gases are released from the bat tery of an EV without 

immediate ignition was rated medium in likelihood of occurrence but was deemed as a 

high severity event. Given the number of reported incidents, special consideration was 

given to the lack of currently existing risk reduction measures. This consequently 

indicates a need for pote ntial risk reduction measures. 

Arcing between EV and charging plug was rated low in likelihood of occurrence; however, 

it was assigned a high severity of consequence, considering that an enclosed surrounding 

environment could have multiple adjacent EVs pa rked and charging. Risk factors 

considered in the discussion were the quality of connectors, fuses, overloading and 

overheating. 

Another unwanted event is f looding of the charging station or EV . This was rated medium 

to high in likelihood of occurrence, co nsidering the increase in the number of EV fires 

reported caused by extreme weather conditions, as well as the overall increase in number 

of charging stations installed for EVs. The severity of the consequences of the event was 

rated high. Moreover, lack o f current risk reduction measures to mitigate this event 

makes it even more important to consider potential risk reduction measures to mitigate 

the outcomes of the event. 

Risk Reduction Measures 

Based on the HAZID discussion , an increased distance between parked and parked and 

charging EVs is a proposed risk reduction measure . Safety recommendations with 

respect to number of EVs parked in per unit area to indicate safe capacity were also 

discussed as a risk reduction measure . A technological solution could be based on 

artificial intelligence (AI ) and machine learning (ML ) to aid safer parking distances and 

guide the EV to a specific spot . The software of the vehicle is empowered by an AI 

program and ML which is based on safety distances as well as type and size of EV that is 

subjected to be parked. The purpose is to keep fire safe distance and fill the farther spots 

first to mitigate fire accidents arising from EVs .

Charging stations can be addressed both as a potential preventive as well as a mitigative 

measure for infrastructur e. B etter planning of the positioning of charging stations ,

regarding fire spread , was given special emphasis. By strategical placement of charging 

stations , fire spread between EVs can be prevented. This measure can also be expected 

to improve the time required for the first response tactical teams to arrive at the location 

of the accident and begin firefighting. Furthermore, introduction of quality 

assured/compliant charging stations was a clear recommendation. Gas detection 

adjacent to charging stations c ould be introduced as another measure addressing 

infrastructure. Regular inspections of the charging stations to avoid using worn 37  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

equipment could be introduced as a prevent ive measure. In addition, design which 

ensures compa tibility could be introduced to prevent inappropriate equipment to be 

connected to charge EVs. 

Regarding measures to prevent a rcing between EV and charging plug , there is a need to 

make compliant a nd standard connectors, connections and charging stations accessib le. 

More precisely, the HAZID discussions highlighted th at a lack of proper charging 

stations (that comply with voltage, connection, connectors, and similar design 

compatible recommendations ) could lead to an increase fire risk due to the use of 

inc ompatible equipment .

Concerning risk reduction measures to prevent flooding of the charging station or EV s. 

A potential infrastructure risk reduction measure is raised platforms for charging 

stations to delay water submersion but more importantly to allow easier drainage of 

water . As a tactical risk reduction measure, advice and more detailed recommendations 

on how to tow away submerged EVs and on how to handle EV s following a flood was 

proposed . This scope could be included in the desi gn phase of EV s where ACEA can 

possibly play an influential role on guidance & recommendations. 

# 3.3 Firefighting Practises 

Concrete guidance from this study is that rescue operations with EVs are mostly similar 

as for ICEVs. Trapped smoke is the main challe nge in enclosed spaces and ventilation 

will most likel y play an important role for the rescue operation and for evac uation 

purposes . It is necessary for the emergency personnel and operators of tunnels to have 

the knowledge to make an appropriate risk analysis for different fire scenarios that can 

occur. 

Vehicle fire blanket could be used for preventi ve purposes , to mitigate fire spread to an 

adjacent vehicle, and during post extinguishment , to hinder re -ignition and to contain 

gas emis sions . However , these fire blankets have not yet been fully validated in terms of 

efficiency compared to already existing practises. 

A thermal imaging camera is a very good tool and almost a necessity for access in 

complex structures, this was highlighted in the SP Report “Risks associated with 

alternative fuels in road tunnels and underground garages ”. [70] The use of drones and 

robots for fire localisation and detection, espec ially in enclosed parking garages, could 

ensure better accessibility for the firefighters. Drones or robots installed with thermal 

imaging cameras could be regarded as an effective complementary tactical measure in 

fire detection and localisation. These ca n also be used to gather more information which 

could be used to decide upon which firefighting tactic that should be utilized. 38  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# 4 Workshop with the Fire and Rescue 

# Service s

A workshop regarding the Emergency Rescue Sheet and Response Guide s (ERG ) was 

held digitally , with representatives from three Swedish fire and rescue services on the 

25 th of November 2022. Question and answers from a survey circulated beforehand were 

used as basis for the discussion s. The results from the survey are presented i n Figure 13 .

Additionally , to the questions presented in Figure 13 , two more questions were asked in 

the survey :

1. Do you have any additional suggestions /questions regarding /related to the 

ERGs ?

2. Is there a nything else (techniques/information missing) that you would like to 

point out, re lated to fires in alternatively fuelled vehicles? 

As to summaries the answers presented in Figure 13 , all firefighters that answered the 

survey knew about and had used the ERGs . The main reason for using the ERG s varied 

but in most of the cases (34.6%) they were used to obtain information regarding 

hazardous material. The ERGs were also considered clear in respect to color -coding, font 

and information used/supplied. Regarding the two additional questions asked in the 

survey , the following answers were given (translated from Swedish) :

“Safety distances regard ing of gas -powered vehicles should be included” [71 ]

“How to handle damaged batteries should be included” 

“How to extinguish a battery fire and how to/not to approach a battery fire” 

“There should be standardized attack point for connecting fire hoses to the battery pack, 

so that water can be directly injected to the pack” 

“The possibility to use fog nail ”

“What type of reinforcem ent that is used in the vehicle” 

“Sometimes recommendations of equipment that is not available for the fire engine are 

made” 

“It would be great if we could know the burn time of the pack in the car” 

“Charging stations and connected parking lots should be d esign so that the fire cannot 

spread to adjacent vehicles or buildings” 

“Cutting zones should be included” 

“There should be a possibility to ground the vehicle to avoid electric shock” 

“The potential risks of electric shock should be included”. 39 

© RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

Figure 13 . Answers to the survey that was sent out to the fire and rescue services in Sweden. 0% 

> 100%

Yes No 

Have you ever used an ERG? 0% 

> 45,5%
> 54,5%

During an incident Studied the ERG, not used it during operation Other 

When, in what context have you used the ERG? 0% 

> 40%
> 30%
> 30%

Never (0%) Rarely (1-50%) Often (50-90%) Always (90-100%) 

How often do you use the ERG? During rescue operation, involving vehicles 34,6%  

> 15,4%
> 0% 3,8%
> 15,4%
> 19,2%
> 11,5%

Immobilization of vehicle, lift Deactivation of HV system Safe access to passengers To check hazardouz material Recommendations of fire suppression Towing procedures Other 

What was the main reason to use the ERG? 0% 

> 100%

Yes No 

Are the ERGs clear? regarding colour, pictogram, fonts etc. used 40  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# 4.1 Workshop Discussions 

Since t he ISO 17840 standard does not cover “the rescue process” or “information related 

to education and training for rescue teams ” some of the answers were out of scope but 

were still included in the discussion and are presented below for completeness .

Re garding t ools and equipment , discussions were held regarding the cutting zones and 

the reinforced parts of the vehicle . It was point ed out that it is very important that the 

material specifications and the thickness of the reinforced parts should be specified .

Especially if carbon fibre components have been used in the vehicle , as this poses a great 

health risk for the firefighters . Additionally , the information regarding the use of prying 

tools is currently very limited regarding EVs and the following question was asked “Can 

prying tools be braced against the battery pack /flooring of the vehicle , or will it 

damage the i ntegrity of the pack ?”.

The use of fog -nails for the battery pack is most often not recommended in the ERGs .

However, questions arouse regarding the use of fog -nails in the engine compartment of 

the EVs . Is there a risk associated due to damaged HV cables , which could result in 

electric shock ?

A wish to standardize the equipment recommended in the ERGs in line with the 

equipment used on the fire engines was made. 

Sprinkler systems w ere discussed , and consensus was reached that the regulations are 

lagging . “There is a great difference to attend a fire were there has been a sprinkler 

system active , the working conditions , in all aspects , are much better when sprinklers 

have been activated ”. There was a wish to increase the u se of sprinklers , or at least 

standpipe systems , in parking garages. 

A large part of the workshop wa s dedicated to discuss ions regarding the electrical safety 

of EVs during rescue operations. Two anecdotal accounts of electrical shock related to 

EVs, and rescue operations were shared . Note, that further information such as incident 

reports regarding these incidents where not collected. The first experience included a 

crashed vehicle where the contactors were damaged, and the safety feat ures had failed ,

which resulted in an electric shock for one of the fire fighters. The second experience 

involved a bus that was stuck in the snow , the driver h ad spun the wheels for some time 

before the fire and rescue service s arrived. When the tow truck operator performed work 

around the wheels it resulted in an electric shock and the tow truck operator had to be 

taken to the hospital . A concern for new car manufacturers and their safety systems was 

expressed . Additionally, th e need to be able to earth/ground the vehicle was expressed .

More information regarding the risk related to charging, fires and application of water 

was enquired. 

Lastly, it w as brought up that the end chain , such as tow -truck operators and vehicle -

workshops , need s more educat ion regarding EVs . “There is a lack of knowledge ,

sometimes we see crashed EVs being stored inside of vehicle workshop s with no safety 

zones around them .” Additionally, t he recommendation of discharging battery packs 

using water baths (and salt) found in some of the ERGs was heavily criticized .41  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# 5 Conclusion 

This section presents the main conclusion from the conducted study. 

# 5.1 Literature Study 

The data available today does not indicate that fires in EVs are more likely than in ICEVs, 

rather the contrary by a factor of 8 - 10 . However, as EVs are still relatively new and few ,

it might be that the number of EV fires will increase as the fleet beco mes larger and as 

the fleet ages . Recommendations on more detailed statistics are encouraged , especially 

regarding the root causes of fires, as well as if the traction battery was involved or not in 

the fire. In addition, the energy carrier is normally not reported in statistics of vehicle 

fires , which makes statistical studies difficult. 

Collected data from large -scale vehicle fire tests show that there are no significant 

differences between fires in ICEVs and EVs regarding the peak HRR (maximum intensity 

of the fire) or the THR (total energy combusted). The total chemical energy available in 

a vehicle var ies depending on the vehicle type and size, and on the materials used to 

manufacture the vehicle. It is interesting to note that the time until rea ch ing t he peak 

HRR is often shorter for ICEVs than for EVs, due to rupture of the fuel tank and release 

of a large amount of chemical energy in a short duration of time. However, the fire 

initiation play s an important role regarding the time until and the magnitu de of the peak 

HRR. 

Factors that Determine Fire Spread 

The probability of fire spread in enclosed spaces is affected by three main factors: 

• distance between parked vehicles 

• material s used to manufacture the vehicles 

• ceiling height of the enclosed space 

The factors that enable fire to spread are similar for EVs and ICEVs. One additional risk 

for ICEVs is the possibility of liquid pool fires. Such fires may result from the rupture of 

the petrol or diesel tank, for example due to external hea ting. Liquid pool fires may 

increase the fire spread, the extent of which depend s on factors such as, the amount of 

fuel, the incline of the flooring and drains adjacent to the vehicle. 

For EVs , the possibility of jet flames from the battery pack could pot entially contribute 

to fire spread. Jet flames are commonly deflected underneath the vehicle and could 

potentially reach a neighbouring vehicle and cause ignition. However, to the best 

knowledge of the authors , specific studies of this phenomenon have not yet been 

performed. Compared to jet flames from gas tanks , such as a CNG tank, jet flame s from 

EVs are substantially shorter (in length and duration), as noticed during several large -

scale vehicle fire tests performed at RISE. 

Vehicle Fires in Enclosed Spa ces 

Since publicly available data on EV fires in tunnels and parking garages are limited ,

conclusions regarding fires in enclosed spaces were mostly based on statistics and field 

experiences related to ICEVs. 42  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

Accident investigations from fires in enclosed parking garage s in Sweden conclude that 

an important difference when attending to a fire in an enclosed and an open structure is 

the environment for the fire and rescue service s. For fires in enclosed car parks, the 

environment is harsh due to thick smoke and generally long access routes. Structural 

damages (concrete spalling) were found in all the cases studied , which all involved 

multiple vehicles on fire , and can potentially i mpose a great danger to the firefighters. In 

another study, it was concluded that in 42% of car park fires the fire spread from the 

initial vehicle to an adjacent vehicle. Fire will most likely spread much faster in an open 

car park compared to an undergro und garage due to the availability of air as well as wind. 

Additionally, the data studied indicated that the total number of fires is higher for open 

multi -story parking garages than for enclosed parking garages. The extent of damage was 

although similar f or fires in the two groups. 

Vehicle Fires in Tunnels 

Statistics and field experiences studied in this work show ed that the catastrophic fire 

incidents often involve d heavy goods vehicles (HGVs), and that most fires were caused 

by vehicle defects. For cause s related to vehicle defects, the location of ignition most often 

involved the engine or tyers/wheels. The rate of fires caused by vehicle defects was 3 – 6

times higher for HGVs than for passenger vehicles. Additionally, between 10 – 30% of 

the fire incid ents were caused by a traffic accident (or collision). 

For tunnel fire incidents , where the tunnel was equipped with a fire suppression system, 

the time from fire detection to re -opening of the tunnel was less than 4.2 hours. By 

contrast, the past catastrophic fire incidents in tunnels , without fire suppression systems ,

showed that this duration could be several mo nths to several years , mainly due to the fire 

spread between vehicles and its impact s on tunnel structure and equipment. Th is could 

be regarded as a positive indication for installation of fixed fire suppression systems in 

tunnels. 

Sprinkler System Design and Field Experiences from Parking Garages using 

Sprinkler Systems 

Requirements for sprinkler systems in parking garages vary, and can depend on floor 

area, other fun ctions in the building and can also be a subject for a risk analysis if the 

building is complex ( i.e. risk for fire and rescue intervention, many floors, other functions 

above the garage). 

The overall conclusion is that a sprinkler system design in accord ance with 

EN 12845:2015+A1:2019 for parking garages is adequate, based on field experience and 

large -scale tests. It is expected that a sprinkler system can control a fire and prevent fire 

spread between vehicles. Based on free -burn fire tests, fire suppre ssion tests and a 

limited number of actual fire incidents in sprinklered parking garages, it is likely that this 

conclusion also applies also to fires involving EV s (passenger cars). 43  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# 5.2 Risk Assessment 

A summary of the distinct unwanted events identified and assessed from respective 

HAZID sessions are presented in Figure 14 .

Figure 14 . Summary of the likelihood of event and severity of consequence from the scenarios 

discussed during the HAZID workshop s essions. 

# 5.3 Current and Proposed Risk Reduction 

# Measures 

Risk reduction measures on vehicle level are difficult to assign without having the root 

causes of the fire. Here, more statistics are needed to propose appropriate risk reduction 

measures on a vehicle level. A summary of potential risk reduction measures for 

infrastructure is presented in Table 3 .

Early detection is key to reduce the severity of consequence s of the fire. As fires in EVs 

are more difficult to extingui sh than fires in ICEVs, preventive measures and early 

detection of the fire should be prioritized. Preventive measures are aimed at reducing the 

occurrence of fires (safe design ), for example by limiting thermal propagation in the 

battery pack or by a battery management system and thermal management system which 

enables quick detection and management of events that are outside the safety window of 

operation. For the vehicle , early detection of vent gas, vo ltage fluctuations and/or 

temperature could potentially be coupled to the car alarm or an eCall which could reduce 

the time of fire detection, enabling a quicker response to the fire. From the workshop 

with the Swedish fire and rescue services , technical s olutions that enable water injection 

into the battery pack were suggested as a risk reduction measure. However, if this is 

practically feasible , was out of the scope. Additionally , extinguishing lances were out of 

the discussion since the risk of electric shock was highlighted as a high -risk event .44  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

Table 3. Summary from the four HAZID workshop sessions , unwanted event s, and the risk 

reduction measures on infrastructure , currently existing and potential, preventive as well as 

mitigating are presented below .

HAZID workshop 

session  Unwanted event  Risk reduction measures 

(infrastructure) 

Fire in parking garages 

Carport, open above 

ground car park, enclosed 

underground car park 

Arson 

Fire detection system, FFFS, wider 

parking spots, reduction in size of 

the fire cells, jet fans/ventilation to 

combat smoke 

Collision of EVs in Tunnel 

Explosion  Fire/traffic flow interruption 

detection systems, FFFS, escape 

routes, portable extinguishers, 

emergency calling systems, 

ventilation to combat smoke 

Release of toxic gas 

Fire 

Fire during active driving 

EV fires in enclosed car 

parks when the origin of 

fire is external to the 

vehicle . Vehicle is parked 

or parked and charging. 

Fire in electrical 

socket/adjacent electrical 

installation 

Fire detection systems, FFFS, wider 

parking spots, handheld 

extinguishers, maintenances and 

inspections of electrical 

installations, safety rounds, “safe 

by design” to prevent the use of 

improper equipment for charging, 

fire curtains, AI/ML en abled 

parking allocation to ensure safe 

distances between vehicles 

Fire in 2 –3-wheel light electric 

vehicles 

Fire due to spill of flammable 

liquid 

Fire in adjacent storage room 

Fire in adjacent vehicle 

EV fires in enclosed car 

parks when the origin of 

fire is the vehicle. Vehicle 

is parked or parked and 

charging. 

Fire during charging  Fire detection systems, FFFS, wider 

parking spots, handheld 

extinguishers, maintenances and 

inspections of electrical 

installatio ns, safety rounds, “safe 

by design” to prevent the use of 

improper equipment for charging, 

fire curtains, AI/ML enabled 

parking allocation to ensure safe 

distances between vehicles 

Explosion 

Release of toxic gases 

Arcing 

Flooding of car park causing 

fire in EV 

# 5.4 Fire fighting Tactics 

Regarding firefighting tactics, concrete guidance from this study is that rescue operations 

with EVs are similar to ICEVs. 

Trapped smoke is the main challenge in enclosed spaces . Since ventilation , both natural 

and mechanical, plays an important role in fire scenarios, it is therefore critical to have 

an improved awareness on risks and opportunities with ventilation, i.e ., when to use it 

as a firefighting tactic or when it m ight lead to a secondary side effect causing a greater 

risk . Such knowledge is likely to influence the outcome of the firefighting, rescue 

operation and evacuation. Therefore, it is necessary for the emergency personnel and 45  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

operators of tunnels and parking garages to have enough knowledge to make an 

appropriate risk judgement applicable to different fire scenarios that might occur. 

Drone s are used in wildfire surveillance and may also be applicable in vehicle fires in 

enclosed spaces. The use of drones and robots f or fire localisation and detection, 

especially in enclosed parking garages, could ensure better accessibility for the 

firefighters. Drones or robots installed with thermal imaging cameras could be regarded 

as an effective complementary tactical measure in fire detection and localisation. These 

can also be used to gather more information which could be used to decide upon which 

firefighting tactic that should be utilized. 46  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# 6 References 

[1] K. Storesund, C. Sesseng, R. Fjellgaard Mikalsen, O.A. Holmvaag, A. Steen -Hansen, 

Evaluation of fire in Stavanger airport car park 7 January 2020, 2020. 

http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=u rn:nbn:se:ri:diva -50960. 

[2] O. Willstrand, R. Bisschop, P. Blomqvist, A. Temple, J. Anderson, Toxic Gases from 

Fire in Electric Vehicles, 2020. http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:ri:diva -

52000. 

[3] C. Liu, L. Zhao, C. Lu, Exploration of the characteristics and trends of electric vehicle 

crashes: a case study in Norway, European Transport Research Review.  14 (2022) 6. 

https://doi.org/10.1186/s12544 -022 -00529 -2. 

[4] MSB, Effekter på räddningsinsatser o ch personskador till följd av covid -19, 2022. 

https://rib.msb.se/filer/pdf/29911.pdf (accessed December 5, 2022). 

[5] MSB, IDA MSB statistics, (n.d.). https://ida.msb.se/ida2#page=3d635cdf -e7eb -

4f49 -b579 -9612fb44c941 (accessed October 24, 2022). 

[6] U. Ber gholm, MSB PM - Sammanställning av bränder i elfordon och 

eltransportmedel 2018 -2020, Karlstad, 2021. 

[7] M. Ahrens, Vehicle Fires, NFPA Research. (2020) 1 –14. https://www.nfpa.org/ -

/media/Files/News -and -Research/Fire -statistics -and -reports/US -Fire -

Problem /osvehiclefires.pdf (accessed May 16, 2022). 

[8] M. Ahrens, B. Evarts, Fire Loss in the United States During 2020, 2021. 

[9] D. Brzezinska, R. Ollesz, P. Bryant, Design car fire size based on fire statistics and 

experimental data, Fire Mater. 44 (2020) 109 9–1107. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/fam.2913. 

[10] ALBERO project, (n.d.). https://alberoprojekt.de/#xl_xr_page_index (accessed 

December 5, 2022). 

[11] Vehicle fire statistics - China, (n.d.). https://www.119.gov.cn/article/47Sd3LDSJrA 

(accesse d October 1, 2022). 

[12] Zuto Car finance, The Car Size Revolution, (n.d.). https://www.zuto.com/car -size -

evolution/ (accessed October 24, 2022). 

[13] E. Emilsson, L. Dahllöf, M. Ljunggren Söderman, Plastics in passenger cars, 

Stockholm, 2019. 

https://www. ivl.se/download/18.14d7b12e16e3c5c36271082/1574935157259/C454.pdf 

(accessed May 5, 2022). 

[14] K. Terlouw, The fire safety of car parks, TU Delft, 2019. 

http://resolver.tudelft.nl/uuid:eef3e542 -c2f9 -4e2a -ae21 -eae8fff1732a (accessed 

October 24, 2022). 

[15] J. Gehandler, A. Lönnermark, CNG vehicle containers exposed to local fires, 2019. 

http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:ri:diva -42143. 

[16] A. Lönnermark, P. Blomqvist, Emissions from an automobile fire, Chemosphere. 62 

(2006) 1043 –1056. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2005.05.002. 

[17] J. Gehandler, A. Olofsson, J. Hynynen, A. Temple, A. Lönnermark, J. Andersson, J. 

Burgén, C. Huang, BREND 2.0 - Fighting fires in new energy carriers on deck 2.0, 2022. 

http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:ri:diva -59162. 47  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

[18] A. Temple, J. Anderson, BREND 2.0: Fire simulation technical report, 2022. 

http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:ri:diva -59161. 

[19] ISO, ISO 13571:2012 Life -threatening components of fire - Guidelines for the 

estimation of time to compromis ed tenability in fires, International Organization for 

Standardization, 2012. 

[20] A.R. Baird, E.J. Archibald, K.C. Marr, O.A. Ezekoye, Explosion hazards from 

lithium -ion battery vent gas, J Power Sources. 446 (2020) 227257. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org /10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.227257. 

[21] Y.Z. Li, Study of fire and explosion hazards of alternative fuel vehicles in tunnels, 

Fire Saf J. 110 (2019) 102871. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.firesaf.2019.102871. 

[22] CTIF, Explosion on Norweigan batt ery hybrid ferry may have been caused by the 

fire extinguishing system, CTIF. (2020). https://www.ctif.org/news/explosion -

norwegian -battery -hybrid -ferry -may -have -been -caused -fire -extinguishing -system 

(accessed December 6, 2022). 

[23] D. Hill, McMicken Batt ery Energy Storage System Event TEchnical Analysis and 

Recommendations, 2020. https://www.aps.com/en/About/Our -

Company/Newsroom/Articles/Equipment -failure -at -McMicken -Battery -Facility 

(accessed December 6, 2022). 

[24] A.R. Baird, A Framework for Characteri zing the Safety of Li -BESS using 

Performance Based Code Analysis and Testing, 2019. 

https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.26153/tsw/3260. 

[25] J. Gehandler, A. Olofsson, J. Hynynen, A. Temple, BREND 2.0 - Fighting fires in 

new energy carriers on deck 2.0, Borås, 2022. 

http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:ri:diva -59162 (accessed May 5, 2022). 

[26] L. Vylund, P. Mindykowski, K. Palmkvist, Methods and equipment for fire fighting 

with alternative fuel vehicles in ro -ro spaces, 2019. 

http://urn.kb.se/resolve?u rn=urn:nbn:se:ri:diva -43879 (accessed June 27, 2022). 

[27] L. Vylund, J. Gehandler, P. Karlsson, K. Peraic, C. Huang, F. Evergren, Fire -fighting 

of alternative fuel vehicles in ro -ro spaces, 2019. 

http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:ri:diva -43878. 

[28] J. Gehandler, U. Millgård, TUSC HANDBOK Brandskydd under byggtiden för 

tunnlar och andra undermarksanläggningar : Med exempel p å risker och f örslag p å

åtg ärder, 2nd ed., RISE Research Institutes of Sweden, Bor ås, 2022. 

http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn :nbn:se:ri:diva -58985. 

[29] H. Ingason, Y.Z. Li, A. Lönnermark, Tunnel Fire Dynamics, Springer New York, New 

York, NY, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4939 -2199 -7. 

[30] PIARC, Experience with significant incidents in road tunnels, 2016. 

[31] N. Casey, Fire incident data for Australian road tunnels, Fire Saf J. 111 (2020) 

102909. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.firesaf.2019.102909. 

[32] Burnley Tunnel fire, 2007, Australian Institute for Disaster Resilience. (n.d.). 

https://knowledge. aidr.org.au/resources/transport -burnley -tunnel -fire -melbourne -

2007/ (accessed December 5, 2022). 

[33] J. Bai, H. Liao, Y. Xia, Study on Fire Accidents in Tunnels, IOP Conf Ser Mater Sci 

Eng. 741 (2020) 012095. https://doi.org/10.1088/1757 -899X/741/1/012095 .48  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

[34] Tunnel fire incident 1, (2022). 

https://view.inews.qq.com/a/20220726A033QK00?refer=wx_hot&ft=0 (accessed 

December 5, 2022). 

[35] Tunnel fire incident 2, (2022). http://www.juda.cn/news/267002.html (accessed 

December 5, 2022). 

[36] Trafikverket, Krav Tunnelbyggande, Trafikverket, 2016. 

https://trvdokument.trafikverket.se/Versioner.aspx?spid=290&dokumentId=TDOK% 

202016%3A0231 (accessed December 7, 2022). 

[37] Lag (2006:418) om säkerhet i vägtunnlar, Infrastrukturdepartementet RST TP, 

2006. https://rkrat tsbaser.gov.se/sfst?bet=2006:418 (accessed December 7, 2022). 

[38] Transportstyrelsen, TSFS 2019:93, TSFS 2019:93. (2019) 1–14. 

https://www.transportstyrelsen.se/TSFS/TSFS%202019_93.pdf (accessed December 5, 

2022). 

[39] NFPA, Standards for Road Tinnels, Br idges, and Other Limited Access Highways, 

National Fire Protection Association, n.d. https://www.nfpa.org/codes -and -

standards/all -codes -and -standards/list -of -codes -and -standards/detail?code=502 

(accessed December 7, 2022). 

[40] SiS, Fire resistance tests - Part 2: Alternative and additional procedures, Swedish 

Institute for Standards, 1999. https://www.sis.se/api/document/preview/25798/ 

(accessed December 7, 2022). 

[41] PIARC, PIARC Road tunnels manual - Self rescue, (n.d.). 

https://tunnelsmanual.piarc.org/ en/safety -safety -measures/self -rescue (accessed 

December 7, 2022). 

[42] PIARC, Fixed fire fighting systems in road tunnels: current parctices and 

recommendations, 2016. 

[43] FHWA, Tunnel fire protection using fixed firefighting systems: Advanced practices 

from Australia and New Zealand, n.d. 

https://international.fhwa.dot.gov/pubs/pl18030/fhwa_pl18030.pdf (accessed 

December 5, 2022). 

[44] NFPA, NFPA 88A Standard for Parking Structures, National Fire Protection 

Association, 2023. https://www.nfpa.org/codes -and -standards/all -codes -and -

standards/list -of -codes -and -standards/detail?code=88A (accessed December 7, 2022). 

[45] Boverket, Boverkets byggregler (2011:6) - föreskrifter och allmänna råd, BBR, 

Boverket, n.d. 

https://www.boverket.se/contentassets/a9a584aa0e 564c8998d079d752f6b76d/konso 

liderad_bbr_2011 -6.pdf (accessed December 14, 2022). 

[46] J. Miller, Reassessing the fire hazard in parking structures, Coffman Engineers. 

(2022). https://www.coffman.com/news/reassessing -fire -hazard -in -parking -

structures/ (acce ssed December 5, 2022). 

[47] Sprinklers verplicht in nieuwe parkeergarages, Sprinkler.Nl. (2022). 

https://sprinkler.nl/sprinklers -verplicht -in -nieuwe -parkeergarages/ (accessed 

December 5, 2022). 

[48] Dutch car parks to be protected with sprinklers, Europea n Fire Sprinkler Network. 

(2022). https://www.eurosprinkler.org/dutch -car -parks -to -be -protected -with -

sprinklers/ (accessed December 5, 2022). 49  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

[49] Fire sprinklers required in Belgian car parks, Euoropean Fire Sprinkler Network. 

(2022). https://www.eurospri nkler.org/fire -sprinklers -required -in -belgian -car -parks/ 

(accessed December 5, 2022). 

[50] SiS, Fixed firefighting systems - Automatic sprinkler systems - Design, installation 

and maintenance, Swedish Institute of Standards, 2020. 

https://www.sis.se/produk ter/miljo -och -halsoskydd -sakerhet/skydd -mot -

brand/brandbekampning/ss -en -128452015a12020/ (accessed December 7, 2022). 

[51] NFPA, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, National Fire Protection 

Association, 2022. https://www.nfpa.org/codes -and -standards/all -codes -and -

standards/list -of -codes -and -standards/detail?code=13 (accessed December 7, 2022). 

[52] T.W. Gardner, M. Tatum, How should parking garage fire hazards be classified?, 

PHCP Pros. (2020). https://www.phcppros.com/articles/11470 -how -sho uld -parking -

garage -fire -hazards -be -classified (accessed December 5, 2022). 

[53] Eurofeu, EFSAC, Position Paper on the Protection of Car Parks, 2009. 

[54] Directive 2014/94/EU of the European Parliamnet and of the Council, THE 

EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION, n.d. 

https://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32014L0094 

(accessed December 7, 2022). 

[55] Y. Svensson, Boverkets föreskrifter och allmänna råd om utrust ning för laddning av 

elfordon, Boverket, 2021. https://rinfo.boverket.se/BFS2021 -2/pdf/BFS2021 -2.pdf 

(accessed December 7, 2022). 

[56] EU Directive, EU 2014/35/EU om harmonisering av medlemsstaternas lagstiftning 

om tillhandahållande på marknaden av elektr isk utrustning, EU, 2014. 

[57] SEK Svensk Elstandard, Electric vehicle conductive charging system - Part 1: 

General requiremnets, Svenska institutet för standarder, 2011. 

https://www.sis.se/produkter/fordonsteknik/elfordon/ssen6185112/ (accessed 

December 7 , 2022). 

[58] Y.Z. Li, H. Ingason, Overview of research on fire safety in underground road and 

railway tunnels, Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology.  81 (2018) 568 –589. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tust.2018.08.013. 

[59] M. Arvidson, Släcksystem med vattendimma - en förnyad 

kunskapssammanställning, 2014. 

[60] H. Ingason, Y.Z. Li, M. Bobert, Large scale fire tests with different types of fixed fire 

fighting systems in Runehamar tunnel, 2016. 

http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nb n:se:ri:diva -26221. 

[61] A. Lönnermark, H. Ingason, eds., Proceedings from the Eighth International 

Symposium on Tunnel Safety and Security, Borås, Sweden, March 14 -16, 2018, in: Eighth 

International Symposium on Tunnel Safety and Security (ISTSS 2018), RI SE Research 

Institutes of sweden, Borås, Sweden, 2018: p. 708. 

http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:ri:diva -39948. 

[62] BRE, Fire spread in car parks BD2552, London, 2010. 

https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/ukgwa/20120919204054/http:/www.com 

muni ties.gov.uk/documents/planningandbuilding/pdf/1795610.pdf (accessed May 5, 

2022). 

[63] D. Crowder, M. Shipp, Sprinkler protected car stacker fire test, 2009. 

https://www.bafsa.org.uk/wp -content/uploads/bsk -pdf -manager/2020/05/BRE -

Global -Client -Report1.pdf (accessed December 5, 2022). 50  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

[64] Lashfire website, Lashfire.Eu. (n.d.). https://lashfire.eu/ (accessed December 5, 

2022). 

[65] M. Arvidson, Deliverable D10.1, Description of the developemnet of automatic first 

response fire protection systems for ro -ro sp aces on vehicle carriers, 

Https://Lashfire.Eu/. (2022). https://lashfire.eu/deliverables/ (accessed December 5, 

2022). 

[66] Sprinklers controleren brand parkeergarage Epe, Sprinkler.Nl. (2020). 

https://sprinkler.nl/sprinklers -controleren -brand -parkeergarag e-epe/ (accessed 

December 5, 2022). 

[67] D. Pichler, Elektroauto löst Feuer in Marienplatzgarage Ravenburg aus, 

Wochenblatt Ravensburg.  (2021). https://www.wochenblatt -news.de/elektroauto -loest -

feuer -in -marienplatzgarage -ravensburg -aus/ (accessed December 5, 2022). 

[68] E-SUV VW ID4 in Tiefgarage ausgebrannt: 370.000€ Schaden, Autto.At. (2021). 

https://autto.at/en/news/e -suv -vw -id4 -in -tiefgarage -ausgebrannt -370000 -schaden -

20211130.html (accessed December 5, 2022). 

[69] M. Held, M. Tuchschmid, M. Zennegg, R. Figi, C. Schreiner, L.D. Mellert, U. Welte, 

M. Kompatscher, M. Hermann, L. Nachef, Thermal runaway and fire of electric vehicle 

lithium -ion battery and contamination of infrastructure facility, Renewable and 

Sustainable Energy Reviews. 165 (2022) 112474. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2022.112474. 

[70] J. Gehandler, P. Karlsson, L. Vylund, Risks associated with alternative fuels in road 

tunnels and underground garages, 2017. 

http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:ri:diva -29101. 

[71] MSB, Räddningsinsatser vid händelser med gasdrivna fordon, 2022. 

https://rib.msb.se/filer/pdf/30039.pdf (accessed December 5, 2022). 

[72] A. Lecocq, M. Bertana, B. Truchot, G. Marlair, Comparison of the fire consequences 

of an electric vehicle and an internal co mbustion engine vehicle, in: International 

Conference on Fires In Vehicles - FIVE 2012, Chicago, 2012: pp. 183 –194. https://hal -

ineris.archives -ouvertes.fr/ineris -00973680/document (accessed January 12, 2022). 

[73] H. Ingason, A. Lönnermark, Heat Release R ates from Heavy Goods Vehicle Trailers 

in Tunnels, Fire Saf J. 40 (2005) 22. http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:ri:diva -

5927. 

[74] Park, Ryu, Ryou, Experimental Study on the Fire -Spreading Characteristics and 

Heat Release Rates of Burning Vehicles Usi ng a Large -Scale Calorimeter, Energies 

(Basel). 12 (2019) 1465. https://doi.org/10.3390/en12081465. 

[75] C. Lam, D. MacNeil, R. Kroeker, G. Lougheed, G. Lalime, Full -Scale Fire Testing of 

Electric and Internal Combustion Engine Vehicles, in: P. Andersson, B. Sundström 

(Eds.), Fires in Vehicles - FIVE 2016, Baltimore, 2016: pp. 95 –106. https://ri.diva -

portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1120218/FULLTEXT01.pdf (accessed January 12, 2022). 

[76] D. Li, G. Zhu, H. Zhu, Z. Yu, Y. Gao, X. Jiang, Flame spread and smoke temp erature 

of full -scale fire test of car fire, Case Studies in Thermal Engineering. 10 (2017) 315 –324. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csite.2017.08.001. 

[77] N. Watanabe, O. Sugawa, T. Suwa, Y. Ogawa, M. Hiramatsu, H. Tomonori, H. 

Miyamoto, K. Okamoto, M. Honma, Comparison of fire behaviors of an electric -battery -

powered vehicle and gasoline -powered vehicle in a real -scale fire test, in: P. Andersson, 

B. Sundström (Eds.), Fires in Vehicles - FIVE 2016, SP, Borås, 2016: pp. 195 –206. 

http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn :nbn:se:ri:diva -30071. 51  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

[78] E.J. Spek, Internal Fire Testing of xEVs, 2019. 

[79] T.R. Long, A.F. Blum, T.J. Bress, B.R.T. Cotts, Best Practices for Emergency 

Response to Incidents Involving Electric Vehicles Battery Hazards: A Report on Full -

Scale Testing Results, 2013. 

https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2014/02/f8/final_report_nfpa.pdf (accessed 

January 18, 2022). 

[80] T. Hirashima, Y. Wang, H. Uesugi, Large Scale Fire Tests Of A 4 -story Type Car Park 

Part 2 Analysis Of The Thermal Stresses And Deflections, Fire Safety Science. 7 (2003) 

655 –666. https://doi.org/10.3801/IAFSS.FSS.7 -655. 1 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

# Appendix A. Data on vehicle fires 

Data on vehicle fires have been collected from different countries and sources, with focus on EV. Table A1 presents EV and ICEV fire test data and 

Table A2 presents data collected on EV fire accidents .

Table A 1. Data collected on EV and ICEV fire test data, where green rows mark data for EV 

Ref  Type of 

vehicle 

Vehicle 

year 

Li -ion 

battery 

Amount 

of fuel/ 

SOC 

ignition  THR 

(GJ) 

Peak 

HRR 

(kW) 

Mass 

loss 

(kg) 

Radiat ./

temp .

Gas/ 

prod. 

meas .

Sim ./

modelling 

Cell/Module/ 

Pack tests 

performed 

Other 

[2] ICEV, 

diesel 

2011  n.a  44 L  external 

fire 

5,9  5700  252  Temp . y Yes - smoke 

moveme nt

garage 

y

[2] BEV  2019  NMC pouch  80%  external 

fire 

5,2  7000  247  Temp . y Yes - smoke 

movem en t

garage 

y

[2] BEV  2016  NMC 

prismatic 

80%  external 

fire 

6,7  5000  400  Temp . y Yes - smoke 

movem en t

garage 

y

[72 ] BEV  330V, 50Ah  100%  cabin  6,3  4200  212  Temp . y n y

[72] BEV  355V, 

66,6Ah 

100%  cabin  8,54  4700  279  Temp . y n y

[72] ICEV, 

diesel 

cabin  6,89  4800  192  Temp . y n y

ICEV, 

diesel 

cabin  10  6100  275  Temp . y n y

[73 ] 4xTrailer 

mock -up 

n.a.  n.a.  Temp ., 

gas 

n n y

[7 4] ICEV  1998  0 cabin  3500  heat flux  y n n flame height 

[74 ] ICEV  1998  0 cabin  6000  heat flux  y n n flame height 2 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

[75 ] ICEV  45  simulated 

pool fire -

burner 

1000 

0+ 

Temp . n y

[7 5] ICEV  45  simulated 

pool fire -

burner 

8500  Temp . n y

[72]  Small 

PHEV 

simulated 

pool fire -

burner 

8000  Temp . n y

[72]  Large 

PHEV 

simulated 

pool fire -

burner 

1000 

0

Temp . n y

[72]  BEV  100%  simulated 

pool fire -

burner 

8000  Temp . n y

[72]  BEV  85%  simulated 

pool fire -

burner 

8000  Temp . n y

[72]  BEV  100%  simulated 

pool fire -

burner 

9000  Temp.  n y

[76 ] ICEV  2008  100 mL  engine 

comp .

space 

Temp ., 

heat flux 

n fire spread 

[77 ] BEV 

(Nissan 

Leaf) 

2011  100%  left rear 

soft 

bumper 

6,4  heat flux  n n

[7 7] ICEV 

(Honda 

Fit) 

2003  10 L  left rear 

spla sh

guard 

4,2  heat flux  n n3 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

[2] ICEV 

(Toyota 

Sedan) 

10 L  5,1 

[2] ICEV 

(Nissan 

minivan) 

10 L  5,3 

[2] ICEV 

(Subaru 

station) 

10 L  5,6 

[2] ICEV 

(Toyota 

minivan) 

10 L  5,9 

[2] ICEV 

(Toyota 

luxury 

sedan) 

10 L  7,4 

[78 ] BEV2  ”new ” electric 

resistance 

heater 

y time to escape 

[7 8] PHEV2 -1 side 

impact 

electric 

resistance 

heater 

y time to escape 

[7 8] PHEV2 -2 front 

impact 

electric 

resistance 

heater 

y time to escape 

[7 8] BEV1  front 

impact 

electric 

resistance 

heater 

y time to escape 

[7 8] PHEV1  front 

impact 

electric 

resistance 

heater 

y time to escape 4 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

[78 ] HEV3  ”n ew ” electric 

resistance 

heater 

y time to escape 

[7 9] PHEV 

battery 

(A) 

battery 

only 

4.4 kWh  100%  external 

fire 

Temp ,

heat flux 

y n y electrical 

measurements, 

firefighting tactics, 

water 

[79 ] EREV 

battery 

(B)

battery 

only 

16 kWh  100%  external 

fire 

0,72  700  Temp ,

heat flux 

y n y electrical 

measurements, 

firefighting tactics, 

water 

[7 9] PHEV 

battery A

mock up  4.4 kWh  100%  external 

fire 

Temp ,

heat flux 

y n y electrical 

measurements, 

firefighting tactics, 

water 

[7 9] PHEV 

battery A 

mock up  4.4 kWh  100%  external 

fire 

Temp ,

heat flux 

y n y electrical 

measurements, 

firefighting tactics, 

water 

[7 9] PHEV 

battrey A

mock up 

w

interior 

4.4 kWh  100%  external 

fire 

Temp ,

heat flux 

y n y electrical 

measurements, 

firefighting tactics, 

water 

[7 9] EREV 

battery 

(B) 

mock up  16 kWh  100%  external 

fire 

Temp ,

heat flux 

y n y electrical 

measurements, 

firefighting tactics, 

water 

[7 9] EREV 

battery 

(B) 

mock up  16 kWh  100%  external 

fire 

Temp ,

heat flux 

y n y electrical 

measurements, 

firefighting tactics, 

water 5 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

[7 9] EREV 

battery 

(B) 

mock up 

w

interior 

16 kWh  100%  external 

fire 

Temp ,

heat flux 

y n y electrical 

measurements, 

firefighting tactics, 

water 

[80 ] 12 

vehicles 

each floor 

63x63 m 

car park 

4 story 

Temp.  n n n steel 

temperatures, 

stress -strain 

curves, deflection 

etc .

[7 5] ICEV  2015  full  propane 

burner -

pool fire 

3,29  7100  274  Temp ,

heat flux 

y n Electrical 

measurement 

[75 ] EV  2014  100%  propane 

burner -

pool fire 

6000  333  Temp ,

heat flux 

y n Electrical 

measurements 

[7 5] EV  2013  85 % propane 

burner -

pool fire 

4,91  5900  295  Temp ,

heat flux 

y n Electrical 

measurements 

[7 5] ICEV  2013  full  propane 

burner -

pool fire 

4, 95  1080 

0

336  Temp ,

heat flux 

y n Electrical 

measurements 

[7 5] EV  2013  100%  propane 

burner -

pool fire 

4, 66  6900  363  Temp ,

heat flux 

y n Electrical 

measurements 

[7 5] PHEV  2013  full/ 

85% 

propane 

burner -

pool fire 

4, 63  6000  308  Temp ,

heat flux 

y n Electrical 

measurements 

[7 5] PHEV  2014  full/ 

100 %

propane 

burner -

pool fire 

5,85  7900  445  Temp ,

heat flux 

y n Electrical 

measurements 6 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

* BEV no 

Battery, 

free burn 

2020/20 

21 

no fuel 

storage 

external 

fire 

5 2500  240  Temp . y n y water run -offs 

* ICEV, 

sprinklere 

d test 

2020/20 

21 

40L  external 

fire 

6,1  3700  309  Temp . y n y SPRINKLERED 

TEST, water run -

offs 

* BEV ,

sprinklere 

d test 

2020/20 

21 

50kWh, 216 

cells in 18 

modules 

90%  external 

fire 

5,7  3000  327  Temp . y n y SPRINKLERED 

TEST, water run -

offs 

* Battery 

pack ,

sprinklere 

d test 

50kWh, 216 

cells in 18 

modules 

90%  external 

fire 

0,8  2400  75  Temp . y n y SPRINKLERED 

TEST, water run -

offs 

*Tests conducted January 2022, data not yet published     

> Table A2. D ata collected on EV fire accidents , where c oloured rows mark vehicle swhich were parked upon fire initiation

Year  Type of EV  Reference  Comment 

2008  Toyota Prius  9 A Toyota Prius caught fire due to spontaneous ignition while in transit. This vehicle 

was converted to a PHEV. The main reason could be an improper assembly of bolted 

joints with electrical lugs inside the battery pack, which triggered the o verheating 

and thermal runaway of the battery cell .

2011  Chevrolet Volt  9 A Chevrolet Volt spontaneously caught fire almost three weeks after the crash -test 

exercise 

2011  Tesla Model S  9 In Merida, Mexico, a Tesla Model S caught fire at high -speed driving through a 

roundabout and hit a wall and a tree 

2012  Nissan GTR  9 A Nissan GTR crashed and caught fire. The fire was caused by electric arcs created by 

the short -circuiting of high voltage lines, which ignited the vehicle’s combustibles 

(interior materials and around 75% of the power batteries 7 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

2012  Toyota 

Prius/Fisker 

Karmas 

9 After Hurricane Sandy flooding, a Toyota Prius Plug -in Hybrid and 16 Fisker Karmas 

caught fire while being parked in a marine. The fire was caused by saltwater 

expansion into the electrical system, its corrosion, and finally —a short circuit in the 

unit 

2013  Mitsubishi -

iMiev 

9 A Mitsubishi i -MiEV caught fire at the Mizushima battery pack assembly while being 

charged 

2013  Tesla Model S  9 A Tesla Model S caught fire after the vehicle hit debris while being driven on a 

highway. Flames began coming out both of the fronts at the end of the car. 

Extinguishing the fire with water obtained from outside of the car was unsuccessful 

because the fire reignited underneath the vehicle. Water given directly to the burning 

battery extinguished it finally. 

2013  Tesla Model S  9 A Tesla being driven in Murfreesboro, Tennessee, caught fire after it struck a tow 

hitch on the roadway that caused damaged beneath the vehicle 

2014  Tesla Model S  9 In Toronto, Canada, a Tesla Model S caught fire while parked in a garage, but it was 

not charged 

2016  Tesla Model S  9 in Norway, A Tesla Model S caught fire while being charged by a Tesla Supercharger. 

The fire grew up slowly, and the owner managed to unplug the car. Tesla suggested a 

short circuit in the vehicle’s distribution box as the direct reason for the fire. 

2016  Tesla Model 

S90D 

9 In France, A Tesla Model S 90D caught fire during a promotional test drive. The 

vehicle started burning spontaneously and was destroyed within 5 min. Tesla 

suggested a “bolted ele ctrical connection” that was “improperly tightened” under 

the production process, causing the fire. 

2017  Tesla Model X  9 in California a Tesla Model X lost control over an embankment and struck a garage, 

starting a fire that completely damaged the car 

2017  Tesla Model S  9 In Austria A Tesla Model S crashed on a concrete barrier at a motorway, which 

initiated the fire in the battery at the front of the vehicle. The fire was described as 

extremely severe with a lot of toxic gas production 

2017  VW -e Golf  9 in Germany, a VW e -Golf caught fire in a high -voltage battery space; after initial 

cooling, the firefighters moved the vehicle into a water container 8 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

2018  Kia Optima 

Hybrid 

9 A driving Kia Optima Hybrid spontaneously caught fire, and the whole car started to 

burn just 30 s after it started. The causes were electrical in nature but not 

determined in detail. 

2018  Panamera E -

hybrid 

9 A Panamera E -Hybrid burst into flames while being plugged into a household outlet 

for charging 

2018  Lifan 650  9 A Lifan 650 ignited and was completely lost as the fire could not be extinguished in 

time. The fire initiated spontaneously under the car, in the battery space. During the 

fire, several small explosions and significant emissions of toxic black smoke were 

noticed 

2018  Porsche 

Panamera 

9 A Porsche Panamera caught fire and exploded while its battery was being charged. 

The reason was an improper installation and working of the charging system 

2018  Tesla Model S  9 A Tesla Model S hit a wall, causing the battery pack to ignite. The battery reignited 

twice, requiring it to be extinguished three times in total 

2018  Tesla Model S  9 In Switzerland, A Tesla Model S caught fire after the vehicle hit the guard -rail on a 

highway 

2018  Tesla Model S  9 in California, a Tesla Model S started to smoke while being parked in the street and 

flames started shooting out from under it. Firefighters were able to extinguish the 

fire effectively, and the cabin was left unaffected. 

2019  Tesla Model S  9 A Tesla Model S caught on fire being parked in a garage. The same car caught on fire 

again two months later (on April 8th), while it was under investigation. 

2019  Tesla Model S  9 in Florida, A Tesla Model S burst into flames just after it crashed into a tree, was 

effectively extinguished, and repeatedly caught fire after being brought to the car 

park used by police. 

2019  Tesla Model X  9 A Tesla Model X was completely burned in the middle of a frozen lake; during the 

fire, numerous small explosions were noticed, and firefighters arrived about 30 min 

after the fire began, which appeared to be too late. 

2019  Tesla Model S  9 in China, A Tesla Model S caught on fire and exploded in an underground car park; in 

total, five cars were damaged by the fire. 9 

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

2019  Outlander  9 An Outlander caught fire after immersion in saltwater. 

2019  Tesla Model S  9 A Tesla Model S spontaneously caught on fire while not plugged in, with smoke 

observed near the rear right tire. 

2019  Tesla Model S  9 A Tesla Model S in Hong Kong caught on fire while parked. 

2019  Tesla Model S  9 in Belgium, A Tesla Model S burned down while supercharging. 

2019  Tesla Model 3  9 in Russia, A Tesla Model 3 hit a truck on a high -speed road and subsequently burned 

down 

2019  Tesla Model x  9 in England, A Tesla Model X from 2017 burst into flames while charging. The fire 

ignition was confirmed in the battery pack, and it was caused by an impact on one of 

the battery pack modules. 

2019  Kona Electric  9 In Canada, A Kona Electric caught on fire while being parked in a residential garage in 

Montreal. The car was not plugged in. The fire triggered an explosion and caused 

damage to the attached structure. 

2019  Kona Electric  9 in south Korea, a Kona Electric caught fire while charging 

2019  Kona Electric  9 in south Korea, A Kona Electric burst into flames while being charged in an 

underground car park. The vehicle was completely destroyed 

2019  Tesla  https://driving.ca/auto -

news/news/tesla -spontaneously -

combusts -in -shanghai -parking -garage 

Tesla spontaneously combusts in garage 

2019  Porsche 

Panamera 

9 in Portugal, a Porsche Panamera E -Hybrid caught fire after hitting a pillar of a bridge 

2020  Porsche Taycan  9 in Florida, a Porsche completely burned while parked in a residential garage 

2021  Chevrolet Bolt  https://www.nbcwashington.com/ne 

ws/local/northern -virginia/electric -

vehicle -sparked -fire -at -virginia -home -

did -235k -in -damage -

officials/2663744/ 

Fire started while charging 10  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

2021  Tesla model S  https://www.nationthailand.com/blog 

s/tech/40004207 

The car gave an alarm that the charging where interrupted before th e fire started 

2021  Tesla  https://www.republicworld.com/worl 

d-news/us -news/tesla -model -s-in -us -

catches -fire -while -charging -overnight -

in -a-garage.html 

A California couple has said that their Tesla Model S caught fire while charging in 

their garage overnight, spread to a second Tesla vehicle before engulfing their house 

in flames. 

2022  https://www.surfsantamonica.com/ss 

m_site/the_lookout/news/News -

2022/April -

2022/04_04_2022_EVs_Catch_Fire_in 

_Parking_Structure_Crash.html 

In California, two electric vehicles caught fire when they crashed inside a Downtown 

parking garage 

2022  100 cars 

involved 

https://bikekharido.in/news/100 -

vehicles -catch -fire -in -delhis -electric -

vehicle -charging -station/ 

a massive fire broke out in Delhi’s Jamia Nagar electric vehicle parking station. The 

authorities are yet to conclude the reason for the fire. However, it could have 

happened because of a short circuit. 

2022  Jaguar I pace  https://www.zeebiz.com/automobile/ 

news -jaguar -i-pace -electric -car -

catches -fire -while -charging -in -florida -

192708 

Jaguar I -Pace battery caught on fire without any crash after simply sitting charging in 

a garage. 

2022  Tesla X and Y  https://carbuzz.com/news/watch -two -

teslas -catch -fire -beside -a-garage -full -

of -ammo 

Two cars burned in a garage ; the cause is not known 

2018  Hybrid electric  6 PHEV alarmed for electrical fault, soon after the car started to burn during drive 

2018  Hybrid electric  6 Fire in engine, car was parked 

2018  Hybrid electric  6 Fire in parked vehicle, reason for fire is unknown, the fire spread to another vehicle 

(ICEV) 

2018  Hybrid electric 

+ 3 ICEVs 

6 Four vehicles on fire, unknown cause and unknown vehicle that started the fire 

2018  Hybrid electric  6 Driver started vehicle and flames erupted from the engine compartmen t11  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

2018  Electric  6 Fire in carport, charger or cable was the origin of fire 

2018  Hybrid electric  6 Fire in a hybrid electric vehicle on a car park , unknown reason for fire 

2018  Hybrid electric  6 Fire in a hybrid electric vehicle on a car park , unknown reason for fire 

2019  Hybrid electric  6 Fire during charging, the fire started in the wall socket 

2019  Hybrid electric  6 Fire during drive 

2019  Hybrid electric  6 Fire in a hybrid electric vehicle on a car park , unknown reason for fire 

2019  6 Fire in coupe which spread to the carport, no damages on the battery 

2019  Electric  6 Fire during drive, started in front seat 

2019  Hybrid electric  6 Short circuit due to jump start cables which short circuited and ignited the luggage 

compartment 

2020  Hybrid electric  6 Fire in engine compartment during drive 

2020  Hybrid electric  6 Front of vehicle affected, parked vehicle, fire cause unknown 

2020  Electric  6 Unknown cause, vehicle parked 

2020  Hybrid electric  6 parked vehicle, charging, unknown cause of fire 

2020  Hybrid electric 

+ 5 other 

vehciles 

6 fire in multi -car port, 6 vehicles on fire, one was hybrid electric, unknown cause of 

fire 

2020  Hybrid electric  6 Race car, vaulted, batteries most likely not affected 

2020  Gas vehicle and 

electric vehicle 

6 Fire in garage, gas bottles were stored in the garage as well as one biogas vehicle and 

one electric vehicle, fire cause unknown' 

2020  VW transporter  6 Parked vehicle, Unknown cause of fire, batteries most likely not affected 

2020  Hybrid electric  6 Fire in engine compartment, parked vehicle, not charging fire cause unknown 

2020  Hybrid electric  6 Parked in garage, charging vehicle, fire localized to the vehicle but cause unknown 

2020  Hybrid electric  6 Daisy chain connection started the fire, fire did not spread to vehicle 

2020  Electric  6 Parked vehicle, battery not affected, unknown cause of fire 

2020  electric + 2 

other vehicles 

6 Unknown cause of fire, ICEVs completely burnet out, fire had started to spread to the 

electric vehicle, battery affected by fire 12  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

2020  hybrid electric 

+ 2 other 

vehicles 

6 Unknown cause of fire, 2 vehicles (including the hybrid) was completely burnet out 

when the FRS arrived 

2020  hybrid electric 

+ ICEV 

6 two cars on fire at a parking lot, fire started in petrol car and spread to the front of 

the hybrid, battery not affected, unknown cause of fire 

2020  hybrid electric  6 Gas development from ba ttery, unknown cause of smoke, unknown location of 

vehicle (drive/parked) 

2020  Home built 

electric vehicle 

6 Charging, started with explosion, followed by jet flames 

2020  2 electric 

vehicles 

6 Parked, unknown cause of fire 

2020  electric vehicle  6 parked, unknown cause of fire 

2020  Hybrid electric 

+ 2 other 

vehicles 

6 Unknown cause of fire, fire started in the hybrid vehicle 

2021  Hybrid electric  6 Tow truck operator saw sparks from vehicle, car had been on fire the day before 

2021  electric vehicle  6 Charging outdoors, no more details, 

2021  electric vehicle  6 Fire upon driving, fire started in trunk where there were batteries, unknown type of 

vehicle, homebuilt? 

2021  electric vehilce  6 Parked vehicle, unknown if charging or not 

2021  electric + ICEV  6 Crash incident, electric car on fire, ICEV no fire, person in electric vehicle was able to 

rescue him/her -self whilst the driver of the ICEV died 

2021  hybrid electric  6 Charging in carport, TR in battery which lead to full fire 

2021  hybrid electric  6 Short circuit 12 V battery, traction battery not affected, vehicle was likely charging 

2021  electric  6 Parking garage, charging 

2021  older ICEV 

converted to 

electric 

6 Car was charging 13  

> © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden

2021  electric  6 Car was charging 

2021  Hybrid electric  6 Driving, smoke from battery then fire 

2021  Hybrid electric  6 Parked, Fire in passenger compartment, battery most likely not affected 

2021  Hybrid electric  6 Smoke development engine compartment, unknown if driven or parked, unknown if 

battery was affected 

2021  4 electric 

vehicles 

6 Parked and charging outdoors, unknown cause of fire 

2021  Hybrid electric  6 Fire during drive, battery affected by fire, unknown cause 

2021  2 electric and 2 

other vehicles 

6 parked vehicles, unknown cause, batteries not affected 

2021  electric  6 Fire in vehicle at service, car had been in accident earlier during the day, re -ign ition 

2021  Hybrid electric  6 Crash incident 

2021  3 electric + 1 

gas vehicle 

6 Unknown cause, unknown charging state, batteries affected by the fire 

2021  electric vehicle  6 Fire started in passenger compartment ; vehicle was charging 

2021  Hybrid electric  6 Unknown cause and state 

2021  Hybrid electric  6 Vehicle charging, 12 V battery involved - smoke development from 12 V battery 

2021  Hybrid electric 

+ a number of 

other vehicles 

6 Fire in carport, unknown cause and origin of fire 1

© RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

# Appendix B . HAZID Workshops 

Four different HAZID session with different themes were carried out , with different undesired events identified, as listed in Table B1 below. 

Table B1. Unwanted events identified for the different themes investigated 

Arson  Crash of EVs in 

tunnels 

EV fires in enclosed car 

parks, when the origin of 

fire is external/ outside 

the vehicle . Vehicle is 

parked or parked and 

charging. 

EV fires in enclosed car 

parks, wh en the origin 

of fire is the vehicle. 

Vehicle is parked or 

parked and charging. 

Arson in parked EVs in 

multiple carports 

Explosion due to 

crash of EV in tunnel 

Fire in an electrical 

socket/ adjacent 

electrical installation 

Fire during charging 

Arson in parked EVs in 

open above ground 

garages 

Crash followed by 

toxic release of 

gases. 

Fire in adjacent smaller 2 -

3-wheeler light electric 

vehicles 

Explosion in EV while it 

is parked and charging 

Arson in parked EVs in 

closed underground 

garages 

Crash followed by 

fire without 

explosion in 

unidirectional and 

bidirectional 

tunnels. 

Fire due to spill of 

flammable liquid 

Release of gases from 

the battery of an EV 

without immediate 

ignition 

Fire in EV during 

active drive inside a 

tunnel. 

Fire in adjacent storage 

room (rubber tyre 

storage/ garbage) 

Arcing between EV and 

charging plug 

Crash of single or 

multiple EVs into 

tunnel walls. 

Flooding of the 

charging station 2

© RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

Throughout the H AZID sessions, different events were qualitatively rated with regards to likelihood and severity of consequence . The scales of 

likelihood and consequence that were used for the estimations are presented in Table B2 and in Table B3, respectively. 

Table B 2. Likelihood scale used to rate different events during the H AZID sessions 

Likelihood Scale  Score  Description 

Highly unlikely  1 Almost impossible this will happen 

Unlikely  2 Unlikely 

Somewhat likely/ Medium  3 Possible 

Likely  4 Likely 

Highly likely  5 Almost certain this will happen 

Table B 2. Scales used to rate the likelihood for fire spread as well as the severity of consequences during the H AZID sessions 

Interpretation of Likelihood and Consequence (1 -5 scale) 

Likelihood  1 2 3 4 5

The fire is highly 

unlikely to spread. 

The fire is unlikely 

to spread. 

The fire is somewhat 

likely to spread. 

The fire is likely to spread.  The fire will almost 

certainly spread. 

Severity of Consequence  1 2 3 4 5

Severity of Consequence 

Severity of Consequence 

(Fire spread) 

No effect  Minor effect  Moderate effect  Major effect  Hazardous effect 

Fire does not 

spread at all 

Fire spreads to up 

to 1 vehicle 

Fire spreads to up to 5

vehicles 

Fire spreads to more than 

5 vehicles 

Fire spreads to more 

than 10 vehicles 

Severity of Consequence 

(Damage to infrastructure/ 

property) 

No damage to 

infrastructure 

Damage to surface 

of infrastructure 

Damage to loadbearing 

structure but no 

collapse 

Partial collapse  Complete collapse 

Severity of Consequence 

(Availability of tunnel 

and/or car park) 

Unavailable for 

less than 1 day 

Unavailable 

between 1 day and 

1 week 

Unavail able between 

more than 1 week and 1

month 

Unavailable between 

more than 1 month and 1

year 

Unavailable for more 

than 1 year. (E.g.: 

refurbishing of 1 km of 

tunnel lining needed). 

Severity of Consequence 

(Environmental impact) 

[E.g.: waste water collection 

from car park s after fire; 

smoke]. 

No re al damage  Short -term damage 

with small 

geographic spread. 

Reversible long -term 

damage with small 

geographic spread. 

OR 

Short -term damage 

with large geographic 

spread. 

Permanent (Non 

reversible) damage with 

small geographic spread. 

OR Long -term 

(Reversible) damage with 

large geographic spread. 

Permanent (Non 

reversible) damage with 

large geographic spread. 3

© RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

The results from the four H AZID sessions are documente d in tables B4 -B7. 

Table B 4. Results from HAZID Theme 1: Arson 

Unwanted 

event 

Current safety measures 

already existing 

(preventive and 

mitigating) 

Likelihood  Risk Factors  Differences between EV and ICEV  Mechanism of 

failure 

Consequence  Potential safety 

measures (preventive 

and mitigating) 

What do we 

NOT want to 

happen? 

FFFS Fixed firefighting 

systems installed/ 

technical aspects for e.g. 

type of sprinklers, type of 

ventilation etc. 

Tactical aspects for e.g. 

related to manual 

firefighting and first 

response etc. 

Description  Factors affecting Likelihood of 

the Unwanted Event and/or 

Severity of Consequence of the 

Unwanted Event. 

Mechanism of 

failure = How 

does the fire 

spread? 

Fixed systems installed/ 

technical aspects for 

e.g. type of sprinklers, 

type of ventilation etc. 

Tactical aspects for e.g. 

related to manual 

firefighting and first 

response etc. 

Parked; Carport 

multiple. 

No FFFS: no ventilation, 

detection or sprinkler 

system. Requirement for 

safety distance for 

adjacent b uildings exists 

today. 

Somewhat likely if there 

is anything nearby, 

provided the arsonist is 

able to get the fire 

started. 

It depends on whether there are 

any cars nearby. Open or closed 

windows in vehicle. How early or 

late the fire is detected. This 

depends on if it is in a remote 

area and time of the day, Place of 

ignition source. The size of the 

car. Etc. 

No difference  Je t flames, 

radiation, 

liquid pool, 

smoke layer, 

other 

flammable 

material, 

ceiling height. 

detectors, sprinklers, 

shorter arrival times for 

the rescue services 

Probably rather high 

provided there are 

vehicles nearby, we 

should check numbers in 

literature on how long 

time it takes to spread 

Longer burning time of the EV influence 

the risk of spread. The potential jet 

flames from the battery, does this pose 

a larger spread risk. Liquid pools from 

ICEV is a comparable factor. Jet flames 

usually no t that long (m). The E -tox2 

tests showed rather short jet flames for 

the vehicle but longer for the battery 

itself. The jet flames are not long lasting 

in time. 

Manual firefighting ;

Portable fire 

extinguisher 

Parked; Open 

above ground 

car park 

Building material, 

(normally concrete); 

Influenced by wind 

condition; Ceiling height, 

direction of vehicles 

Detection, sprinkler, 

other FFFS. 4

© RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

parked, placement of 

the vehicles, multiple 

floors. 

Parked; Closed 

underground car 

park 

Jet fans, 

might 

produce high 

velocities 

and thus 

spread the 

fire 

Sprinkler, (jet fan could 

perhaps be used as a 

safety measure also), 

detection, not so large 

fire cells, larger parking 

slots 

Parked and 

charging; Closed 

underground car 

park 

No impact on fire development 

unless the EV is fully charged 

Yes  Improve education and 

awareness 

Table B5. Results from HAZID Theme 2: Collision of EVs in tunnels 

Unwanted 

event 

Factors affecting the 

unwanted event 

Current safety measures 

already existing (preventive 

and mitigating) 

Factors affecting the 

Likelihood of occur rence 

Differences 

between EV and 

ICEV fires 

Consequences  Potential safety 

measures (preventive 

and mitigatin g) 

Post HAZID comments 

What do we 

NOT want to 

happen? 

Fire size, fire spread, fire 

development, gases 

released etc. E.g.: Explosion 

from crash = Unwanted 

event. Factors affecting 

explosion from crash = 

Amount of gas released, 

ventilation circumsta nces, 

type of vehicle in the crash 

etc. 

Fixed systems installed/ 

technical aspects for e.g. type 

of sprinklers, type of 

ventilation etc. 

Tactical measures 

Description  Compare between 

gas release; How 

prone are EVs vs 

ICEVs to fire from 

crash? how prone 

ar e EVs vs ICEVs to 

fires from active 

drive? 

Description 5

© RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

Chain of events: 

Crash followed 

by explosion. 

Explosion 

caused by 

flammable 

gases from 

battery in EV. 

Amount of ventilation, type 

of tunnel (unidirectional or 

bidirectional), length of 

tunnel. 

Tunnels in Sweden more 

than 1000 m and with more 

than 4000 vehicles per 24 

hours are required to have 

mechanical ventilation. 

Tunnels in USA: no such 

requirement f or mechanical 

ventilation / emergency 

ventilation for tunnels less 

than 1000 m. 

Portable extinguishers, drainage 

to prevent fire from liquids, 

telephones, escape routes, 

accessibility for fire fighters, 

lightning. Fixed firefighting 

systems - not require ments but 

advice on what to evaluate if 

these are installed. "If a fixed 

system is installed then what 

should the evaluation 

parameters for that fixed 

system be?" 

High SOC high probab ility 

of immediate ignition and 

thus no explosion. Lower 

SOC me ans less H2. 

Damage to 

structure 

Fire and gas detection 

system, CCTVs, Fire 

suppression. Any 

changes in first 

responders? Mechanical 

ventilation system 

(emergency ventilation) 

also for shorter tunnels 

More than the fire spread in the 

explosion, focus on the severity 

of damage to structure. 

Personal safety. 

Chain of events: 

Crash followed 

by toxic release 

of gases. 

No difference 

between ICEV and 

EV 

Toxic gas are generally more 

severe for humans than for the 

building construction. 

Chain of events: 

Fire followed by 

crash BUT no 

explosion. 

Severity of crash  Inputs from MSB and leading 

vehicle manufacturer: Most 

crashes in vehicles may not lead 

to fire. This is valid even in 

frontal crashes with ICEV (hot 

surfaces and flammable liquids. 

Most accidents are lower speed 

accidents. 

Crash in 

unidirectional 

tunnel 

Probably a less severe crash 

as all vehicles are driving in 

the same direction 

probably difference in cities and 

rural tunnels. CCTV in cities and 

then it is possible to notice the 

crash. AI for identifying traffic 

flow. Surveillance for tunnels 

longer than 3000m, CCTV and 

automatic detection of 

incidents/accidents. Differences 

between cities if the rescue 

services direct the traffic or not. 

IN Gothenburg it is the traffic 

surveillance that do this. 

No difference in 

likelihood for crash 

if there would be 

the same number of 

vehicles (EV and 

ICEV) 

Systems for identifying 

traffic flow rate. A stop 

is detected fast. 

Currently surveillance 

for tunnels longer than 

3000m, CCTV and 

automatic detection of 

inc idents/accidents, an 

option also for shorter 

tunnels? 

Crash in 

bidirectional 

tunnel 

Can be more severe in 

frontal crash 

Possibility of explosion is high. 6

© RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

Single collision 

(into tunnel 

wall) 

Most common of the different 

crashes in general but we do 

not know specifically for 

tunnels. 

Multiple 

coll is ion 

(collision 

between 

vehicles) 

Both frontal crash or side to 

side crash; Depends on the 

amount of traffic in tunnel, 

rear end crashes are the 

most common (75%). 

Fire spread to more vehicles or 

cloud explosion risks is relatively 

high. 

Jet flame  Assumes that the battery pack is 

involved, which may not always 

be the case. Such jet flame 

lengths are short. 

Explosion of 

vehicle itself 

Compare with explosions in the 

EV, difference is the delay of 

explosion 

Fire involving 

several vehicles 

If there is a queue, size of 

fire, amount of traffic 

Dep ends on whether heavy 

good vehicles are involved .

Fire in one 

vehicle 

it is quite common with 

these fires but when one 

considers that the vehicle 

should be in a tunnel the 

likelihood decreases. 

Surveillance, emergency parking 

places 

engine compartment, 

wheel, brakes, hot 

surfaces, flammable 

liquids 

Difficult to tell. 

Brakes are different, 

not sure how it will 

affect the likelihood. 

Engine 

compartment is 

different 

Not so large if 

the vehicle is 

able to drive 

out of the 

tunnel 

Early detection, getting 

the vehicle out of the 

tunnel, sprinkler not so 

useful while the vehicle 

is moving, ventilation 

The fire consequence can be 

huge if there is a queue with 

trucks. 

Fire spread to 

other vehicles 

if the vehicle stops or not, 

driving to the outside is 

better but will people do 

that. Not if it is in the 

compartment 

Surveillance, emergency parking 

places 

Fire spread is not likely if the 

vehicle can be kept driving out 

of the tunnel. 

Fire spread to 

other vehicles 

Depends on how many 

vehicles nearby 

Sprinklers are installed in some 

cases as this allows less fire 

ventilation openings, larger 

distances to evacuation routes, 

etc. (per Swedish building 

regulations) 

Less space so maybe more 

likel y to spread, also the 

cars are parked not 

moving, ceiling height is 

less which increases the 

likelihood of spread 

Usually , it is only a few cars that 

are involved in the fire. 

Uncertain if it is due to 

ventilation control or perhaps 

sprinklers. Semi -enc losed above 

ground gives much more 

intense fires. UK: multistorey 

fires above ground are much 

more common (but might be 

due to more parking garages 

above ground). 7

© RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

Gas release 

(toxic) 

Maybe less ventilation in 

car park than tunnel 

Simulations done in BREND and 

ETOX using data on from free 

burning vehicle. The source 

terms should still be OK 

considering how enclose d the 

vehicle is itself. 

Explosion  Higher SOC results in 

more gas 

Structural safety to be 

considered, currently 

Katarina garage in 

Stockholm is designed 

How is the load -bearing 

structures designed in parking 

garages? Seems it is only escape 

routes that are designed for 

explosion. Designed only against 

load and fire. Exp losion is only 

considered if you have a storage 

of explosives. 

Table B6. Results of HAZID Theme 3: EV fires in enclosed car parks, when the origin of fire is external/ outside the vehicle . Vehicle is parked or parked and 

charging .

Unwanted event  Factors affecting the 

unwanted event 

Current safety measures 

already existing (preventive 

and mitigating) 

Factors 

affecting the 

likelihood 

Differences 

between EV 

and ICEV fires 

Consequence  Potential safety measures 

(preventive and mitigating) 

Post HAZID comments 

Fire size, fire spread, fire 

development, gases 

released etc. E.g.: Explosion 

from crash = Unwanted 

event. Factors affecting 

explosion from crash = 

Amount of gas released, 

ventilation circumstances, 

type of vehicle in the crash 

etc. 

Fixed systems installed/ 

technical aspects for e.g. type 

of sprinklers, type of ventilation 

etc. 

Tactical measures 8

© RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

Fire in electrical 

socket; EV is 

parked and 

charging. 

Quality of installation, how 

well the plug fits, damaged 

cables, dirty socket 

Daisy chain is 

one cause that 

is seen in 

statistics and 

also using 

indoor cables 

outdoor. 

Fire might 

spread to vehicle 

or other 

materials , but 

this depends to a 

large degree on 

distance, there 

are some 

accidents where 

this has 

happened but 

maybe not so 

often. 

checking the cables and 

charging station, not allowing 

charging in normal wall 

socket. Not allowing charging 

by outlets for engine hea ters .

Covered sockets. Fire rounds. 

Raising awareness of the risk 

of fires in electrical 

installations. 

Of the 100 fires 5 were caused by faulty 

installation. Fires in power stations in 

buildings and open spaces in Denmark, 

charging electric car: 7 cases i n 2021, 

electrical panel, cables, socket. Statistic 

from China on AFV fires, 50% caused by 

smoking, carelessness, etc. 28% caused 

by electricity. 

Fire in adjacent 

vehicle; EV is 

parked and 

charging. 

Distance between vehicles, 

type of other vehicle (gas 

powered), size of fire. Attack 

on a fire nearby a charging 

vehicle could be delayed 

because of wanting to cut 

power before attack. Low 

ceiling in general increases 

the radiation and thus the 

fire spread but on the same 

token a small compartment 

limits the amount of air 

makes the fire self -

extinguish. 

In many cases sprinklers are 

installed 

Distance  It is very rare 

that 

underground 

parking fires 

grow big, 

whether this is 

due to lack of 

oxygen or if 

there is 

sprinklers. 

In general , make the fire 

compartment smaller has a 

positive effect on number of 

vehicles that can take part in 

the fire and amount of air 

available. But there is a risk of 

explosion when the 

compartment is opened. 

Control of where people p ark 

their cars, should not park 

next to another car. Parking 

assistance, distance between 

cars , Valet parking. 

Potential Risk Reduction Measure: Large 

fire blankets. Not cost efficient to have 

installed all the time, better that the 

rescue service has the m. Fire curtains 

esp ecially in underground car park s. 

Inspired from EU's LASH FIRE Risk 

Control Options in closed roro space to 

mitigate fire risk. Divided (not solid), 

rollable fire curtains to enhance fire 

compartmentalization. Complemented 

by sprinklers. Fire robots. In the car park 

no on e knows where the driveable 

area s are. Drones to identify where the 

fire is. The robots can be equipped with 

thermal imaging and other sensors like 

for flammable gases. 

External fire not 

part of vehicle in 

e.g. garbage; EV 

is parked. 

Amount and kind of material 

stored, complexity of 

building both in terms of 

entrance and other building 

factors and organisation 

Should not be done according to 

regulations but still happens, 

fire rounds, fire alarms might 

not be required but still might 

be in place, sprinklers are 

required underground in USA 

but perhaps not in other 

countries. By installing sprinkler ,

one could allow longer distances 

to the escape doors and 

staircases. 

Amount and 

kind of 

material 

stored, 

organisational 

factors 

No differenc e Proper housekeeping, 

awareness, detection 

The fire that occurred spread smoke to 

the buildings connected to the garage: 

reference to the accident. 9

© RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

Fire in spill of 

flammable 

liquid; EV is 

parked. 

Functioning drainage, slope 

of floor, distance between 

leakage and drainage. 

Surface roughness, dirt etc. 

Amount of spill; Need to 

unplug. 

Drainage, slope of floor, R100 

and R34 standards. 

Surface 

roughness of 

floor 

More probable 

from ICEVs. No 

difference 

when exposed. 

Depending on 

size of pool the 

fire migh t ignite 

one or several 

vehicles. 

Housekeeping, maintenance 

of drainage 

Very rare. 

Fire in adjacent 

vehicle 

spreading to 

vehicle; EV is 

parked. 

Functioning drainage, slope 

of floor, distance between 

leakage and drainage. 

Surface roughness, dirt etc. 

Distance 

between 

vehicles 

Probably not so 

much difference, 

if charging 

Higher than charged and parking since 

more cars are parked than charging, so 

more than possible; Severity of 

consequence depends on if the fire 

spreads. 

Fire from 

flammable gas; 

EV is parked. 

if other things are stored in 

car park or from gas 

powered veh icles 

A flammable gas release may result in 

either a long jet flame that ignites 

ever ything along its path (fire spread) or 

a gas cloud expl osion that poses a high 

risk to personnel. Low likelihood but 

severe consequence. 

Fire in e -bikes, 

kick bikes, 

moped, vespas, 

motorcycles etc.; 

EV is parked. 

if other things are stored in 

car park , distance between 

bike/moped etc. and vehicle 

Bikes should probably not be in 

the same "room" as the vehicles 

Distance 

between 

vehicles 

Charging of these items 

should not be allowed in 

underground parking, arrange 

special lots for these items 

Rather high likelihood if the EV is 

charging. 

Fire in adjacent 

storage rooms 

like storage for 

tyres; EV is 

parked. 

These types of storage are 

not so common in public 

garage, but more common 

in garages for apartment 

buildings 

Awareness of fire risk, if this is 

used then proper 

compartmentalisation 

Large amounts of fuels are probably 

available and thus flashover of that 

room is highly possible. The flames 

could extend from the room to car park. 

Therefore, fire spread to cars nearby 

and further spread are probable . There 

is a need to set a fire barrier between 

them. 

Fire from gas 

powered 

vehicles; EV is 

parked. 

In some communities in Sweden 

these are not allowed in public 

garages. In some countries gas -

powered vehicles are not 

allowed in tunnels and/or 

underground car park s. 

Due to restrictions, the likelihood could 

be low. But the consequence could be 

high due to the high probability of 

causing fire spread in car park that may 

damage the structure. 

Table B7. Results of HAZID Theme 4: EV fires in enclosed car parks, when the origin of fire is the vehicle . Vehicle is parked or parked and charging. 10 

© RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

Unwanted 

event 

Factors affecting the 

unwanted event 

Current safety measures 

already existing (preventive 

and mitigating) 

Factors 

affecting the 

Likelihood 

Differences 

between EV 

and ICEV fires 

Severity of 

Consequence 

Potential safety measures 

(preventive and mitigating) 

Post HAZID comments 

What do we 

NOT want to 

happen? 

Fire size, fire spread, fire 

development, gases 

released etc. 

Fixed systems installed/ 

technical aspects for e.g. type 

of sprinklers, type of 

ventilation etc.; Tactical 

measures 

Fixed systems installed/ 

technical aspects for e.g. type 

of sprinklers, ty pe of 

ventilation etc.; Tactical 

measures 

Parked and 

charging; Fire in 

vehicle. 

Not proper appliances, 

malfunction in charging 

station, using normal plug 

appliances 

charging stations do have 

measures for preventing fires, 

tactics: unplug before 

intervention 

not proper 

appliances, 

malfunction in 

charging 

station, use of 

normal plug 

appliances, 

Higher SOC 

will result in a 

more intense 

fire. 

Overcharge 

increases the 

likelihood a 

lot 

ICEV cannot 

be charged, 

except the 

12V 

Rather severe if 

the fire spreads 

more proper charging 

stations, not possible to use 

normal plugs, check of 

charging station after 

installation has it been done 

properly, more training and 

information. Better statistics 

would be useful but there is 

always a lack of fire statis tics .

A first step would be 

manufacturers to share 

statistics .

Data is not detailed enough to tell if the TR 

is more common during charging. Much of 

the data reported is fires starting in the 

electrical socket. 

Parked and 

charging; 

Release of gases 

from the 

battery not 

immediately 

ignited 

Not proper appliances, 

malfunction in charging 

station, using normal plug 

appliances 

charging stations do have 

measures for preventing fires, 

tactics: unplug before 

intervention, gas detection 

more proper charging 

stations, make it not possible 

to use normal plugs, check of 

charging station after 

installation has it been done 

properly, gas detection, 

improved detection around 

charging stations 

Parked and 

charging; 

Explosion 

The strength of th e

"container" i.e. the cell, 

module, pack. Of the 100 

cases 5 mentions explosion. 

One of the cases was a 

accumulating gas case. 

There were 2 cases that 

occurred while charging. 

charging stations do have 

measures for preventing fires, 

tactics: unplug before 

intervention 

Homebuilt, 

improper 

installation 

A lot of things 

can explode 

related to a 

vehicle like 

tyres, gas 

dampers, etc. 

Not so much 

difference 

between. 

Rather severe  Explosion is not a well -defined 

term, unclear definition, 

essentially anything that 

makes a sound. Simulations 

conducted in BREND. There 

are videos, but no data on 

how common. 

Plenty of the parking slots in underground 

parking garages built today are equipped 

with chargers. In the future, it is not unlikely 

that all slots will have its own charger or 

electrical connection point. Severity of 

consequence will depend on the size of 

garage and what is next to the vehicle; 

Placement of charging stations, near 

entrance would allow easy access to 

disconnect and the rescue service do not 

nee d to go very far into the building. 11 

© RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

Parked and 

charging; Arcing 

between vehicle 

and charging 

plug or 

overheat 

Quality of connectors, too 

many fuses, overload 

more proper charging 

stations, make it not possible 

to use normal plugs, check of 

charging station after 

installation has it been done 

properly, inspection of 

charging stations? 

Refer to arcing: 

https://www.dubizzle.com/blog/cars/arcing -

in -automobiles/ 

Parked and 

charging , Arcing 

in vehicle 

Quality of connectors. We 

do not know to what extent 

this happens. Dust etc. Too 

many fuses, overload 

Parked and 

charging; 

Vehicle starts 

moving 

Not sure if this can happen. 

We have not seen any fires 

as a result of this. 

Is it possible to start/moving 

the vehicle while it is charging? 

Is it possible to start/moving 

the vehicle while it is 

charging? 

May not be fire but only damage 

Parked and 

charging; Fire 

spread to other 

vehicles 

Distance to other vehicles, 

size of fire 

How is the charging station 

dimensioned geometrically, is it 

like a normal parking slot or 

not? Does a fire in one vehicle 

have an impact through the 

charging stations on the other 

vehicles? Perhaps extinguishing 

systems/sprinkler. Buildi ng

recommendations not to place 

the charging so that the 

building does not burn down 

distance to other vehicles? A 

fire blanket that is on the 

market but not so much used. 

In Sweden usually 20 cm 

wider parking spots for E Vs. 

Risk of severe damage to structure. 

Parked and 

charging; 

Flooding of the 

space and the 

vehicles. 

Storms, heavy rain, 

hurricanes, design of 

drainage in car park 

Drainage  Place charging stations where 

the flooding is less likely, 

cleaning of vehicle after 

flooding. Inspection after 

flooding, tow away the 

vehicle after the flooding, 

measure on vehicle level. 

Flooding should be covered in 

the design. 

There are several reported cases of EV fires 

after flooding. 

Inputs & claims: Tesla claims that their 

vehicle can float on the water and the pack 

completely sealed. Opel Mocha claims just 

that there is no extra risk if the vehicle is 

submerged 

Parked and 

charging; 

Explosion of 

accumulated 

gas 

Amount of gas released  Not so many reported . Most severe case 

from the perspectives of personnel safety. © RISE Research Institutes of Sweden 

Through our international collaboration programmes with academia, industry, and the public 

sector, we ensure the competitiveness of the Swedish business community on an international 

level and contribute to a sustainable society. Our 2, 800 employees support and promote all 

manner of innovative processes, and our roughly 100 testbeds and demonstration facilities are 

instrumental in developing the future -proofing of products, technologies, and services. RISE 

Research Institutes of Sweden is fully owned by the Swedish state. 

I internationell samverkan med akademi, näringsliv och offentlig sektor bidrar vi till ett 

konkurrenskraftigt näringsliv och ett hållbart samhälle. RISE 2 800 medarbetare driver och stöder 

alla typer av innovationsproces ser. Vi erbjuder ett 100 -tal test - och demonstrationsmiljöer för 

framtidssäkra produkter, tekniker och tjänster.  RISE Research Institutes of Sweden ägs av 

svenska staten. 

RISE Research Institutes of Sweden AB 

Box 857, 501 15 BORÅS, SWEDEN 

Telephone : +46 10 -516 50 00 

E-mail : info@ri.se , Internet : www.ri.se 

Fire Safe transport 

RISE Report 2023:42 

ISBN: 978 -91 -89757 -90 -5
