Title: 

URL Source: https://www.financeministersforclimate.org/sites/cape/files/inline-files/CFMCA_2024-2025%20Strategic%20Work%20Program.pdf

Published Time: Sun, 26 Oct 2025 03:34:20 GMT

Markdown Content:
1

(coal n

> 02 4-202 5

# Strategic Work Program 

# 202 4-202 5

www.financeministersforclimate.org 1

# 025 

# Content s

I.  Introduction ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 2

II.  Strategic Objectives ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 4

III.  Delivery Mechanism ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................... 6

IV.  2024 -2025 Timeline ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 14 

VI.  Thematic Workstreams: Priorities and Deliverables ................................ ................................ ....... 22 

Crosscutting: NDC Support Initiative (HP1/6)  ................................ ................................ .......................... 23 

Crosscutting: Country and Regional Follow -Up, Peer Learning and Capacity Building (HP2) .................. 23 

Promoting Carbon Pricing Measures & Phasing Out Inefficient and Harmful Subsidies (HP3)  ............... 24 

Mainstreaming Climate in Economic Policy (HP4)  ................................ ................................ ................... 24 

Mobilizing Private Climate Finance (HP5)  ................................ ................................ ................................ 24 

Adaptation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............. 25 

Nature  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 25 

Green and Just Transition  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 25 

Annexes ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 26 

Annex I. Detailed Workstream Plans for 2024 -2025  ................................ ................................ ............... 27 

NDC Support Initiative (HP1/6)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................ 27 

Country and Regional Follow -Up, Peer Learning and Capacity Building (HP2)  ................................ ....... 32 

Mainstreaming Climate in Economic Policy (HP4)  ................................ ................................ ................... 39 

Mobilizing Private Climate Finance (HP5)  ................................ ................................ ................................ 43 

Adaptation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............... 46 

Nature  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 49 

Green and Just Transition  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................ 52 

Annex II. Results Framework  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 55 

Annex III. Institutional Partner Cont ributions and Technical Expertise Areas  ................................ ......... 56 

Annex IV. Summary of C3A Strategic Approach and Suppo rt to the Coalition  ................................ ........ 73 

Annex V. Institutional Partner In -kind Contribution Survey Form  ................................ ........................... 76 

Annex VI. Organizational Changes  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........... 77 

Annex VII. Schedule of Planned 2024 Deputy Meetings ................................ ................................ .......... 78 2

# I. Introduction 

During the first five years of its operation, the Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action ( ‘the 

Coalition’) has significantly expanded its membership, reach, convenings and activities. The Coalition has 

helped finance ministers and ministries approach the complex issues of climate change and has introduced 

the way to approach the climate crisis through the econ omic and fiscal perspective and policy measures. 

At the five -year mark , the Coalition has grown from around 20 to over 90  member countries  and more than 

25 institutional partners. Building on a strong basis of knowledge creation and convening power, it is now 

priority to increase active member engagement, ownership, and leadership, to further climate action in 

countries and increase the impact of the Coalition .

As set out in its Charter , the purpose of the Coalition is to mainstream climate change aspects in economic 

and financial policies and public finance, as well as promoting domestic and global action on climate change. 

Members of the Coalition have signed up to the following founding principles :

1. Align our policies and practic es with the Paris Agreement commitments 

2. Share our experience and expertise with each other in order to provide mutual encouragement and 

promote collective understanding of policies and practices for climate action 

3. Work towards measures that result in effec tive carbon pricing 

4. Take climate change into account in macroeconomic policy, fiscal planning, budgeting, public 

investment management, and procurement practices 

5. Mobilize private sources of climate finance by facilitating investments and the development of a

financial sector which supports climate mitigation and adaptation 

6. Engage actively in the domestic preparation and implementation of Nationally Determined 

Contributions (NDCs) submitted under the Paris Agreement 

As member countries, we use the Coalition forum to facilitate the exchange of expertise and experience s on 

relevant policies, promote common standards and best practices, and support coherent and coordinated 

responses on climate change issues. 

In 2023, the Coalition presented its first  Climate Action Statement  (CAS) , which highlighted key trends in 

climate actions from member countries and also informs the focus of thematic workstreams in the coming 

years. Importantly, more than 40 member countries showcased 150+ Ministry of Finance ( MoF ) climate 

actions for the coming year. In the yea rs ahead, we aim to support implement ation and scal ing up these 

actions. The overall trends for 2024 were seen as: 

• Spearheading climate action by building strategic policy roadmaps and coordinating activities both 

within MoFs and across ministries 

• Greening the financial system and aligning financial flows with the Paris Agreement to better manage 

risks and opportunitie s through disclosure, reporting, and risk assessment 

• Designing innovative climate -related financial mechanism, including transition finance, to mobilize 

private and public finance to bridge the green investment gap 

• Advancing the implementation of carbon pr icing mechanisms to curb emissions and incentivize the 

transition towards low carbon technology, processes, and practices 

• Greening public investments and current expenditures, whilst integrating climate risks into 

macroeconomic modeling and budgetary fore casts and frameworks 

In 2023, the Coalition also launched its flagship report on  Strengthening the Role of Finance Ministries in 

Driving Climate Action  (‘the Guide’) . It further sets out the narrative on the critical role of MoFs, and presents 3

over 100 country case studies to illustrate how actions may be taken. I n the coming years, we will support 

memb er countries to further strengthen their role in driving climate action, including by enhancing 

opportunities for practical country -to -country learning and by facilitating follow -ups on the guide framework 

at national and regional levels. Key messages from the flagship report include: 

• MoFs have significant levers they can pull to accelerate the climate action needed to deliver on the 

goals of the Paris Agreement and drive sustainable, inclusive and resili ent development and 

growth — but these levers are not yet being fully utilized. 

• Bold climate action can be instrumental in helping MoFs achieve their core priorities of 

macroeconomic stability, growth and responsible management of public finances, with majo r

benefits. 

• MoFs have a window of opportunity to mainstream climate action within their core functions of 

economic strategy, fiscal and financial policy. This involves broad -ranging changes to strengthen 

governance and leadership, coordination and human an d analytical capabilities. 

• Concretely, MoFs can take action by: 

o Introducing fiscal policies to transform macroeconomic incentives for climate action 

o Using the budget and public financial management to drive transformation in all sectors of 

the economy 

o Redesigning the tax system for net zero and climate resilience 

o Raising, steering and blending finance for climate investment at unprecedented speed and 

scale 

• A big part of the role of Finance Ministers is contributing to and supporting climate action by other 

government departments and other stakeholders. 

• MoFs have the experience to be the strong leaders the moment demands, with many demonstrating 

visiona ry leadership and progress. 

Finally, steps were taken for the Coalition to evolve into a more ambitious and operational multilateral forum 

by strengthening the foundational structures of the Coalition , its supporting Secretariat at the World Bank 

and the IMF , and collaborations with institutional partners . An ongoing effort, this will be fundamental for 

the enhanced delivery of services to member countries and achievement of impactful outcomes of the 

Co alition as a collective. The 2023 Co -Chairs, Indonesia and the Netherlands, also developed the first joint 

‘Co -Chair Strategy’, which has been used to provide an anchor of the overall mission of the Coalition and to 

directly inform the 2024 -2025 Work Progr am. Therefore, this Strategic Work Program now acts as the central 

document for all key Coalition information. 

In 2024 -20 25, we will build on these results and building blocks , make continuous improvement s based on 

member feedback, to further increase the Coalition’s impact – both politically and on the ground . It is the 

first time the Coalition sets out a Strategic Work Program for two years, to provide a longer, strategic horizon 

to work towards collectiv ely. The Work Program has been developed through an inclusive and consultative 

process including a member survey, various member consultation calls, discussions during the annual in -

person deputies meeting, and has been adopted by the members of the Coalition as of 18 March 2024. 4

# II. Strategic Objectives 

As the Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action, our overall aim is to achieve meaningful and 

impactful climate action by member countries’ ministers and ministries of finance. We aim to inform, 

support, activate and mobilize finance ministers to take an active and constructive role in mainstreaming 

climate action in their countries and international fora, while maintaini ng the focus of the Coalition on the 

MoF policy domain .

To this end, and based on further inputs from ministers and member representatives, we jointly set the 

following strategic objectives for 2024 -2025 . Each of these objectives is further elaborated in Section III. 

1. Accelerating climate action s taken by MoFs through their policy instruments 

2. Deepening member s’ exchanges on and understanding of MoF climate policy implementation 

3. Enhancing and facilitating the peer learning community around MoF climate policy instruments 

and implementation trajectories 

4. Activating member climate leadership by MoFs across all regions 

5. Increas ing MoF engagement in the 2025 NDCs and other climate -related strategies 

6. Strengthening strategic partnerships and increasing support from institutional partners 

Recognizing that the Coalition has evolved since its establishment in 2019, building on extensive consultation 

with members, drawing on existing evidence and results we measure and aim to measure, and considering 

our overall mission and strategic goals, the Coalition’s Theory of Change 1 was proposed as follows in 2023. 

See Annex II for the proposed results framework for progress measurement over time.           

> 1Assumptions are the underlying conditions or resources that need to exist for planned change to occur. Activities are what Coalition
> members, Co -Chairs, Secretariat and partners do regularly or daily. Outputs are our immediate deliverables, the result of what we do.
> Outcomes include changes in Coalition members behaviours and capacities, which are the medium -term results or actions
> implemented by members that follow the output. Finally, the impact is the long -term impact on members (national -level changes) and
> in the international policy space.

5

Theory of Change 

Assumptions  Activity  Output  Outcome  Impact 

High level 

commitment from 

members, IPs, and 

other stakeholders 

in line with 

Coalition’s mission 

and vision 

Availability of 

sustainable 

funding for 

Coalition activities, 

and solid 

governance 

Work by 

Secretariat, Co -

Chairs, active 

members, IPs, 

advisors and other 

partners on 

developing and 

implementing work 

program and work 

plans; preparing 

(Ministerial) 

meetings and 

events; improving 

governance, 

funding, Secretariat 

efficiency and 

increasing active 

member 

engagement 

Member access to high 

quality knowledge, 

peer -to -peer learning 

and exchange 

opportunities, and 

capacity development 

provided and facilitated 

by the Coalition and its 

partners 

Increased member and 

IP engagement within 

the Coalition and at 

relevant national, 

regional and 

international events 

representing the 

Coalition 

Strengthened institutional 

climate capacities of 

member countries 

Increased international 

collaboration between 

MoFs on climate action 

Increased whole -of -

government collaboration 

on climate change 

between MoFs and other 

ministries at national 

levels 

Increased climate action 

and leade rship by MoFs, 

including through Annual 

Climate Action Statement 

from ministers with 

specific policy actions 

Mainstreaming of 

climate change in 

member MoF 

instruments and 

policies 

Mainstreaming of 

climate change 

elements in global 

fiscal and economic 

polic ies 

Increased whole -of -

government climate 

action and increased 

financing of climate 

actions by public and 

private sectors 

Based on the Coalition’s founding principles, the Helsinki Principles, members come together in thematic 

workstreams – with the  support of Institutional Partners – to advance work on the “how to” of policy 

implementation. The above -mentioned six strategic objectives guide the overall workstreams ’ priorities ,

approaches, and deliverables. See Annex I for the detailed workplans. 6

# III. Delivery Mechanism 

1. Accelerating climate action s taken by MoFs through their policy instruments 

1.1 Increased focus on MoF climate policy instruments 

Across Coalition deliverables and convenings at both ministerial and deputy -level, emphasis will increasingly 

shift to practical policy implementation discussions around specific policy instruments. The main objective is 

to assist and encourage members to follow up on specific MoF climate policy instruments they may (be 

looking to) apply or strengthen in their country or regional context . This way, we work to accelerate the 

climate actions that MoFs take and for which the Coalition act s as a facilitating pl atform for practical 

knowledge and peer exchange and encouragement .

1.2 Climate Action Statement progress stocktake 

By mid -year, in the same process of gathering input for the annual Climate Action Statement (CAS) , members 

are consulted on their progress and learnings on the actions they included in the previous year’s CAS . This 

will inform the next CAS and should provide valuable insights to other members in terms of advancement of 

policy implementation and respec tive country trajectories. If members are able to meet in a regional setting 

(such as through the regional initiative in Latin America and the Caribbean) , this would provide another 

opportunity to take stock on progress as well as context -specific and regional challenges. 

1.3 Development of annual Climate Action Statement 

Once a year, the Coalition will continue to present a public joint ministerial statement in which we highlight 

our collective progress, learning s and insights and look ahead to what policy actions we will be stepping up. 

If feasible, regional convenings may also provide inputs into the CAS to enrichen the insights and context -

specificity . The CAS will continue to contain an Annex with (new and enhanced) country actions that provi de 

a valuable resource to the Coalition membership and can provide a further basis to matchmake between 

countries to engage in peer learning on the implementation of specific policy instruments .

2. Deepening members’ exchanges on and understanding of MoF climate policy implementation 

2.1 Ministerial discussions about specific policy instruments 

When ministers convene and exchange in the context of the Coalition, the aim is to  focus on specific climate 

actions taken by MoFs using their policy instruments and acting from their core responsibilities of budget 

management, fiscal policies, economic st rategy, and financial policies and regulation. Ministerial meetings 

are therefore an important forum to focus on exchanging good practices to accelerate climate action at the 

national level, as well as spurring change internationally by addressing gaps thr ough collective action. 

In consultation with members, t he Co -Chairs identif y one or two specific policy instruments on which Spring 

ministerial session s in 2024 and 2025 will focus and the Coalition will work towards , including at the 

technical level. At the ministerial convening during the IMF/WB Spring Meetings, a setting with smaller 

discussion tables will be facilitated from 2024 onwards, while Annual Meetings continue to meet in a plenary 

setting and serve as the Coalition’s Annual Ministerial Meeting . In addition, Co -Chairs will consult with 

members and thematic workstreams on possible other policy discussions that may happen through high -

level events on the sidelines of the Coalition’s Ministerial Meetings, such as related to macro -economic 7

modelling (HP4) and phasing out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies (HP3) during Spring 2024. 

Topics identified for upcoming ministerial discussion sessions are: 

Spring 2024 

Role of Finance Ministries in designing , financing and implementing national climate policies (NDCs), 

including addressing harmful financial incentives and appropriate pricing mechanisms, and mobilizing debt 

markets for the just transition (HP1+6 , HP3, Transition )

Spring 2025 (to be confirmed in early 2025) 

Adaptation fiscal policy measures (Adaptation & HP4) , Phasing out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies and 

subsidies harmful to nature (HP3 & Nature ), Instruments on nature/climate nexus , or another topic TBC 

Well a head of the Spring Ministerial, discussion notes on the policy instruments and guiding questions for 

ministers are shared , developed by the Co -Chairs (and/or co -leads for side events) with assistance from the 

Secretariat and guidance from co -leads, members and input from expert I Ps where appropriate .

Following the Spring Ministerial and guidance from ministers, practical policy notes on the specific 

instrument(s) that can support members with their in -country implementation efforts will be elaborated in 

the respective workstream and published after members review and Co-Chairs approval. 

2.2 Development of policy notes and practical deliverables in thematic workstreams 

The Coalition’s thematic workstreams will work together towards concrete policy notes and other practical 

delivera bles (including for minister -level consideration) that focus on the “how to” of policy implementation 

based on Coalition members’ practical experiences, learnings, challenges and good practices. This will follow 

the Spring Ministerial discussion s but may also occur at any other time during the year on policy 

topics/instruments prioritized by members. More details on the planned workstream priorities and 

deliverables can be found in Section V I and Annex I .

Institutional and Knowledge Partners, coordinated by the Coalition Secretariat , are asked to provide further 

knowledge and expertise regarding MoF climate policy implementation (in Annex III , partners are expected 

to provide more information on their contr ibutions to the Coalition, featuring an overview of their relevant 

expertise areas and support to members). The objective is working towards the development of more in -

depth guidance on practical country trajectories for policy implementation joi ntly with existing proof s of 

concept from Coalition countries , with consideration of regional differences and needs. This may also result 

in a sister document to the Guide, most likely in an easy -to -navigate online format, taking the next step in 

assisting countries with practical implementation questions and dilemmas. 

Moreover, in products and outputs from the Coalition and its thematic workstreams, members and partners 

are strongly encouraged to put increasing emphasis on the implementation ‘trajectories’ (the concrete steps 

countries have taken to – successfully – implement certain climate policy instruments) of members, 

increasing understanding and learning around appl icability. 

3. Enhancing and facilitating the peer learning community around climate policy instruments and 

implementation trajectories 

3.1 Mapping of members’ policy instruments 8

Building on the first  CAS , the Coalition’s flagship  Guide , and prior workstreams act ivities and deliverables, a 

mapping of MoF climate policy instruments that have been and are being applied across members with 

various geographic/economic backgrounds will be collated in a user -friendly way by the Coalition Secretariat. 

By providing members with the information on what other – especially economically and/or geographically 

similar – countries are undertaking to mainstream climate in their MoF, members are encouraged to get in 

touch directly to create peer -to -peer learning opportunities on specific policy instruments. This may lead to 

increased virtual exchanges of ministry experts, in -person peer convenings, or even short exchange programs 

between ministries . The Coalition Secretariat may provide a facilitative role in maki ng these connections as 

needed (including through access to members contact list), and I Ps may be asked to support both on policy 

substance and convening if financial resources are required. 

3.2 Country -level and regional follow -ups 

Members will be consulted to better understand the needs and interests within ministries for presentations 

on the general framework of MoF climate policy actions (such as outlined in the flagship guide) and interest 

in follow -ups on specific policy instruments that may b e areas for organization of (regional) peer exchanges ,

including examples of other countries’ climate policy implementation trajectories .

The Coalition Secretariat with key Institutional Partners and country Ambassadors will work to increase 

follow -ups o n Coalition work at the country (and regional) level based on members demand, through 

increased virtual and in -person presentations and workshops for ministries on the guide framework, policy 

instruments, best practice case studies and learnings through th e work of the Coalition. This work will be 

undertaken in tandem with efforts on increasing member engagement in the NDC process, so that country 

follow -ups can ideally feed directly into relevant climate policy -making processes. More information can be 

fou nd in the HP2 action plan in Section VI and Annex I .

3.3 Interactive members portal 

It is a high priority in 2024 to start upgrad ing the functionality and accessibility of the Coalition members 

portal , with the objective to provide by early 2025 :

• Country connections and case study information by d irect access to country contacts and easy -to -

navigate country case studies , mapping of members’ policy instruments, and more in -depth guidance 

on climate policy implementation trajectories. 

• Capacity building and training catalogue , including expert resources from institutional and 

knowledge partners, easy and direct access to useful courses and papers, and IP contact in formation 

to request specific technical support for members. 

4. Activating member climate leadership by MoFs across all regions 

4.1 Regional ministerial champions 

With the significant growth of the Coalition over the years, there is need and great opportunity in broadening 

and diversifying the Coalition’s climate leadership across regions. Member ministers are asked to become 

Coalition champions from their respectiv e regions and share key messages from the Coalition in respective 

(regional) fora , as well as leverage opportunities to convene regionally where possible with partner support. 

Members are invited to take the l ead in bringing together ministers informally in smaller groups , to hold 

focused conversations to discuss specific policy instruments, exchange on practical implementation 9

approaches and political challenges overcome. This can feed into overall Coalition learning and deliverables. 

This may be done on the sidelines of scheduled regional meetings, such as those listed below. Note that the 

occurrence of such regional convenings fully depends on member initiative and partner support. Depending 

on increase in resources, the Secretariat m ay play a role in providing additional logistical support. Members 

and partners are encouraged to reach out to Co -Chairs and Secretariat if they wish to set something up. 

Overview of potential Coalition events during regional and other global meetings in 2024 

Regional climate/finance 

meetings in 2024 

Regional champion 

country /countries 

Partner support 

Under preparation 

Europe 

Session during 

ECOFIN/Eurogroup 

May and September/ October 

2024 (tentative) 

Netherlands, Belgium, Hungary, 

Denmark, Luxembourg 

TBD 

Asia Pacific 

Regional convening Indonesia 

July 2024 (tentative) 

Indonesia  UNDP, ADB, UNEP (pending) 

Under discussion 

Asia & Pacific 

High -level event on adaptation 

during ADB Annual Meeting 

2-5 May, Georgia 

TBD 

ADB (pending) 

Europe 

Regional session at EBRD 

Annual Meeting 

14 -16 May, Armenia 

Netherlands  EBRD 

East Africa 

African Caucus high -level 

adaptation meeting 

Prior to AM (tentative) 

Uganda  TBD 

Global – UNGA 

22 -25 September, NYC 

TBD  New York Climate Exchange (knowledge 

partner) (pending) 

Global – G20 

Finance Ministers Meeting 

22 -25 July, Sao Paulo 

Brazil, Indonesia (pending)  TBD 

Latin America 

Details to be confirmed 

Chile  IDB 

Southeast Asia 

ASEAN 

Possible event in 2025 

Malaysia  TBD 10 

Other events where regional groupings of members may take the lead in convening include: 

• AfDB Annual Meeting, 27 -31 May, Kenya (Africa) 

• SIDS -4 Conference, 27 -30 May, Antigua & Barbuda (SIDS) 

• AIIB Annual Meeting, 25 -26 September, Uzbekistan (Asia) 

4.2 Country Ambassadors and the Ambassador Network 

The 2023 member survey reinforced a fundamental principl e: peer -to -peer learning is the cornerstone of the 

Coalition's success. To foster this vital exchange of knowledge, we need members who are not only willing 

but enthusiastic about sharing their insights and experiences. Coalition Ambassadors are a new and key way 

of putting this principle into action and showcasing the abundant diversity and outputs of the Coalition .

The purpose of an Ambassador s is to promote peer -to -peer interactions, enhance the visibility of the 

Coalition , connect Coalition outputs to capacity building programs, and empower members to take 

ownership of their involvement in public engagement efforts. Ambassadors will be deployed as part of a 

proactive and reactive engagement strategy to disseminate the work of the Coalition and help M oFs 

mainstream climate action into their activities in their countries (and regions) .

To help roll out and present the work of the Coalition effectively, an d organise the work of Ambassadors, 

an “Ambassadors Network” has been launched at the end of 2023 as a community of practice . Countries 

have been invited to join the network (which include members of the flagship Guide’s steering group) plus 

additional countries who have expressed interest. Representatives from the countries list ed below have 

(initially) be en invited to join the Ambassador Network, as Ambassadors , since they have expressed interest 

in doing so in the past. 

Overview of Ambassadors     

> Latin America
> Vulnerable Island
> States Europe Asia
> Africa and
> Middle East North America
> Uruguay
> Chile
> Mexico
> Bahamas
> Jamaica
> Netherlands
> Finland
> UK
> Denmark
> Sweden
> Belgium
> Indonesia
> Malaysia
> Singapore
> Rwanda
> Uganda
> Morocco
> Egypt
> United States

The Ambassador Network was launched in part to showcase policy options and connect them to how the 

Coalition and its partners can support member actions – including by highlight ing the Coalition’s growing 

capacity building support initiatives to members as a subsequent step. 

5. Increas ing MoF engagement in 2025 NDCs and other national climate strategies 

5.1 . Support initiative for Emerging Markets and Developing Economies (EMDE ) members on NDC/LT -LED S11 

During COP28 in 2023 , a strengthened collaboration with the NDC Partnership 2 was announced by the Co -

Chair ministers to provide support for members from EMD E countrie s to access dedicated technical 

assistance for the active involvement of MoFs in the next round of submissions of Nationally Determined 

Contributions (NDCs) by 2025 3 and the subsequent development of Long -Term Low Emission Development 

Strategies (LT -LED S) for the transition of economies by mid -century. Any s upport will be demand -driven 

based on countries’ needs and interest, and there will be close collaboration with other institutional partners 

that lead on -the -ground delivery of support , as well as creating linkages with ongoing country conversations 

in the context of the Guide . Moreover, as part of this effort, the Coalition intends to strengthen its 

partnership with the UN system , based on initial conversations between Co -Chairs and the UN Secretary -

General’s climate office in 2023, to leverage harmonized and coordinated country -level and regional 

assistance. More information can be found in the HP1/6 action plan in Section V I and Annex I .

The Coalition also strongly advocates for increased participation of Ministries of Finance (MoF) in other 

important national climate policy initiatives such as National Adaptation Plans, biodiversity strategies, and 

other national climate strategies. This heightened engagem ent should be spearheaded and actively taken 

forward th rough the Nature and Adaptation Working Group s.

5. 2. High -level engagement between Ministers of Finance and Ministers of Environment on NDCs 

The Coalition will actively seek opportunities to bring the Finance Ministers’ perspective to climate policy 

discussions, including by exploring a joint dialogue between Finance and Environment Ministers during an 

early stage of the NDC process. This also include s an intended joint a nnouncement and high -level 

conversation between the Coalition Co -Chairs (Ministers of Finance of Indonesia and the Netherlands) and 

Co -Chairs of the NDC Partnership ( in 2024 the Minister of Environment of Rwanda and Minister of 

Development Cooperation and Global Climate Policy of Denmark) on the needed whole -of -government 

collaboration for climate action, including engaging MoFs from the start. Such collaboration will start during 

the Spring Meetings Ministerial in 2024 and may also feature a subsequent highlight during COP29 in 

Azerbaijan where the Coalition can bring further attention to the important role of MoFs for the next round 

of NDCs to be submitted to UNFCCC in early 2025. The Coalition will also engage with the troika of COP 

Presidencies (UAE, Azerbaijan and Brazil) with the objective to bring this MoF perspective more prominently 

and consistently into the Finance Day of COPs. 

6. Strengthening strategic partnership s and increasing support from institutional partners 

6.1 . Engagement in G20 and other key fora 

• In 2024, t he Coalition will engage in the G20 Task Force on a Global Mobilization against Climate 

Change , represented by the Co -Chairs . The Co -Chairs will work closely with Brazil as well as leading 

Coalition countries in the G20 to define the Coalition’s concrete contributions to the task force and 

vice versa. Moreover, Coalition Co -Chairs and the Coalition’s G20 members will seek synergies 

betwe en the G20 Sustainable Finance Working Group and the Coalition’s 2024 -2025 Work Program.               

> 2Institutional partner of the Coalition and a network of over 200 members ( advanced economies, emerging markets and developing
> economies , institutional partners and associate members –partially overlapping with the Coalition) that was set up in 2016 to support
> EMDE countries with the implementation of national climate commitments under the Paris Agreement .
> 3Under the Paris Climate Agreement, countries are required to submit new (or updated) ND Cs –national climate plans –every five
> years, through the so -called ambition mechanism, which requires countries to ratchet up their climate ambition in each subsequent
> NDC. The first NDCs were submitted in 2015 with the Paris Agreement, the first updati ng round took place in 2020, and the next
> submission deadline is in (no later than mid -)2025, prior to COP30 in Brazil.

12 

• The Coalition will also seek collaboration with the V20 (Vulnerable 20) group of countries, as well as 

the G24, to strengthen EMDE perspectives in the work of the Coalition. 

• The Coalition will also continue engaging with the UN system (specifically the UNSG Climate Action 

Team) on strengthening collaboration between the Coalition and UN following initial work in 2023. 

• Given the important role of MoFs as shareholders and governors in international financial institutions 

and multilateral development banks, members are also encouraged to engage in climate -related and 

relevant reform discussions and share insights from the Coalition where useful in this context, for 

example on the sidelines of IFI/MDB Annual Meetings or Finance in Common .

• Members are invited to share insights and key messages from the Coalition ’s in the international fora 

in which they participate (i.e. from CAS, flagship report, ministerial meeting outcomes, workstream 

deliverables, policy notes) . M ember ministers are encou raged to take an active role in this process. 

6.2 . Introduction of f ramework for institutional partner contributions 

The Coalition, growing in numbers and prominence, attracts attention and appetite for association from an 

increased number of organizations, ranging from development agencies to civil s ociety organizations . There 

is therefore a necessity of creating a framework to support transparency in the co -creation process on the 

engagement of institutional partners in the Coalition. To address this, an Institutional Partner In-kind Pre -

assessment Form and Evaluation Form is introduced. The objective of these forms is to provide the Coalition 

Co -Chairs and members with a clear understanding of the collaborative effort s between members and 

institutional partners and specifically in -kind contributions made by partners. This increased transparency 

will ensure that the work conducted with institutional partners is beneficial for member countries. Annex V

provides a propose d in -kind survey form for this purpose. 

6.3. Capacity building and training catalogue 

The Coalition has put together an initial catalogue that showcases the rich offering of climate -related capacity 

building programs of our Institutional Partners available to MoFs . The catalogue concisely offers members a 

central place for key information about our Institutional P artners’ capacity building programs , so that all 

information is accessible and in one place. The catalogue is available to all members online and will be 

advertised to new joining members, whilst Ambassadors will also pro -actively highlight the various offerings 

at events with ministries and to the broader public where relevant .

The Secretariat will further complete and update the content of the catalogue based on inputs received from 

Institutional Partners , and add member testimonials on their experiences with listed programs. We will 

explo re ways to make the catalogue more accessible and useful to members , with the eventual objective of 

integrat ing it digitally in the online members portal .

While number of trainings are already listed in the catalogue, we plan to further develop the training aspect 

of the catalogue, by working with countries a nd institutional and knowledge partners t o provide a more 

comprehensive overview of available climate -related trainings (i.e. from leading universities and IPs ) relevant 

for MoF offi cials , and make these resources more easily accessible to Coalition members. 

6.4. Facilitating exchanges between IPs to seek synergies between relevant expertise and country support 

Both members and IPs have underscored the necessity for enhanced coordination among IPs and support 

delivery partners . This is to mitigate redundancy and competition, thereby fostering efforts that complement 

each other and are tailored to the needs of the pro jects they intend to support, in the collaborative spirit of 13 

the Coalition . To facilitate this, the Coalition through its Secretariat will facilitate bi -annual virtual gatherings 

of the IPs of the Coalition , aimed at fostering synergies and collaborative endeavors. 

Moreover, as part of the Coalition’s matchmaking role, ongoing efforts will be made to help IPs showcase 

some of their most relevant work to members. For example, on an ad -hoc basis IPs will be able to present 

some of their work an d/or key updates at meetings of deputies. The material presented would be concise 

and encompass only those topics not previously addressed in meetings or workshops across workstreams. 

IPs are invited to get in touch with Secretariat to pitch possible prese ntations, which may then be scheduled 

throughout the year following Co -Chair consultation. 14 

# IV. 2024 -2025 Timeline 

While activities in thematic workstreams continue throughout the year based on workstream plans (see 

Annex I), the below shows the overall Coalition agenda for 2024 -2025 , including planned Ministerial Meetings 

and overarching Coalition deliverables. The calendar will be updated on an ongoing basis. 

Agenda for 2024 -2025 

2024 

January  February  March  April  May  June 

Work Program 

and Annual 

Report 

Preparation 

In -person 

Deputies 

Meeting in The 

Hague 

Finalization of 

Strategic Work 

Program & 

Workstream 

Plans 

Annual Report 

approval and 

publication 

Start 

Implementation of 

Work Plans 

Ministerial 

Discussion Note s

shared, Pre -

Ministerial Deputies 

Discussion 

Final approval and 

publication of 

Strategic Work 

Program 2024 -25 

Spring Meeting 

Ministerial (high -level 

opening followed by 

discussion tables )

Policy Topics :

Role of MoFs in 

designing, financing 

and implementing 

NDCs  (HP1/HP6) 

Ministerial side event 

(HP 3)

Ministerial side event 

(HP 4)

Press event: 

5-year anniversary of 

the Coalition (press 

moment) and 

Ministerial Co -Chairs 

announcement (HP1/6) 

Elaboration of Policy 

Note(s) on 

Ministerial Topic(s) 

Publication of Policy 

Note(s) on 

Ministerial Topic(s) 

Co -Chair Stocktake 

on Workstream Plan 

progress 

Stocktake on CAS +

gathering of country 

inputs on new 

and/or enhanced 

policy actions for 

CAS Annex 

July  August  September  October  November  December 

Coalition 

Representation 

at G20 Finance 

Ministers 

Meeting in Brazil 

Regional 

Coalition 

meeting in 

Indonesia (TBC) 

Draft CAS shared 

with members for 

approval 

Pre -Ministerial 

Deputies Discussion 

Regional Coalition 

meeting at ECOFIN 

(Europe) 

Annual Meeting 

Ministerial (plenary) 

CAS2 Launch 

Coalition 

Representation at G20 

Climate & Finance 

Ministers Convening 

COP29 Ministerial 

Event in Azerbaijan 

Possible COP29 

Coalition side events 

organized by 

members/partners 

(Ministerial) C oalition 

Representation at 

COP16 through 

Nature workstream 

champions 

Co -Chair Stocktake 

on Work Plan 

progress 

Members Survey 

Updated Members 

Portal Launched 

2025 

January  February  March  April  May  June 

Annual Report 

preparation 

Adjustments to 

Work Program 

and Work Plans 

as needed and 

guided by 

In -person 

Deputies 

Meeting in 

Indonesia 

(TBC) 

Annual Report 

approval and 

Ministerial 

Discussion Note 

shared, Pre -

Ministerial Deputies 

Discussion 

Spring Meeting 

Minister ial (high -level 

opening followed by 

discussion tables )

Proposed Policy Topics: 

1. Adaptation fiscal 

policy me asures (TBC) 

Elaboration of Policy 

Note(s) on 

Ministerial Topic(s) 

Publication of Policy 

Note(s) on 

Ministerial Topic(s) 

Co -Chair Stocktake 

on Work Plan 

progress 

Stocktake on CAS +15 

members  publication  2. Policy instruments 

on the climate/nature 

nexus (TBC) 

Co -Chair change 

(Indonesia), new Co-

Chair starts (EMDE 

country) 

gathering of country 

inputs on new 

and/or enhanced 

policy actions for 

CA S Annex 

July  August  September  October  November  December 

Start 

Independent 

M&E Review of 

Coalition 

Progress 

Draft Climate 

Action Statement 

shared with 

members for 

approval 

Pre -Ministerial 

Deputies Discussion 

Annual Meeting 

Ministerial (plenary) 

CAS3 Launch 

End of current Co-Chair 

mandate (Netherlands) 

COP30 Coalition 

Ministerial in Brazil 

Possible COP30 

Coalition side events 

organized by 

members/partners 

Members Survey 

Independent Review 

of Coalition Progress 

completed with 

recommendations 

to inform next cycle 

Start of work 

planning for next 

cycle guided by Co -

Chairs 16 

# V. Working Arrangements 

Ministerial meetings 

• During IMF/WB Spring Meetings , smaller discussions tables will be organized around specific policy 

actions/instruments selected by the Co -Chairs with member inputs , where ministers can exchange on 

practical implementation approaches and political challenges to overcome related to the topic chosen .

o The Spring Meeting Ministerial will be prepared through the development of discussion notes on the 

specific policy instrument(s), with relevant guiding questions for ministerial level discussion . A 

deputies meeting will be dedicated to pre -ministerial prep arations, which includes preparatory 

substantive discussions , at least one month prior to the ministerial .

o The Spring Meeting Ministerial should give ministerial guidance on the further elaboration and 

publication of policy note(s) on the instrument(s) di scussed, which would be developed in the 

respective workstream with support from the respective technical specialist at the Secretariat and 

relevant institutional partners with expertise in the specific policy area addressed. Prior to 

publication, these no tes will be shared with all members and approved by Co -Chairs. 

• During IMF/WB Annual Meetings , the annual convening of the CFMCA membership takes place in a 

plenary setting, taking stock of climate action progress made by members in the Coalition context. This 

meeting is intended to jointly advance understanding and commitment of the steps to take to implement 

the guiding principles of the Coalition, with the policy instruments at ministers’ disposal. 

o During the summer, a collective stocktake is done on the previous Climate Action Statement by 

consulting members on their implementation progress and learnings that may be shared with other 

Coalition members during the Annual Meeting Ministerial. Moreover, inputs are collected on new 

an d advanced actions that countries are planning to take. This will culminate in an updated Climate 

Action Statement Annex for publication through which members can continue to showcase their 

action s. The Coalition will also present at the Annual Meeting Min isterial its annual Climate Action 

Statement , in which it can highlight progress, challenges, key topics and upcoming actions. 

• With the UNFCCC COPs generally taking place very close after the Annual Meeting Ministerial, the 

Coalition will seek partnership s with IPs and/ or the Presidency for organizing a high -level Coalition 

convening for Finance ministers at COP. It is the goal to increase Coalition ministers’ participation and 

activity during COPs, which the Coalition aims to help facilitate. The COP conv ening offers the Coalition 

an opportunity to showcase the contents from the CAS and share key messages from the discussions 

from the Annual M inisterial Meeting. The main objective would be to solicit input and engage in 

discussions with members of oth er international economic communities, including trade ministers, 

heads of central banks, leaders of international organizations, private sector associations, and more .

o The Coalition intends to work closely with the COP Presidencies Troika to establish con tinuity in the 

Coalition’s engagement on COP Finance Days, ensuring politically relevant and impactful convenings. 

o The COP may be used for countries to showcase their actions from that year’s Climate Action 

Statement, including through (high -level) side e vents organized by members and with organizational 

support from IPs. An overall cl oser collaboration with the UNFCCC and UN Secretary -General’s 

Climate Action Team , NGFS, GFANZ and other associations is proposed to ensure Coalition activities 

can feed more effectively into relevant UN discussions. 

• In addition , members are encouraged to organize high -level events on the sidelines of the Coalition’s 17 

Spring and Annual Ministerial Meetings, related to key topics addressed across workstreams. These 

events would be organized in consultation with (and with support from) Co -Chairs and HP co -leads ,

while members have flexibility to organize such additional events to complement the central 

Coalitio n program. 

Deputy meetings 

Deputy meetings (formerly called ‘Sherpa meetings’ – see further explanation in Annex VI) are held virtually 

each month and will be used increasingly to accommodate interactive exchanges between deputies on 

specific policy instruments and country cases. The objective is to reform the deputy meetings to meet 

increasi ng demand for policy discussions rather than administrative and logistical information ; which would 

be provided in writing such as in newsletters. This will be piloted during the first half of 202 4. Time will be 

allotted to w orkstream country leads (1 or 2 per meeti ng) will be asked to present updates on deliverables 

and for substantive discussion between members on topics identified by the leads . Guest speakers from 

institutional partners or other relevant initiatives may also be encouraged . At members’ request, t he tim ing 

of the virtual deputy meetings will also be rotated to fit different time zones, which will be tested in the first 

half of 2024. 

Once a year, deputies meet physically to discuss work plans and strategy for the upcoming period , generally 

hosted by one of the Co -Chair countries . Moreover, deputies may decide to convene informally on sidelines 

of ministerial meetings and/or regional conferences. 

Thematic workstream meetings (working groups) 

Working groups will have a monthly check -in on progress with the Secretariat coordinator, workstream leads 

and active members that are available and interested to join. Working group meetings are intended for 

substantive discussions between members on the ir workstream’s specific policy area s and instruments. E ach 

working group follow s their own member -driven work plan as outlined in Section V I and Annex I .

Each working group is supported by a technical specialist from the Coalition Secretariat at the World Bank or 

IMF for the delivery of th e respective workplan throughout the year . Moreover, Institutional Partners with 

expertise in the technical areas of focus are asked to contribute with their knowledge and expertise .

Partnership s with other relevant institutions, platforms, or initiatives (‘ knowledge partners’) may also be 

explored to leverage synergies and to avoid duplication with other ongoing efforts .18 

Co -Chairs 

Co -Chair teams offer guidance and lead strategic discussions. Other responsibilities include: 

• Presiding over all Ministerial and Deputy meetings 

• Leading the Coalition 's strategic planning and agenda setting 

• Representing the Coalition at prioritized high -level public events with support from the Secretariat 

• Participating in selected workstream activ ities 

• Identifying funding opportunities and providing a financial contribution where possible 

Members 

Memb ers responsibilities and tasks include: 

• Contributing to the Coalition’s work by co -leading or actively engaging in at least one workstream 

• Enhancing domestic and international awareness while actively participating in events promoting 

Coalition objectives 

• Overseeing and providing feedback on the progress and performance of the Coalition’s work 

• Responding to member surveys 

• Providing financial contributions to the Coalition’s core activities if possible 

Secretariat 

The Secretariat of the Coalition is being strengthened in early 2024 to include the following positions: 

• Secretary : Responsible for the overall functioning of t he Secretariat 

• IMF Secretar iat Coordinator : Provides technical and strategic advice , as well as administrative 

support in the organization of meetings and ev ents, and support for the activities and organization 

of the Coalition’s workstreams where the IMF is engaged as IP 

• 2-3 technical specialists (WB/IMF): Provide technical support to workstreams and country leads to 

produce deliverables as guided by members , coordinating with relevant IPs including WB/IMF 

• Events & logistics coordinator : Responsible for the logistical organization of ministerial m eetings and 

provides support for organization of other Coalition (virtual) events 

• Member engagement coordinator : Main contact point for members’ engagement with the Coalition, 

assisting members’ participation in Coalition activities and working groups and mapping members’ 

needs and areas of (policy) interest for peer exchange and specific follow -ups at the country level 

• Communications coordinator : Responsible for communications assets including social media, 

design, media engagement and improvement s to we bsite and upgrading of member portal 

functionality 

Moreover, short -term consultants may be deployed on a needs basis, depending on emerging Coalition 

member priorities and needs that require additional human resources and capacity. 

Long -term, sustainable funding of the core functions of the Secretariat remains needed and should be 

provided by member s. Member countries are therefore asked to make (preferably multi -year) contributions 

to the newly established Coalition Funding Window a t the World Bank Climate Support Facility Trust Fund. 

In addition, members and IPs may provide in -kind support or mobilize dedicated resources to support specific 

deliverables/projects. For example: 

• LSE/GRI continues to provide support to present the guide framework to members on request , and 19 

will provide assistance on request of the HP4 working group on the development of a technical paper 

• The NDC Partnership supports the implementation of the NDC/LT -LEDS support initiative through its 

Thematic Call on NDC and LT -LEDS alignment, update, and enhancement, including a part -time 

consultant to coordinate with the Coalition. 

• Regional organizations are asked to provide staff support to regional convening s

Institutional Partners 

With the growing number of members and interest from partners, it is proposed to introduce a new 

categorization to better distinguish partner institutions and organizations into two different categories based 

on functions and contributions to the work of t he Coalition. The Co -Chairs and Secretariat will further develop 

this proposed framework to be discussed and approved by members in Q2 202 4. 

Institutional versus Knowledge Partners: Categorization                   

> Institutional partner Knowledge partner
> 1. Able to offer added value to finance ministers
> related to climate action
> 2. Able to provide direct support for more than 2 of the
> Helsinki Principles
> 3. Able to provide support for regional and/or global
> capacity building activities and convenings
> 1. Able to provide a d-hoc support to specific topical
> areas of the Helsinki Principles and/or cross -cutting
> themes
> 2. Open to prominent research and knowledge creating
> institutions or even regional organizations, where
> the delivery does not have be specific, but where
> there is clear finance ministry dimension

Interested organizations are admitted to the Coalition as a p artner after confirmation by the Coalition 

membership, in accordance with the Organization and Governance Charter. For international organizations 

and bodies the status as an Institutional Partner is obtained through a dialogue between the Coalition and 

In stitutional Partner candidate and an approval by the Coalition membership, as per Charter. Nevertheless, 

agents with predominantly national origin will gain admission to the Coalition after a clear endorsement by 

the respective Coalition member (Ministry o f Finance) and after confirmation by the Coalition members. The 

confirmations, as is the principle of the Coalition, require consensus. 

High -level advisors 

The Co -Chairs may seek strategic inputs from high -level advisors with esteemed expertise in the ar eas of 

work of the Coalition, who provide such support on a pro -bono basis. The Co -Chairs will strive towards a 

regionally and gender -balanced group of advisors. In early 2024, a general terms of reference will be 

drafted by Secretariat for member approval defining the role of such advisors to Co -Chairs and Coalition. 

Coalition representation 

During the 2023 Deputy meetings, the Co -Chairs proposed, and members endorsed the following principles 

of Coalition representation at t he events and Coalition -branded events :

• If a member wishes to organize a Coalition event, they inform and consult Co -Chairs and Secretariat for 

coordination purposes. If a member is leading and driving the event, it can be Coalition -branded. 20 

• To be Coalition -branded, events should be clearly relate d to the Coalition Work Program. Overall 

objectives of MoF relevance must be a priority, and audience is expected to be MoFs (or IPs) unless 

otherwise agreed with Co -Chairs. 

• If events are to take place or involve the ministerial level, Co -Chairs should be included to represent the 

collective. 

• IP -organized events can be branded as Coalition events if organization happens at the behes t of members 

and is directly related to Coalition's work. All such events should similarly be consulted and coordinated 

with Secretariat and Co -Chairs. Coalition members attendance would not suffice for the Coalition 

branding if the link to Coalition's wor k is absent. 

Collaboration with the Coalition for Capacity on Climate Action (C3 A) 

The Coalition and C3A are dedicated to enhancing their partnership through continuous collaboration and 

engagement, with the goal of strengthening and leveraging the capacity of Ministries of Finance to integrate 

climate actions into their operations. This commitment is reinforced by C3A's launch of specialized thematic 

and regional hubs, tailored to provide customized, demand -driven capacity building services to countries .

These hubs will serve as platforms for the collaborative development of analytical t ools and models crucial 

for advancing the green transition among interested Coalition members. 

Furthermore, C3A's expansive knowledge network will grant members direct access to international experts 

and the latest in climate -related macro -economic research. In this light, C3A is set to host a series of technical 

seminars and workshops for members, aligned with the focus areas of its thematic and regional hubs. These 

events – along with papers, reports and blogs – should provide valuab le insights and support informed 

climate policy decision -making by Ministries of Finance. More details can be found in Annex IV.

Funding the Coalition ’s activities 

Achieving the Coalition ’s goals and implementing the Strategic Work Program depends on member support, 

including providing financial resources for the planned activities. The Secretariat of the Coalition benefits 

from support by the host organizations, the World Bank and IMF, that enables the Coalition to hold its 

ministerial meetings during IMF/WB Spring and Annual Meetings and provide some staff resources at the 

service of the Coalition. However, the resources to cover the Coalition ’s overall staff and operating cost s

must come from the membership as per the agreement at the Coalition’s founding .

The Coalition has received generous support from BMZ in Germany ( EUR 3 million ) and SECO in Switzerland 

(EUR 0.6 millio n) , channelled through the World Bank Climate Support Facility (CSF) Trust Fund. In 2023, the 

CSF introduced the new Coalition -specific window, after which the MoF of the Netherlands committed EUR 

4 millio n over 3 years to the Coalition windo w. However, as of early 2024, at least the same amount is still 

needed additionally to cover the costs of Coalitions increased activities and fund the core staffing of the 

Secretariat for the duration of this Work Program . Fundraising will therefore remain a continuou s area of 

attention and member countries are asked to step up support for the basic functions of the Coalition 

Secretari at to facilitate implementation of the Strategic Work Program and strengthen the provision of 

services to the growing Coalition membersh ip. 

In 2023, the Co -Chairs also introduced a fundraising framework for the Coalition, including for its partners 

raising funds for Coalition -directed ac tivities. 21 

Proposed Fundraising Framework 

Purpose of funding 

Core Coalition Secretariat 

functions (main coordination 

functions, expert coordination, 

operational support , central 

activities budget )

Activities to support thematic 

workstreams (coordinated 

through Coalition Secretariat) 

IPs responding to member needs an d providing 

capacity building and technical support to 

MoFs at country/regional level (C3A, NDC 

Partnership process, capacity building programs 

featured in the catalogue, new IP support) 

Fundraising principles for each purpose of funding 

$ Financial contributions to 

Secretariat from member 

countries through the new 

Coalition -specific funding 

window at the World Bank 

Climate Support Facility 

$ Financial contributions from 

member countries & non -

members for specific 

outputs/activities throug h the 

World Bank’s externally funded 

operations (EFO), managed by 

the Coalition budget manager 

(Secretary) 

$ Financial contributions to C3A from member 

countries & non -members through the World 

Bank Climate Support Facility in close 

coordination with Secre tariat/Co -Chairs 

$ In -kind contributions from 

members and IPs (i.e. 

consultants, staff time) 

$ Existing, ongoing or new financial 

contributions to IPs from member countries & 

non -member s that may be utilized to provide 

support to countries in the context of the 

Coalition as a component of projects/programs 

$ New f inancial contributions to IPs from 

member countries & non -members to deliver 

bespoke support in the context of the Coalition 

(requirement : IPs to coordinate directly with 

Secretariat and confirm with Co -Chairs) 22 

# VI. Thematic Work stream s: Priorities and Deliverables 

Introduction 

The Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action includes various member -driven working groups that 

work towards specific deliverables on key topics identified by members and with support from institutional 

partners. Each member of the Coalition is expected to join at least one working group of interest, as per the 

membership requirements each country has signed up f or at the time of joining. 

Member s are encouraged  to take the lead on a specific policy area and/or instrument of focus in which the 

Coalition can advance understanding of policy actions, facilitate action -oriented peer learning and practical 

collaborati on, especially around the “how” of implementation.  Leads may change throughout the duration 

of the Work Program, in agreement between members. Other members are encouraged to join one or more 

working groups from which they may benefit for their own learnin g and advancement of policy 

implementation in their context, including ministry representatives beyond deputies . They may also act as 

Coalition champions on the workstream topics , including ministers at external public -facing events . Practical 

work of the workstreams is supported by the technical specialists at the Secretariat and Institutional Partners. 

Workstream deliverables are shaped by members and may include: 

• Policy notes, responding to member needs, i.e. on the “how” of im plementation . These are 

generally developed and published by the Coalition, but expert institution al and knowledge 

partners may also write notes to the Coalition. 

• Virtual and in -person technical peer -to -peer exchange workshops (global/regional) 

• Creation of communities of practice around specific policy areas/instruments 

• More interactive outputs such as podcasts, explainer videos, concise digital lectures 

• High -level side events or joint dialogues on sidelines of a thematic meeting (i.e. UNCBD, UNGA) 

Below are the key deliverables and policy priorities for each working group. More elaborate work plans can 

be found in Annex I. Each working group has selected several priority policy topics (preferably no more than 

three) for the coming year(s) and developed a plan of action for each policy area of focus, including activities, 

roles, deliverables and deadlines. Working groups are supported by technical coordinators at the Coalition 

Secretariat. Co -Chairs check in with workstream lead countries in June and December of each year to jointly 

take stock of progress, insights and needs.  Substantive outcomes and learnings from the themati c working 

groups can inform and feed into ministerial level discussions. Moreover, they can be shared by member 

ministers in international for a and policy discussions. 

The Coalition activities across thematic workstreams are organized according to the diagram below, with 

peer learning and capacity building (HP2) and NDCs and Paris alignment (HP1/6) serving as cross -cutting areas 

linked with all other policy -focused workstreams. Interaction between the se efforts and between the various 

policy workstreams is strongly encouraged to maximize synergies and efficiency of our efforts. 23 

Thematic Workstream s Overview 

Overview of Priorities and 2024 -2025 Deliverables 

Kindly refer to Annex I for detailed workstream plans. 

Crosscutting: NDC Support Initiative (HP1/6) 

Country leads: Cambodia, Spain, Uganda 

Member countries: Bahrain, Croatia, Cote d’Ivoire, Denmark, Egypt, Indonesia, Netherlands 

Contributing IPs:  C3A, EBRD, EC, IADB, LSE/GRI, NDC Partnership, OECD, UNDP, WB, 2050 Pathways Platform 

(observer) 

In 2024 -2025, main focus will be on: 

• Boost awareness, increase engagement, and facilitate peer -to -peer learning and exchanges on the 

practical MoF role in NDCs and Long -Term Low Emission Development Strategies (LT -LEDS). 

• Propel active MoF engagement in the design and financing of NDCs and LT -LEDS, including by 

providing dedicated support to MoFs in EMDE member countries. 

• Bringing together voices of finance and environment ministers to emphasize the importance of MoF 

involvement in NDCs from an early stage , including by hosting prominent mini sterial dialogue(s), co -

organized with the NDC Partnership and UN, emphasizing the pivotal role of MoFs in updated NDCs 

and LT -LEDS. 

Crosscutting: Country and Regional Follow -Up, Peer Learning and Capacity Building (HP2) 

Country leads: Finland , Indonesia, Netherlands, Rwanda 

Member countries: Austria, Bahamas, Cambodia, Chile , Croatia, Denmark, Egypt, Indonesia, Jamaica, 

Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sweden, Uganda, United Kingdom, United 

States, Uruguay 

Contributing IPs: Brookings, Commonwealth, IDB, LSE/GRI, NIB, NDC Partnership, UNDP, WB, WRI , UNEP 

In 2024 -2025, main focus will be on: 

• Demand -driven virtual and in -person national/regional events for peer -to -peer learning and follow -

ups on the Coalition’s flagship Guide. 24 

• Increasing access to partners’ climate -related capacity building support for MoFs. 

• Facilitating better instruments for peer -to -peer exchange. 

Promot ing Carbon Pricing Measures & Phasing Out Inefficient and Harmful Subsidies (HP3) 

Country leads: Ecuador, Sweden 

Member countries:  Argentina, Austria, ,Chile, Denmark, Finland, France, Ghana, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, 

Italy, Korea, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, Rwanda, Singapore, Switzerland, UK, Uruguay, 

Uzbekistan 

Contributing IPs:  ADB, EBRD, EC, GGGI, IADB, IMF, OECD, UNDP, WB 

Priority policy areas within workstream for 2024 -2025 

• Phasing out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies 

• Carbon pricing 

Mainstreaming Climate in Economic Policy (HP4) 

Country leads: Denmark , United States of America 

Member countries:  Austria, Bangladesh, Can ada, Chile, Finland, France, Greece, Honduras, Indonesia, Ireland, 

Italy, Luxembourg , Mexico , Portugal, Rwanda, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Uganda 

Contributing IPs:  EC, GRI/LSE, IMF, NGFS, OECD, UNDP, UNEP, WB , WRI 

Priority policy areas within workstream for 2024 -2025 

• Integrate climate into the macroeconomic modelling tools and approaches and develop better 

answers to the policy challenges faced by Ministries of Finance in assessing the economic and fiscal 

implications of climate change. 

• Identify current gaps and opportunities in green budgeting to catalyze climate action, including other 

cross -cutting issues such as disaster risk management and disaster risk financing. 

Mobilizing Private Climate Finance (HP5) 

Country leads: Luxembourg, Mexico, Switzerland , U nited Kingdom 

Member countries: Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Finland, France, German y, Italy, 

Morocco, the Netherlands, Philippines, Uganda 

Contributing IPs: Brookings, C3A, EBRD, EIB, IMF, LSE/GRI, NGFS, NIB, WB 

Priority policy areas within workstream for 2024 -2025 

• Leveraging greater private finance - via providing better enabling conditions, strengthening inter -

ministerial collaboration, enhancing projects bankability and broadening investors base, as well as 

using blended finance instruments and green, sustainabili ty and other climate -related bonds. 

Greening private climate finance, including developments in reporting, data and disclosure .

• Work on voluntary carbon markets and potentially biodiversity carbon markets .25 

Adaptation 

Country leads: Honduras, Netherlands , Uganda 

Member countries:  Ghana, Greece, Kenya, Mexico, Mozambique, Philippines, Sierra Leone, United Kingdom 

Contributing IPs: ADB, AfDB, the Commonwealth, EC, EIB, GGI, IMF, UNDP, UNEP, WB, WRI , EBRD 

Priority policy areas within workstream for 2024 -2025 

• Develop better understanding of macro -critical adaptation risks and opportunities, so that MoF can 

gauge these risks/opportunities against what actions they are taking to mitigate/realize them .

• Identify best practices in terms of planning risk reduction (opportunity enhancing) policies, 

instruments and investments at both at the macro -level and sectoral levels, to help inform 

interventions (i.e. via LT -LED S, NDCs, and NAP s). 

• Focus on ways to improve MoF ’s acce ss to increased climate finance for adaptation, among others 

by gathering/sharing information on the mapping of different adaptation -related funds, their 

guidelines, and how to access financing for adaptation projects. 

Nature 

Country leads: Finland, U nited Kingdom 

Member countries: Cambodia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Mexico, Rwanda, 

Slovakia, Switzerland 

Contributing IPs: Brookings, Commonwealth, EIB, NGFS, OECD, SITRA , TNFD, UNEP, WB, WRI 

Priority policy areas within workstream for 2024 -2025 

• Implementation of relevant targets of the Global Biodiversity Framework by member countries: 

aligning financial flows (target 14), disclosure (15), subsidies (18), mobilization of resources (19). 

• Data, reporting and disclosure , especially biodiversity -related taxonomies and annual TNFD update .

• How to value nature capital, including data and decision -support tool needed to assess risks and 

design policies (e.g. natural capital accounting and other tools ).

• Nature financing, including p hasing out subsidies harmful to nature .

Green and Just Transition 

Country leads: Indonesia 

Member countries: Belgium, Colombia, Greece, Indonesia, Japan, Lithuania, Sierra Leone, United Kingdom 

Contributing I Ps: ADB, C3A, EBRD, EIB, LSE/GRI, NGFS, OECD, UNEP, WB 

Priority policy areas within workstream for 2024 -2025 

• Transition plans and role of MoF s in guiding the transition .

• Transition finance products and tools (harmonization, taxonomy). 

• Just transition financing framework with emphasis on s ocial aspect s of economic transition (including 

impact on jobs and gender equality) .26 

# Annexes 27 

# Annex I. Detailed Workstream Plans for 2024 -2025 

# NDC Support Initiative (HP1/6) 

Country leads : Cambodia, Spain, Uganda 

Contributing countries : Bahrain, Cote d’Ivoire, Croatia, Denmark, Egypt, Indonesia, Netherlands 

Contributing I Ps: C3A, EBRD, EC, IADB, LSE/GRI, NDC Partnership, OECD, UNDP, WB, 2050 Pathways 

Platform (observer) 

Secretariat coordinator: Luma Ramos, with additional support from a part -time NDC Partnership 

consultant (to be hired in early 2024) 

Background 

The results from the first Global Stocktake and the escalating socioeconomic impacts of climate -related 

events across the globe call for an urgent transformation of our economies and mobilization of climate 

finance at speed and scale. Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), countries’ national climate plans 

under the Paris Agreement framework, and Long -Term Low Emission Development Strategies (LT -LEDS) are 

at the core of a coordinated global response to tackle climate change and achieve the Paris Agreem ent 

objectives and the Sustainable Development Goals. 

Ministries of Finance (MoFs) have a unique role to play, given their leading role in economic and fiscal policies 

and expertise in financial management. Furthermore, MoFs convene and facilitate collabo ration among 

crucial finance stakeholders, pertinent government departments, and public and private institutions. Such 

collaboration is instrumental in the formulation and execution of ambitious and implementable NDCs and 

LT -LEDS and in effectively connect ing climate and development agendas. The 2025 NDC revision timeline –

the deadline set by the UNFCCC of the next required submission of countries’ NDCs by COP30 in Brazil – and 

the design of LT -LEDS in conjunction, represent a unique opportunity for streng thened engagement of MoFs 

in climate action, aligning economic and fiscal policies with emission reduction pathways and resilience to 

climate change. 

The Coalition and the NDC Partnership have been collaborating closely to leverage their broad memberships ,

extensive expertise, and convening power to strengthen the global response to climate change. A s

announced at COP28 in Dubai , the Partnership and the Coalition will collaborate more closely to offer 

targeted resources and expertise for Ministries of Finance to actively engage in the development and 

implementation of NDCs and LT -LEDS in 2024 -2025. To provide this support, the Partnership will leverage its 

Thematic Call on NDCs and LT -LEDS alignment, update and enhancement , a targeted init iative to assist 

countries in designing ambitious NDCs and LT -LEDS implemented in alliance with the 2050 Pathways 

Platform, UNDP and other institutions that are members of the Partnership (and oftentimes already involved 

in the Coalition as well). This ini tiative, closely coordinated with the wide network of the NDC Partnership 

and other institutional partners, will increase the awareness and engagement of MoFs in NDCs and LT -LEDS, 

and ensure efficient and targeted support for countries. 

Due to the signifi cant overlap in practice between HP1 (Align Policies with the Paris Agreement) and HP6 

(Engage in NDC Preparation and Implementation), these two workstreams have been merged into one 

working group, now with specific focus on and under the banner of NDC Sup port Initiative (HP1/6) .28 

The priorities of this workstream and dedicated initiative are:  

> 1.

Boost awareness, increase engagement, and facilitate peer -to -peer learning and exchanges on the 

practical MoF role in NDCs and LT -LEDS.  

> 2.

Propel active MoF engagement in the design and financing of NDCs and LT -LEDS, including by providing 

dedicated support to MoFs in EMDE member countries.  

> 3.

Bring together the communities of finance and environment ministers to emphasize the importance of 

MoF involvement in NDCs from an early stage , including by hosting prominent ministerial dialogue(s), 

co -organized with the NDC Partnership and UN, emphasizing the pivotal role of MoFs in updated NDCs 

and LT -LEDS 

HP1/HP6 Moving Forward: Action Plan for 2024 -2025 

As the 2025 deadline for revising Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) approaches and countries 

prepare their LT -LEDS, a significant opportunity arises for MoFs to redefine their role in climate action. MoFs 

have the opportunity to drive the alignmen t of economic, environmental, and climate strategies, ensuring 

that climate goals are both ambitious and economically viable. 

The Coalition offers a vital platform for this transformation, enabling MoFs to engage in knowledge sharing 

and peer learning. Thi s period of NDC revision is more than a procedural milestone; it ’s a pivotal moment for 

MoFs to lead in integrating fiscal policies with environmental objectives, leveraging the Coalition’s network 

to develop sustainable and effective climate strategies. T his shift represents a crucial step towards cohesive, 

finance -informed climate action, positioning MoFs at the heart of the journey towards resilient, low -carbon 

economies. Within this context, HP1/HP6 through the new support initiative will focus on the f ollowing. 

1. Boost awareness, increase engagement and facilitate peer -to -peer learning and exchanges on 

NDCs and LT -LEDS. 

Raising awareness of NDCs and LT -LEDS with a focus on how finance ministries are and can take a decisive 

and strategic role in the desi gn and implementation of these instruments to achieve the goals outlined in the 

Paris Agreement and the Sustainable Development Agenda (2030 Agenda). Climate policies may compete 

with other economic and financial priorities of ministries of finance, which are themselves shaped by global 

economic transformation and the role of various economies worldwide. A rapid low -carbon transition could, 

for instance, generate risks and opportunities of various kinds for different countries. Developing LT -LEDS 

and NDCs m ay be influenced by global transition dynamics, therefore harmonized scenarios of global 

economic transition could thus help inform critical aspects of LT -LEDS and NDCs at national levels. 

The primary means of raising awareness and ensuring MoFs are well -informed are through MoF leadership, 

peer -to -peer, and member exchange. These are critical due to the evolving nature of Nationally Determined 

Contributions (NDCs) and Long -Term Low Emission Development Strategies (LT -LEDS) and the multiple entry 

points for MoFs. By facilitating knowledge exchanges among member countries, finance ministers and 

ministries can share best practices, innovative approaches, and lessons learned. 

To enhance peer -to -peer learning and knowledge sharing, increased engagement within this workstream is 

imperative because active participation from a diverse range of member nations enhances the collective 

capacity to address climate challenges effectively. Each country brings unique experiences and challenges to 

the table, making broader engagement essential for comprehensive and informed decision -making. 29 

In this context, strengthening coordination with other HPs is also crucial, because their substantive work 

areas overlap in the design and implementation of NDCs and LT -LEDS. This coll aboration will ensure a more 

comprehensive and effective approach to addressing climate change. Collaborative efforts with other HPs 

enhance the alignment of policies, resources, and expertise, ultimately driving greater progress toward 

achieving climate g oals and sustainability. 

Key activities, milestones, and timeline: 

• Two workshops that highlight how different ministries of finance are approaching NDCs and LT -LEDS, 

including the tools, processes, and approaches used, May 2024 and September 2024 

• A series of technical workshops and a background technical note led by C3A on how existing 

transition scenarios, including NDCs and LT -LEDS are fit for purpose for Ministries of Finance ( ie include 

granularity and variables that respond to their core missions) 

• Coalition Co -Chairs, HP1/HP6 Country Leads, and Ambassadors advocatin g for stronger MoF 

engagement in NDCs and LT -LEDS, ongoing 

• High -level Joint Statement (Call for action) signed by Coalition and the NDC Partnership Co -Chair 

Ministers (and UNSG TBD) to be announced during the Coalition High -Level Ministerial Meeting in the 

Spring and accompanying press release, 2024 

• At least one joint event with other working group by December 2024 

• Bi -monthly convenings of the working group, from March 2024 . 

> 2.

Propel active MoF engagement in the design and financing of NDCs and LT -LEDS 

Building on the collaboration announced at COP28, the NDC Partnership and Coalition will support Ministries 

of Finance to actively engage in the development of NDCs and LT -LEDS. To provide this support, the 

Partnership will leverage its Thematic Call on NDCs and LT -LEDS alignment, update, and enhancement, a 

targeted initiative currently supporting more than 50 countries in designing and implementing ambitious 

NDCs and LT -LEDS (see NDC Partnership support mechanism section below). 

Key activities, milestones, and timeline: 

• Presentations of the NDC Partnership’s Support to MoFs (during different meetings/convenings), 

ongoing 

• Advertise the support mechanism and access process at re levant events through Co -Chairs, Country 

Leads, and Ambassadors – and dissemination of other Coalition outputs, ongoing 

• Based on member requests, support MoFs to articulate and communicate their support needs to the 

NDC Partnership, and mobilize tailore d and coordinated support through the Partnership’s systems and 

processes, ongoing . 

> 3.

Bring together the communities of finance and environment ministers to emphasize the 

importance of MoF involvement in NDCs from an early stage 

The Coalition will explore engaging in joint dialogue(s) between Finance and Environment Ministers during 

an early stage of the NDC process in 2024 , to ensure MoFs are being engaged in NDC processes led by MoE 

ministries from the start, contrary to processes in previous years . This would include an intended joint 

announcement and high -level conversation between the Coalition Co -Chairs (Ministers of Finance of 

Indonesia and the Netherlands) and the Co -Chairs of the NDC Partnership (Ministers of Environment of 

Rwanda and Denmark) , and possibly the UN Secretary -General and UNFCCC Executive Secretary, on the 

needed whole -of -government collaboration for climate action, including engaging MoFs from the start. Such 30 

collaboration will start during the Spring Meetings Ministerial in 2024, and may also feature a highlight during 

COP29 in Azerbaijan where the Coalition can bring further attention to the important role of MoFs for the 

next round of NDCs to be submitted to UNFCCC in 2025. 

Such dialogue between key ministries would aim to assess the involvement of Ministries of Finance in the 

process of designing and implementing Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) and LT -LEDS. It would 

facilitate the exchange of me thods and successful strategies, while also promoting greater participation in 

preparation for COP30. The early 2025 deadline for enhanced NDCs underscores the urgency and importance 

of this step, as it is a critical opportunity to strengthen global climat e commitments and actions. 

Key activities, milestones, and timeline: 

• Draft discussion note for the Spring Meetings, emphasizing discussion questions to be addressed at 

the level of ministers 

• Draft technical note by Spring Meetings 2024, to be finalized following ministers’ input 

• Help shape Climate Action Statement inputs around NDCs, LT -LEDS and COP for Annual Meeting 

Ministerial 

• Publish brief note with key insights and recommendations by the end of 2024 to stimulate further 

MoF engagement in the critical final months prior to the NDC submission deadline , published on the 

interactive members portal and NDC Partnership’s  Knowledge Portal 

Leveraging the NDC Partnership Support Mechanism 

Summary: The  NDC Partnership  provides an existing and proven mechanism for partners to respond to 

countries’ climate needs, including Ministries of Finance (MoF). As of 2023, the Partnership has been 

providing support to more than 90 engaged developing member coun tries (~40 of which are members of the 

Coalition), which are supported by over 160 implementing and development partners from the NDC 

Partnership network. Countries request support for NDC priorities, through focal points in the Ministries of 

Environment a nd the MoF (or Planning), closely coordinated with relevant sectoral ministries. 

Mechanism: The NDC Partnership facilitates matchmaking between identified country climate needs and 

technical and financial support from partners. Mechanisms through which countries can request support 

include Request for Support Letters (RSLs), NDC Implementation Plans / Partnership Plans (PPs), Climate 

Investment Plans, and special initiatives, such as the NDC Partnership Thematic Call on LT -LEDS and NDC 

Alignment, Update, and Enhancement , particularly relevant for this Action Plan. RSLs and special initiatives 

such as the Thematic Call on NDCs and LT -LEDS, usually focus on specific and immediate priority needs of a 

country or Ministry of Finance (MoF), while Implementation and Investment Plans provide a more 

programmatic and holistic approach to whole -of -government NDC implementation and investment priorities 

over many years. 

NDC Partnership member countries seek support through these mechanisms to catalyze and harmonize 

support from several implementing and development partners, including those that are part of the Coalition. 

The Partnership can serve as a vehicle for Coalition member countries to convey requests aligned with 

recommendations and guidance emerging from the Coalition to various institutional partners. It can 

complement the work of the Coalition by facilitating access to existing and new opportunities for country 

support. 31 

Given countries’ needs and requests, support can be provided in multiple areas. Below is a non -exhaustive 

list of areas of support with a specific focus on the finance ministries and the NDC Partnership Thematic Call 

on NDC and LT -LEDS alignment, update, and enhancement :

Preparatory Support 

• Development of a long -term vision integrating climate and socio -economic goals 

• Analysis of current policies, institutional arrangements, and actions led by MoFs 

• Awareness and initial capacity -building for MoF 

• Scoping and needs assessments 

• Assist in the preparation of requests for support to be communicated to the NDC Partnership 

Development, update, and enhancement of NDCs and LT -LEDS 

• Deployment of expertise and targeted TA to MoF to engage in NDCs and LT -LEDS formulation 

• Cost -Benefit analys is and prioritization to inform NDCs and LT -LEDS 

• Macro -economic and Macro -Fiscal analysis to assess climate risks, impacts, and opportunities and 

inform NDCs and LT -LEDS 

• Strengthening M&E systems in line with Paris Agreement requirements 

Promoting long -term transformation and action 

• Formulation of economic and fiscal policies and regulatory instruments to deliver LT -LEDS and NDC 

• Strengthening of institutions and governance mechanisms, including the MoF and the financial 

system 

• Development of C limate Investment Plans and Financing Strategies 

• Mainstreaming LT -LEDS and NDC into economic and fiscal policies (e.g. PFM, PIM, PAM, PP, etc.) 

• Support investment readiness and financial instruments for transformative interventions 

• Greening central ba nks, including climate stress testing, taxonomy, disclosure, and regulations to 

protect financial stability and align finance with Paris Agreement 

• Other climate -related needs from MoFs 

Focus countries : Member countries  of the NDC Partnership, while non -member s can apply to become  a

member. 

Advisory and service delivery partners: Network of more than 90 institutions/associat e members .

How to access support : Can be requested at any time through NDC Partnership Government Focal Points. 

Who to contact for more information: NDC Partnership Thematic Call ( thematiccall@ndcpartnership.org ) and 

Joaquim Leite, Head of Climate Finance ( Joaquim.Leite@ndcpartnership .org )

Workstream background and previous key outputs 

Since 2020, across HP1 and HP6, reports and knowledge sharing highlighted the critical role of finance 

ministries in driving fiscal and economic policies for updating and implementing NDCs and LT -LEDS, essential 

for a just and affordable transition to climate resilience and carbon neutrality. These include: 

• Report:  Ministries of Finance and Nationally Determined Contributions: Stepping Up for Climate 

Action , July 2020 

• Workshop: Ministries of Finance and Nationally Determined Contributions: Stepping Up for Climate 

Actio n, August 2020 32 

• Workshop: Survey Findings – Engagement of Finance Ministries in NDC Preparation and 

Implementation, October 2021 

• Workshop: Scoping Fiscal Impacts of Long -term Climate Strategies, February 2022 

• Report:  How to Scope the Fiscal Impacts of Long -Term Climate Strategies? A Review of Curre nt 

Methods and Processes , May 2022 

• Report:  Ministries of Finance and Nationally Determined Contributions Raising Ambition and 

Accelerating Climate Action , November 2022 

• Workshop:  Empowering Climate Action: Ministries of Finance Role in Nationally Determined 

Contributions and Long -Term Strategies Implementation , September 202 3

• COP28 HL Event:  NDC Partnership & Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action’s – Ministries 

of Finance and NDCs/LT -LEDS: Stepping up for Climate Ambition , December 2023 

# Country and Regional Follow -Up, Peer Learning and Capacity Building (HP2) 

Country leads: Finland, Indonesia, Netherlands, Rwanda 

Contributing countries: Austria, Bahamas, Cambodia, Chile, Croatia, Denmark, Egypt, Jamaica, 

Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sweden, Uganda, United Kingdom, 

United States, Uruguay 

Contributing I Ps: Brookings, Commonwealth, IDB, LSE/GRI, NIB, NDC Partnership, UNDP, UNEP, WB, WRI 

Secretariat coordinator: Frank van Lerven (with supporting consultant to be hired early 2024) 

Priority areas within workstream for 2024 -2025 

1. Demand -driven virtual and in -person national/regional events for peer -to -peer learning and follow -

ups on the Coalition’s flagship Guide. 

2. Updating the capacity building catalogue and i ncreasing access to partners’ climate -related 

capacity building support for MoFs. 

3. Facilitating instruments for peer -to -peer exchange. 

1. Demand -driven virtual and in -person national/regional events for peer -to -peer learning and 

follow -ups on the flagship Guide 

1.1 Deploy ment of Ambassadors Network for enhanced peer -to -peer learning 

Ambassadors are needed to help facilitate the exchange of expertise and promote peer -to -peer learning 

among members. With the Coalition’s  flagship guide now published  and workstreams constantly producing 

new outputs, ambassadors will play a crucial role in sharing practical and illustrative country experiences 

alongside the technical experts of Institutional Partners. With ambassadors now identified and engaged (see 

table below), the Secretariat and HP2 member leads will actively focus on mobilizing and deploying 

ambassadors. The potential to involve higher level ambassadors (i.e. former finance ministers and leading 

influencers) as Co alition champions will also be explored. 

Objective: Have a fully established ambassadors’ network with engaged members to facilitate peer -to -peer 

exchange and promote Coalition outputs 33 

> Timeline and Milestones

• Full list of engaged ambassadors, end of Ap ril 2024 (including meetings with select ambassadors if 

needed) 

• First ambassador convening, March 2024 – quarterly meetings thereafter 

• Explore potential of involving high level champions, July 2024 

1.2 Proactive and reactive dissemination of Coalition outputs through peer -to -peer exchange 

The Coalition will shift into second gear to help proactively disseminate the outputs produced to its members. 

The Coalition is ready to respond to member requests to present the Coalition’s key outputs ( such as the 

Guide, CAS, capacity building offerings , the NDC Support Initiative , a bespoke presentation of a specific 

workstream area) to their MoF. But C oalition members may also be proactively contacted by the Secretariat 

about potentially having a coalition -based virtual presentation (for example new joining members). For these 

presentations, different ambassadors and I Ps would be invited to share their experience, technical expertise 

and/or political advice – dependent on the needs and preferences of the member requesting the 

presentation. 

Specifically relating to the Guide, members and I Ps can request virtual and in -person presentations of the 

Guide to the Secretariat. HP2 will start work in Q1 2024 to develop a rapid self -assessment tool, which would 

allow members to obtain a general overview on the situation of integrating climate considerations in its 

policies. Such a tool is intended to support th e design of actions and events, and not to rank countries. 

Objective: Proactively and re -actively disseminate coalition outputs to enhance peer -to -peer learning and 

knowledge exchange 

Timeline and Milestones 

• Have at least 3 -5 in -person events surrounding the guide with further links to capacity building 

programs and IP offerings each year during 2024 and 2025. Preliminarily interest for 2024: Uganda, 

Scandinavia, and Peru. 

• Have virtual events on the guide and coalition outputs with at least 10 members in 2024, and then 

additional 10 in 2025. 

• Organize three (regional or global) events around the guide and Coalition outputs with I Ps aimed at 

MoF as main target audience – thro ugh 2024 and 2025 

• Develop rapid assessment tool (with range of I Ps) by end of Q1 2024 – targeting at least eight 

countries by end of 2024 based on members’ demand. 

1.3 Updating the Coalition’s Flagship Guide 

The flagship guide is an instrumental tool t o help enrich peer -to -peer learning and knowledge sharing 

amongst members. As time goes by, the Guide will need to be updated with new insights, developments and 

country examples. By the end of Q2 2024, we will put in place a ‘core team‘ that will engage m embers and 

IPs, and by the end of 2024 lay the groundwork for the update of the Guide. Over the course of 2025 the core 

team will deliver an updated version of the Guide. Where relevant, we will deepen the information contained 

in the document. The update is expected to draw from country experiences and feedback received on the 

roll -out events, as well as deliverables from different work streams and analytical work of the I Ps and 

stakeholders, where relevant. 

Objective: Update the guide based on rich exch ange and experience of Coalition members 34 

Timeline and Milestones 

• Form core team responsible for designing, creating and updating a database for the next version of 

the guide, March 2024 

• Develop action plan for updating the guide and creating database, Ap ril 2024 (i.e. below) 

• Harnessing inputs from coordinators and HPs 

• Getting feedback from ambassadors and ambassador network 

• Launch consultation for member submissions 

• Establishing a Database for Best Practices and Key Lessons, June 2024 

• Consult ambassa dor network and HP2 convening group on updates, June 2024 then quarterly 

• Continuously update database, up to 2025 

• Begin first draft, first quarter 2025 

• Member feedback and edits, 2 nd Quarter 2025 

• Publication, Annual meeting 2025 

2. Increasing access to partners’ climate -related capacity building support for MoFs 

2.1 Heightening peer learning through the capacity building catalogue 

Ips have a lot of capacity building initiatives on offer for our members. The Coalition has collated these 

offerings in the  Capacity Building Catalogue . HP2 will regularly update the catalogue, to ensure all our I Ps

potential programs for our members are included and can be effectively utilized and scaled up. 

The Catalogue will be further updated to include: 1) member testimonials regarding the capacity building 

initiatives on offer. We will collect experiences from members that have gone through th ese capacity building 

initiatives, which will help members understand what the process looks like and may facilitate take -up, 2) 

climate -related trainings relevant to MoF officials offered from institutional partners, knowledge partners 

and leading univers ities, and 3) offer a one pager on where countries can go to apply for donor funding, 

especially related to capacity building. 

Special effort will be taken to support members to more easily access the Catalogue and specific trainings. 

Meanwhile, the Catal ogue will be digitized and uploaded into the revamped members portal. 

Objective: Update the Capacity Building and Training Catalogue 

Timeline and Milestones 

• Updated capacity building catalogue with all IP offerings, March 2024 

• Expand the catalogue to include climate -related trainings relevant to MoF officials offered from 

knowledge partners and leading universities, April 2024 

• Member testimonials added to Ca talogue, June 2024 

• Digitalize the capacity building and training catalogue, July 2024, and upload in the upgraded online 

portal, Dec ember 2024 

2.2 Offering bespoke training sessions to members and increasing collaboration with C3A and NDC 

Partnership 

Next to institutional capacity building offerings, HP2 will focus on building up the training pillar of its capacity 

building offerings, to offer our members and deputies the skills to lead in integrating climate change in their 35 

ministries policies. This would take the form of very short half seminars organized around in -person events 

scheduled throughout the year. We will work with our Institutional Partners and Knowledge partners to offer 

some basic training on the most recent work related to mainstreaming cl imate into the operations of MoF 

(e.g. , as provided by Oxford Smith School at the in -person Sherpa meeting in February 2023 in Helsinki). 

Moreover, the Coalition plans to enhance and increase its collaboration with I Ps like the NDC Partnership ,

C3A , and WRI . This augmented cooperation aims to provide even more specialized and targeted capacity 

building support to ministries. 

Objective: Enhance the technical know -how of members and their staff through capacity building and 

bespoke training sessions. 

Time line and Milestones 

• Co -organized half -day workshop AM 2024, Spring Meeting 2025, AM 2025 

• Demand for training in our members and the supply of trainings surveyed, August 2024 

• Organizing technical training sessions for members on the sidelines of in -person Coalition convenings 

such as ministerial meetings, in collaboration with C3A and other I Ps by January 2025 

3. Facilitating better instruments for peer -to -peer exchange between members 

3.1 Upgrading the member portal and complementing the Guide with more concrete example of policy 

implementation 

Over the course of 2023, Members have indicated that they find learning from other countries through peer -

to -peer exchange to be the most important and relevant way to increasing their climate -related capacities, 

and identify the Coalition as a key forum to facilitate such exchange. To facilitate this e xchange, HP2 will 

contribute to updating the members portal , making it more easily accessible and loaded with material that 

expand peer learning and knowledge sharing. 

Following on from this, the in -person deputies meeting in 2024 in The Hague clearly in dicated a demand from 

members to offer a knowledge product that complimented the CAS, flagship guide,  and the outcomes of 

previous workstreams,  by offering more granular examples for members policy implementation. The 

Coalition Secretariat under the guida nce of HP2 member leads aims to assemble a comprehensive overview 

of the climate policy tools currently and previously implemented by member MoFs across diverse geographic 

and economic contexts. This output,  facilitating better access to country policy exa mples,  will be made 

available  through upgraded member portal. 

Objective: To upgrade the member s portal and develop a detailed knowledge product that showcases a 

comprehensive overview of the climate policy tools offering granular examples of climate policy 

implementation 

Timeline and Milestones 

• Develop plan and T oR prior to Spring Meeting 2024 

• Follo wing Spring meeting, begin mapping exercise and developing a database – use additional CAS 

inputs (July 2024) and updates to Guide, to help inform policy mapping. 

• At the same time, begin design of new member portal – have at least three possible options re ady 

by August 2024. 

• By end of Q3 2024, have one policy example – key lessons learned – from at least 60% of members. 36 

• By end of Q4 2024, draft of policy mapping ready. 

• By end of Q4 2024, have new member portal ready to go up online. 

• January 2025, present the output and key findings at HP2 workshop – and take on feedback and 

suggested edits. 

• By Spring meetings 2025, have a polished draft ready to be approved by members. 

3.2 Where to start on climate mainstreaming? 

In alignment with the Coalition ’s strategic initiative to host bi -annual induction sessions, HP2 is committed to 

the development of a knowledge product designed to bolster these efforts. Specifically, there has been a 

discernible demand among members for a concise document (no more than fi ve pages in length) that 

facilitates a foundational understanding of where to start on working on climate change in MoF embarking 

on these issues for the first time. To this end, the HP2 Coordinator, together with leading members and 

supporting I Ps, shall undertake the creation of an easily navigable resource. This resource will primarily draw 

upon the insights and experiences of MoF that have demonstrated advanced proficiency in this domain, 

thereby ensuring that the product not only informs but also empow ers new entrants in the field of climate 

change. 

Objective: Develop a concise, accessible knowledge product to equip MoFs new to climate change with 

foundational insights, leveraging the experiences of more advanced MoFs. 

Timeline and Milestones 

• Develop plan and ToR by M ay 2024 

• Have 3 I Ps support in drafting process before Spring Meeting 2024 

• Following Spring meeting, have s keleton outline drafted – based on case study examples 

• Have first draft ready, May 2024 

• Test and get feedback from members by June 2024 

• Final draft ready for approval July 2024 

Workstream background and previous key outputs 

Launching, rolling out and raising awareness of the Guide:  The Coalition’s flagship guide , with substantial 

support from LSE GRI, was launched at the Spring Meetings – followed by  the K ey Messages  (various 

languages ) and  Synthesis report.  A spotlight event  with release of the Full Guide Report had an all -star cast 

of experts including Janet Yellen (Secretary of the Treasury, United States), Azucena Arbeleche (Minister o f

Economy and Finance, Uruguay), Morten Bødskov, (Acting Minister of Finance, Denmark), and Pablo 

Saavedra (Vice President, EFI Global Practice, World Bank). A variety of events were held with MoFs, 

Institutional Partners, and the broader general public. 

Setting up the Ambassadors Network for enhanced peer -to -peer learning: Three working group convenings 

were organized before the Coalition ’s Ambassador’s Network was launched in 2023 to enhance the 

Coalition ’s impact through member expertise and dedication. Our survey confirms that peer -to -peer learning 

is essential for our success. Accordingly, the purpose of an ambassador is to promote peer -to -peer 

interactions, enhance the visibility of the coalition, connect Coalition outputs (especially the Guide) to 

ca pacity building programs, and empower members to take ownership of their involvement in public 

engagement efforts. 37 

Capacity leveraging through the capacity building catalogue: Over the course of the year,  two workshops 

were held where all the Coalition’s capacity building programs available to members were present ed. 

Alongside this,  an init ial catalogue  was developed that showcases the rich array of capacity building programs 

of our Institutional Partners. The catalogue concisely offers members a central place for the key and relevant 

information of our In stitutional Partners’ capacity building programs – so that all information is accessible 

and in one place. 

Capacity leveraging through C3A Institutional Partnerships: The C3A program,  launched in 2023 in support 

to the Coalition , is currently covering 20 members (and gro wing) with specialized management, core, and 

analytical teams, and establishing two advisory committees. Through various events (Paris Summit, LAC 

platform of finance ministers, Annual WB -IMF meeting, and COP28), C3A has become a visible actor in the 

lands cape of capacity building programs. Launching its thematic and regional hubs, C3A has forged 

partnerships to co -create climate -related models and analytical tools supporting Ministries of Finance. 

# Promoting Carbon Pricing Measures & Phasing Out Inefficient and Harmful 

# Subsidies (HP3) 

Country lead s: Ecuador , Sweden 

Contributing countries: Argentina, Austria, Chile, Denmark, France, Finland, Ghana, Iceland, Indonesia, 

Ireland, Italy, Korea, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, Rwanda, Singap ore, Switzerland, UK, 

Uruguay, Uzbekistan 

Contributing I Ps: ADB, EBRD, EC, GGGI, IADB, IMF, OECD, UNDP, WB 

Secretariat coordinator: IMF 

Priority policy areas within workstream for 2024 -2025 

In 2024 -2025, HP3 will continue to provide guidance and support o n the design and implementation of 

carbon pricing measures, including fossil fuel subsidy reform, by facilitating bilateral and multilateral 

experience and knowledge exchange among members, and by matching members with institutional partner 

support/existin g tools and resources. Guided by members’ needs and priorities, the focus will increasingly 

be on practical aspects (the “how”) of implementation, addressing the most pressing barriers to members 

as well as the support . In that context, members have identified the following specific policy priorities for 

further work in 2024 -2025: 

1. Phasing out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies 

2. Carbon pricing 

1. Phasing out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies 

• HP3 will work to advance progress on methodological issues related to fossil fuel subsidies. A core 

issue in phasing out fossil fuel subsidies is how to define and measure subsidies in a meaningful way 

which is coherent with different reform commitments (e .g., under G7, G20 and at COP28) and which 

leads to decreased net carbon emissions when the subsidies are phased out. The Coalition aims to 

advance work in this area by mapping and assessing definitions and methodologies in use and 

promoting a coordinated approach among members and relevant stakeholders. 

• HP3 will facilitate experience and knowledge exchange on the main barriers to phasing out fossil fuel 

subsidies and how to overcome them, with a focus on political economy challenges. This work will 

be don e through a series of webinars or similar interactive settings and peer -to -peer exchange. This 38 

will include a deep dive into the nature of the most pressing national and international barriers for 

members and reflecting on solutions, e.g., the type of refo rms that could/should be prioritized, what 

constitutes an “enabling environment” for reform, which strategies (including communication) could 

be used to facilitate reforms, the alternatives to subsidies/alternative uses of freed -up resources, 

and the needs in terms of additional support/cooperation. Countries will be invited to share their 

experiences as case studies, to identify different approaches to subsidy reform as well as existing 

initiatives and available support. These will then be used as a basis for discussions , and will be turned 

into a practical policy note by the end of 2024. 

• Phasing out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies is also on e of the topics on the agenda of the Spring 

Meetings Ministerial agenda in 2024, which will be based on a disc ussion note and result in a policy 

note on the topic .

2. Carbon pricing 

• HP3 will facilitate experience and knowledge exchange on the main barriers to introducing carbon 

pricing instruments and how to overcome them , with a focus on political economy challenge s. This 

will work will be done through a series of webinars or similar interactive meetings and peer -to -peer 

exchange, coordinated with the corresponding exercise above on fossil fuel subsidies .

• HP3 will explore and facilitate experience and knowledge exch ange through a workshop or seminar 

on the effectiveness of carbon pricing instruments in different industries and macroeconomic 

contexts, drawing on member country experience. 

Time line and Milestones             

> Time
> period
> Milestone Objective Member(s) in
> Charge
> Possible
> Partners
> 2024
> Q1 -8
> (rolling
> basis)
> Deliver training for the
> wider Coalition on the
> IMF -World Bank Climate
> Policy Assessment Tool
> (CPAT)
> Raise awareness of and facilitate use of CPAT, a
> spreadsheet -based ‘model of models’ that
> allows for the rapid estimation of effects of
> mitigation policies for over 200 countries.
> Ecuador,
> Sweden
> IMF, WB,
> IABD, ADB
> Q1 Contribute to discussion
> note and policy note on
> phasing out inefficient
> fossil fuel subsidies related
> to Spring Meetings side
> event
> Facilitate knowledge exchange during Spring
> Meetings Ministerial side event discussion on
> phasing out fossil fuel subsidies and
> disseminate new insights on effective
> strategies to reform fossil fuel subsidies.
> Ecuador ,
> Sweden
> IMF
> Q2 -4Deliver workshop and
> possible papers on
> different methods of
> measuring fossil fuel
> subsidies, including
> discussion note s
> Promote a coordinated approach among
> relevant stakeholders on the measurement of
> fossil fuel subsidies.
> Ecuador,
> Swe den,
> Finland,
> Netherlands ,
> France
> IMF, WB,
> OECD
> Q2 -4Organize exchanges on
> developing and
> introducing carbon pricing
> measures, including phase
> out of fossil fuel subsidies
> Exchange among members of experiences and
> approaches in implementing carbon pricing
> measures and phasing out fossil fuel subsidies,
> as well as lessons learned, with a focus on the
> political economy of reforms. The insights of
> these discussions will be brought together in a
> policy note.
> Ecuador,
> Sweden,
> Chile, Uruguay
> IMF, WB,
> IADB , ADB, EC,
> UNDP

39     

> Q4 Deliver webinar on
> financing mechanisms
> offered by relevant I Ps
> Increase awareness among members of
> available financing options, such as the
> Resilience and Sustainability Trust.
> Ecuador,
> Sweden
> IMF, WB,
> IADB, ADB
> 2025
> Q2 Deliver seminar/workshop
> on carbon pricing
> effectiveness
> Experience exchange on carbon pricing
> instruments and their effectiveness in different
> contexts.
> Sweden, UK,
> Denmark
> (tentative)
> IMF, WB,
> OECD
> Q3 Carbon leakage risk in the
> context of increased
> climate ambition
> Discuss ways to address carbon leakage in the
> context of increased climate ambition,
> including measures such as border carbon
> adjustment mechanisms (BCAs) and product
> standards.
> France, Sweden,
> UK
> IMF, WB, EC,
> OECD, UNDP

Co -Cha ir, Secretariat and Institutional Partner support requests 

The co -leads will rely on the Secretariat and relevant institutional partners to assist in the coordination and 

organization of proposed activities, events, and notes. In addition, the co -leads will also seek to leverage 

existing analytical work of relevant institutional partners and practical experience from member countrie s in 

delivering the work plan .

Workstream background and previous key outputs 

Pricing carbon through a carbon tax or an emission trading system (ETS) is a cost -efficient way to reduce 

emissions. It creates a clear signal for the market, generates revenue s which can be used to further support 

the climate transition and strengthens the competitiveness for alternative solutions. HP3 promotes and 

supports the development and implementation of robust carbon pricing systems, including the phasing out 

of ineffic ient fossil fuel subsidies, as a central part of an effective climate policy. 

• Recent publications:  International Coordination Mechanisms for Climate Change Mitigation , April 

2023 

• Recent events:  Two -day in person Workshop on International Carbon Pricing and Taxation in Jakarta, 

Indonesia , October 2023, organized with Ministries of Finance of Indonesia and Sweden and the 

Asian Development Bank (ADB) 

# Mainstreaming Climate in Economic Policy (HP4) 

Country leads: Denmark, U nited States 

Contributing countries: Austria, Bangladesh, Canada, Chile, Finland, France, Greece, Honduras, 

Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg , Mexico , Portugal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Spain, 

Sweden, Uganda 

Contributing I Ps: EC, GRI/LSE, IMF, NGFS, OECD, UNDP, UNEP, WB , WRI 

Secretariat coordinator: Abdulaziz Almuzaini and a macro -fiscal climate expert (to be hired in 2024) 

Priority policy areas within workstream for 2024 -2025 

1. Integrate climate into the macroeconomic modelling tools and approaches and develop better 

answers to the policy challenges faced by Ministries of Finance in assessing the economic and fiscal 

implications of climate change. 40 

2. Identi fy current gaps and opportunities in green budgeting to cataly ze climate action, including other 

cross -cutting issues such as disaster risk management and disaster risk financing. 

1. Macroeconomic Modelling 

The workstream seeks to develop deeper knowledge around macroeconomic modeling approaches and 

challenges – while also bringing opportunities for knowledge sharing and collaboration to the forefront of the 

agenda in 2024. Through both Coalition HP4 activities and work to support and reach out to the wider 

research and modeling community, the aim will be to bring together Ministry of Finance policy practitioners 

and modelers with experts and influential and innovative economic modeling teams from around the world 

to understand current practices for integrat ing climate into economic analyses, identify key gaps, and suggest 

a path forward to close the gap between needs and current practices. This will be pursued as follows: 

• Building a community of practice around the macroeconomics of green and resilient trans itions: 

HP4 co -leads will work together with member countries and more stakeholders (I ps, external 

experts, etc.) to help build a community of practice on integrating climate into the macroeconomic 

modelling tools and approaches. The aim of the community is to gain clarity on the specific questions 

and needs of Ministries of Finance and to help develop better answers to these policy challenges 

through assessing the economic and fiscal implications of the green transition and dealing with the 

effe cts of climate change. The community of practice and member leads will leverage existing 

Coalition engagements around modelling approaches (e.g., I Ps, C3A, HP2, green transition) to share 

best practices, challenges, and engage in wider peer to peer learnin g and outreach to researchers 

and modelling communities on a joint agenda to advance research and support the development of 

more decision -useful models. 

• Developing a White Paper: HP4 co -leads will work with the Grantham Research Institute at the 

London School of Economics and the wider community of practice to develop a paper on the state 

of climate macro -economic analysis and modelling that that can be of use for the Coalition of Finance 

Ministers for Climate Action and beyond. The report will aim to 1) Provide an up –to date, detailed, 

granular review of the experiences of a number of finance ministries in integrating climate change 

into modelling and other economic analysis. 2) Set out key asks and needs from finance ministries in 

terms of the big policy challenges and questions they face and the need for macro -models and other 

analytical tools to help provide answers. 3) Provide an overview of a future agenda for making better 

use of existing tools, developing new analytical approaches, aiming to synthesize both cutting edge 

modelling and other relevant analytical tools being used by finance ministries, as well as new ideas 

and approaches developed by major institutional players and the wider analytical community. The 

development of the White Paper will be overseen by a steering group of Finance Ministries chaired 

by HP4 co -leads United States and Denmark and accompanied by a diverse group of senior experts, 

high -level champions a nd institutional partners. 

2. Climate -Informed Public Financial Management 

Ministries of Finance play a critical role in the achievement of climate objectives. They must translate policy 

objectives into instruments considering the relative merits of informa tion, regulation, taxation, and public 

spending as policy tools. Policymakers also have to offer incentives to both the public and private sectors and 

to be able to enforce implementation. To that end, member countries have recognized existing gaps and the 

need for more guidance around i) identifying and reducing government fiscal risk to climate change, including 

disaster risk management and disaster risk financing; ii) using public investment to drive climate action; iii) 41 

reducing emissions and climate ri sk through public procurement; and iv) incorporating the social cost of 

carbon into the budget. The workstream aims to raise awareness about these issues as follows: 

• Provide a stock -take on how green budgeting tools have been put to use in Coalition member 

countries and how they can be further developed and improved to both enhance cost -effectiveness 

and deliver impact on green transition and resilience objectives. 

• Showcasing how Ministries of Finance can use green budgeting tools and practices to drive 

in vestments towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate -resilient development. This will 

involve workshops under HP4 and the aim would be to produce a Coalition paper that can help 

support and inform debates at COP29 and other fora on how Ministries of Finance make use of 

budgetary policymaking to help achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement. 

• Enhancing coordination and seizing future opportunities for member countries to get more actively 

engaged in green PFM will be a priority. Green budgeting engageme nts with I Ps and members will 

be identified and/or planned to help showcase progress, needs, and opportunities of ministries of 

finance. There will be an increased focus on adaptation and resilience alongside other cross -cutting 

thematic areas within the C oalition. 

Timetable and Milestones 

Time 

period 

Milestone  Objective  Members in 

Charge 

Possible 

Partners 

2024 

Q2  Annual meeting 

OECD Paris 

Collaborative on 

Green Budgeting 

Meeting 

The meeting will highlight the latest trends in green 

budgeting and showcasing progress made by various 

countries. 

OECD, TBD 

based on 

proposed 

agenda and 

topics 

Q2  Coalition High -Level 

Event on Integrating 

Climate into Macro 

Modeling 

HP4 Co -leads are planning a high -level Ministerial side event 

during Spring Meetings to set out the political case for 

improving macroeconomic modeling tools in Ministries of 

Finance to better assess and economic and financial effects 

of the green transition and the physical impacts of climate 

change. 

Denmark, USA 

Q2  1st Forum on the 

Macroeconomics of 

the Green 

Transitions 

As part of the effort to develop a wider community of 

practice, HP4 co -leads United States and Denmark and the 

Bezos Earth Fund will organize a forum bringing together 

policy practitioners and economi c modelers from finance 

and economic ministries, development banks, universities, 

and think tanks. 

Denmark, USA  Bezos Earth 

Fund 

Q2  HP4 Seminar on 

Green Budgeting 

The workshop will gather Coalition member countries and 

institutional partners to showcas e country experiences and 

set out the case for how green budgeting tools and 

practices can support the capacity of Ministries of Finance 

to drive investment towards low greenhouse gas emissions 

and climate -resilient development. 

Denmark, 

Austria 

Switzerland, 

Sierra Leone, 

Mexico 

Q3  Workshop on Initial 

Findings from White 

Paper 

The workshop will aim to showcase progress in building 

initial findings from the White Paper and provide the 

community of practice with an opportunity to share inputs. 

Den mark, USA  GRI LSE 

Q4  Coalition Paper on 

Green Budgeting 

Under HP4, engaged country members and institutional 

partners will work with the Coalition secretariat to develop 

Denmark, 

Austria 42         

> a paper setting out the case for how green budgeting tools
> and practices can suppo rt the capacity of Ministries of
> Finance to drive investment towards low greenhouse gas
> emissions and climate -resilient development.
> Q4 Presentation of the
> White Paper on
> Integrating Climate
> Change into Macro -
> Economic Modeling
> Presentation of the white paper at COP29 –possibly as a
> side event.
> Denmark, USA GRI LSE
> 2025
> Q1 HP4 White Paper
> Dissemination
> Events
> To share findings with members and I Ps and gain a better
> sense of how the Paper can be used to inform
> macroeconomic decision -making as well as next steps.
> Denmark, USA
> Q1 HP4 Green
> Budgeting Paper
> Dissemination
> Events
> To share findings with members and I Ps and better
> understand remaining gaps to prioritize certain elements of
> green budgeting in 2025.
> Denmark,
> Austria
> Q2 Workshop on the
> Social Cost of
> Carbon
> Integrating the social cost of carbon (SCC) into green public
> financial management can be a crucial step in ensuring that
> public investments and expenditures are aligned with
> climate change mit igation and adaptation goals. This topic
> area will be a focus for the workstream over the course of
> the next two years.
> Denmark, USA

Co -Chair, Secretariat and Institutional Partner support requests 

The Secretariat will be responsible for coordinating outputs and workshop organization with co -leads. I Ps will 

be requested to provide technical inputs and presentations at workshops. The co -leads also welcome 

additional involvement from member countries and institutional partners, particularly from emerging 

economies and developing countries to set out the policy and analytical needs they would like the Coalition 

to work on as well as country experiences and engagement in further work. To that end, Co-Chairs will be 

requested to facilitate more active member engagement on public financial management, particularly around 

adaptation and resilience, participate in the working group discussions and workshops. 

Workstream background and previous key outputs 

HP4 aims to mainstream climate change across macro -fiscal, budgeting, investment, and procurement 

processes. Since 2020, HP4 has hosted several joint workshops with the OECD Paris Collaborative on green 

budgeting while also developing guidance around climate budget tagging by collaborating wit h institutional 

partners including the World Bank, IMF, OECD, and IDB. HP4 has also focused on climate -informed public 

investment management and disaster resilient public financial management (including disaster risk 

financing). Additionally, HP4 has focus ed on emerging priority areas including the need to climate change into 

macroeconomic models for economic policymaking. To date, these conversations have centered around 

implications of climate change on several key economic sectors; the availability of re liable data or accurate 

macroeconomic modeling and forecasting; pressure testing macroeconomic models regularly to identify gaps 

and find solutions; and to make modeling approaches accessible to member countries. 

Key outputs include: 

• How Sovereigns Can Bu ild on the Work of the International Sustainability Standards Board (Joint HP5 

Workshop; February 10, 2022) 43 

• Joint World Bank and Coalition Technical -Level Climate -Smart Public Investment Management in 

Africa Week (Workshop; April 4 – 7, 2022) 

• Driving Climate Action Through Economic and Fiscal Policy and Practice  (Report; April 14, 2022) 

• Roundtable Discussion: Driving Climate Action Through Economic and Fiscal Policy and Practice 

(Report Launch Event; June 16, 2022) 

• Using Economic Tools to Adapt and Build Resilience to Climate Change (Workshop; June 27, 2022) 

• Integrating Climate Change into Macroeconomic Models for Economic Policymaking (Workshop; 

April 13 – 14, 2023) 

• Leveraging Climate -Smart Public Investment Management to Address Climate Change (Workshop; 

May 25, 2023) 

• Addressing Cli mate Change from a Disaster Risk Management and Financing Perspective (Joint HP5 

and Adaptation Workshop; September 20, 2023 

• World Bank and IMF Annual Meetings in Marrakesh Side Event on Modelling and C3A (Workshop; 

October 12, 2023) 

• Green Macroeconomic Mo delling in the margins of the Integrated Assessment Modelling Consortium 

(IAMC) Annual Meeting (Workshop; November 13, 2023) 

• Mainstreaming climate economic policies: Success stories and forward priorities (COP28 Side Event; 

December 5, 2023) 

# Mobilizing P rivate Climate Finance (HP5) 

Country leads: Luxembourg, Mexico, Switzerland, United Kingdom 

Member countries: Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Finland, France, Germany, 

Indonesia, Italy, Morocco, the Netherlands, Philippines, Uganda 

Contributing I Ps: Brookings, C3A, EBRD, EIB, IMF, LSE/GRI, NGFS, NIB, WB 

Secretariat coordinator: Olha Krushelnytska and a financial sector climate expert (to be hired in 2024) 

Priority policy areas within workstream for 2024 -2025 

• Leveraging greater private finance - via providing better enabling conditions, strengthening inter -

ministerial collaboration, enhancing projects bankability and broadening investors base, as well as 

usi ng blended finance instruments and green, sustainability and other climate -related bonds. 

Greening private climate finance, including developments in reporting, data and disclosure .

• Work on voluntary carbon markets and potentially biodiversity carbon marke ts .

1. Leveraging greater private finance for climate action 

To support the transition to a net -zero, climate -resilient and nature -positive future, members will focus on 

various aspects of leveraging greater private finance. This will include: 44 

• Blended finance (Luxembourg, others, to co -lead) 

• Inter -ministerial cooperation on climate finance (joint with OECD) 

• Green, sustainability and other climate -related bonds 

• Leveraging private finance for Nature (Mexico) and Adaptation (Uganda) – joint work wi th Nature 

and Adaptation workstreams 

• Voluntary carbon markets, part of this topic, are descri bed separately as point 3 below. 

To understand and cooperate on this priority policy area, there is a need to start a work on mapping: 

1. Instruments to mobilize finance – what kind of financing (de -risk ing , guarantee s, blended finance, 

etc .) works for particular projects and being deployed by each member; 

2. Creating links with other line ministries to better understand the demand side of finance ;

3. Rankings of the investment climate for green investments of different countries to better understand 

the role of MoFs in ensuring an attractive investment climate .

To leverage private finance at scale, this mapping exercise is important to identify what p articular 

projects/sectors can actually be financed by private finance and for what purposes/sectors (Brookings will 

provide support here). This mapping could lead to the creation of a ‘toolkit’ on private finance mobilization. 

2. Greening private climate fi nance 

Together with relevant partners and exploring the synergies between nature and climate, this will cover 

developments in sustainability disclosure requirements (SDRs), comparability and accessibility of data, and 

other alignment approaches. Including developments in reporting, data and disclosure – with annual updates 

from ISSB and TNFD as per members’ demand, and as has been done in the past few years. This will help 

members make robust and well -informed policy decisions. 

3. Work on voluntary c arbon markets and biodiversity carbon markets (with Nature) 

Carbon markets were in focus at COP28, however countries failed to reach an agreement on Article 6.2 (rules 

for bilateral carbon trading between countries) and Article 6.4 (rules for international carbon market). The 

talks will resume next year – which puts additional pressure and creates an opportunity for the voluntary 

carbon market. A number of actors came forward articulating the importance of transparent, well -

functioning voluntary carbon mark ets and outlined their actions: 

• The World Bank released its  Engagement Roadmap for Carbon Markets  and announced plans for 15 

countries to earn up to $2.5 bn from the sale of credits 

• Major voluntary carbon credits standard setters signed  an agreement  to work in partnership to 

“amplify the impact of carbon markets.” 

• Several European governments issued a statement , proposing a framework “to prevent 

greenwashing and restore integrity in voluntary carbon markets” on the claims side. The US CFTC 

proposed  gui dance regarding the listing of voluntary carbon credit derivative contracts .

• Large conservation organizations, put out a  statement  endorsing transparent, high integrity carbon 

markets as important in “moving climate action furthe r, faster.” 

Members expressed interest in learning about the issue, key actors, and the role that MoFs can play in 

supporting voluntary carbon market development. There is potential for joint work with the Nature 

workstream on biodiversity credits and of fsets. 45 

Timetable and Milestones 

Time 

period 

Milestone  Objective  Members in 

Charge 

Possible 

Partners 

2024 

Q2 -Q3  Inter -ministerial 

coordination workshop 

with OECD and 

potential input to the 

paper 

Enhanced inter -ministerial coordination on climate is one of 

the Coali tion ’s intended outcomes and a key area of focus. 

Upcoming paper on inter -ministerial cooperation for 

climate mitigation, to be published in Sept 2024, with a 

draft ready and a workshop organized by the OECD in May. 

It will provide useful c ase studies (and members are 

welcome to submit their own if interested). 

Switzerland, 

others 

OECD 

Q1 -Q4  Mapping exercise on 

Private Finance 

mobilization, including 

Blended Finance 

To leverage private finance at scale, a Mapping exercise (in 

the form of su rvey) was proposed – to map MoFs actions on 

blended finance (what partners, deals. Projects/sectors can 

actually be financed by private finance and for what 

purposes/sectors. This mapping could lead to creation ‘’ of a 

‘toolkit’ on private finance mobilizat ion. 

Update from 2022 Blended finance paper is another 

potential deliverable. 

Luxembourg, 

Switzerland, 

others 

Brookings, 

others 

Q2 -3 Update from TCFD and 

ISSB on disclosure and 

reporting 

For the past 2 years, members have requested to provide 

climate - and sustainability related disclosure updates by 

TCFD and ISSB. They requested the same for 2024. 

Secretariat  TCFD 

Q4 or 

2025 

Voluntary carbon 

markets 

With carbon markets talks to resume at the next COP, there 

is additional pressure and opportuni ty for the development 

of transparent, well -functioning voluntary carbon markets. 

Members are interested in learning about the issue, key 

actors, and how MoFs can get engaged. 

Switzerland, 

UK, others 

UNDP 

2025 

Q2 -3 Update from TCFD and 

ISSB 

Annual update on climate - and sustainability related 

disclosure by TCFD and ISSB (as in previous years and as 

requested by members) 

Co -Chair, Secretariat and Institutional Partner support requests 

The Secretariat will be responsible for coordinating the output with member co -leads, drafting papers (with 

co -leads and I Ps input) and workshop organization. I Ps will be requested to provide technical input. C o-Chairs 

will be requested to facilitate more active member engagement and to participate in the working group 

meetings workshops. 

Workstream background and previous key outputs 

Work plan 2023 areas of focus: 

1. Leveraging greater private sector finance, including blended finance 

• Workshop  Paris Agreement Article 2.1c Implementation  fo r Ministries of Finance 

• COP28 Ministerial Meeting: Mobilizing private and public finance for climate action, Su mmary 

Note 

• Joint workshop with Nature workstream on  Nature Investments 

• Blended finance work w as postponed to 2024 -2025 46 

2. Greening private fin an ce – including data, reporting and disclosure 

• Workshop  Update on climate -related and nature -related disclosure requirements  (Joint 

HP5+Nature workshop, presentations by ISSB and TNFD) 

• Blog  Supporting private sector net zero commitments – the role of Ministries of Finance  – ba sed 

on 2022 report  Supporting Private Sector Net Zero Targets 

3. Transition fin ance 

• Transition Finance:  Net Zero Data Public Utility (NZDPU), Its Relevance to MoFs, and Challenges 

with Respect to Private Sector Commitment Tracking 

• 9th Ministe rial Meeting summary , including on Transition Finance 

4. Financing adaptation and climate -related disasters 

• Joint workshops with Adaptation on  Adaptation Finance , with HP4 on  Disaster Risk Management 

# Adaptation 

Country leads: Honduras , Netherland s, Uganda 

Contributing countries: Ghana, Greece, Kenya , Mexico, Mozambique, Indonesia, Philippines, Sierra Leone, 

United Kingdom 

Contributing I Ps: ADB, AfDB, Commonwealth, E BRD, E C, EIB, GGI, IMF, UNDP, UNEP, WB, WRI 

Secretariat coordinator: Frank van Lerven 

Priority policy areas within workstream for 2024 -2025 

1. Climate -related adaptation risks and opportunities 

2. Best practice management strategies 

3. Access to adaptation f inance 

1. Climate related adaptation risks and opportunities 

Objective: Develop better understanding of macro -critical adaptation risks and opportunities, so that MoF 

can gauge these risks/opportunities against what actions they are taking to mitigate/reali ze them – for Spring 

Ministerial 2025. 

Outcome: Finance Ministries have enhanced their understanding of adaptation risks and opportunities, more 

importantly, where to go to improve this understanding. 

• Form IP and member working group dedicated to this theme (ADB, AfDB, WRI, LSE GRI, OECD, EIB, 

UNDP and UNEP demonstrated interest). 

• Literature review end of 2024 draft. 

• Workshop Part 1: With members/I Ps end of 2024 based on risks and opportunities of adaptation, 

preparation for Spring meeting ministerial brie fing note. 

• Gain insight and feedback through workshop – drafting briefing early January 2025. 

• By Spring of 2025, have a very draft and concise framework/taxonomy to better understand these 

risks and opportunities written -up in concept note. 

2. Best practice management strategies 

Objective: In tandem with risk and opportunity assessments, work with members and I Ps to identify best 

practices in terms of planning risk reduction (opportunity enhancing) policies, instruments and investments 47 

at both at the macro -level and sectoral levels, to help inform interventions (i.e. via LT -LED S, NDCs, and NAPS). 

Members engage in pee r-to -peer learning, and exchange best practices in actions to help reduce risks and 

seize opportunities. 

Outcome: Members are better informed of the practical policies to mitigate adaptation risks and realize 

associated opportunities. 

• High level roundt able sharing best practices at Africa Caucus 2024. 

• Workshop Part II: January 2025 on best practices to reduce risks and seize, opportunities in 

preparation for Spring meeting. 

• By February 2025, have identified 10 leading best practices by MoFs. 

• Contin ue building on these into late 2025. 

• Merge best practices and key lessons into short concept note on risks, for Spring meeting 2025 (in 

line with objective 1). 

3. Access to adaptation f inance 

Objective: Focus on ways to improve MoF ’s access to increased climate finance for adaptation , among others 

by gathering/sharing information on the mapping of different adaptation -related funds, their guidelines, and 

how to access financing for adaptation projects. 

Outcome: Members are increasingly aware of the fundi ng and financing opportunities available to them, and 

how to access these. 

• Continued evaluation of access to adaptation finance and associated issues throughout 2024 and 

early 2025, with linkages to objective 1 -2. 

• Literature review of problems in relation to finance and of best practices (instruments and funding 

opportunities) June 2025. 

• Workshop July 2025. 

• Briefing toolkit end of 2025, perhaps for annual meeting. 

Timetable and Milestones   

> Time
> period
> Milestone Objective

Members in 

charge 

Possible 

Partners   

> 2024
> Q1 Form IP and member
> working group dedicated
> to this theme.
> To support the creation of upcoming
> literature review and deliverables at behest of
> co -leads and active members.
> Uganda, Honduras
> and the
> Netherlands
> ADB, WRI, LSE
> GRI, OECD, EIB,
> UNDP, AfDB,
> GCF, UNEP
> Q2 Continued evaluation of
> access to adaptation
> finance and associated
> issues throughout 2024
> and early 2025, with
> linkages to objective 1 -2.
> To maintain and advance the understanding
> of the relationship between finance and
> adaptation.
> Uganda, Honduras
> and the
> Netherlands
> UNEP, OECD,
> AfDB, ADB,
> Oxford Smith
> School

48 

Q3  High level roundtable 

sharing best practices at 

Africa Caucus 2024. 

To put adaptation firmly on the agenda of 

MoFs before Spring meeting 2025, acting as a 

sort of prelude. 

Uganda  AfDB 

Q4  Literature review –

adaptation risks and 

opportunities – end of 

2024 draft. 

Workshop Part 1: With 

members/I ps end of 

2024 based on risks and 

opportunities of 

adaptation, preparation 

for Spring meeting 

ministerial briefing note. 

To inform upcoming deliverables, discussion 

and dialogue from co -leads, active members 

and wider members. 

Members to respond to literature review, 

exchange experiences on identifying risks an d

opportunities – informing future deliverables. 

Uganda, Ho nduras 

and the 

Netherlands 

ADB, WRI, LSE 

GRI, OECD, EIB, 

UNDP, AfDB, 

GCF, UNEP 

2025 

Q1  Workshop Part II: 

January 2025 on best 

practices to reduce risks 

and seize opportunities 

in preparation for Spring 

meeting. 

Drafting concept briefing 

early January 2025. 

By February 2025, have 

identified 10 leading best 

practices by MoFs. 

Members to continue discussio n from 

previous meeting, exchanging experiences on 

best practices – informing future deliverables. 

To have a deliverable for Spring meeting 2025 

on Adaptation for ministers to discuss. 

To continue to identify best practices and 

ensure that members are engaging in peer -to -

peer exchange, so as to inform future 

deliverables. 

Uganda, Honduras 

and the 

Ne therlands 

ADB, WRI, LSE 

GRI, OECD, EIB, 

UNDP, AfDB, 

GCF, UNEP 

Q2  By Spring of 2025, have a 

very first draft and 

concise 

framework/taxonomy to 

better understand these 

risks and opportunities 

written -up in concept 

note. 

Ministers have a deliverable that can be 

discussed – the deliverable would ideally also 

help to increa se the profile of the Coalition 

and gain press coverage. 

Uganda, Honduras 

and the 

Netherlands 

ADB, WRI, LSE 

GRI, OECD, EIB, 

UNDP, AfDB, 

GCF, UNEP 

Q3  Literature review of 

problems in relation to 

finance and of best 

practices (instruments 

and funding 

opportunities) , June 

2025. 

Workshop Part III: 

Access to Finance, July 

2025. 

To maintain and advance the understanding 

of the relationship between finance and 

adaptation – to inform future output for 

Annual meeting. 

To better understand the experiences and 

allow members to engage in knowledge 

sharing best practices for adaptation finance. 

Uganda, Honduras 

and the 

Netherlands 

ADB, WRI, LSE 

GRI, OECD, EIB, 

UNDP, AfDB, 

GCF, UNEP 49 

Co -Chair , Secretariat and Institutional Partner support requests 

The Secretariat is expected to take a strong coordinating role in helping organize events and drafting relevant 

material with I Ps. Co -Chair support would be welcome when designing, reviewing, and approving activities 

and outputs. Speaking at relevant events would also be a key area of support from the Co -Chairs. 

Workstream background and previous key outputs 

The importance of adaptation efforts to minimize climate change losses is increasingly rec ognized by Finance 

Ministers. The year 2022 saw the recognition of adaptation as a horizontal area of work by the Coalition of 

Finance Ministers for Climate Action , with the ministerial meeting at COP27 stressing the importance of long -

term strategies for adaptation and the overall need to scale up adaptation finance. 

Key outputs include: 

• Side event during Spring Meeting 2022 

• Adaptation report , 2022 

• Side event at COP27, 2022 

• Workshop NAPs and NDCs , 2023 

• Workshop Private Finance for Adaptation , 2023 

• Workshop Disaster Risk Management , 2023 

• Side event at COP28, 2023 

# Nature 

Country leads: Finland, United Kingdom 

Member countries: Cambodia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Mexico, Rwanda, 

Slovakia, Switzerland 

Contributing I Ps: Brookings, Commonwealth, EIB, NGFS, OECD, SITRA , TNFD, UNEP, WB, WRI 

Secretariat coordinator: Olha Krushelnytska 

Priority policy areas within workstream for 2024 -2025 

1. Implementation of relevant targets of the Global Biodiversity Framework by member countries: 

aligning financial flows (target 14), disclosure (15), subsidies (18), mobilization of resources (19). 

2. Data, reporting and disclosure – especially biodiversity -related taxonomies, and annual TNFD update .

3. How to value nature capital, including data and decision -support tool needed to assess risks and 

design policies (e.g. natural capital accounting and other tools ).

4. Nature financing, including phasing out subsidies harmful to nature .

1. Implementation of Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF) 

The GBF was adopted during CBD COP15 in December 2022 in Montreal. The message during the COP was 

clear – the MoF play a critical role in achieving commitments set out in the GBF. A high -level roadmap  for 

aligning financial flows with the GBF, released in July 2023, provides a plan of action for the financial industry. 

The Coalition’s  Note  on GBF published in 2023 highlighted t hose actions particularly relevant for the 

Ministries of Finance. In 2024, members are interested to follow up on work  done by members on targets 14 

(aligning financial flows) 15 (disclosure),18 (subsidies), 19 (mobilization resources) in light of preparat ion for 

CBD COP16 (to be held in Colombia in November 2024). 50 

2. Biodiversity and nature -related d ata, reporting and disclosure 

Especially work on biodiversity -related taxonomies, and annual reporting update from TNFD – to update 

members on the developments in the above disclosure requirements, what these standards would mean in 

practice, and the role of Finance Ministries in implementing them at national levels. 

3. Valuation and decision -support tool needed to assess risks and design policies 

Valu ing natural capital is an important tool for members. MoFs (together with other relevant Ministries and 

agencies) can support the implementation of national and subnational natural capital accounting (NCA) 

practices and ensure this information is integrate d into national accounts so that it is considered in 

budgeting, policy, and planning alongside other economic information to ensure effective ‘asset 

management’ of all forms of a nation’s capital. MoF can also use new metrics (applying advance technology 

to measure ecosystem health) and Macroeconomic and financial mode lling could give MoFs information on 

the fiscal implications of nature loss and enable evaluation of potential trade -offs and complementarities of 

different nature -related policy instruments. 

4. Nature financing, including biodiversity markets and phasing out subsidies harmful to nature 

Phasing out subsidies harmful to nature :

• Governments are spending trillions on inefficient subsidies that are making nature degradation 

worse – money that could be tapped to help solve the problem. Agriculture subsidies are responsible 

for the loss of 2.2 million hectares of forest per year – or 14% of global deforestation. Fisheries 

subsidies, which exceed $35 billion each year, are a key driver of dwindling fish stocks, oversized 

fishing fleets, and falling profitability. 

Biodiversity offsets credits: 

• Carbon credit standard body VERRA launched a public consultation on its  Nature Fra mework  that 

aims to certify investment in measurable positive biodiversity outcomes. The framework outlines 

how projects can generate Nature Credits, which “represent one quality hectare equivalent of 

biodiversity uplift from a baseline as a result of project intervention.” ( VERRA’s web site )

• If you are interested in biodiversity offsets, it would be good to read  In -depth Q&A: What are 

‘biodiversity offsets’ ? (as distinct from nascent biodiversity credits) that provides a good primer on 

the offset market and looks at whether biodiversity of fsets could be a reliable and predictable source 

of finance. 

Timetable and Milestones              

> Time
> period
> Milestone Objective Members in
> Charge
> Possible
> Partners
> 2024
> Q1 -2Work starts on
> Implementation of
> Global Biodiversity
> Framework (GBF) –this
> has to be aligned with
> COP16 deliverable
> Coalition had a 2023 workshop and note “What GBF
> means for MoF”, where the relevant GBF targets were
> discussed.
> In 2024, members are interested to map the
> implementation –what work was done by members on
> targets 14 (aligning financial flows) 15 (disclosure),18
> (subsidies), 19 (mobilization resources) in light of
> preparation for CBD COP16. Possible deliverable:
> Investing in Nature paper (see below)
> Colombia,
> Chile, others
> Q1 -Q2 Update from TNFD on
> nature -related
> disclosure requirements
> This is an annual update on nature disclosures. Member’s
> focus is on the role of MoFs to make sure TNFD is known
> to financial sector, and members/MoFs do in order
> stakeholders take up voluntary framework.
> UK,
> Luxembourg,
> Switzerland

51            

> March Colombia is hos ting an
> event in March on this
> topic (outside of
> CFMCA)
> Members are interested in learning how to mainstream
> biodiversity in taxonomies –Information about different
> routes to take, and what are the minimum requirements.
> Possibility to combine this work wi th Transition
> workstream.
> Colombia,
> Chile, Mexico
> Indonesia
> (Transition
> workstream)
> Q2 -3Nature financing,
> including phasing out
> subsidies harmful to
> nature
> Members expressed interest in joint work with HP3 on
> phasing out subsidies harmful to nature, and on
> biodiversity credits. This is a new topic, with the first
> workshop raising awareness of the issues and the role of
> MoF.
> Another possible subtheme is public -private partnerships.
> Possible deliverable : Investing in Nature paper,
> highlighting c ase studies on public and private financing in
> nature, possibly for COP16.
> Chile,
> Colombia
> 2025
> Q2 Valuing nature Since 2023, members expressed interest in learning how
> to Value natural capital .MoFs can support the
> implementation of national and subnational natural
> capital accounting (NCA) practices and ensure this
> information is integrated into national accounts so that it
> is considered in budgeting, policy, and planning.

Co -Chair, Secretariat and Institutional Partner support requests 

The Secretariat will be responsible for coordinating the output with member co -leads, drafting papers (with 

co -leads and I Ps input) and workshop organization. I Ps will be requested to provide technic al input. Co -Chairs 

will be requested to facilitate more active member engagement and to participate in the working group 

meetings workshops. 

Workstream background and previous key outputs 

In 2022, Coalition started work on Nature, producing the comprehe nsive report  An Overview of Nature -

Related Risks and Potential Policy Actions fo r Ministries of Finance: Bending he Curve of Nature Loss .

In 2023, Nature became a separate workstream, with the following focus areas: 

1. Understanding Nature work across I Ps, as per member’s demand 

• Workshop : Taking stock of Nature: Insights from Institutional Partners 

2. Nature -related d ata, reporting and d isclosure – annual update from ISSB and TNFD 

• Workshop : Update on climate -related and nature -related disclosure requirements  (joint with 

HP5) 

3. What Global Biodiversity Framework ( targets 14,15,18,19) means for MoF 

• Short paper on  What GBF means for MoF and Central Banks  (joint with NGFS) 

• Blog  Finance Ministries actions to implement the Global Biodiversity Framework and halt and 

reverse nature loss 

• Workshop:  What the Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF ) means for Finance Ministries and 

Central Banks 

4. Investing in nature – instruments, risks, and reporting 

• Workshop:  Nature Invest ments  (joint with HP5) 52 

# Green and Just Transition 

Member co -leads: Indonesia 

Member countries: Belgium, Colombia, Greece, Indonesia, Japan, Lithuania, Sierra Leone, United Kingdom 

Contributing IPs: ADB, C3A, EBRD, EIB, LSE/GRI, NGFS, OECD, UNEP, WB 

Secretariat coordinator: Olha Krushelnytska (transition plans, finance), Frank van Lerven (just transition) 

Priority policy areas within workstream for 2024 -2025 

1. Transition plans and role of MoF in guiding the transition 

2. Transition finance , whether harmonization or taxonomy 

3. Just transition financing framework 

1. Transition plans 

Transition plans are documents that disclose information of a firm’s intended pathway to low or net -zero 

emissions. Today, a bewildering range 4 of guidance for transition plans is available – but only for corporates. 

In 2024, several efforts are underway to guide countries in drafting their own, sovereign transition plans. 

Sovereign transition plans can help governments (1) design and monitor climate actions in a centralized 

fashion, (2) identify investment opportunities for public and private investment, and (3) provide investors 

with confidence in their commitment to susta inability, and thus attract financing. Funders have an incentive 

to use existing dominant transition plan frameworks to ensure credibility and comparability, but corporate 

transition frameworks are an imperfect fit for governments. 5 Work is underway at th e WB to outline a 

sovereign transition plan that is as close as possible to existing frameworks but also includes key elements 

that are particular to governments. 

A sovereign transition plan is centered around the Finance Ministry, which has two relevant functions in this 

context, namely (1) mobilize climate finance from domestic and international sources (link with HP5) and (2) 

manage the national budget, a share of which is dedicated to financing climate action. This includes 

government procurement, tax expenditures, subsidies, and other financial incentives (link with HP4). 

2. Transition finance 

Transition finance is an important tool for helping traditionally high -emitting sectors to transition to low -

carbon production processes. A large amount of financi ng is required in carbon intensive sectors that need 

to decarbonize and turn from “brown” to “green”. Considering a crucial role that Ministries of Finance play 

to incentivize transition finance and the need to speed up the transition, it is of particular importance that 

we examine the right tools at our disposal for setting credible net zero targets by the private sector and for 

monitoring progress. Governments, especially the Ministries of Finance, can play a bigger role in private 

sector net zero alignme nts – from engagement and coordination with the private sector entities to the use 

of guidelines and regulations ( see 2022 report  Supporting Private Sector Net Zero Targets ).

Indonesia proposed to work together with Nature workstream on a brainstorming event on links between 

transition finance and taxonomies on climate and nature, and to discuss a coordinated paper. A lot of ongoing    

> 4Bingler et al (2023) compare 28 transition plan frameworks.
> 5Corporate transition plans are focused on mitigation, not adaptation. They almost never incorporate just transition concerns. Some
> concepts don’t apply to governments (e.g. supply chain management), others need to be adjusted (e.g. Board oversight, incenti ves
> and remuneration, products and services, CAPEX).

53 

work in Latin America on this already. We cou ld also consider sectors that have high abatement cost and 

think about the distributional impact (energy, transport, agriculture). Not to duplicate work, the Coalition’s 

value add could be at the higher level of the international financial architecture. 

3. Just transition financing framework 

To leave no one behind, it is crucial to shape a transition in a way that is just, affordable, and inclusive, 

reducing socio -economic impacts and incentivizing effective and timely labour reallocation for workers 

transiti oning out of high -emitting sectors, using the tools under the behest of finance ministries such as tax 

and linkage with financing social protection. There is a need to expand on current initiatives for a just 

transition, such as those covering some key ele ments of country platforms 6.

Timetable and Milestones 

Time 

period 

Milestone  Objective  Members in 

Charge 

Possible 

Partners 

2024 

Q1  Transition plans 

– workshop and 

paper 

Provide understanding on sovereign and private 

Transition Plans – and guidance to countries in drafting 

their own, sovereign transition plans in the future. 

UK adopted transition plan principles in July 2023, also 

conducted two workshops alongside GFANZ. 

Indonesia, UK, 

Brazil, others 

World Bank, 

G20, GFANZ, 

NGFS, UNPRI, 

LSE, others 

Q2 -3 Just transition 

finance 

framework 

Understanding what just transition is and how to 

manage the social cost aspects of transition. 

Need to leverage existing initiatives: O ECD and UNEP, 

has ongoing work related to HP3 on just transition. 

UNFC CC has KCI Expert group on economic 

diversification and just transition. MDBs and ISSB work 

on just transition taxonomy. There are a lot of existing 

initiatives like the just transition platforms and 

emerging social climate funds. 

Indonesia, 

Belgium, Colombia, 

others 

OECD, UNEP, 

UNFCCC 

Q2 -3 Transition 

finance products 

and tools 

The proposed metrics is to explore varieties of 

transition finance products and tools , ranging from 

taxonomy, metrics for transition finance, and emerging 

transition finance products such as transition bond. 

Indonesia  WB TRE on 

green bonds, 

WB FCI on 

blen ded, SCCFE 

on carbon 

markets, 

transition 

bonds 

Q2 -3 Transition 

Finance 

workshop and 

paper, joint with 

Nature and HP5 

Indonesia proposed to work together with Nature 

workstream on a brainstorming event on links 

between transition finance and taxonomies on climate 

and nature, and to discuss a coordinated paper. A lot 

of ongoing work in Latin America on this already. We 

could also think on sectors that have high abatement 

cost and think about the distributional impact (energy, 

transport, agricul ture). Not to duplicate work, the 

Coalition’s value add could be at higher level of 

international financial architecture. 

Indonesia, others  

> 6

An example is the Just Energy Transition Partnership (JETP) in South Africa, which committed to decarbonize its coal 

dependent electricity sector. 54   

> Q4 C3A program:
> energy
> innovation and
> transition
> TBC C3A

Co -Chair, Secretariat and Institutional Partner support requests 

The Secretariat will be responsible for coordinating the output with member co -leads, drafting papers (with 

co -leads, members and IPs input) and workshop organization. IPs are requested to provide technical inpu t. 

Co -Chairs will be requested to facilitate more active member engagement and to participate in the working 

group meetings workshops. 

Workstream background and previous key outputs 

The Green Transition workstream was established in 2023, following input from HP5 (see 2022 report 

Supporting Private Sector Net Zero Targets ) wit h a dedicated thematic discussion during the  9th Ministerial 

Meeting  (2023) which focused on transition finance as one of its topics. In 2023, Transition was established 

as a separate workstream and its  Concept Note  was approved with the following areas of focus: 

• Taxonomy, definition of eligible activities, and performance standards 

o Workshop  Green Transition taxonomy  was organized , focusing on experiences and best 

practices to create interoperable tools 

• Green transition framework and transition plans 

• Access to long -term finance 

• Just transition 55 

# An nex II. Results Framework 

Based on the Coalition’s Theory of Change ( To C) proposed during the August 2023 Deputies meeting (see 

Section II for ToC details ), the following results framework is proposed. 

Output results indicators are proposed as follows: 

 Work program and work plans developed /updated by February each year 

 Deputy meetings conducted timely and orderly 

 Coalition represented at relevant international events , including member -led and/or Coalition -

branded contributi ons to events (with gender balance) 

 Number of workstream activities conducted according to work program/plans – with increased 

numbers of members attending and actively involved 

 Increased number of active members 

 Increased number of active IPs providing support to members and the Coalition 

 Coalition ministerial meetings (including at COP) conducted 

 Capacity building support effectively provided (via C3A, catalogue, partnerships) 

 Knowledge products prepared and peer exchange workshops organized , including regionally 

 Annual Climate Action Statement developed and presented at Coalition Annual Meeting 

Output results indicators will be collected on a continuous basis by the Secretariat and reported once a year 

in the Annual Reports. Quarterly updates may be made available to members /funders on request (optional) .

Outcome results indicators are proposed as follows: 

● Increased member capacity on climate action, as stated by members 

● Strengthened role of MoFs in national -level climate action with increased inter -ministerial 

coordination, as stated by members 

● Increased collaboration between cou ntries’ MoFs on climate action where the Coalition has played 

a facilitative role , for example through cross -border initiatives, as stated by members 

● Increased international collaboration and leadership of MoFs on climate action, as seen through 

internatio nal fora and stated by members 

● Increased climate action and leadership by MoFs, including through Annual Climate Action 

Statement (CAS) from ministers , with specific commitments, as seen via CAS development and 

analysis 

Outcome results indicators will be collected by the Secretariat via surveys and CAS development process, 

and will be reported in the Annual Reports and CAS as relevant. 56 

# Annex III . Institutional Partner Contributions and Technical Expert ise Areas 

Institutional Partner  Relevant Climate -Related 

Capacity Building & Training 

Programs for MoFs 

Areas of Expertise Relevant to Coalition 

Members 

Contribution to the Coalition 2024 -25 Work 

Program Implementation 

African Development Bank 

(AfDB) 

Training of Trainers’ Program 

for Developing Project 

Proposals to Access Green 

Climate Fund 

Risk assessment of renewable energy, smart 

agriculture, resilient infrastructure, and 

adaptation projects, expertise in unlocking 

diverse financing solutions (public, private, 

blende d) and de -risking investments to attract 

private sector participation in tackling climate 

action. 

Asian Development Bank (ADB)  Regional Capacity -Building 

Training Workshop on Climate 

Change 

Assessing risks in renewable energy, sustainable 

infrastru cture, smart agriculture, and adaptation 

projects, expertise in innovative finance, urban 

challenges, climate risk assessment and 

modelling, and technology transfer and 

innovation. 

Support to Adaptation, Carbon Pricing, and 

Green Just Transition workstreams , including 

support to generate evidence, convene 

meetings and capacity building – covering all 

HPs. Will co -organize the Lao PDR -led High -

Level Policy Dialogue at 11 th ASEAN AFMGM 

meetings, 3 April 2024, where the ADB will 

support Lao PDR as ASEAN Chair to organize a 

high -level dialogue on ‘Enhancing the Role of 

Ministries of Finance for Climate Action in 

Southeast Asia’. Indonesia CFMCA regional 

event 2024: ADB support .

Brookings Institution  Climate macro modelling and wider macro -

economic and fiscal policy. Strong specialization 

in investment needs and development of policy 

frameworks and regulations. 

Will continue to offer support to members in 

collaboration with LSE GRI (see below). 

Commonwealth Secretariat  The Commonwealth Climate 

Finance Access Hub (CCFAH) 

Mobilizing funds through innovative financing 

mechanisms and wider reform of global financial 

architecture. Policy development expertise for 

Small Island Developing States (SIDS), focusing on 

strategies for climate adapt ation and mitigation. 

Strong background in data and research, offering 57 

evidence -based recommendations for effective 

climate action policies and measures. 

European Bank for 

Reconstruction and 

Development (EBRD) 

EBRD Corporate Climate 

Governance Facility 

Carbon Project and Asset 

Development Facility for Paris 

Aligned Carbon Markets 

Joint MDB LTS Programme 

Paris -aligned investments with a private sector 

focus in green economy projects, including 

sustainable infrastructure and green credit lines. 

Strong experience in developing market -oriented 

solutions and leveraging private sector 

investment through innovat ive partnerships. 

Examples of delivery and support mechanisms 

include: EBRD’s Renewable, Energy Auction 

Programme; Guarantee schemes (i.e. a Climate 

Mobilisation Platform equipped with a €30 

million first -loss guarantee; programmes utilising 

EU’s EFSD+ gua rantees). Co -investment 

programmes with climate funds (e.g. GCF, CIF). 

Relevant experience on carbon pricing through 

policy dialogue, including integration of carbon 

markets in NDCs and LTS, capacity building for 

GHG and digital MRV, carbon pricing roadmap s

and ETS policy support. 

Methodological expertise on climate finance 

tracking and determination of activity alignment 

with the Paris Agreement. 

In addition, NDC/LTS support via technical 

assistance and capacity building programmes, 

including for the de velopment of sector low -

carbon pathways (LCPs). 

The EBRD proposes to contribute to the 

Coalition’s Work Program by supporting the 

Work Streams. In HP1, knowledge sharing on 

Paris alignment, e.g. by organizing a

presentation on its Paris alignment approach. 

HP2, coordinating with CFMCA on possible 

events of interest. For HP3, enhance carbon 

pricing dialogue by sharing EBRD’s carbon 

market development experience. Also 

leveraging the MDB Article 6 workgroup. 

Discussing integration of carbon markets in 

NDCs and LTSs, capacity building for GHG and 

digital MRV , developing carbon pricing 

roadmaps and Emissions Trading Scheme policy 

support. For HP4, sharing information on 

EBRD’s support for Green Financial Systems 

and Corporate Climate Governance Facility. On 

HP5, knowledge sharing on private sector 

mobilizatio n, e.g. through blended finance, 

guarantees and local currency. For HP6, EBRD 

offers technical support on NDC/LTS 

development via the EBRD’s NDC Support 

Programme and the Joint MDB LTS 

Programme. 58 

European Commission (EC)  JRC Summer School on 

Sustainable Finance 

Technical Support Instrument 

(TSI) and Taiex 

Macro -fiscal areas, integrating risks into debt 

sustainability, green & SDG budgeting, green 

taxation and wider climate macro -modelling. 

Similarly, in areas relevant to carbon pricing and 

fossil fuel subsidies, whilst also entailing excellent 

expertise in areas related to mobilizing private 

finance and supporting a just green transition. 

Challenges and best practices in management of 

disaster risk and climate change impact. Capacity 

building and peer to peer expertise on demand 

driven projects for EU MS. 

Available to contribute to present and inform 

on EU processes and working methods in line 

with areas of expertise. 

European Investment Bank (EIB)  Structuring and mobilizing finance for climate 

action and environmental sustainability 

investments, inclu ding renewable energy, energy 

efficiency, sustainable transport, water, 

bioeconomy, circular economy, innovation, 

nature and adaptation to climate change. 

Provides as well advisory services, ranging from 

upstream support to strategic and market 

developmen t to project development and 

capacity building, including support for greening 

financial systems. Can offer insights into 

developing and implementing innovative 

financing instruments that attract private sector 

financing in climate action and environmental 

sustainability investments. 

The EIB will support HP5, Adaptation, Nature 

and Green Just Transition workstreams. For 

HP5, the EIB could contribute with its 

experience in blended finance and in mobilizing 

private sector investment for green objectives. 

The EIB could also present its framework to 

ensure that its clients are takin g steps towards 

decarbonizing its business activity and 

strengthening resilience to climate change. The 

EIB could contribute on the topic of green 

bonds and Sustainable Awareness Bonds. It 

could also speak about its experience in 

providing advisory support to greening financial 

systems. On Adaptation, the EIB could 

contribute by explaining the socio -economic 

benefits of adaptation investments, why it 

makes sense to invest on adaptation and the 

importance of supporting transformative 

adaptation projects. It could also contribute 

presenting its experience on adaptation 

financing and on providing advisory support to 

translate NAPs into an investment pipeline. For 

Nature, the EIB could contribute by presenting 

its experience in financing nature related 

investme nts. The EIB is co -chairing a WEF WG 

on biodiversity credits, so it could also 

contribute to the event programmed on this 59 

topic in Q2 -3. For the Green and Just Transition, 

the EIB could contribute to this workstream by 

presenting its EIB Global approach to just 

transition and just resilience, which builds on 

its experience in the implementation of the EU 

Just Transition Mechanism. 

Global Green Growth Institute 

(GGGI) 

Crafting green growth strategies, designing 

impactful projects across diverse sectors like 

renewable energy and climate -smart agriculture, 

and unlocking private finance for green 

investments. This comprehensive approach can 

aid the shaping of national green growth plans, 

prioritizing impactful projects, and mobilizing 

resources to accelerat e the transition to low -

carbon economies. 

GGGI proposes to support the CFMCA on Green 

and Just Transition in 2024. GGGI is currently 

supporting Indonesia and Colombia (both 

member countries), and working with the 

United Kingdom (member country) to 

implemen t options for green and just energy 

transition to increase social inclusion and 

improve gender outcomes as a result of 

focused policy and investment tools. We look 

forward to defining the format of this 

contribution, such as a lessons learned 

workshop with member countries in Q3 or Q4 

as a complement to CFMCA workshops. 

Grantham Research Institute of 

the London School of Economics 

(GRI -LSE) 

From Guide to Action: 

Strengthening the Role of 

Finance Ministries in Driving 

Climate Action 

Analyzing and developing economic and policy 

frameworks for climate action, with strong 

specializations in both mitigation and adaptation. 

Macro -fiscal expertise, including climate macro -

modelling and mobilizing fiscal space – with 

strong understanding of climate investment gaps 

and innovative financing tools. 

LSE GRI proposes to support HP1/6, HP2, HP4, 

HP5 and Adaptation workstreams. For HP1/6, 

LSE GRI plans to support NDC/LT -LEDs support 

initiative (support with preparatory support 

and requests) and the development of 

knowledge products and events. For HP2, LSE 

GRI will support the rollout of the guide 

(presentation, country visits, regional roll o ut), 

finalization of MoF capability assessment tool, 

and provide support/advise on co -chair led 

update of the guide, development of case study 

database, note on climate mainstreaming and 

the roll -out of ambassador network (e.g. 

training on guide/slides). F or HP4, coordinate 

the technical work related to the initiative on 

revamping economic analysis and modelling for 

Finance Ministries co -led by Denmark and the 

US, working closely with members and leading 60 

academic and policy institutions to develop 

Coalition report and related engagement and 

communications strategy. LSE GRI is also 

available to support other areas of HP4 where 

relevant. For HP5, support in mapping exercise 

on private finance mobilization. On Adaptation, 

supporting workstream outputs (details to be 

confirmed). For the Green and Just Transition, 

supporting work on the energy 

transition, gender equality in just transition 

frameworks, and developing guidance for 

sovereign transition plans (via new GRI Centre 

for Economic Transition Expertise (CETE x)). 

Green Climate Fund (GCF)  The Readiness and 

Preparatory Support 

Programme 

As one of the world's largest dedicated climate 

finance funds, providing grants, l oans, 

guarantees, and equity investments for 

developing countries to address climate change 

can help member countries access the resources 

they need to implement their climate action 

plans. Offers transformational planning and 

programming to maximize the co -benefits 

between mitigation, adaptation and sustainable 

development; Catalyzing climate innovation, de -

risking investment to mobilize finance at scale, 

and mainstreaming climate risks and 

opportunities into investment decision -making. 

GC F plans to contribute to HP2, HP5, 

Adaptation, Nature and Green and Just 

Transition. For HP2, as indicated during the 

Hague meeting, the priorities and activities 

align with GCF`s new readiness strategy, and 

GCF is looking forward to proactively 

contributi ng. GCF can send experts to inform 

the finance ministries on how to access 

capacity building funding, facilitate peer to peer 

learning through regional meetings and provide 

examples of good practices. Regarding HP5, 

while we are discussing with the leads, our 

Division of Private Sector Facility can provide 

plenty of good examples of and give guidance 

on private sector climate finance projects. On 

Adaptation, Nature, and Green and Just 

Transition, we would also be keen to provide 

project examples and any gui dance we can 

provide on these sectors from our experience 

and knowledge. 

Inter -American Development 

Bank (IADB) 

Introduction to Fiscal 

management for Climate 

Action (MOOC) 

The IDB is at the forefront of supporting 

countries in the LAC region integrate climate 

change into their development strategies and 

fiscal plans. Provides technical and financial 

Exchange experiences, lessons learned, 

methodologies and tools on issues such as 

climate public budget classification; reforming 

national investments systems; evaluating public 

expenditures; issuance on themat ic sovereign 61 

The Benefits and Costs of 

Reachin g Net Zero Emissions 

in Latin America and the 

Caribbean 

Cash transfers in the context 

of carbon pricing reforms in 

Latin America and the 

Caribbean 

Fiscal Policy for Resilience and 

Decarb onization: 

Contributions to the Policy 

Dialogue 

A Conceptual Framework for 

the Classification of 

Gove rnment Spending on 

Climate Change 

Towards resilient and 

decarbonized public 

in vestment: practices for 

integrating climate action in 

public investment 

management 

assistance for finance ministries to lead the 

development of national climat e strategies, NDCs 

and plans that integrate fiscal and public finance 

measures. A key pillar of the IDB's work is 

strengthening the capacities of governments to 

assess and manage the fiscal risks associated 

with climate change and the transition to a net -

zero economy through the work of the Regional 

Climate Change Platform of Economy and 

Finance Ministries. It supports quantifying the 

impacts on public finances of natural disasters, 

decarbonization and exposure of the financial 

sector, as well as adjusting fiscal rules and 

developing financial protection instruments. The 

IDB promotes public financial management that 

fully integrates the climate agenda, including 

instruments such as taxonomies and cost -benefit 

evaluations for public investment. Provides 

assis tance in adopting climate spending budget 

classifiers, providing accountability, evaluating 

the efficiency and effectiveness of public 

spending in this area, and strengthening budget 

cycles. The IDB also provides technical and 

financial support to establis h debt instruments to 

finance the transition, such as debt -for -nature 

swaps, and Sustainability -linked bonds. 

Another key line of work is to promote green 

fiscal policies such as the elimination of fossil fuel 

subsidies, the establishment of carbon taxes a nd 

the design of incentives for climate mitigation 

and adaptation. The IDB supports impact 

assessments, analysis of policy options and their 

effective implementation to correct market 

failures, mobilize private investment towards 

sustainable activities and generate resources to 

finance climate action. 

bonds; implementing sustainable taxonomies; 

NDC investment plans and climate finance 

strategies; policy mix to improve effectiveness 

of carbon price instruments; and improving 

climate institutions. 62 

International Monetary Fund 

(IMF) 

Macroeconomics of Climate 

Change 

Specialist in carbon pricing and fossil fuel subsidy 

reform. Integrating climate change into 

macroeconomic frameworks and fiscal policies, 

including analyzing the impact of climate change 

on economic stability, public finances, and 

devising strategies to incorporate climate 

considerations into national budgets and fiscal 

polici es. Creating enabling environments for 

private sector investment, including mitigating 

climate related financial risks. 

The IMF co -hosts the Secretariat of the 

Coalition. As part of this role, it hosts the 

Annual Ministerial Meeting of the Coalition 

each fall at the IMF/WB meetings. 

Aligned with the HP3 workstream, the IMF 

provides policy advice and capacity 

development to its members on climate 

adaptation and mitigation policies, such as 

carbon pricing and fossil fuel subsidy reform, as 

well as on enabling institutions including 

through training on climate policy analytical 

tools. 

The IMF is also active via the engagement of 

IMF focal points in the HP4 (macroeconomic 

policy and public financial management), HP5 

(financial policy) and adaptation workstreams. 

Korea Development Institute  Experience in green growth strategies, with 

practical guidance for developing effectiv e green 

fiscal policies, designing carbon pricing 

mechanisms, and implementing sustainable 

investment strategies. Additional expertise in 

macroeconomic modeling – especially evaluate 

the economic and financial implications of 

climate change and proposed po licies. Deep 

understanding of climate -related financial risks 

and vulnerabilities, particularly within the Asian -

Pacific context. Knowledge on green technologies 

and innovation identify and support promising 

solutions for climate mitigation and adaptation. 

KDI will share the implications of the studies on 

net -zero policies that KDI has conducted for last 

several years: covering carbon pricing, 

emissions trading system, renewable portfolio 

standard, electricity vehicle subsidies, and 

other green transition policies, focusing on 

their impacts on industrial competitiveness, 

firms’ performance, trade, and other economic 

variables, and citizens’ acceptance to them. 

(HP3, HP4) 

As a related activity, KDI held a joint conference 

on green growth with the World Bank at WB 

headquarter on 28 th February. 

Knowledge Sharing Programs that KDI provides 

jointly with the Ministry of Strategy and 

Finance might be a channel through which KDI 

shares the research results with other 

countries. 

Korea Institute for International 

Economic Policy 

Research and analysis on global economic trends, 

international trade and investment, digital 

transformation, and specifically, climate change. 63 

Examines the implications of climate change 

policies, international cooperation for sustainable 

development (espe cially analysis of global 

cooperation agendas, including climate finance 

and green economy strategies.), and the 

economic impacts of environmental policies 

positions. 

Korea Institute of Public Finance  Research expertise on green tax reforms, carbon 

pr icing mechanisms, and budgeting for climate 

mitigation and adaptation. Experience in fiscal 

performance evaluation can be helpful in 

assessing the effectiveness and efficiency of 

climate -related investments and policies. 

Research on government investment a nalysis can 

inform members of strategies for mobilizing 

public and private finance for green 

infrastructure, renewable energy, and other 

climate -friendly projects. 

Korea Institute of Finance  Leads research operations for the advancement 

of the financial industry and the realization of the 

'Information Age' throughout the financial sector. 

Offering research and analysis of domestic and 

international financial market trends, alongside 

managerial efficiency of financial institutions for 

improvement of their international 

competitiveness. 

NDC Partnership  NDC Partnership Support 

Mechanisms 

The NDC Partnership brings together over 220 

membe rs, including developed and developing 

countries and institutional members, to create 

and deliver on ambitious NDCs that help achieve 

the Paris Agreement and the Sustainable 

Development Goals (SDGs). Governments 

identify their NDC implementation priorities and 

the type of support that is needed to translate 

them into actionable policies and 

programs. Based on these requests, the 

The Partnership is actively engaged and 

providing substantial su pport to the 

implementation of HP1, 2 and 6. Additionally, 

support can be extended to Partnership 

member countries to advance their 

engagement across areas covered in all Helsinki 

Principles. The Partnership mechanisms 

outlined in this Work Program and the 

Catalogue outline ways in which the 

Partnership can leverage its wide network to 64 

membership offers a tailored package of 

expertise, technical assistance, and funding. The 

Partnership is supporting over 90 countr ies, 

including 50 ministries of finance, many 

members of the Coalition. 

Given developing country requests, support can 

be provided in multiple areas, such as: Capacity 

building on climate change and interlinkages with 

MoF roles/mandates; Macroeconomic mod eling 

of climate risks, impacts and opportunities; 

Incorporating climate actions in Public 

Investment Management; Climate 

mainstreaming in Public Financial Management; 

Support related to carbon pricing and fossil fuel 

subsidy phase -out; Greening central ba nks, 

including climate stress testing, taxonomy, 

disclosure, and regulations to protect financial 

stability and align finance with the Paris 

Agreement; Other climate -related needs from 

MoFs. 

assist Ministries of Finance in advancing climate 

action. 

Nordic Investment Bank (NIB)  Deep understanding of climate related issues for 

Nordic and Baltic regions. Financing of 

sustainable infrastructure has expertise in 

renewable energy and energy efficiency. 

Promoting cross -border cooperation on 

sustainability can share important insights on 

collaborative climate solutions. 

NIB has published its Climate St rategy and 

targets in 2023 and recently reported the first 

progress against the targets in its Annual 

Report 2023. The strategy is supporting the 

national targets of NIB’s member countries. If 

the Coalition is planning a session/workshop on 

climate strateg ies, NIB could propose an expert 

speaker to give a presentation, share insights 

and best practices. In addition, NIB could write 

a blog post on this topic to share experiences 

and learnings on this topic. Optionally, the 

topic could be linked to sustainabi lity reporting 

(TCFD/preparing for the ISSB) or taking the first 

actions with nature -related disclosures. In case 

the Coalition is planning a regional activities in 

Helsinki, NIB could consider jointly participating 

in providing support in terms of offerin g a 

venue, speakers, moderators etc. In addition, 

NIB can support in raising awareness by sharing 65 

the Coalition's key messages and outcomes 

through NIB's own channels. 

Network for Greening the 

Financial System (NGFS) 

Climate micro and macro financial e xpertise –

with special lens of climate/nature related 

financial risks and wider financial stability. 

Developing scenarios, conceptual frameworks 

and analysis papers to support the decisions of 

financial policy makers. 

The NGFS will continue to contrib ute to HP%, 

Nature, HP$ and Green and Just Transition. For 

HP5, building off its learnings from its 

December 2023 publication on scaling up 

blended finance in EMDEs. The NGFS will also 

continue to collaborate on Nature as it builds 

off its previous work, s uch as the September 

2023 Conceptual framework for Nature -related 

Financial Risks. The NGFS will also provide input 

to HP4 based off of its learnings on 

macroeconomic modelling tools and 

approaches within central banks, as well as to 

the work on the Green and Just Transition 

where the NGFS will be able to provide input 

linked to its work on the transition plans of 

financial institutions. More generally, the NGFS 

will continue to develop collaboration and 

knowledge sharing with the CFMCA. 

Organization for Economic 

Cooperation and Development 

(OECD) 

Research capabilities and policy analysis across 

economic performance, environmental 

sustainability, green budgeting and public 

governance, with excellent proficiency in climate 

macro -modellin g. In -depth knowledge of 

effective tax policies, such as carbon pricing and 

incentives for green investment. Innovative 

financing tools and private sector investment. 

SITRA  Nature, circular economy and wider sustainable 

development. Pioneering financi ng solutions for 

clean technologies and renewable energy offers 

practical examples of mobilizing investments for 

climate action harnessing innovation and digital 

solutions for sustainability. 

United Nations Development 

Programme (UNDP) 

Support on Climate Finance to 

Strengthen Climate Action 

Evaluating and planning financial strategies for 

the energy sector's transition, including the 

The UNDP aims to provide support across 

HP1/HP6, HP2, HP3, HP4, and HP5. For HP1/6, 

the UNDP will engage on the upcoming Spring 66 

development of climate finance strategies 

aligned with NDCs and fiscal frameworks for 

accessing both domestic and international 

climate finance. Supporting the c reation of 

sustainable finance taxonomies, methodologies 

for green taxonomy, and frameworks for carbon 

finance, including the regulation of carbon 

pricing and market assessments. Expertise in 

issuing various thematic bonds, such as 

sustainability -linked bo nds and sovereign green 

bonds, while also exploring debt -for -climate 

swaps. Risk -informed planning, budgeting 

practices, and a roadmap to mainstream climate 

change in PFM, underpinned by climate budget 

tagging and expenditure reviews to ensure 

alignment wi th the Paris Agreement. 

2024 ministerial discussion session on the Role 

of Finance Ministries in designing, financing, 

and imple menting national climate policies 

(NDCs), including effective coordination with 

Ministries of Environment. The UNDP will 

support NDCs prioritization in macro -economic 

policy making and in public financial 

management cycle for two select countries 

through t he Climate Promise. The UNDP will co -

host a seminar on adaptation to build on 

National Adaptation Plans portfolio to sensitize 

ministries on the need for anticipatory risk 

informed financial planning to achieve the 

NDCs. The UNDP will integrate NDC financi ng 

plans with Integrated National Financing 

Frameworks in select countries and offer 

support to Chile in developing a Long Term 

Climate Strategy and costing through active 

MoF engagement in the design and financing of 

NDCs and LT -LEDS. A deep dive on adapt ation –

Regional Workshop – to bring together MoFs 

with other stakeholders involved in the 

NAP/NDC processes could also be organized 

(tbc). For HP2, the UNDP will support 

knowledge sharing workshops and north -south, 

south -south learning exchanges on clima te 

change integration into macro -fiscal policies, 

adaptation financing, blended finance 

mechanisms. Capacity building support will be 

provided to for ‘Development of Climate 

Finance’ training modules covering the climate 

finance landscape, mainstreaming cl imate in 

planning and budgeting – approaches & tools, 

adaptation finance, private climate finance. On 

HP3, the UNDP will continue to implement its 

existing carbon markets portfolio, and will 

assess demand from host countries, local 

stakeholder, and buyers alike on what the 

Initiative proposes, to further hone the four 

service offers, their rollout and means of 67 

operation. For HP4, regular UNDP thematic 

engagement under our joint Climate Hub –

Sustainable Finance Hub partnership, with 

emphasis on whole -of -eco nomy approach and 

integrating financing strategies into the next 

round of NDCs (also applies to HP5). THE UNDP 

will further develop a brief on climate change 

integration into budgeting in Asia Pacific based 

on Climate Change Budget Integration Index to 

be shared with members. For HP5, the UNDP 

can support the workstream by co -hosting 

private sector investment in climate change 

through climate investor mapping and 

accelerator labs. Support to members can be 

further offered on the issuances of thematic 

sovere ign bonds for climate financing. This 

includes support on framework development, 

use of proceeds/KPI determination, eligible 

projects/SPT determination and establishment 

of impact measurement and management 

(IMM) measures; and can provide support to 

countr ies on developing frameworks and 

policies on blended finance mechanisms. The 

UNDP will also produce a brief on the 

Development of a Step -by -step guide on 

Sustainable Finance Taxonomies that can be 

shared with members. 

United Nations Environment 

Programme (UNEP) 

Specializing in macro -economic modeling and 

sustainable budgeting, integrating environmental 

and development principles into fiscal planning 

to facilitate equitable green transitions. Co -

designing sustainable finance taxonomies, 

technical assistance for green fiscal policy, and 

strategic measures for reducing fossil fuel 

subsidies and greening public procurement. 

Expertise extends to policy gap assessments for 

financing adaptation and resilient infrastructure 

with Nature -based Sol utions (NbS), alongside 

UNEP intends to leverage global agendas with 

regional actors through partnerships, 

enhancing knowledge exchange in green fiscal 

policy via PAGE and GFPN collaborations. The 

creation of executive training and peer -learning 

modules tailored to sustain able fiscal and 

environmental governance, for both online and 

in -person learning environments is proposed. 

UNEP is seeking to integrate adaptation and 

resilience into public and sustainable transition 

finance, assisting in policy gap assessments for 

NZNPA transitions – the results of which can be 68 

capacity building for Ministry of Finance staff on 

green fiscal transformations. Also leads in 

implementing nature -based solutions and 

supports developing National Adaptation Plans, 

engaging finance ministries in climate funding 

str ategies. UNEP FI focuses on mobilizing private 

climate finance for just transitions and providing 

guidance on adaptation risks and nature 

conservation to banks and DFIs, aiming for 

greater harmonization of impact metrics and 

best practices in adaptation fi nance. 

shared with members. UNEP further aims to 

mobilize private finance for climate action, 

leveraging networks and expertise in 

collaboration with the UNEP Finance Initiative, 

and will make this available to members. U NEP 

is willing to facilitate dialogues between 

ministers of trade and finance to explore 

synergies in climate action at regional 

meetings, in synergy with initiatives like the 

Net -Zero Export Credit Agencies Alliance for 

sustainable development. UNEP furth er 

proposes closer engagement of CFMCA 

members in National Adaptation Plan 

processes, especially in Ghana, Uganda, and 

Rwanda. A Regional event or “adaptation deep -

dive” could be convened on NAP 

implementation with UNDP. Further on 

Adaptation, UNEP aims to contribute to 

adaptation discussions in Spring 2025 

ministerial sessions, and to enlarge the 

suggested topics to investments in nature and 

inclusion of mitigation objectives. UNEP further 

suggests 2 contributions on policy notes and 

practical deliverables : a) To gather information 

on practical experiences, challenges and good 

practices related to policies and incentives 

linked to investments in nature to reach 

climate objectives. b) If a sister document to 

the Guide was to be developed, to support the 

UN EP NAP countries to share their good 

practices in the NAP context. UNEP wishes to 

join the Country and Regional Follow -Up, Peer 

Learning and Capacity Building workstream, to 

contribute to developing guidance on fiscal and 

regulatory instruments to promote investments 

in nature to reach climate objectives, to 

provide its inputs to the capacity building and 

training catalogue to be updated, and support 69 

members to organize peer -learning events 

related to NAPs. 

United Nations Framework 

Convention on Climate Ch ange 

(UNFCCC) 

Capacity -building resource e -

booklets 

The UNFCCC offers expertise and guidance on 

integrating climate change considerations into 

national budgeting and fiscal policies. This 

includes developing and implementing strategies 

for sustainable finance, promoting the 

mobilization of climate finance to su pport low -

carbon and climate -resilient development 

pathways, and enhancing transparency and 

accountability in the use of climate funds. 

Additionally, through the UNFCCC’s partners, 

assistance be provided in building capacity for 

the economic valuation of c limate impacts and 

the design of financial instruments to manage 

climate risk, thereby supporting the Coalition’s 

efforts to align financial flows with the Paris 

Agreement objectives and the transition towards 

a sustainable economy. 

World Bank Group (WBG)  Capacity Creation Coalition for 

Climate Action (C3A) 

Climate macro modelling, in areas related fiscal 

and debt, taxation, technology innovation to 

aggregate, sectoral, and welfare effects of 

mitigation measures to assessing country -specific 

adaptat ion needs, considering the impacts of 

extreme weather events as well as gradual global 

warming. Expertise in carbon taxation and 

redirecting fossil fuel subsides - conducting 

economic analysis to assess the potential impacts 

on various sectors, advising on the optimal design 

of instruments, and supporting the establishment 

of legal and regulatory frameworks to facilitate 

implementation. Mobilizing private finance 

through project financing, risk mitigation 

instruments, advisory services, and support for 

mark et development. 

The World Bank hosts the Secretariat of the 

Coalition, alongside the IMF. As part of this 

role, the World Bank hosts the Coalition’s 

Ministerial meetings in the Spring, supports the 

IMF in hosting the Annual Meetings, and 

supports UNCCC C OP Secretariat in hosting 

Ministerial during the COP. During these 

Ministerial Meetings, World Bank offers core 

administrative functions of the Secretariat. This 

includes providing technical coordination of 

workstreams HP2, HP3, HP4, HP5, Nature, 

Green and Just Transition, and Adaptation 

through the Secretariat. 

As an Institutional Partner, the WB will also 

offer expertise on technical focal points from 

relevant units. For HP2, experts on specific 

subject matters can be offered for Coalition 

events and mee tings related to the Guide. For 70 

HP4, in part through C3A (see below), technical 

expertise on green budgeting and climate 

macro -modelling is available – and 

consultation/support on the upcoming 

technical paper is ongoing. For HP5, the Bank 

supports the thre e main pillars of leveraging 

greater private finance greening private climate 

finance, and carbon markets. For Adaptation, 

experts support the development of the 

literature review and a side event at the Spring 

Meetings. On Nature, the Bank continues to 

su pport on Investing Nature deliverable. The 

Bank will further support the Green and Just 

Transition workstream through technical input 

on sovereign transition plans paper/workshop 

and best practices for ensuring the just 

transition. 

The World Bank will be o ffering demand driven 

capacity building services to members through 

the C3A capacity building programme. This will 

include: hosting a number of side events in 

collaboration with the Coalition at the World 

Bank and IMF Spring and Annual Meetings and 

the COP s. Further to this, specific demand 

assessment and technical review reports will be 

published starting in Spring 2024 in the 

different thematic areas invested by the 

program. These technical documents will be 

notably shared with Coalition members and lay 

the ground for more policy -oriented 

discussions. A number of seminars/trainings 

will be further designed and offered to 

Coalition members from summer 2024 

onwards leading to a few selected flagship 

reports in coordination with championing 

countries. Regiona l conferences are planned in 

Central Asia and LAC before Summer 2024. 

Following the structure of the Coalition HPs: In 

support of HP2, C3A alongside other IPs, may 71 

also offer specific tailor -made half day seminars 

to members at specific in -person moments a t

regional levels. In support of HP4 as well as 

many demanding countries, C3A is dedicating 

resources to strengthening an analytical 

toolbox to address critical climate policy issues 

for Ministries of Finance. In support of HP1/6, 

C3A will foster a reflect ion on common 

transition scenario principles for Ministries of 

Finance, ahead of an increased attention of 

Ministries of Finance for the new wave of Long 

Term Strategies and Nationally Determined 

Contributions in 2025. In support of the Nature 

workstream, C3A will create a training program 

on Nature transition issues for Ministries of 

Finance, while developing an assessment of 

existing Nature scenarios and their possible use 

by Ministries of Finance to support the 

achievement of the Global Biodiversity 

Fram ework. 

World Resources Institute (WRI)  Resilience and Adaptation 

Mainstreaming Program 

(RAMP) 

RAMP builds the capacity of Ministries of Finance 

to better manage climate change risks and access 

adaptation finance. It provides training 

specifically related to the macro -fiscal risks of 

climate change, i.e., projected impacts on 

growth, trade flows, fiscal balances, debt 

sustainability, and financial sector stability. 

RAMP builds capacity by (a) training Ministry of 

Finance officials by providing tools to better 

integrate climate change into their core functio ns 

(such as macro modeling, fiscal policy, public 

finance, disaster risk financing, climate 

budgeting, monitoring and evaluation, etc.); and 

(b) training faculty, financing research, and 

creating new masters' programs in national 

universities. In its curri culum, RAMP shares 

relevant technical materials with the World Bank, 

Building on RAMP, but also tapping other 

institutional programs, WRI supports HP2, HP4, 

Adaptation, and Nature workstreams. 

- For HP2, RAMP provides a proven and 

sustainable model for capacity -building. RAMP 

has developed a unique model that taps 

international best practice; supports local 

knowledge development; ensures program 

sustainability; and fosters peer -to -peer learning 

through communities of practice. 

- For HP4, through our peer -reviewed 

curriculum and ap plied research, RAMP 

supports the adaptation aspects of macro 

modeling, fiscal policy, debt sustainability, 

public finance, climate budgeting, financial 

sector supervision. More broadly, through its 

country offices and its National Climate Action 

(NCA) pr ogram, WRI routinely provides 

guidance on developing and financing 72 

IMF, NDC Partnership, and others. Current RAMP 

focus countries include Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, 

Nigeria, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia. 

Its university network includes additional 

ac ademic partners in Asia and Latin America. 

ambitious climate strategies aligned with 

international agreements. 

- For the Adaptation workstream, RAMP 

represents an advanced network of countries 

and universities working together on 

mainstreaming climate risk, risk management, 

and finance. 

- For the Nature workstream, WRI’s entire 

institutional focus is to promote sustainability 

and nature -based solutions. It has global 

programs in Food, Forestry, Land Restoration, 

Oceans, and Water that connect physical 

ecosystem health with the financial and 

economic benefits of investing in nature, 

including for climate change objectives. 73 

# Annex IV. Summary of C3A Strategic Approach and Support to the Coalition 

Background 

Originated at COP27 through a demand from the Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action (CFMCA) to 

the World Bank, the C3A program was announced at the Ministerial Meeting of the CFMCA at the 2023 IMF -

World Bank Spring Meetings in Washington. It was then formally launched at the June 2023 Paris Summit for a 

New Global Financing Pact. 

C3A has become an Institutional Partner to the Coalition, uniquely designed to offer innovative approaches to 

capacity building and knowledge sharing on climate issues for Ministries of Finance :

• It is a demand -driven initiative that aims for global outreach across Ministries of Finance. 

• It makes use of a privileged working relationship wit h the CFMCA (through different workstreams ,

notably HP 1/6 , HP 2 and HP 4), as well as a wide array of emerging regional and thematic platforms of 

Ministries of Finance and knowledge institutions. 

• It is evolutionary in its content to match a fast -evolving glo bal climate debate. 

The partnership with the Coalition is cemented through the involvement of the Coalition’s Co -Chairs in C3A’s 

governance framework, by having C3A’s team actively participate in Secretariat and Co -Chair meetings, and C3A 

playing an active role in different thematic workstreams of the Coalition. 

Key Features and Services of the C3A Program 

The C3A program aims to set itself apart by offering three type of core activities, supported by in house 

capabilities as well as partnerships with a di verse external Knowledge Network: 

• Technical capacity creation sequences through seminars and workshops that are structured on demand, 

based on the scientific and policy -oriented materials available or to be created. They can be delivered 

physically or virtually to high -level policymakers. 

• Expert and skill -based exchanges are also a strategic channel for raising awareness and sharing views on 

existing experiences and challenges faced by countries. 

• Climate analytical tools can also be co -developed by C3A and local partners so that Ministries of Finance 

can have their own an alytical tools designed with local stakeholders and adapted to the national context. 

Beyond existing programs, a range of tailor -made materials will be progressively made available to Ministries of 

Finance through collective approaches. To achieve these goals, the C3A program relies on a knowledge network 

consisting of a diverse group of world -leading academics, practitioners, and e xperts, mobilized around a core 

team with its own thematic and regional expertise. 

Thematic and Regional Hubs 

The two main delivery building blocks that Coalition members can access to benefit from C3A services are the 

regional and thematic hubs . The regio nal and thematic hubs play a pivotal role in connecting the specific needs 

for capacity creation with a diverse array of knowledge providers. 

Hosted by regional institutions , the regional hubs monitor and mobilize local knowledge stakeholders to help 

Mini stries of Finance design ambitious and effective climate policies.  The mission of regional hubs is to facilitate 

the creation of capacity in each region by mobilizing relevant stakeholders to support the emergence of climate 

action -oriented economic polici es within the respective regional Ministries of Finance . C3A services will be 

initially deployed in four regions as part of the development of regional hubs. These regions are:  

> •

Latin America and the Caribbean (launched)  

> •

Central Asia (launched)  

> •

East Africa (in preparation, launch expected in 1 st half 2024)  

> •

South -East Asia (in preparation, launch expected in 2 nd half 2024) 74 

Thematic hubs provide decision -makers with knowledge from the latest international academic research and 

practitioner experience on the most critical topics. The mission of thematic hubs is to address cross -cutting issues 

and stimulate the knowledge creation on this to pic by drawing on policy -relevant scientific work and 

policymakers' experiences. The thematic hubs are responsible for aggregating country requests (demand 

assessments), build a work plan (i.e. identifying beneficiaries and designing seminars), and stimula te the 

production of relevant scientific works. Initial thematic activities will be related to five broad domains identified 

through consultations with MoFs . These thematic hubs are:  

> •

Climate macro -modelling (launched)  

> •

Green innovation (launched)  

> •

Fiscal and debt sustainability in the transition (launched)  

> •

Nature (soon to be launched)  

> •

Adaptation (in preparation) 

Work Plan Design and Strategic Support to the Coalition 

Each regional and thematic hub within the framework is tasked with the co -development of its own work plan. 

These plans are crafted based on demand -driven needs assessments, which are derived from a comprehensive 

process involving bilateral deep -dive interviews, surveys, high -level exchanges, workshops, and ot her forms of 

engagement, primarily with Coalition members. 

While t here may be instances of content overlap with the broader themes addressed by the Coalition, the 

majority of these work plans focus on distinct topics or delve deeper into technical details. And, while the 

Coalition workstreams serve as a unique and dynamic platform enabling members to exchange knowledge and 

experiences, C3A distinguishes itself by focusing on t he development of technical expertise and know -how in 

these areas. 

It accomplishes this by granting Coalition members direct and exclusive access to a broad array of technical 

experts within its Knowledge Network. This strategic approach is designed to c omplement the Coalition's broader 

objectives by deepening the technical capacities of its members, concentrating on the provision of empirical 

analyses, specialized models, and advanced analytical tools. Through this targeted initiative, C3A seeks to 

empow er Coalition members and other Ministries of Finance with the expertise to navigate and address complex 

challenges effectively. 

C3A Governance and the Coalition 

There are three main governance bodies of the C3A program. First, the C3A team , which is respo nsible for 

designing and implementing the components of the work program. Second, a  distinguished Scientific Advisory 

Committee (SAC) comprised of esteemed scientists and  economists regularly provides guidance to the program. 

Third , a  Countries and Partners Advisory Committee , currently chaired by the two Co -Chairs of the Coalition, 

Indonesia and the Netherlands, as well as other countries ’ representatives  from different re gional platforms . This 

ensures that the program is constantly evolving to meet the current needs of the countries. More importantly, it 

also approves and offers guidance to the work plan design – ensuring further strategic alignment with the 

Coalition. The two committees have so far met on the occasion of the launch of the program (June 2023) and will 

meet again next time on the occasion of the next Spring Meetings (April 2024). 

Next Steps for C3A during 2024 -2025 

Based on member engagements and interactio ns, iterations of the C3A work program w ere shared an d discussed 

in further detail at the deputies meeting of the Coalition in The Hague in January 2024 . A finalized version will be 

made available to Coalition members ahead of the 2024 Spring Meetings. 75 

C3A will continue to host a number of side events in collaboration with the Coalition at the World Bank and IMF 

Spring and Annual Meetings and the COP s. Further to this, specific demand assessment and technical review 

reports will be published starting in Spring 2024 in the different thematic areas invested by the program. These 

technical documents will be notably shared with Coalition members and lay the ground for more policy -oriented 

discussions. A number of seminars will be further designed and offered to Coalition members from summer 2024 

onwards leading to a few selected flagship reports in coordination with championing countries. 

In support of HP2, C3A alongside other IPs, may also offer specific tailor -made half day seminars to members at 

specific in -person moments . In support of HP4 as well as many demanding countries, C3A will dedicate resources 

to strengthening an analytical toolbox to address critical climate policy issues for Ministries of Finance. In support 

of HP1 /6, C3A will foster a reflection on common transition scenario principles for Ministries of Finance, ahead 

of an increased attention of Ministries of Finance for the new wave of Long -Term Strategies and Nationally 

Determined Contributions in 2025 .76 

# Annex V. Institutional Partner In -kind Contribution Survey Form 

a. In -kind pre -asse ss ment form 

The in -kind pre assessment form will need to be prepared submitted together by country co -leads and IPs 

involved in the project before starting the collaboration to the Co -Chairs team and the Secretariat. Upon 

assessment and approval from the Co -Chair s team, country leads and institutional partners can execute the 

project. 

1. Name of the project/program: 

2. Name of the country working in the program (including name of focal points) 

3. Description of the project/program (500 words maximum) 

4. Name of institutional partners involved 

5. Short description of the institutional partners involved with name of focal points 

6. Program governance and stakeholders ’ responsibility within the Coalition (500 words maximum) 

7. Funding arrangement (if any) 

8. Indicator of achievement 

9. Comments of country leads 

10. Co -Chair comments and approval 

b. In -kind post assessment form 

The in -kind post assessment form will be used by country leads to Co -Chair s team and the Secretariat. The 

purpose of the in -kind post assessment form is to see the progress of partnership between IPs and country 

leads and to provide transparency and monitoring to Co-Chair s team and Secretariat. The form will need to be 

submitted annually, depending on the project timeline. 

1. Name of the project/program: 

2. Name of the country assessors (including name of focal points) 

3. Rate the IPs achievement (1 until 5) 

4. Comments from country assessors (500 words maximum) 77 

# Annex V I. Organizational Changes 

As of 2023 or early 2024, several organizational changes have been implemented. 

• Overlap of Co-Chair terms: To avoid two Co-Chair countries finishing their terms at the exact same time, 

one Co-Chair will now start in Spring, while the other will start (and end) in Fall. As Indonesia is set to 

complete its four -year Co-Chairmanship in Spring 2025, this means that the Netherlands will continue 

until Fall 2025, unless they request for a further exte nsion to the Fall term in the subsequent year. 

• Ministers and deputies : Ministers are supported by and represented by deputies in the Coalition. For 

the first five years, the term ‘sherpas’ applied to these individuals (now ‘deputies’) . However, due to 

conc erns raised by members of among others cultural appropriation, it has been decided to use the more 

neutral term ‘deputies’ for the sherpa function moving forward. 

• Member o nboarding and expectations : The onboarding and induction process for new members and 

newly assigned deputies will be revamped as such that members are better enabled to participate in 

Coalition activities including working groups. As noted at the start of membership, members are re quired 

to be part of at least one working group (however, this does not need to be a leading or very active role). 

• Secretariat and funding : The Secretariat providing Coalition core functions will now be funded through 

a dedicated Coalition funding window under the World Bank Climate Support Facility Trust Fund. An 

Operations Manual has been designed outlining the governance and operations of the window and 

Secretariat, including member -led decision -making on the Coalition’s work and Secretariat support. A 

proper Coalition Secretariat structure has been set up as a dedicated Secretariat unit, with core functions 

as outlined in Section V . The World Bank commits to facilitate this basic structure at minimum. 

The Coalition Charter will be reviewed in 2024 and amendments proposed to members for approval as needed. 78 

# Annex VI I. Schedule of Planned 2024 Deputy Meetings 

Deputy meetings generally take place on Wednesdays during the first week of the month. Actual dates may 

differ based on current ev ents. Changes will be communicated to deputies well in advance. 

Month  Date  Time  Topics  Calendar 

Placeholder 

March  6-Mar  8am (EST) 

Work Program 

Finalization 

Pre -Ministerial 

Discussion CFMCA Deputy 

> Meeting.ics

April  2-Apr  8am (E DT)  Pre -Ministerial 

Discussion CFMCA Deputy 

> Meeting.ics

May  8-May  8am ( EDT ) Workstream 

Presentations CFMCA Deputy 

> Meeting.ics

June  12 -Jun  11am (CEST)  Workstream 

Presentations 

July  3-Jul  8am ( EDT ) Workstream 

Presentations 

August  No meeting  No meeting  No meeting 

September  5-Sep  11am (CEST)  Pre -Ministerial 

Discussion 

October  9-Oct  8am (E DT)  Pre -Ministerial & COP 

Discussion 

November  6-Nov  8am (E DT)  COP Discussion 

December  11 -Dec  8am (EST)  Year In Review
