Title: 

URL Source: https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/11752

Markdown Content:
Offices Located At:  

> Central Maine Commerce Center 45 Commerce Drive Augusta, Maine 04333 (207) 287-3659 (Fax) (207) 626-3800 (Voice) (207) 287-3659 (TTY)
> Janet T. Mills Governor

## STATE OF MAINE 

## Department of Public Safety  

> 104 State House Station Augusta, Maine
> 04333-0104 Michael J. Sauschuck Commissioner

To: Senate Chair Anne Carney House Chair Amy Kuhn 

Members of the Committee on Judiciary 

From: Michael J. Sauschuck, Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety Ref: Statutorily Required Weapons Restriction Order Annual Report 

Date: April 18, 2025 

Senator Carney, Representative Kuhn, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary. My name is Mike Sauschuck and I’m the Commissioner for the Department of Public Safety. 

As you might remember, in the 130th Legislature H.P. 629 - L.D. 861 a “Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services to Contract for Assessments for Involuntary Hospitalizations” was ultimately amended and titled: “Resolve, Concerning Training and Assessments Related to Protection from Substantial Threats”. The resolve was approved by the Governor on April 18, 2022. 

A link to the resolve can be found here  H.P. 629 - L.D. 861  but it essentially included two basic 

goals. 

1. In 2022, the Department of Public Safety shall conduct one mandatory training program for all law enforcement officers on the temporary weapons removal process. In 2023 and 2024, the department shall conduct at least one voluntary training program for law enforcement officers on the temporary weapons removal process per year. 

In August of 2024, I worked with Brian MacMaster, representing the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, to host a virtual 90-minute voluntary training on the “Yellow Flag: Supporting Maximal Use of Maine’s Updated Extreme Risk Protection Order (ERPO) Statute”. The training was conducted by a law enforcement supervisor who has been involved with a number of successful orders, and Spurwink’s Vice-President of Adult Behavioral Health, Ben Strick. The training was attended by 155 documented officers, but it should be noted that many of the attendees were acting as a sign in person for conference rooms that contained a larger group. The training was also recorded and is now available in the Maine Criminal Justice Academy and Dirigo Safety free training libraries. 

On December 9 th of 2024, I co-presented with Spurwink’s Vice-President of Adult Behavioral Health, Ben Strick, during a one-hour Yellow Flag presentation requested by the Maine National Guard. Approximately 15 Command Staff members and social work staff from the Guard attended. This was an invitation-only targeted session intended to update the team on the latest Offices Located At:  

> Central Maine Commerce Center 45 Commerce Drive Augusta, Maine 04333 (207) 287-3659 (Fax) (207) 626-3800 (Voice) (207) 287-3659 (TTY)

statutory changes to the law. 

The Maine Criminal Justice Academy’s Board of Trustees selected “Responding to Behavioral Health Calls & the Yellow Flag Law” as a mandatory 2-hour training block for all law enforcement officers in 2024. The Board approved the lesson plan, see attached, in July and all officers were required to complete the training by the end of 2024. 

It should also be noted that Spurwink’s Vice-President of Adult Behavioral Health, Ben Strick, also conducted approximately 12 other yellow flag presentations for the Maine Medical Association and other community groups and associations. 

2. Beginning March 1, 2023, and each March 1st until March 1, 2026, the Department of Public Safety shall report to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over judiciary matters on the following: 

A. Participation in the training programs under section 1. 

The voluntary training was attended by 155+ documented officers, but it should be noted that many of the attendees were acting as a sign-in-person for conference rooms that contained a larger group. The training was also recorded and is now available in the Maine Criminal Justice Academy and Dirigo Safety free training libraries. 

The mandatory two-hour block of training was completed by all 2679 full-time and 404 part-time law enforcement officers. 

B. Materials for the training programs under section 1. 

See attachment. 

C. Identification of telehealth services providers contracted by the State and credentials of all providers conducting temporary weapons removal assessments. 

Spurwink is the sole contractor for these lifesaving assessments. The actual telehealth assessments are conducted out of the Living Room Crisis Center program in Portland. 

All telehealth assessments have been completed by board certified psychiatric nurse practitioners. 

D. The number of temporary weapons removal assessments conducted per month, including: See attachment for the complete and most up to date list but between March 1 st 2024 and February 28 th 2025 521 assessments were conducted. 

1. The number of temporary weapons restriction assessments conducted in person, including the locations. 

Between 3/01/2024 and 2/28/2025, the due date for this report, 14 assessments were conducted in person. All of these assessments were conducted in a hospital emergency room setting. The sheer volume of this year’s assessments has made it difficult to determine exactly which emergency rooms were utilized but we’re working to better track that information for next year’s report. Offices Located At:  

> Central Maine Commerce Center 45 Commerce Drive Augusta, Maine 04333 (207) 287-3659 (Fax) (207) 626-3800 (Voice) (207) 287-3659 (TTY)

2. The number of temporary weapons restriction assessments conducted by telehealth services providers contracted by the State, and the locations where the persons being assessed were located during the temporary weapons restrictions assessments. 

Spurwink began conducting telehealth weapons restriction assessments for the state in October of 2022. The first telehealth assessment was conducted on December 4th, 2022. Spurwink conducted 507 telehealth weapons assessments between 3/1/2024 and 2/28/2025. All assessments were completed while individuals were in protective custody and in a hospital, or from a law enforcement vehicle immediately prior to being brought into a hospital emergency department. 

3. The number of temporary weapons restriction assessments that recommended temporary weapons removal. 

Practitioners determined individuals met criteria for weapons restriction in 506 out of 507 telehealth assessments. One individual did not meet criteria for a mentally ill person. 

4. For recommended temporary weapons restrictions, whether the restrictions were based on the person's being assessed as: (1) Predominantly a threat to self; (2) Predominantly a threat to others; or (3) A threat to both self and others; and 

Of 521 total assessments, 282 were predominantly harm to self, 110 were predominantly harm to others, and 129 were both. 

5. The number of temporary weapons restriction assessments that were requested by law enforcement officers but not conducted and the reasons they were not conducted. 

Spurwink was unable to complete one assessment because the individual was unconscious. This occurred prior to the law change allowing third party information to be used for the medical assessment. The probable cause statement suggests this individual would have met criteria post statute change. 

Only completed assessments are tracked by the Department of Public Safety. Spurwink has worked closely with the Department of Public Safety to help train law enforcement on the statutory requirement for an individual to be in protective custody for a weapons restriction assessment to occur. 

Law enforcement agencies and their officers are under no obligation to contact the Department of Public Safety when their request for an assessment is denied so I’m unable to provide this information for in person assessment requests. 

Respectfully, 

Michael Sauschuck 

Commissioner, Maine Department of Public Safety 1

# UNIT TITLE: Extreme Risk Protective Orders 

# UNIT NUMBER: 1.1.1 

# INSTRUCTOR: 

# Maine Criminal Justice Academy 

# 15 Oak Grove Road 

# Vassalboro, ME 04989 

# Prepared By: Michael Sauschuck, Commissioner, Maine Department of Public Safety; Brian MacMaster, Chief Law Enforcement Consultant, Dirigo Safety; Don Finnegan, Training Coordinator, Maine Criminal Justice Academy 

# Date: July 12, 2024 2

# Instructional Goal 

# Performance Objectives 

Following this unit of instruction, the student will understand Maine’s laws relating to extreme 

risk protective orders, including steps required of law enforcement. 

1.1.1. Describe the law of Extreme Risk Protection Orders, as outlined in this lesson. 

1.1.2 Describe what an officer may do if unable to take someone into protective custody immediately 

1.1.3 Describe two methods law enforcement may use to secure weapons from a person. 

1.1.4 Identify how weapons may be stored while a person is prohibited from possessing them. 

1.1.5 Describe the role of the officer in facilitating the assessment process. 3

# Administrative Information 

Estimated Time Range: 

# Presentation Methods / Media 

Methods Media 

Material & Equipment 

Student outside assignments: 

> 90 minutes

Lecture  https://www.wmtw.com/article/man -

in-custody-guns-seized-after-threat-

to-rockland-schools/20959343 

34-B MRS § 3862-A (Handout 1) 

34-B MRS § 3801.4 ‑A (Handout 2) 

Copy of form for Extreme Risk Protective Order 

Copy of Officer’s probable cause statement 

Copy of ERPO warrant affidavit 

Laptop 

Projector or television Maine Criminal Justice Academy Lesson Plan Outline 

> 4

Outline of instructional Unit Objectives & Notes 

# I. Introduction (10 min) 

A. Instructor background/credentials 

B. Objectives 

1.1.1. Describe the Extreme Risk Protection Order, as 

outlined in this lesson 

1.1.2 Describe what an officer may do if unable to 

immediately take someone into protective custody 

1.1.3 Describe two methods law enforcement may use to secure weapons from a person 

1.1.4 Identify how weapons may be stored while a person is prohibited from possessing them 

1.1.5 Describe the role of the officer in facilitating the 

assessment process. 

C. Attention grabber 

1. The man described in the video, who heard voices telling him to shoot up a school, was charged with terrorizing following his release from the hospital. Ultimately, that charge was dismissed in an agreed disposition following successful mental health treatment. 

2. However, in other cases where there was no evidence of a crime having been committed, keeping dangerous weapons from the person involved proved problematic. 

3. In 2019, the 129 th Legislature enacted “An Act to Enhance Personal and Public Safety by Requiring Evaluations of and Judicial Hearings for Persons in Protective Custody Regarding Risk of Harm and Restricting Access to Dangerous Weapons” taking effect on July 1, 2020. 

Review objectives of the training 

Show video 

https://www.wmtw.com/article/man-

in-custody-guns-seized-after-threat-

to-rockland-schools/20959343 

Advise students that handouts of the current law will be available Maine Criminal Justice Academy Lesson Plan Outline 

> 5

Outline of instructional Unit Objectives & Notes 

4. The 131 st Legislature enacted “An Act to Strengthen Public Safety by Improving Maine's Firearm Laws and Mental Health System”, which goes into effect August 9, 2024. 

# II. The law’s intent (5 minutes) 

A. The act, also called Restricting Access to Dangerous Weapons, is found in 34-B MRS § 3862-A, “Extreme Risk Protection Orders”. 

B. The law is designed to restrict access to dangerous weapons by persons who: 

1. have been assessed by a medical practitioner and found to present a likelihood of foreseeable harm. “Dangerous weapon” means a firearm or any device designed as a weapon and capable of producing death or serious bodily injury. Title 17-A, section 2, subsection 9C. 

# III. When protective custody has occurred: 

(50 minutes) 

A. Taken into Protective Custody : If a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that a person may be mentally ill and that due to that condition the person presents likelihood of serious harm to that person or to other persons, the officer may take the person into protective custody. 

The Maine Supreme Judicial Court in State v. Parkinson, 389 A.2d 1, 8 (Me. 1978) held that probable cause to arrest exists where “facts and circumstances within the knowledge of the officers and of which they have reasonably trustworthy information would warrant a prudent and cautious person to believe that the arrestee did commit or is committing the (crime).” 

Applying this definition of probable cause to taking a person in to protective custody, probable cause exists when facts and circumstances within the knowledge of the officers and of which they have reasonably trustworthy information would warrant a prudent and cautious person to believe that: 

1.1.1 

Provide handouts of § 3801, subsection 4 ‑A, paragraph A, B & C. 

Review the definitions with the class. Maine Criminal Justice Academy Lesson Plan Outline 

> 6

Outline of instructional Unit Objectives & Notes 

1. The person may be mentally ill and that, due to that condition, the person poses a likelihood of serious harm as defined in section 3801, subsection 4 ‑A, paragraph A, B or C. or, 

2. The person has an advance health care directive authorizing mental health treatment and the person lacks capacity. 

When formulating probable cause, the law enforcement officer may rely upon information provided by a third party informant if the officer confirms that the informant has reason to believe, based upon the informant's recent personal observations of or conversations with a person, that the person may be mentally ill and that due to that condition the person poses a likelihood of serious harm as defined in § 3801, subsection 4 ‑A, paragraph A, B or C. 

A. “mentally ill person” means a person having a psychiatric or other disease that substantially impairs that person’s mental health or creates a substantial risk of suicide. “Mentally ill person” includes persons suffering effects from the use of drugs, narcotics, hallucinogens, or intoxicants, including alcohol. 

B. For an assessment by a medical practitioner to occur, the person MUST be in protective custody AND the law enforcement officer must have probable cause to believe that the person possesses, controls or may acquire a dangerous weapon, except that the assessment may be performed within 24 hours after the person is released from protective custody if an examination for involuntary hospitalization (“blue paper”) has occurred. 

C. Once both conditions have been met, an assessment of the person in protective custody is conducted by an authorized medical practitioner, i.e., a licensed physician, registered physician assistant, certified clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse practitioner, or licensed clinical psychologist. The officer shall provide to the medical practitioner the information that led to the protective custody, including, but not limited to, the information that gave rise to the probable cause determination for protective custody, the person's pertinent criminal history record information including conviction and non-conviction data, and other known history and recent or recurring actions and behaviors including intelligence and investigative record information. 

Ask the class how an officer may determine if a person possesses, controls or may acquire a dangerous weapon. Bring the discussion to effective questioning by the officer, of both the person and others who have knowledge of the situation. Maine Criminal Justice Academy Lesson Plan Outline 

> 7

Outline of instructional Unit Objectives & Notes 

D. The medical practitioner shall assess whether the person presents a likelihood of foreseeable harm. The medical practitioner may consult with other medical professionals as the medical practitioner determines advisable. If the medical practitioner finds that the person can benefit from treatment and services, the medical practitioner shall refer the person to treatment and services. 

1. An assessment may be performed at a health care facility, 

If the assessment is provided at a health care facility, law 

enforcement shall, upon request of the facility, absent 

compelling circumstances, assist the facility with the 

security of the person awaiting the assessment. 

Usually, officers bring the person in protective custody 

to a hospital’s emergency department for care, which may 

include involuntary hospitalization, commonly referred to as a 

blue paper. Officers should familiarize themselves with their 

hospital’s emergency department admission process, which 

may include steps such as: 

• Registration 

• Triage 

• Room assignment 

• Initial medical assessment 

2. Not all health care facilities are able or willing to conduct an 

assessment for restricting access to weapons. Law 

enforcement agencies are encouraged to contact their local 

health care facilities to determine their willingness and/or 

ability to conduct these assessments in advance of utilizing 

this process. 

When available and as appropriate, an assessment may be 

performed at an alternative location, or via telehealth. The 

State of Maine has contracted with Spurwink to conduct 

telehealth assessments. The officer will arrange for a 

telehealth assessment of the person by calling Spurwink at 

207-535-2009, complete, sign, and return the following 

documentation prior to the assessment: 

As an example, MaineHealth has a program for these instances. Pass out DPS, MaineHealth and legislatively approved MaineHealth program material. 

During the hours of 9am-5pm Monday-Friday, the phone will be answered by a staff at the Living Room Crisis Center who will help coordinate law enforcement connecting with a mental health professional. After hours and on weekends, this number is routed directly to the on-call provider assigned to complete the weapons restriction assessments. Maine Criminal Justice Academy Lesson Plan Outline 

> 8

Outline of instructional Unit Objectives & Notes 

• Section 1 of the State of Maine Application for 

Weapons Restriction Order 

• Officer’s Statement of Probable Cause. 

Law enforcement agencies will be responsible for providing 

access to a/v equipment to conduct the telehealth 

assessment. This equipment could include a laptop or even a 

cellular phone. 

The medical practitioner will: 

• Review Officer’s Statement of Probable Cause 

• Assess the individual in person or via telehealth or, if 

necessary, based on third-party information. 

• Reach out to pertinent collateral contacts as necessary 

• Use the above information to a determination as to 

whether the person is mentally ill and due to that 

mental illness presents a likelihood of foreseeable 

harm to self or others. 

The Medical Practitioner entity will document the assessment 

and determination on Section 2. Assessment by Medical 

Practitioner of the Application for Extreme Risk Protection 

Order form. The Medical Practitioner will provide the law 

enforcement agency with a signed copy of the form that the 

LEA can provide to the Superior Court Justice, District Court 

Judge, Judge of Probate, or Justice of the Peace. 

3. A juvenile who is subject to this section may be accompanied at the assessment by a parent, guardian, grandparent, aunt or uncle or a sibling who has attained the age of 18, whose company is requested by the juvenile, who is timely available and whose accompaniment is practicable. 

4. A medical practitioner and any other medical or mental health professional consulted by the medical practitioner are not liable in a civil action brought by any person for any act performed in good faith in execution of the obligations imposed on medical practitioners by law, including any 

Pass out Extreme Risk Protective Order form 

Pass out officer’s statement of probable cause Maine Criminal Justice Academy Lesson Plan Outline 

> 9

Outline of instructional Unit Objectives & Notes 

decision regarding the affirmative or negative assessment of 

the likelihood of foreseeable harm. The immunity also applies 

to a principal if the medical practitioner or professional is 

acting as an agent or employee of the principal. 

E. A medical practitioner shall notify in writing the law enforcement officer or law enforcement agency that, based on the assessment, the person is found to present a likelihood of foreseeable harm. 

F. If so notified, the law enforcement officer or law enforcement agency shall, as soon as practicable, seek endorsement by a Superior Court Justice, a District Court Judge, or a justice of the peace of the medical practitioner's assessment and law enforcement's declaration that the person was taken into protective custody and that the law enforcement officer has probable cause that the person possesses, controls, or may acquire a dangerous weapon. The judge or justice shall promptly transmit to the law enforcement officer or agency the decision to endorse or not endorse. A decision transmitted electronically has the same legal effect and validity as a signed original. 

G. A person whose assessment is endorsed by a judicial officer becomes, at the time of notice by a law enforcement officer, a restricted person subject to initial restrictions and subject to the prohibitions in Title 15, section 393 as follows: 

1. The restricted person is prohibited from possessing, controlling, acquiring, or attempting to possess, control or acquire a dangerous weapon pending the outcome of a judicial hearing; 

2. The restricted person shall immediately and temporarily 

surrender any weapons possessed, controlled or acquired by the 

restricted person to a law enforcement officer who has authority 

in the jurisdiction in which the weapons are located pending the 

outcome of a judicial hearing; and 

3. The restricted person has a right to a judicial hearing. 

H. A law enforcement officer shall, as soon as practicable, or is the subject has been medically incapacitated, within 48 hours after Maine Criminal Justice Academy Lesson Plan Outline 

> 10

Outline of instructional Unit Objectives & Notes 

the officer is notified that the person is no longer medically incapacitated, notify: 

1. The restricted person that the restricted person: 

a. Is prohibited from possessing, controlling, acquiring or attempting to possess, control or acquire a dangerous weapon pending the outcome of a judicial hearing; 

b. Is required to immediately and temporarily surrender any weapons possessed, controlled or acquired by the restricted person to a law enforcement officer who has authority in the jurisdiction in which the weapons are located pending the outcome of a judicial hearing; and 

c. Has a right to a judicial hearing within 30 days of the notice. 

2. Notify the contact person, if any, disclosed by the restricted person to the medical practitioner, as well as the district attorney in the district of the restricted person's residence of the person's restricted status; and 

3. Report the person's restricted status to the Department of Public Safety. 

I. A restricted person who makes all practical, immediate efforts to voluntarily comply with a surrender notice is not subject to arrest or prosecution as a prohibited person. If a law enforcement agency has probable cause to believe the restricted person possesses or controls but has not surrendered a weapon, law enforcement may, prior to or as part of a judicial hearing, search for and seize such a weapon when authorized by a judicially issued warrant or other circumstances approved by law, such as when exigent circumstances or another exception to the search warrant rule exist. Possession of a dangerous weapon by a restricted person is a Class D crime pursuant to Title 15, section 393(E-1). 

J. A law enforcement agency may store or arrange with another law enforcement agency or federally licensed firearms dealer to Maine Criminal Justice Academy Lesson Plan Outline 

> 11

Outline of instructional Unit Objectives & Notes 

store, any weapon surrendered to or seized by law enforcement under this section for as long as the threat-based restrictions are in effect. The duties and liability of a law enforcement agency with respect to handling and storage of a weapon surrendered or seized are governed by Title 25, section 2804-C, subsection 2-C. A weapon surrendered to or seized by a law enforcement agency must be returned to the restricted person when the threat-based restrictions expire. If a seized or surrendered weapon remains unclaimed for six months after the expiration or dissolution of threat-based restrictions, the law enforcement agency may dispose of the weapon consistent with Title 25, section 3503-A. 

K. Law enforcement’s role in the restricting access process is, substantially, facilitating the assessment with the mental health professional. As always, the safety of the officer, medical personnel and of the person in protective custody is the priority; facilitating the assessment is our secondary role. 

# IV. When protective custody has not occurred (10 minutes) 

A. If a law enforcement officer is unable to take a person into protective custody to conduct an assessment under this section, the law enforcement officer may apply for a protective custody warrant. The officer must submit an affidavit of probable cause for a protective custody warrant to a Justice of the Superior Court, a Judge of the District Court, or a justice of the peace. 

B. The justice or judge shall issue a protective custody warrant and promptly transmit that warrant to the officer for execution upon finding the affidavit under this subsection is sufficient to establish: 

1. Probable cause to believe that the person is mentally ill and due to that condition presents a likelihood of serious harm; 

2. Probable cause to believe that the person possesses, controls or may acquire a dangerous weapon; and 

1.1.3 

1.1.4 

1.1.5 

1.1.2 

Pass out Protective Custody Arrest Warrant affidavit form Maine Criminal Justice Academy Lesson Plan Outline 

> 12

Outline of instructional Unit Objectives & Notes 

3. That the officer has made reasonable attempts to take the person into custody without a warrant. 

C. A warrant transmitted by facsimile machine or an electronic warrant transmitted by secure electronic means has the same legal effect and validity as an original endorsement signed by the justice or judge. The electronic arrest warrant or paper arrest warrant may be executed by a law enforcement officer authorized to take the person into protective custody. 

D. While the protective custody arrest warrant allows the officer to take the person into custody, a search warrant may still be necessary to search for and seize dangerous weapons if the person taken into protective custody is determined to present a likelihood of foreseeable harm to self or others. Once the person is in protective custody, the process outlined above is followed. 

E. As always, safety of the officers involved in executing the arrest/search warrants, as well as the safety of the subject, is of great concern. Consideration of how best to execute the warrants should include risk mitigation. 

# V. Additional law changes within the act (10 minutes) 

A. It provides that a person may not own, possess or have under 

that person's control a firearm if that person is a restricted person under an order issued by another jurisdiction that is similar to an extreme risk protection order in this State. 

B. Established background checks and waiting periods for certain 

firearms transfers. 

C. It provides that a person may not recklessly sell or transfer a firearm to a person who is prohibited from owning, possessing or having under that person's control a firearm. 

D. It changes the classification of the crime of recklessly, 

knowingly or intentionally selling or transferring a firearm to a person who is prohibited from owning, possessing or having Maine Criminal Justice Academy Lesson Plan Outline 

> 13

Outline of instructional Unit Objectives & Notes 

under that person's control a firearm from a Class D to a Class C crime. 

# VIII. Conclusion (5 minutes) 

A. While some of the updates to the law are new, the restrictions 

work in a similar fashion to restrictions on possessing or accessing dangerous weapons by defendants in standard protection orders. 

B. Questions? 14 

# Criterion Test 

1.1.1. Describe the law of Extreme Risk Protection Orders as outlined in this lesson. 

1.1.2 Describe what an officer can do if unable to immediately take someone into protective custody. 

1.1.3 Describe two methods law enforcement may use to secure weapons from a person. 

1.1.4 Identify how weapons may be stored while a person is prohibited from possessing them. 

1.1.5 Define law enforcement’s role in the restricting access process. 15 

# Criterion Test Answer Key 

1.1.1. Describe the law of Extreme Risk Protection Orders as outlined in this lesson. 

The law is designed to restrict access to dangerous weapons by persons who have been assessed by a medical practitioner and found to present a likelihood of foreseeable harm. 

1.1.2 Describe what an officer can do if unable to immediately take someone into protective custody. 

After reasonable attempts to take the subject into protective custody are unsuccessful, officers may apply for a protective custody warrant. 

1.1.3 Describe two methods law enforcement may use to secure weapons from a person. 

Consent or search warrant. 

1.1.4 Identify how weapons may be stored while a person is prohibited from possessing them. 

At the law enforcement agency or arranged to be stored at another law enforcement agency or federally-licensed firearms dealer. 

1.1.5 Define law enforcement’s role in the restricting access process. 

Safety of all involved is the first priority; facilitating the assessment is our secondary function. 16 

# Bibliography 

34-B MRSA §3862, §3862-A & § 3801, subsection 4 ‑A, paragraph A, B & C 

Brian MacMaster, Chief Law Enforcement Consultant, Dirigo Safety 

Michael Sauschuck, Commissioner, Department of Public Safety 131st Maine Legislature An Act to Strengthen Public Safety by Improving Maine's Firearm Laws and Mental Health System L.D. 2224 

LR3066, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page 17 

# An Act to Strengthen Public Safety by Improving Maine's Firearm Laws and Mental Health System 

STATE OF MAINE 

_____ 

IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD 

TWO THOUSAND TWENTY-FOUR 

_____ 

S.P. 953 - L.D. 2224 

An Act to Strengthen Public Safety by Improving Maine's Firearm Laws and Mental Health System 

Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 

Sec. 1. 15 MRSA §393, sub-§1, ¶E-1, as enacted by PL 2019, c. 411, Pt. C, §2 and affected by Pt. D, §3, is amended to read: 

E-1. Is currently a restricted person under pursuant to Title 34 ‑B, section 3862 ‑A, subsection 2 4 or Title 

34-B, section 3862-A, subsection 6, paragraph D or a similar order issued by another jurisdiction, except 

that the prohibition applies to possession and control, and not ownership. A permit issued pursuant to 

subsection 2 is not a defense to a violation of this paragraph. Violation of this paragraph is a Class D 

crime; 

Sec. 2. 15 MRSA §394, sub-§1, ¶B-1 is enacted to read: 

B-1. "Intentionally" has the same meaning as in Title 17-A, section 35, subsection 1. 

Sec. 3. 15 MRSA §394, sub-§1, ¶B-2 is enacted to read: 

B-2. "Knowingly" has the same meaning as in Title 17-A, section 35, subsection 2. 

Sec. 4. 15 MRSA §394, sub-§1, ¶B-3 is enacted to read: 

B-3. "Recklessly" has the same meaning as in Title 17-A, section 35, subsection 3. 

Sec. 5. 15 MRSA §394, sub-§2, as enacted by PL 2023, c. 305, §1, is amended to read: 

2. Sale or transfer prohibited. A person may not knowingly or intentionally, knowingly or recklessly 

sell or transfer a firearm to a person who is prohibited from owning, possessing or having under that person's control a firearm pursuant to section 393 and who does not have a permit issued under section 393. This subsection does not apply to the sale or transfer of an antique firearm. 

Violation of this subsection is a Class D C crime. 

Sec. 6. 15 MRSA §395 is enacted to read: 131st Maine Legislature An Act to Strengthen Public Safety by Improving Maine's Firearm Laws and Mental Health System L.D. 2224 

LR3066, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page 18 

§395. Background checks of firearms buyers 

1. Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have 

the following meanings. 

A. "Advertisement" means the presentation of a message regarding a firearm for sale by a seller that is: 

(1) Broadcast on television or radio; 

(2) Broadly disseminated over the Internet; 

(3) Printed in magazines or newspapers; or 

(4) Displayed on a handbill, poster, sign or placard. 

B. "Buy" means to acquire ownership for monetary or other consideration. 

C. "Buyer" means a person who buys from a seller. 

D. "Family member" means a spouse, domestic partner, parent, stepparent, foster parent, child, 

stepchild, foster child or person related by consanguinity within the 2nd degree. 

E. "Federally licensed firearms dealer" or "dealer" means a person who is licensed or is required to be 

licensed as a dealer under 18 United States Code, Section 923(a)(3). 

F. "Firearm" has the same meaning as in Title 17-A, section 2, subsection 12-A. 

G. "Gun show" means any gathering or exhibition at which any firearm is displayed that is: 

(1) Open to the public; 

(2) Not occurring on the permanent premises of a federally licensed firearms dealer; and 

(3) Conducted principally for the purposes of transactions. 

H. "Sell" means to transfer ownership for monetary or other consideration. 

I. "Seller" means a person who sells to a buyer. 

J. "Transaction" means the transfer of ownership of a firearm from a seller to a buyer. 

2. Transactions covered by this section. This section applies only to transactions in which: 

A. A seller sells to a buyer at a gun show; or 

B. A seller sells to a buyer as a result of an advertisement. 

3. Transactions not covered by this section. This section does not apply to transactions in which: 

A. The buyer and seller are family members; or 

B. The transaction is for a firearm that is: 

(1) A curio or relic, as defined in 27 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 478.11, as in effect on 

November 19, 2019, and the sale, transfer or exchange is between collectors as defined in 18 United 

States Code, Section 921(a)(13), as in effect on June 25, 2022, who each have in their possession a 

valid collector of curios and relics license issued by the United States Department of Justice, Bureau 

of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives; or 

(2) An antique firearm, as defined in 18 United States Code, Section 921(a)(16), as in effect on June 

25, 2022. 131st Maine Legislature An Act to Strengthen Public Safety by Improving Maine's Firearm Laws and Mental Health System L.D. 2224 

LR3066, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page 19 

4. Requirement for transactions covered by this section. A seller who is not a federally licensed 

firearms dealer may not complete a transaction to which this section applies unless the seller facilitates the 

transaction through a federally licensed firearms dealer. The dealer shall perform a background check of the 

putative buyer by using the Federal Bureau of Investigation, National Instant Criminal Background Check 

System in the same manner as if the dealer were the seller of the firearm that is the subject of the transaction. 

If the background check reveals that the putative buyer is prohibited from purchasing a firearm, the dealer 

shall notify the seller of that fact and of the fact that the transaction may not proceed. The dealer may charge 

a reasonable fee for serving as the facilitator. 

5. Violations. A person who sells a firearm in violation of this section commits a Class C crime. 

Sec. 7. 22-A MRSA §203, sub-§2, as enacted by PL 2003, c. 689, Pt. A, §1, is amended to read: 

2. Additional programs and services for children and families. The department shall provide children and families with additional programs and services to assist them in meeting their needs, including, but not limited to: 

A. Child welfare services; 

B. Head Start and child care services; 

C. Maternal and child health services, including home visiting programs; 

D. Paternity establishment and child support enforcement services; and 

E. Residential and long-term care services for children with disabilities.; and 

F. Injury and violence prevention programs, including data collection, synthesis and evaluation. 

Sec. 8. 25 MRSA §2804-C, sub-§2-E, as enacted by PL 2019, c. 411, Pt. C, §4 and affected by Pt. D, §3, is amended to read: 

2-E. Receipt of certain dangerous weapons; training; procedure; liability. Beginning in 2020, the Maine Criminal Justice Academy Board of Trustees shall require training as part of its mandated training schedule for municipal, county and state law enforcement officers regarding the process for protection from 

substantial threats by a restricted person extreme risk protection orders and the proper handling, storage, 

safekeeping and return of dangerous weapons received pursuant to an endorsement or court order under Title 34 ‑B, section 3862 ‑A or 3873 ‑A. The training must include education concerning the prohibitions on the purchase, control or possession of dangerous weapons. A law enforcement officer who receives custody of a dangerous weapon pursuant to Title 34 ‑B, section 3862 ‑A or 3873 ‑A shall exercise reasonable care to avoid loss, damage or reduction in value of the weapon and may not permanently mark or fire the weapon unless there is reasonable suspicion that the weapon has been used in the commission of a crime. Any liability for damage or reduction in value to such a weapon is governed by Title 14, chapter 741. 

Sec. 9. 34-B MRSA §3613 is enacted to read: 

§3613. Crisis receiving centers 

1. Definition. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, "crisis receiving center" 

means a center that provides immediate and short-term walk-in access to an array of both clinical and 

nonclinical mental health and substance use disorder crisis stabilization services to all individuals seeking 

care regardless of severity or insurance coverage and within bounds of licensing. 

2. Department to develop plan and serve as coordinator. The department shall develop a plan for a 

network of community-based crisis receiving centers across the State to support both clinical and nonclinical 131st Maine Legislature An Act to Strengthen Public Safety by Improving Maine's Firearm Laws and Mental Health System L.D. 2224 

LR3066, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page 20 

mental health and substance use disorder crisis stabilization services. The department shall also coordinate 

meetings, technical assistance and training and provide other assistance to help create, maintain and, as 

necessary, expand the network. 

3. Guidelines. In carrying out its duties under subsection 2, the department shall: 

A. Consult with law enforcement agencies, municipalities, public health experts, behavioral health care 

providers, other states and others as appropriate; 

B. Assess geographical locations for maximization of community impact; 

C. Provide technical assistance to persons and entities across the State and providers interested in 

joining the network; 

D. Coordinate regular meetings with crisis receiving centers and provide technical assistance to crisis 

receiving centers; and 

E. Engage in continual process improvement and planning updates. 

Sec. 10. 34-B MRSA §3862-A, as enacted by PL 2019, c. 411, Pt. A, §1 and affected by Pt. D, §3, is amended by amending the section headnote to read: 

§3862-A. Protection from substantial threats Extreme risk protection orders 

Sec. 11. 34-B MRSA §3862-A, sub-§1, ¶C, as enacted by PL 2019, c. 411, Pt. A, §1 and affected by Pt. D, §3, is amended to read: 

C. "Initial restrictions" means the immediate and temporary 14 ‑day 30-day threat ‑based restrictions 

pursuant to subsection 4. 

Sec. 12. 34-B MRSA §3862-A, sub-§2, ¶B, as enacted by PL 2019, c. 411, Pt. A, §1 and affected by Pt. D, §3, is amended to read: 

B. The medical practitioner under paragraph A this subsection shall assess whether the person presents 

a likelihood of foreseeable harm. In assessing the person, a medical practitioner may consult with other medical professionals as the medical practitioner determines advisable. If the medical practitioner finds that the person can benefit from treatment and services, the medical practitioner shall refer the person to treatment and services. The medical practitioner may rely on information provided by a 3rd party if it 

reasonably appears that the 3rd party has had recent personal observations of or conversations with the 

person being assessed. 

Sec. 13. 34-B MRSA §3862-A, sub-§2, ¶C, as enacted by PL 2019, c. 411, Pt. A, §1 and affected by Pt. D, §3, is amended to read: 

C. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, an assessment pursuant to this section may be performed at a health care facility but or, when available and as appropriate, must may be performed at 

an alternative location. The assessment may be facilitated using telehealth technology. If the assessment 

is provided at a health care facility, law enforcement shall, upon request of the facility and consistent with section 3863, subsection 2 ‑A, absent compelling circumstances, assist the facility with the security of the person awaiting the assessment under this section. 

Sec. 14. 34-B MRSA §3862-A, sub-§2, ¶C-1 is enacted to read: 

C-1. The assessment required by this subsection must be performed while the person being assessed 

remains in protective custody, except that the assessment may be performed within 24 hours after the 

person is released from protective custody if: 131st Maine Legislature An Act to Strengthen Public Safety by Improving Maine's Firearm Laws and Mental Health System L.D. 2224 

LR3066, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page 21 

(1) The protective custody stemmed from a law enforcement officer's probable cause to believe the 

person may be mentally ill and presents a likelihood of serious harm because the person possesses, 

controls or may acquire a dangerous weapon; and 

(2) An examination under section 3863 has occurred. 

Sec. 15. 34-B MRSA §3862-A, sub-§2-A is enacted to read: 

2-A. Protective custody warrant for purposes of conducting an assessment. If a law enforcement 

officer is unable to take a person into protective custody to conduct an assessment under this section, the 

law enforcement officer may apply for a protective custody warrant. The officer must submit an affidavit of 

probable cause for a protective custody warrant to a Justice of the Superior Court, a Judge of the District 

Court or a justice of the peace. 

The justice, judge or justice of the peace shall issue a protective custody warrant and promptly transmit that 

warrant to the officer for execution upon finding the affidavit under this subsection is sufficient to establish: 

A. Probable cause to believe that the person may be mentally ill and due to that condition presents a 

likelihood of serious harm; 

B. Probable cause to believe that the person possesses, controls or may acquire a dangerous weapon; 

and 

C. That the officer has made reasonable attempts to take the person into custody without a warrant. 

A warrant transmitted by facsimile machine or an electronic warrant transmitted by secure electronic means 

has the same legal effect and validity as an original endorsement signed by the justice, judge or justice of 

the peace. The electronic protective custody warrant or paper protective custody warrant may be executed 

by a law enforcement officer authorized to take the person into protective custody as provided in section 

3862, subsection 1, paragraph B. 

Sec. 16. 34-B MRSA §3862-A, sub-§3, as enacted by PL 2019, c. 411, Pt. A, §1 and affected by Pt. D, §3, is amended to read: 

3. Notification by medical practitioner and judicial endorsement. A medical practitioner shall notify in writing the law enforcement officer or law enforcement agency that took the person into protective custody 

under section 3862, subsection 1, paragraph B that, based on the assessment under subsection 2, paragraph 

B, the person is found to present a likelihood of foreseeable harm. If so notified, the law enforcement officer 

or law enforcement agency shall as soon as practicable seek endorsement by a Superior Court Justice, 

District Court Judge, judge of probate or Justice of the Superior Court, a Judge of the District Court or a 

justice of the peace of the medical practitioner's assessment and law enforcement's declarations that the person was taken into protective custody and that the law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe 

that the person possesses, controls or may acquire a dangerous weapon. The judge justice or justice judge 

shall promptly transmit to the law enforcement officer or agency the decision to endorse or not endorse. Adecision transmitted electronically has the same legal effect and validity as a signed original. An endorsement must authorize law enforcement to execute the authority in subsection 4. This section may not be construed to prevent law enforcement from accepting a voluntary surrender of dangerous weapons. 

Sec. 17. 34-B MRSA §3862-A, sub-§4, as enacted by PL 2019, c. 411, Pt. A, §1 and affected by Pt. D, §3, is amended to read: 

4. Initial restrictions; notice by law enforcement. A person whose assessment is endorsed by a judicial officer under subsection 3 becomes, at the time of notice by a law enforcement officer under 131st Maine Legislature An Act to Strengthen Public Safety by Improving Maine's Firearm Laws and Mental Health System L.D. 2224 

LR3066, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page 22 

paragraph B, a restricted person subject to initial restrictions and subject to the prohibitions in Title 15, section 393, subsection 1, paragraphs E ‑1 and E ‑2 as follows: 

A. The restricted person, after notice under paragraph B: 

(1) Is prohibited from possessing, controlling, acquiring or attempting to possess, control or acquire a dangerous weapon pending the outcome of a judicial hearing; 

(2) Shall immediately and temporarily surrender any weapons possessed, controlled or acquired by the restricted person to a law enforcement officer who has authority in the jurisdiction in which the weapons are located pending the outcome of a judicial hearing; and 

(3) Has a right to a judicial hearing within 14 30 days of notice under paragraph B; and 

B. A law enforcement officer shall, as soon as practicable, but no later than 24 hours after the judicial 

endorsement, unless the restricted person is medically incapacitated, in which case within 48 hours after 

the law enforcement officer has been notified that the person is no longer medically incapacitated: 

(1) Notify the restricted person that the restricted person: 

(a) Is prohibited from possessing, controlling, acquiring or attempting to possess, control or acquire a dangerous weapon pending the outcome of a judicial hearing; 

(b) Is required to immediately and temporarily surrender any weapons possessed, controlled or acquired by the restricted person to a law enforcement officer who has authority in the jurisdiction in which the weapons are located pending the outcome of a judicial hearing; and 

(c) Has a right to a judicial hearing within 14 30 days of the notice under this paragraph; 

(2) Notify the contact person, if any, disclosed by the restricted person to the medical practitioner and the district attorney in the district of the restricted person's residence where the person was taken 

into protective custody of the person's restricted status; and 

(3) Report the person's restricted status to the Department of Public Safety as soon as practicable.; 

and 

(4) Provide a copy to the court of the notification to the restricted person, including the date of 

notification. 

Sec. 18. 34-B MRSA §3862-A, sub-§6, ¶A, as enacted by PL 2019, c. 411, Pt. A, §1 and affected by Pt. D, §3, is amended to read: 

A. Within 5 14 days of the date of the notice given to a restricted person under subsection 4, paragraph 

B, the district attorney the court shall schedule a hearing in the district of the restricted person's residence 

shall file a petition for judicial review of the initial restrictions by the district court. The district attorney 

shall provide where the person was taken into protective custody and provide notice of the hearing to the 

restricted person written notice of the petition and hearing and the district attorney at least 7 days prior 

to the hearing. The restricted person has the right to be represented by counsel at the hearing, and the court may appoint counsel for an indigent party. Upon a showing of good cause, the court may extend the time to hold the hearing. 

Sec. 19. 34-B MRSA §3862-A, sub-§6, ¶B, as enacted by PL 2019, c. 411, Pt. A, §1 and affected by Pt. D, §3, is amended to read: 

B. Within 14 30 days of the notice given under subsection 4, the court shall hold a hearing to determine 

whether to dissolve or extend the initial restrictions. Upon a showing of good cause, the court may extend 131st Maine Legislature An Act to Strengthen Public Safety by Improving Maine's Firearm Laws and Mental Health System L.D. 2224 

LR3066, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page 23 

the time to hold the hearing. In the hearing determining whether to dissolve or extend the initial 

restrictions, the district attorney has the burden to prove by clear and convincing evidence that the restricted person presents a likelihood of foreseeable harm. 

Sec. 20. 34-B MRSA §3862-A, sub-§6, ¶C, as enacted by PL 2019, c. 411, Pt. A, §1 and affected by Pt. D, §3, is amended to read: 

C. In determining whether there are grounds to extend the initial restrictions, the court shall consider all relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, recent threats or acts of violence by the restricted person directed toward other persons; recent threats or acts of violence by the restricted person directed toward the restricted person; recent acts of unlawful abuse of animals by the restricted person; the reckless use or threatening display of a dangerous weapon by the restricted person; a history of the use, attempted use or threatened use of physical force by the restricted person against other persons; a record of prior custodial events or restrictions under this section; prior involuntary confinement of the restricted person in a hospital for persons with psychiatric disabilities; prior protection from abuse and protection from harassment orders against the restricted person or violations regarding protection from abuse or protection from harassment by the restricted person; evidence of stalking behavior, severe obsession or sexual violence by the restricted person; the illegal use of controlled substances by the restricted person; and evidence of alcohol or drug abuse by the restricted person. The court may consider affidavits and 

other reliable hearsay in making this determination. The court shall also consider whether the restricted 

person is receiving treatment responsive to that person's mental health or substance use needs. 

Sec. 21. 34-B MRSA §3862-A, sub-§6, ¶D, as enacted by PL 2019, c. 411, Pt. A, §1 and affected by Pt. D, §3, is amended by amending subparagraph (5) to read: 

(5) A court shall electronically update or transmit to the Department of Public Safety, Bureau of State Police an abstract of the order issued by the court pursuant to this section that includes a prohibition on the possession of a dangerous weapon within 72 hours of the order's being issued. The abstract 

must include the name, date of birth and gender of the person who is the subject of the order; the court's order and the expiration date of that order; and a notation that the person has been notified by the court. 

The abstract required by this subparagraph is confidential and is not a public record as defined in Title 1, chapter 13; however, the information contained in the abstract or a copy of the abstract may be provided by the Department of Public Safety to a criminal justice agency for law enforcement purposes, to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, National Instant Criminal Background Check System or to an issuing authority for the purpose of processing concealed firearm permit applications. The Department of Public Safety shall, when the pertinent database is developed, request that the Federal Bureau of Investigation ensure that, immediately after the order expires, the National Instant Criminal Background Check System no longer reflects that expired order as a ground for prohibiting the subject of the order from possessing or acquiring a firearm. For the purposes of this subsection, "criminal justice agency" means a federal, state, tribal, district, county or local government agency or any subunit of those entities that performs the administration of criminal justice under a statute or executive order and that allocates a substantial part of its annual budget to the administration of criminal justice. Courts and the Department of the Attorney General are considered criminal justice agencies, as is any equivalent agency at any level of Canadian government. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

1 20200719  Lewiston PD  Girlfriend reported boyfriend put gun in his mouth while threatening to 

kill himself. 

2 20200807  Scarborough PD  Mother reported son on drugs and alcohol , threatening suicide with 

knife or “suicide by cop.” 

3 20200905  Hampden PD  22 -yr -old man put gun to his throat in presence of friends and 

threatened suicide. 

4 20200916  Penobscot County 

SO 

28 -yr -old man in Hermon threatening suicide, threatening to shoot 

police , fired shotgun during two -hour standoff 

5 20201009  Brunswick PD  48 -yr -old man, deteriorating mental health , threatening suicide, and 

threatening friend with a firearm. 

6 20201105  Lincoln County SO  53 -yr -old man in Westport threatening suicide in front of girlfriend ,

fired gun over her head, no injury. 

7 20201116  Androscoggin 

County SO 

38 -yr -old depressed man in Greene , arguing with wife, threatening to 

kill himself. 

8 20201118  Androscoggin 

County SO 

37 -yr -old woman in Livermore , suicidal with firearms, threatening to 

shoot her self in the head. 

9 20201201  Bar Harbor PD  54 -yr -old man threatening suicide , left suicide note , fired gun over head 

twice, no injury. 

10  20201209  State Police  38 -yr -old man, delusional, fired gun at imaginary terrorists surrounding 

his house. 

11  20201211  Brewer PD  34 -yr -old man, armed with gun, people are out to kill him, incidents of 

wanting to hurt himself or others. 

12  20201221  Veazie PD  70 -yr -old woman, deteriorating mental health, 16 police incidents in 4 

mos., will shoot anyone who comes to her house. 

13  20201222  Lewiston PD  68 -yr -old man, depressed, called friend to say he was going to kill 

himself, police arrived, he was armed. 

14  20201229  State Police  60 -yr -old man left home in Mass. after telling wife he was going to kill 

himself, stopped by police on turnpike in Litchfield .

15  20210306  State Police  75 -yr -old man in Northport , wife with dementia, threatening to kill 

wife and then himself. 

16  20210317  Brewer PD  38 -yr -old man, armed with AK -47, believe d Stephen King & police are 

after him, possesses many firearms. 

17  20210325  Wells PD  73 -yr -old man shot himself in chest, history of depression, “I’m just 

tired of living.” 

18  20210603  Aroostook County 

SO 

32 -yr -old man with homicidal and suicidal ideations planning on 

“going out with a bang.” 

19  20210908  Cumberland 

County SO 

56 -yr -old man in Gray threatened to kill girlfriend and himself with 

firearm, and accosted police with a knife taunting them to shoot him .

20  20211014  Waterville PD  21 -yr -old man held gun to head in presence of two friends threating to 

kill himself . Taken into custody after brief standoff. 

21  20211218  Aroostook County 

SO 

46 -yr -old man in possession of handgun claimed to be CIA and that 

DEA was holding his family hostage “up the road” and he needed the 

gun to rescue family members. 

22  20220223  Winthrop PD  80 -yr -old woman threatening to “end things” by killing herself with a 

gun if only she could find the bullets. 

23  20220321  State Police  91 -yr -old man with paranoid delusions of men he claims he can see 

sent electronically into his house to harm him ; high risk of harm to self 

or others; 13 firearms removed from residence. 

24  20220612  Biddeford PD  77 -yr -old former police officer with dementia increasingly agitated and 

threatened spouse with handgun . Blue papered and handgun and 

shotgun removed from residence. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

25  20220630  Lincoln County SO  32 -yr -old combat veteran with longtime PTSD and previous suicide 

attempts m aking death threats to staff at Togus VA and expressing 

desires of self -harm. 

26  20220804  State Police  41 -yr -old intoxicated man held loaded gun to his head and threatened 

to kill wife, children, and himself. 

27  20220926  State Police  63 -yr -old man with plan to shoot and kill himself blue papered ; brother 

took gun away from him; released from local hospital because no beds 

available; later tried to acquire a firearm .

28  20221204  Sanford PD  38 -yr -old woman intercepted by police while attempting to purchase 

firearm to kill herself, taken into protective custody and blue papered. 

29  20230101  Sanford PD  38 -yr -old man increasingly paranoid, believes wife cheating on him, 

there are listening devices in light bulbs, and cameras in house 

watching him , possessed two loaded AR -15s, machete, & Bowie knife .

30  20230102  Waterville PD  42 -yr -old “extremely paranoid” woman with schizophrenia , armed with 

two handguns, an AR -15, and a knife, believing that she’s being 

stabbed and the police are going to shoot her in the back of the head. 

31  2023010 4 Franklin County 

SO 

58 -yr -old highly intoxicated man w/ past suicidal ideation, attempted 

suicide by consuming medication, called behavior al health for help .

Police took him into protective custody . Seized several handguns, 

rifles, and shotguns. 

32  20230110  Waterville PD  35 -yr -old w/ past suicidal attempts cut wrist in suicide attempt, told 

officer he had a gun and intended to use it to kill himself. 

33  20230114  Wells PD  25 -yr -old man previously diagnosed with schizophrenia with 

thoughts of slicing the throat of a co -worker and/or getting a gun to 

shoot him multiple times. 

34  20230208  Westbrook PD  49 -yr -old man estranged from domestic partner/mother of his children 

threatening suicide via texting that included photos of him holding a 

gun to his head. 

35  20230216  Knox County SO  54 -yr -old man severely depressed, history of suicidal ideation, 

threatening to kill himself with gun; held gun to his head. Order 

resulted in sei zure of six guns and a crossbow. 

36  20230308  Westbrook PD  50 -yr -old man with worsening depression, history of suicidal ideation, 

threatening “suicide by cop” and his daughter who will “soon be dead.” 

37  20230309  Westbrook PD  35 -yr -old man under the influence of marijuana verbalized a clear plan 

to kill himself and two guests by shooting them with guns he had in 

his home, and threatened to grab an officer’s gun and shoot him with it. 

38  202 30313  Sanford PD  79 -yr -old man with suicidal and homicidal ideations, “nothing to live 

for,” told a social worker he was going to shoot the head of a VFW 

club when he showed up at a meeting that evening. 

39  20230314  South Portland PD  29 -yr -old businessman with a history of 911 calls and apparent 

hallucinations that persons are burglarizing his business; met 

responding officers with guns despite being instructed by dispatch to 

disarm. 

40  20230325  Farmington PD  47 -yr -old man diagnosed experiencing paranoid delusions, convinced 

persons are under his mobile home cutting holes in floor . Discharged 

shotgun from inside in direction of neighbor . Also had rifle in home. 

41  20230327  Sanford PD  40 -yr -old man texted his estranged girlfriend that he was ready to end it 

all . She later witnessed him place a gun to his head . Bipolar; alcohol 

and marijuana use. 

42  20230401  Wells PD  43 -yr -old intoxicated woman reported by husband to have loaded 

handgun and threatening to make a TikTok video of her killing herself .

History of suicide threats when intoxicated. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

43  20230403  Lincoln County SO  40 -yr -old man wrote suicide note after arguing with wife and inserted a

hose into the exhaust of his vehicle after wife left home . He also had 

firearms in the home. 

44  20230409  Androscoggin 

County SO 

53 -yr -old man with MH diagnoses told counselor he was going to kill 

his ex -wife and himself or a deputy sheriff and himself or create a 

police standoff at Walmart. 

45  20230417  Farmington PD  86 -yr -old man believed to be suffering from dementia with paranoid 

delusions and hallucinations threatened wife with rifle believing she 

was seeing a boyfriend. Previous threat with a knife. 

46  20230418  Somerset County 

SO 

44 -yr -old man suffering visual and auditory hallucinations, shot at 

imaginary people in house, jumped out 2 nd story window, and thereafte r

shot at responding police officers. 

47  20230426  Augusta PD  52 -yr -old man , in conversation with his mental counselor, threaten ed to 

shoot and kill a neighbor and then kill himself. 

48  20230426  Cumberland 

County SO 

43 -yr -old man with a cute stress reaction followed by verbal statements 

to wife and officers of plan to kill h imself. Officer found him in an 

outbuilding with a rifle at hand. 

49  20230505  York PD  78 -yr -old man with suicidal ideation and clear plan including using a 

specific weapon on a specific day , and devising a means of postmortem 

identification if the gunshot to his head l eft him unidentifiable. 

50  20230511  Brewer PD  33 -yr -old man with s uicidal ideation ; and holding a loaded gun in his 

mouth with stated intention to end his life. 

51  20230512  Lincoln County SO  31 -yr -old woman threatening suicide; sending texts to mother with rifle 

under her chin; intoxicated; suspected mother was having sex with her 

husband .

52  20230513  Lincoln County SO  53 -yr -old man suffering from PTSD; intoxicated; threatening suicide 

with firearm and saying he will make wife watch . Wife hid ammo, left, 

and called police. 

53  20230513  York County SO  59 -yr -old man depressed over wife leaving him . Threatening suicide .

Son called police. Just as officer arrived, shot himself in the head. 

54  20230516  Lewiston PD  26 -yr -old man highly intoxicated and taking high dosages of drugs 

threatening suicide; told police he was going to shoot himself while 

gesturing under chin. 

55  20230523  Waterville PD  26 -yr -old man intoxicated at motel talking with wife on phone re 

divorcing; threaten ed to “blow my brains out.” Had handgun and rifle 

at hand. 

56  20230526  Cumberland 

County SO 

19 -yr -old man depressed over breakup with girlfriend; told friend he 

was going to kill himself with a shotgun he purchased that was on a 3 -

day hold at the dealer’s; had already purchased the ammunition. 

57  20230529  Cape Elizabeth PD  65 -yr -old man with history of depression experiencing extreme 

paranoia believing there were persons sent to do harm; armed with 

loaded revolver in his pocket when taken into protective custody. 

58  20230530  Newport PD  32 -yr -old man with mental health history called brother and sister 

saying he had a gun to his head and was going to kill himself. 

59  202306 07 York PD  23 -yr -old man with history of mental illness threatening suicide by 

gun; posted ideations on Facebook including a posting with a gun .

9mm handgun found in his vehicle. 

60  20230607  Wilton PD  34 -yr -old man making homicidal threats against 11 -yr -old daughter 

who herself suffers from oppositional defiant disorder. 

61  20230612  Jay PD  19 -yr -old man stressed and anxious over caregiver fatigue held a

loaded rifle to his head intending to kill himself . The rifle discharged 

into a wall after a family pet bumped into the end of the rifle. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

62  20230614  Fairfield PD  35 -yr -old man experiencing psychotic episode; former psychiatric 

patient with history of psychosis; recently threatened mother with 

knife. 

63  20230621  Biddeford PD  63 -yr -old man in declining health and showing signs of mental illness 

threatened bank employees with harm .

64  2023062 3 Lincoln County SO  38 -yr -old man t hreatening suicide via hanging with a paracord that he 

had around his neck ; multiple firearms, 17 strewn around outside gun 

safe ; wanted to be with his deceased veteran friends. 

65  20230630  Bridgton PD  60 -yr -old veteran making alcohol -induced threats on a crisis hotline to 

kill himself and to shoot anyone who comes to his house. 

66  20230630  Lewiston PD  72 -yr -old man presented substantial risk of serious physical harm to 

himself and others as manifested by recent suicidal threats, e.g., he was 

going to “blow his head off” while waving around a loaded gun. 

67  20230718  State Police  56 -yr -old woman with history of mental illness threatening suicide and 

saying she will kill responding EMS/LE personnel. 

68  20230731  Jay PD  49 -yr -old man held loaded shotgun to his head with intent to end his 

life. Verbalized to officers and family members that he is "done with it 

all" and responded in the affirmative when officers asked if he intended 

to harm himself. Previous suicide attempt & recent substance abuse. 

69  20230801  Waterville PD  38 -yr -old intoxicated man holding loaded pistol to head in presence of 

girlfriend threatening to kill himself .

70  20230801  Rumford PD  56 -yr -old intoxicated man arrested for OUI (0.29% BAC) threatened to 

use one of many guns at home to “blow my brains out.” 

71  20230803  State Police  54 -yr -old man made death threats to a local fire chief and family, 

threatened to go to a local festival and “kill everyone ,” and threatened 

to kill a police officer and himself. 

72  20230811  Oxford County SO  45 -yr -old man shooting at imaginary trespassers in a tree, recent 

substance abuse, history of PTSD. 

73  20230823  Sanford PD  22 -yr -old man threatening suicide when arguing with girlfriend and 

taking a rifle and ammunition into garage. 

74  20230901  Fairfield PD  80 -yr -old man with “nothing to live for” attempted suicide by carbon 

monoxide ; when unsuccessful, told a town officer clerk of his attempt. 

75  20230902  Sanford PD  50 -yr -old man threatening suicide with gun if wife left him; history of 

similar threats, including holding a gun to his head; history of 

depression and anxiety. 

76  20230907  Ellsworth PD  40 -yr -old man with symptoms consistent with mania and psychosis ;

grandiose with multiple paranoid delusions ; believes he has a 

“disappearing brain disease .”

77  20230906  Knox County SO  22 yr -old man threatening suicide; posted photo on Facebook holding 

handgun to his chin. 

78  20230908  Lewiston PD  44 -yr -old man threatening suicide with gun in presence of wife and 

children. 

79 20230913  Sanford PD  Police alerted by VA. 53 -yr -old man stated that he wants to die due to 

his “life sucking ;” envisioned putting his gun in his mouth ; if he got up 

out of his chair today he would get his gun and shoot himself. 

80  20230928  Rumford PD  58 -yr -old man discharging gun in neighborhood; history of PTSD, 

depression, alcohol abuse ; symptoms of severe depression including 

wanting to die .

81  20231009  Brunswick PD  27 -yr -old man threatening girlfriend with gun and threatened to shoot 

himself in the head; showed girlfriend video of man shooting himself in 

the head ; told brother on phone he was going to kill himself. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

82  20231027  Scarborough PD  62 -yr -old man making suicidal threats. Charging at officers saying ,

“Bring it on .”

83  20231102  Piscataquis County 

SO 

40 -yr -old woman threatening suicide in cemetery. M ultiple calls to 

Crisis over the past few months threatening suicide. She disclosed 

having multiple means of suicide such as a box cutter, cords, and a belt. 

84  2023 1107  Androscoggin 

County SO 

44 -yr -old suicidal man concerned he will be the next mass shooter. 

Drinking heavily in the context of financial stress and infidelity .

History of removing firearms when depressed and suicidal. 

85  20231108  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

27 -yr -old man locked himself in his parents’ garage with a pistol, 

writing and reading a suicide note to his wife. 

86  20231109  Piscataquis County 

SO 

70 -yr -old woman with plans to kill herself with a gun or knife ; suicidal 

thoughts almost every day since her last suicide attempt two months 

ago when she loaded two guns with incorrect bullets .

87  20231109  Piscataquis County 

SO 

17 -yr -old boy with access to firearms threatening suicide in text 

messages. 

88  20231110  Dover -Foxcroft PD  59 -yr -old woman making suicidal statements to family and police, 

depressed over the suicide death of her son a year ago ; fired several 

rounds from a pistol on her back porch, 

89  20231110  Brunswick PD  22 -yr -old suicidal man upset over break -up with girlfriend; texted her 

that he held a gun to his head for 10 minutes. 

90  20231110  Penobscot County 

SO 

58 -yr -old man charged with DV & terrorizing threatened to kill 

girlfriend and a list of other persons. 

91  20231110  Auburn PD  20 -yr -old man attempted suicide by stabbing himself in abdomen; said 

he was going to be “the next Robert Card.” 

92  20231110  Presque Isle PD  25 -yr -old man threatening to kill himself; past history of suicide 

attempt with firearm. 

93  20231111  Lewiston PD  50 -yr -old man with history of suicidal/homicidal ideations told family 

he was going to do with Robert Card did, but with a knife. 

94  20231112  Brunswick PD  29 -yr -old man c laims he’s being ordered to kill his parents or son ;

referenced Robert Card, the Lewiston mass shooter .

95  20231113  Biddeford PD  41 -yr -old man threatened to kill persons if he was not given a room; 

symptoms consistent with mania, delusional thoughts, auditory 

hallucinations, hyper -religiosity. 

96  20231113  Cape Elizabeth PD  19 -yr -old man believes girlfriend may be a cyborg sent by CIA to spy 

on him; posted homicidal ideations on social media referencing killing 

Blacks, Asians, and Jews .

97  20231114  Scarborough PD  31 -yr -old man making homicidal threats to crisis workers and 

threatening the manager of a business he visited. 

98  20231114  Lewiston PD  24 -yr -old man threatening to cut himself and to kill himself with a gun; 

threatened to kill ex -girlfriend; threatened to confront her at son’s 

school, which resulted in a lockdown of the school. 

99  20231115  Brewer PD  24 -yr -old man threatened to kill people at support center, causing 

center to close down and send employees home; acknowledges 

thoughts of shooting others and killing himself. 

100  20231116  Newport PD  35 -yr -old man threatened suicide while holding a gun in his mouth; 

superficially stabbed himself in the chest. 

101  20231118  Hampden PD  32-yr -old man made verbal and written suicidal statements; agreed to 

help and removal of weapons. 

102  20231115  Oxford County SO  61 -yr -old man with paranoia shooting at imaginary persons near his 

and homes of others; attempted to ignite can of gasoline in presence of 

officer. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

103  20231119  Presque Isle PD  30 -yr -old man called 911 to report he had placed a bomb in the 

Walmart store ; police found multiple weapons at his residence. 

104  20231120  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

41 -yr -old man cut his arm severe enough to require surgery and ICU; 

expressed that he would die one way or another; said he wanted to kill 

his wife and it should be allowed. 

105  20231120  Biddeford PD  52 -yr -old reported imaginary burglary; armed with shotgun when 

encountering police; claimed there were persons dressed in costumes in 

the bushes. 

106  2023 1120  State Police  64 -yr -old woman communicating threats of suicide to her hospice 

patient husband; history of depression and suicidal ideations. 

107  20231120  Androscoggin 

County SO 

35 -yr -old man threatened to “shoot up” his girlfriend and her 13 yr-old 

daughter resulting in lockdown of a doctor’s office and school .

108  20231121  State Police  16 -yr -old boy threatening “suicide by cop.” History of self -injurious 

behavior and extreme mood swings. 

109  20231123  Lewiston PD  37 -yr -old man exhibiting signs of psychosis with homicidal ideations, 

including killing police .

110  20231123  Bar Habor PD  34 -yr -old man in paranoid agitated state; sees persons who do not exist 

surrounding him and placing him in jeopardy; violent ideations. 

111  20231123  Sanford PD  34 -yr -old man threatening suicide; texted suicide threats to girlfriend 

with photos of gun. 

112  20231123  Portland PD  55 -yr -old man making homicidal threats; going to obtain a gun and 

make a name for himself and go to prison for life. 

113  20231126  York County SO  59 -yr -old woman hallucinating; talking to imaginary persons and 

animals; threatened to shoot her roommate; had access to pistol. 

114  20231126  Portland PD  53 -yr -old man claiming to have died and come back as a divine entity 

who will confront police with his AK -47; police recovered two 

handguns, two shotguns, and an AK -47. 

115  20231126  Auburn PD  25 -yr -old man seeking to become “YouTube famous ,” making 

reference to a mass killer in California and saying he will kill people if 

necessary to accomplish his goal. 

116  20231127  Somerset County 

SO 

34 -yr -old man shot himself under the chin in an attempt to kill himself 

while his wife was packing to leave after persistent arguing. 

117  2023112 7 Cumberland PD  22 -yr -old man threatening to kill stepfather with homemade spear and 

knife; locked family out of house; retrieved propane tank to use as 

explosive if police armored vehicle showed up. 

118  20231128  Biddeford PD  22 -yr -old man threatening his uncle with a knife; previous threat to 

grandmother with gun; delusional as to his identity, believing he is 

someone else; indicia of paranoia .

119  20231129  Brewer PD  45 -yr -old man held gun to his head while threatening to kill his partner 

and then himself. 

120  20231201  Jay PD  47 -yr -old man with machete experiencing “manic episode” threatening 

to kill himself or the police; access to firearms in the home. 

121  20231201  Oxford County SO  52 -yr -old man with suicidal/homicidal ideations; threatening to kill 

police and holding gun to his head threatening suicide. 

122  20231201  Sanford PD  29 -yr -old man threatening to go on “murderous rampage;” multiple 911 

calls of man with knife; shot in leg by citizen fearful for himself and 

family; claimed to be a vampire, licking own blood in ambulance. 

123  20231202  Androscoggin 

County SO 

56 -yr -old man in stage 4 cancer threatening to kill persons who did him 

wrong, specifically police; mentioned Lewiston mass shooting as 

triggering him and wanting “to go out with a bang .”WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

124  20231202  Westbrook PD  33 -yr -old man highly intoxicated with firearm and high capacity 

magazines threatening suicide and following a convenience store clerk 

he had threatened when stopped by police. 

125  20231203  State Police  36 -yr -old man told counselor he had guns and wanted to kill people; 

past history of suicidal threats. 

126  2023 1206  Bar Harbor PD  See #110 – District Court denied permanent order . Police later took 

respondent into protective custody and obtained another temporary 

order. 

127  20231207  Winthrop PD  78 -yr -old man arguing with wife; retrieved a rifle and ammo and 

threatened to “end it all” by killing himself. 

128  2023 1209  Topsham PD  42 -yr -old woman threatened boyfriend with gun, then jumped out a 

second story window. 

129  2023 1210  South Portland PD  32 -yr -old man sent his boss a non -sensical messages, 

including a picture of two guns with his identifying 

information next to them; assaulted two persons in a store 

by putting them into a head lock. 

130  20231210  Saco PD  27 -yr -old man making suicidal statements for months, today to one of 

his friends, who reached out to parents ; believed to have purchased a 

gun .

131  20231211  Boothbay Harbor 

PD 

80 -yr -old man with diminishing cognitive capacity upset with 

healthcare providers; making veiled threats of using a gun against 

them. 

13 2 202312 12  Augusta PD  64 -yr -old man armed with handgun took refuge in public library from 

imaginary persons chasing him; later running around Interstate 

believing there were snipers in the woods and atop vehicles. 

133  20231213  State Police  16 -yr -old girl threatened suicide while under influence of multiple 

substances; came out of house with firearm while EMS & police there. 

134  20231214  State Police  38 -yr -old man recently reported he tried to kill himself; sent sister a 

text saying he needed an “exit strategy;” expressed suicidal ideations to 

father. 

135  20231215  Sabattus PD  53 -yr -old woman; past suicide attempts; beat up her husband and 

pulled out his hearing aids. 

136  20231215  Cumberland 

County SO 

31 -yr -old man assaulted brother and sister -in -law; believes government 

planted “bug” in his ear; patrols property with rifle and ballistic vest; 

believes birds are talking to him and construction workers are planting 

bugs in his house. 

137  20231216  Kennebunkport PD  29 -yr -old man with suicidal ideations since age 15 “flipped out” and 

told his mother he was going to buy a gun and kill himself with it on 

Christmas day. 

138  202312 20  Cape Elizabeth PD  31 -yr -old man with history of depression expressing suicidal ideations 

that last for several days; texted friends that he wanted to shoot 

himself ; denied having guns but friend confirmed he has a handgun. 

139  20231220  Auburn PD  19 -yr -old man texting with friend re suicide pact during which he shot 

himself in the head; in hospital. 

140  20231220  Bangor PD  32 -yr -old man feeling a “connection to Robert Card” fearful he will act 

on his thoughts of harming mass quantities of people. 

141  20231220  Falmouth PD  53 -yr -old man with access to firearms wrote suicide note two weeks 

ago and attempted suicide with pills last night. 

142  20231223  Wells PD  73 -yr -old man with history of making threats; arrested for bail 

violations; made threat to shoot whoever responsible for his arrest. 

143  20231223  Hancock County 

SO 

50 -yr -old man making threats of suicide via text to estranged wife 

including a text saying he had a gun in his mouth WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

144  20231226  Wilton PD  47 -yr -old man making several threats to kill his father and his aunt; 

texted his aunt with link for Ice -T’s song “Cop Killer.” 

145  20231227  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

56 -yr -old man separated from wife sent mother -in -law text saying his 

body would be outside; history of threatening suicide with gun 

146  20231227  Presque Isle PD  27 -yr -old man left three -page suicide note discovered by coworkers; 

police thwarted his intent when they found him in his car with an AR -

15 and a shotgun; suicidal ideations since age of 9. 

147  20231230  Cumberland PD  66 -yr -old man threatening to end life by carbon monoxide poisoning; 

access to firearms; left various suicide notes in home. 

148  20231231  Westbrook PD  28 -yr -old man with pistol and stated intent to kill himself; previous 

diagnosis of schizophrenia. 

149  20240101  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

26 -yr -old man made gestures threatening to throw pieces of asphalt at 

passing vehicles so they would stop and he could kill the occupants; 

“the only thing that would bring me pleasure is killing people.” 

150  20240102  Old Town PD  24 -yr -old man texting death threats to woman, including photo of gun 

and ammunition; told police when arrested he should have pulled gun 

on them so they would shoot and kill him. 

151  20240102  Biddeford PD  36 -yr -old man with suicidal ideations and a gun ; third time since 

February taken for evaluation; Portland PD previously took a gun from 

him. 

152  20240103  Kennebec County 

SO 

52 -yr -old man stalking wife believing she was having an affair; if 

confirmed, he was going to kill himself, although he was heavily armed 

and may have had other intentions. 

153  20240103  Penobscot County 

SO 

50-yr -old man paranoid and suicidal shot and killed daughter’s dog 

through a closed door thinking it was a burglar ; fired several rounds 

inside house while police present outside; several loaded firearms and 

ammunition in h ouse. 

154  20240103  Brunswick PD  43 -yr -old man suffering from paranoia; believe people in attic were 

plotting to steal his gun ; kept loaded firearm bedside. 

155  20240103  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

67 -yr -old man with thoughts of self -harm and committing mass 

shootings of people with whom he wants to “get even.” 

156  20240103  State Police  41 -yr -old man desiring suicide by gunshot or hanging; held loaded 

firearm to his head. 

157  20240104  Waterville PD  25 -yr -old man suffering from depression with gun and suicidal 

ideations; left a suicide note few months ago. 

158  20240104  Hancock County 

SO 

27 -yr -old man threatening to shoot himself while on phone with 

girlfriend. 

159  20240104  Bar Harbor PD  31 -yr -old man suffering from depression shot himself in the head 

during an argument with his brother. 

160  20240106  York County SO  60 -yr -old man with acute onset of delusional thinking, erratic behavior, 

howling at the moon, driving dangerously, leaving house in middle of 

night in light clothing, planned on “taking care of business. 

161  20240108  Brewer PD  20 -yr -old arguing with wife over his vaping; threatened to kill himself; 

left house armed with handgun; when taken into protective custody, his 

pistol was loaded with a single round. 

162  20240109  Sanford PD  37 -yr -old depressed over separation from wife; armed with loaded 

handgun when telling his wife he was going to kill himself. 

163  20240109  Gorham PD  30 -yr -old man prohibited from possessing firearms hallucinating from 

effects of Adderall & fentanyl that there were several officers with 

guns at his home; police seized several firearms. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

164  2024011 0 Sanford PD  57 -yr -old man suffering paranoid delusions fired several shotgun 

rounds at imaginary people invading his home and entered neighbor’s 

house with loaded shotgun seeking assistance. 

165  20240112  Lewiston PD  44 -yr -old man called clinic, referenced Robert Card saying he would 

kill everyone there and kill himself if he did not get the help he wanted. 

166  20240114  Bangor PD  40 -yr -old man suffering from depression ; guns in vehicle; overheard by 

coworker attempting to acquire assault rifle .

167  20240117  Hancock County 

SO 

36 -yr -old man arguing with wife, held loaded handgun to his head and 

threatened to kill himself; history of suicidal ideation. 

168  20240119  Piscataquis County 

SO 

41 -yr -old woman with suicidal ideation and plan to use firearm as 

evidenced by loaded firearm on bed and social media post. 

169 

169  20240120  Auburn PD  26 -yr -old attempted suicide by cutting wrists; required sutures; threats 

of killing himself and killing others. 

170  20240122  Knox County SO  49 -yr -old man with access to firearms making suicidal statements to 

others. 

171  20240122  Piscataquis County 

SO 

41 -yr -old armed with handgun with plan to commit suicide; traveled to 

boyhood camp; discharged weapon into ground; further action thwarted 

by neighbor. 

172  20240124  Sanford PD  63 -yr -old man with several firearms threatening to shoot officials of a 

company from which he was fired 20 years ago; arrested for 

terrorizing. 

173  20240126  Cumberland 

County SO 

58 -yr -old woman threatening suicide by cop and threatening to kill her 

husband; history of suicide ideation. 

174  20240129  Penobscot County 

SO 

61 -yr -old man threatening to kill neighbor and a law enforcement 

officer living nearby 

175  20240130  Bangor PD  29 -yr -old man threatening suicide, first by carbon mono xide, then by 

jumping off high building, and then trying to retrieve a firearm taken 

from him by police two years earlier. 

176  20240131  Portland PD  21 -yr -old man sent mother text messages expressing suicidal ideation; 

posting on social media alluding to suicide or a significant event to 

occur on 2/1/2024. 

177  20240202  Knox County SO  31 -yr -old man threatening suicide with gun; history of suicidal 

ideation; calls he made to mental health providers not returned. 

178  20240203  Waterville PD  35 -yr -old armed man making suicidal threats to restaurant staff and 

patrons and later to police. 

179  20240204  Monmouth PD  33 -yr -old man making suicidal threats; police negotiated through 

locked upstairs bedroom door his agreement to go to hospital but the 

man jumped out bedroom window; taken into protective custody and to 

hospital with broken ankle. 

180  20240206  Portland PD  35 -yr -old man threatening to go to hospital emergency room with a gun 

in order to get a doctor to write him a prescription. 

181  20240207  Hancock County 

SO 

30 -yr -odl man texting suicidal threats to ex -wife; history of suicidal 

ideations. 

182  20240208  Presque Isle PD  25 -yr -old man after breakup with girlfriend threatening to “shoot up” 

Walmart and commit suicide; history of threatening others with guns 

and suicidal ideations. 

183  20240209  Scarborough PD  38 -yr -old man assaulted father; threats to kill someone & commit 

suicide; history of suicidal & homicidal threats. 

184  20240209  State Police  27 -yr -old man arrested for DV assault & criminal threatening; 

attempted suicide by hanging but rope broke; continued to threaten 

suicide when interviewed by police WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

185  20240209  Lincoln County SO  59 -yr -old man in pain with MS and other ailments; fired gun twice 

while on phone with healthcare worker to ensure gun worked; told 

police he had the gun to his chest to commit suicide. 

186  20240210  Kennebunk PD  46 -yr -old man believes intruders are on his property; being followed by 

aliens; does not have enough ammo to take care all of them. 

187  20240210  Rumford PD  27 -yr -old man arrested for DV assault; suicidal ideation with plan; 

history of suicidal threats; threatened to “f**k a stranger, get high, and 

blow his brains out.” 

188  20240212  Androscoggin 

County SO 

38 -yr -old man threatening to kill people on his “hit list” if sexual abuse 

allegation goes criminal and he loses his guns; history of threatening 

behavior with guns. 

189  20240213  Westbrook PD  19 -yr -old with past suicidal ideation discharged a firearm while sitting 

in vehicle in garage; a year ago, discharged a firearm in bathroom; 

behavior believed to be indicative of building courage to harm himself. 

190  20240214  Bridgton PD  41 -yr -old arrested after multiple homicidal threats towards police 

officers and neighbors; posted altered digital image of his neighbor 

being dismembered ; also, suicidal ideation .

191  20240218  State Police  57 -yr -old suicidal man with several firearms, including AR -15s and 

AK -47s; made suicidal threats to boss but would not admit suicidal 

ideation to police for fear of losing his guns under “yellow flag.” 

192  20240219  Androscoggin 

County SO 

32 -yr -old man arrested for DV terrorizing for threatening to shoot 

mother who refused to allow him access to his guns .

193  20240221  York County SO  49 -yr -old man telling father and sister he’s going to kill himself. 

194  20240221  Kennebec County 

SO 

19 -yr -old threatening suicide by cop; taken to hospital; hospital 

released him whereupon he returned home and engaged in violent & 

threatening behavior. 

195  20240222  Waterville PD  83 -yr -old man with medical issues confining him to home with little 

social support; threatening to shoot himself to end his problems. 

196  20240222  State Police  49 -yr -old man claims sheriff’s office trying to kill him, surveilling him 

with lasers, robots, and holograms; heavily armed with high -powered 

long guns and pistols. 

197  20240223  York County SO  70 -yr -old man depressed over marital separation threatening to kill 

himself. 

198  20240225  Lisbon PD  48 -yr -old man in “desperation” over marital problems fired a handgun 

six times in his house while wife and two children were present. 

199  2024 0226  Penobscot Nation 

PD 

21 -yr -old threatening suicide with firearm after argument with 

girlfriend; history of suicidal ideation. 

200  20240227  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

37 -yr -old woman called veterans’ help line threatening suicide; 

repeated threats to paramedics; attempted suicide in the past. 

201  202402 28 Portland PD  34 -yr -old man calling & texting family members in NY threatening to 

kill them by going to NY and “putting a bullet in your head.” 

202  202402 28 Cumberland 

County SO 

76 -yr -old man attempted to shoot himself in car while on phone with 

dispatch; rifle malfunctioned; told responding officer he would kill 

himself if officer left. 

203  20240229  Wells PD  19 -yr -old man expressing to coworkers his desire to kill his stepmother, 

dismember his father, and kill himself. 

204  20240301  Wilton PD  65 -yr -old man threatened to kill housemate; hearing voices in 

basement ; claims to be in personal contact with President Biden to 

disarm bombs in house. 

205  20240301  Bath PD  33 -yea r-old armed man making homicidal & suicidal threats via text 

messaging after breakup with girlfriend. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

206  2024 0302  Lisbon PD  34 -yr -old woman assaulted boyfriend and 15 -yr -old son; told boyfriend 

she was going to kill her son by suffocating him with a pillow. 

207  20240301  Machias PD  33 -yr -old man threatening to kill his brother and himself; claimed to 

have a 9mm “ghost” gun; initially eloped from hospital ER after being 

taken into protective custody .

208  20240304  Waldo County SO  37 -yr -old man donning ballistic vest and helmet and believed to have 

been armed deemed danger to himself and others. 

209  20240306  Lincoln County SO  62 -yr -old man at medical facility expressing suicidal ideations. 

210  20240307  Waterville PD  44 -yr -old woman at behavior health facility expressing plan to kill 

herself with a firearm. 

211  20240308  Wells PD  51 -yr -old man with plan to kill himself with firearm; depressed over his 

failure as a parent after 24 -yr -old son arrested for child pornography. 

212  20240308  Knox County SO  43 -yr -old man texting his father expressing desire to kill himself. 

213  20240311  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

25 -yr -old male transient observed on Interstate waving what appeared 

to be handgun; charged at trooper threatening to kill him; referenced 

Lewiston mass shooting and said “things are not going to end well.” 

214  20240312  Bangor PD  37 -yr -old man at MH facility with suicidal ideations; held a loaded gun 

to his head two days ago. 

215  2024 0312  State Police  16 -yr -old boy sending suicidal statements on his school laptop; held 

knife to his throat night before; arms cut up from self -harm; history of 

suicidal ideations; mother has multiple firearms in home. 

216  20240313  State Police  42 -yr -old man arrested for OUI; gun in vehicle; made suicidal 

statements to trooper. 

217  20240314  Bangor PD  34 -yr -old man arrested for OUI; loaded pistol on person and AR -15 

with 40 rounds in vehicle; told officer he intended to kill someone. 

218  20240315  York County SO  39 -yr -old man; history of mental health hospitalization; texted friend 

that he was going “eat a bullet;” texted images of holding gun to his 

head; convicted felon; handgun in vehicle. 

219  20240318  Kennebec County 

SO 

19 -yr -old man showed coworker handgun & said he was going to shoot 

himself; purchased Ar -15 day before; history of suicidal ideation. 

220  20240318  Phippsburg PD  36 -yr -old woman texting wife threatening suicide ; history of suicidal 

ideation 

221  20240318  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

25 -yr -old man threatening to burn house down to kill his family; 

threatened deputy sheriff; exclaimed he wanted to kill innocents and 

himself. 

222  20240320  Westbrook PD  33 -yr -old man called his doctor and disclosed intrusive thoughts of 

killing himself, wife & others; disclosed to police his fear of acting on 

thoughts. 

223  20240320  Kennebec County 

SO 

60 -yr -old man failed to show up for work for 3 days; law enforcement 

did welfare check; he made suicidal statements to law enforcement. 

224  20240320  Fort Fairfield PD  29 -yr -old man texting suicidal statements to ex -fiancé ; threatened 

“suicide by cop.” 

225  20240321  York County SO  22 -yr -old man with symptoms of psychosis including paranoid 

delusions; spoke of calling schools and threatening school shootings to 

retaliate for being bullied when younger. 

226  20240321  Kennebunkport PD  27 -yr -old man with history of psychiatric hospitalizations making 

threats to shoot others, including his parents and the police, and kill 

himself .

227  20240324  Bangor PD  25 -yr -old man with thoughts of suicide by firearm; long history of 

suicidal ideations but more intense lately. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

228  20240325  Biddeford PD  63 -yr -old man tried to stab friend with screwdriver believing friend was 

controlling his mind with a computer. 

229  20240325  State Police 

(Bradford) 

60 -yr -old man threatened to kill his wife and bury her “out back” and 

then kill himself; shot a police drone. 

230  20240326  Farmington PD  58 -yr -old man claiming to have pistol with 1,000 rounds “right in the 

middle of getting ready to hurt people” while referencing Card. Taken 

into protective custody at Walmart. 

231  20240401  State Police  30 -yr -old man arrested for DV on wife; making threats to end his own 

life by firearm. 

232  20240402  Piscataquis County 

SO 

30 -yr -old man threatening via text to shoot himself or commit “suicide 

by cop” if police called. 

233  20240402  State Police  59 -yr -old man lost job; fired gun while on phone with former boss; 

history of making suicidal statements to co -workers. 

234  20240404  Falmouth PD  33 -yr -old man arrested for DV on parents; told sister he wanted to kill 

parents, high school friends, and die himself in “open gunfire.” 

235  20240405  York County SO  73 -yr -old man attempted to shoot himself but the firearm 

malfunctioned. 

236  20240405  York PD  18 -yr -old appeared at York PD asking for help against thoughts of 

killing himself. 

237  20240406  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

50 -yr -old man distressed over girlfriend leaving with their infant child 

expressing suicidal ideation. 

238  202404 07  Knox County SO  53 -yr -old woman exhibiting depressed mood related to multiple 

traumas making suicidal statements and attempting to obtain a firearm. 

239  20240402  Hampden PD  69 -yr -old man depressed over his own medical issues and his spouse’s 

pending death called 911 asking for help because of suicidal thoughts. 

240  20240410  Cumberland PD  17 -yr -old high school student making suicidal threats to other students 

and telling teachers he wants to acquire firearms. 

241  20240411  Kennebec County 

SO 

28 -yr -old man texting suicidal threats to wife and telling her not to go 

into the garage; had gun in hand when confronted by deputy. 

242  20240412  State Police  31 -yr -old man posting suicidal threats to Facebook; history of suicidal 

ideation; at least one attempt at suicide with firearm; firearm in hand 

when police arrived. 

243  20240412  State Police  63 -yr -old woman hallucinating; grabbed firearm to shoot at imaginary 

person in closet; granddaughter in home at the time. 

244  20240412  Lincoln County SO  42 -yr -old man, ex -law enforcement, expressing suicidal ideation; told 

wife she would find him dead in woods. 

245  20240414  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

42 -yr -old man using crystal meth; hallucinating that neighbors are 

breaking into house; shot at neighbor’s house. 

246  20240415  Cumberland 

County SO 

40 -yr -old man threatening ex -wife and son and ex -wife’s boyfriend and 

threatening suicide with firearm. 

247  2020 0411  York County SO  74 -yr -old man with firearms expressing veiled suicidal thoughts to wife 

and deputy sheriff. 

248  20200416  Bangor PD  31 -yr -old woman sitting in car outside hospital with handgun in her lap 

telling crisis worker on phone she was going to kill herself. 

249  20200418  Westbrook PD  39 -yr -old man arrested for assault on mother; she refused to give him 

money to purchase a firearm so that he could kill his son’s mother and 

then himself; his son committed suicide the night before. 

250  20240420  Auburn PD  26 -yr -old woman recently discharged from psychiatric unit making 

homicidal threats via text message, referencing Sandy Hook and Robert 

Card. 

251  20240420  Waterville PD  44 -yr -old with history of suicidal ideation threatening to commit 

suicide with gun after breakup with wife; texted wife photo of gun. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

252  20240420  Oxford County SO  28 -yr -old man making suicidal threats to friends and relatives; found in 

his car after having discharged a round from a handgun inside the 

vehicle; uninjured. 

253  202404 21  Old Town PD  64 -yr -old man hallucinating, seeing home intruders not there, hearing 

people not there; in possession of firearm and machete on two 

successive police calls. 

254  20240421  Wells PD  55 -yr -old man reported by family to be suicidal; armed with handgun 

and running lawnmower in closed space. 

255  20240423  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

67 -yr -old soliciting 13 -yr -old girl by texting for nude photos; wife 

found out; he texted girl’s mother a suicidal threat that he confirmed 

with police and medical assessor. 

256  2024 0423  Yarmouth PD  26 -yr -old man making suicidal gestures and statements after breakup 

with girlfriend/mother of his child. 

257  20240423  Lincoln County SO  55 -yr -old woman with history of suicidal ideation making suicidal 

threat to boyfriend; in possession of three firearms. 

258  20240424  Auburn PD  See #250 

26 -yr -old woman recently discharged from psychiatric unit making 

homicidal threats via text message, referencing Sandy Hook and Robert 

Card; today threatening boyfriend with knife or fork .

259  20240424  Portland PD  31 -yr -old threatening suicide; suspected of physically abusing 3 -yr -old 

daughter. 

260  20240428  Westbrook PD  18 -yr -old man threatening to kill whole family and himself; armed with 

gun that turned out to be a pellet gun, and two knives. 

261  20240428  Kennebunk PD  27 -yr -old man threatening suicide by carbon monoxide poisoning; 

found by police inside closed storge unit with ATV running. 

262  202 40428  Oakland PD  24 -yr -old man threatening to shoot himself in the head; history of 

texting images with gun to his head. 

263  202 40429  Bangor PD 50 -yr -old man threatening to kill his wife, burn down their house, and 

then kill himself. 

264  202 40425  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

21 -yr -old man arguing with girlfriend during which he held a gun to his 

head and then in his mouth; manipulating knives as to sta b himself. 

265  202 404 29  Aroostook County 

SO 

50 -yr -old man believing he’s facing jail time threatened suicide several 

times to police and medical assessor by whatever means available. 

266  202 40430  Bath PD  17 -yr -old overdosed on drugs; other students expressing concern of his 

drug use; robbed would -be marijuana buyer at gunpoint of money .

267  202 40501  Kennebec County 

SO 

69 -yr -old man at a dental clinic, angry over a bill, stated “I am about to 

shoot someone.” 

268  202 40 501  Penobscot County 

SO 

74 -yr -old man threatening to shoot a neighbor, intruders, and law 

enforcement officers. 

269  202 40501  State Police  31 -yr -old threatened to kill stepfather. 

270  20240502  Oxford PD  33 -yr -old man threatening on social media to “publicly execute a few 

of my besties.” 

271  20240503  Ogunquit PD  45 -yr -old man threatening suicide “today,” even if means running into 

traffic or in front of a train. 

272  20240504  Sanford PD  40 -yr -old man claiming a voice is telling him to kill family members 

and himself. 

273  20240506  Clinton PD  35 -yr -old man threatened to shoot neighbor; wife wrangled firearm 

from him; threatened suicide; history of suicidal ideation. 

274  20240507  Lincoln County SO  29 -yr -old woman sent text to police threatening to “blow my brains 

out,” along with an image of a gun on a table; history of suicidal threats 

and bogus reports to police of crimes. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

275  20240508  Bar Harbor PD  14 -yr -old boy creating drawings of school shootings, hangings, and 

planes crashing into buildings; threatening to kill teacher’s family. 

276  20240508  Rockland PD  53 -yr -old woman threatening suicide; made superficial cut on wrist; 

told nurse at hospital she wished she had a gun. 

277  202405 07  Fort Kent PD  32 -yr -old man telling family members he was going to himself; 

discharged firearm in house twice. 

278  20240508  Windham PD  30 -yr -old woman threatening suicide; held gun to her head as she drove 

off leaving husband behind. 

279  20240509  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

83 -yr -old man frequently intoxicated during which he threatens to 

shoot his wife; police remove six long guns and four handguns. 

280  20240510  Kennebec County 

SO 

46 -yr -old man, suspecting wife’s infidelity, called crisis hotline to say 

he was going to kill himself; previously threatened suicide with gun; 

armed when police located him. 

281  20240511  Augusta PD  24 -yr -old man cut wrists in an attempt to kill himself; has attempted 

suicide four times in past two years. 

282  20240512  York County SO  47 -yr -old woman, on her birthday, threatened to shoot himself or drive 

her car into a tree. 

283  20240512  Lewiston PD  50 -yr -old man thwarted in his attempt to kill himself via carbon 

monoxide poisoning; vowed to shoot himself. 

284  20240512  Waldo County SO  30 -yr -old man texting his mother threatening suicide ; pointed handgun 

at police demanding they shoot him. 

285  20240514  State Police  85 -yr -old woman threatening to use gun against her granddaughter. 

286  20240515  Ellsworth PD  34 -yr -old man called police to report his impending suicide by firearm; 

when located by police, he was armed with a semi -automatic pistol. 

287  20240516  Clinton PD  71 -yr -old man wants to shoot a person over a property dispute or shoot 

himself. 

288  20240516  Franklin County 

SO 

72 -yr -old man hearing voices of 4 -5 imaginary people under his camp; 

when he discharged a weapon into the ground, the people ran to a 

neighboring camp. 

289  20240517  Lewiston PD  61 -yr -old woman threatening to stab husband and daughter -in -law; 

when take into protective custody, she told police she wanted to stab 

her husband that day. 

290  20240518  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

20 -yr -old woman attempted suicide by overdosing on prescribed 

medications; firearm in house. 

291  20240520  Winslow PD  40 -yr -old man threatened to shoot himself; when father disarmed him, 

man grabbed knife and held it to his throat. 

292  20240522  Rockland PD  55 -year -old man threatened others with the bat; when disarmed, he 

wielded a knife, and later told a nurse to make room in the morgue for 

the pair he was going to shoot and then kill himself. 

293  20240522  Bangor PD  50 -yr -old man imagining criminal gangs – “n ------” and “NY drug 

dealers - outside home; armed with a rifle and a handgun when meeting 

police; believed intruders were hiding in ceiling. 

294  20240523  Lincoln County SO  52 -yr -old man texting wife that he would burn down house and blow 

his head off; told police he would probably hang himself. 

295  20240528  Rockland PD  26 -yr -old autistic man threatening suicide with firearm; previously 

hospitalized for suicidal ideation. 

296  20240528  Paris PD  94 -yr -old man threatening to shoot loggers on property formerly owned 

by him and then kill himself. 

297  20240528  Kennebunkport PD  29 -yr -old woman extremely intoxicated , causing self -injury and 

threatening to shoot herself. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

298  20240529  Gardiner PD  22 -yr -old man with past suicide attempts by hanging and overdose in 

woods with gun threatening to shoot himself. 

299  2024 0530  Androscoggin 

County SO 

45 -yr -old veteran with PTSD, not taking meds, threatening to kill 

himself; also threatening to kill man and family in Tennessee; suspects 

man is texting with his girlfriend. 

300  20240530  Lincoln County SO  84 -yr -old threatening to kill neighbor she suspects is “messing” with 

her belongings; attempt to purchase a firearm from a dealer on hold; 

threatened to use other means to kill neighbor. 

301  20240530  Portland PD  36 -yr -old man with history of threatening people at a facility he 

believes is engaged in sex trafficking and where his mother resides; 

said he operates on a spiritual level where the only currency is blood. 

302  20240531  Hancock County 

SO 

37 -yr -old man calling police wishing they all would die; wishes Robert 

Card was still alive to help him “take more out;” history of mental 

health hospitalization. 

303  20240601  State Police  53 -yr -old man arrested for OUI; made several statements to trooper that 

he would shoot himself. 

304  20240602  Presque Isle PD  67 -yr -old man, believing roommate was going to kill him, purchased a 

handgun, and threatened roommate with it; history of paranoia. 

305  2024 0602  Clinton PD  42 -yr -old man, in the presence of his sister, put shotgun in mouth 

threatening suicide. 

306  20240602  Ellsworth PD  37 -yr -old woman with prior suicidal attempts pulled handgun from 

holster while at doctor’s appointment; waved gun around while saying 

she had the gun for protection but could commit suicide with it. 

307  2024 0607  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

32 -yr -old woman with history of psychotic episodes; experiencing yet 

another episode; unable to care for herself. 

308  20240607  South Portland PD  40 -yr -old man with several firearms threatening suicide , previously 

brought out guns at home in presence of children. 

309  2024 0609  Rumford PD  49 -yr -old woman told friend she tried to overdose on pills; later 

arrested for DV assault; told friend she was going kill her husband and 

herself 

310  20240609  Androscoggin 

County SO 

33 -yr -old man threatened to kill himself; admits to “serious suicidal 

ideation.” 

311  20240609  Kennebec County 

SO 

41 -yr -old man texted girlfriend that he was going into “survival mode” 

and will kill anyone who stands in his way; armed with pistol; 

threatened suicide in recent past. 

312  20240611  Westbrook PD  39 -yr -old man threatening to kill ex -wife and himself, possibly “suicide 

by cop.” 

313  20240611  Auburn PD  34 -yr -old man left home saying he was going to kill himself , possibly 

“suicide by cop.” 

314  20240611  Ellsworth PD  40 -yr -old man texted wife that he was going to kill himself; texted 

image of himself with gun in mouth; armed with firearm and several 

more in vehicle. 

315  20240612  Knox County SO  23 -yr -old man with mental health history including psychiatric 

hospitalization ; his weapons were removed and he was hospitalized in 

September 2023 after making suicidal threats to shoot himself while 

holding a loaded gun ; continues to express threats of suicide. (See #77 

above.) 

316  2024 0613  Kennebunk PD  22 -year -old woman purchased firearm; history of psychotic episodes, 

and suicidal ideation. 

317  20240613  Androscoggin 

County SO 

38 -yr -old man fired from job; threatened to “go home and put a bullet 

in my head.” WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

318  20240614  Rockland PD  23 -yr -old man with history of suicidal ideation, illicit drug use, and in 

possession of a cache of guns shooting up house. 

319  20240616  State Police  64 -yr -old woman tried to stab husband and told police she would kill 

him and then kill herself. 

320  20240616  Biddeford PD  40 -yr -old man called crisis hotline and said he had a loaded firearm and 

was ready to end his life; history of mental health hospitalizations. 

321  20240 617  Auburn PD  22 -yr -old woman threatened to shoot others; armed when taken into 

custody. 

322  20240618  Bangor PD  55 -yr -old transgender man threatened to kill DHHS workers doing 

child inspection; showed officer and workers several loaded firearms. 

323  20240618  Cumberland 

County SO 

56 -year -old man missing for two days after leaving a suicide note 

behind; while police were searching for him, he returned home and told 

police he was unable to carry out his intention of shooting himself. 

324  20240621  Bar Harbor Mt 

Desert PD 

60 -yr -old texted wife and children that he was going to kill himself; in 

possession of several firearms. 

325  20240622  Lewiston PD  46 -yr -old man told a counselor he was to buy a gun and “make the top 

news;” told police he would hurt himself. 

326  20240622  Bangor PD  29 -yr -old man threatened to kill his ex=girlfriend’s boyfriend and kill 

himself. 

327  20240624  Sanford PD  41 -yr -old man arrested for criminal threatening with a firearm; told 

hospital personnel he thinks about killing himself every day. 

328  20240624  Piscataquis County 

SO 

55 -yr -old man told deputy doing a welfare check he wanted to blow his 

brains out with his .357 magnum. 

329  20240625  Yarmouth PD  18 -yr -old man threatening over several weeks to commit suicide; 

written descriptions of ways he could kill himself. 

330  20240625  State Police  40 -yr -old man talking to his wife about suicide with multiple plans, 

including shooting himself, driving into ongoing traffic. 

331  20240625  Sanford PD  31 -yr -old woman threatening on social media to kill police officers; 

denied purchase of gun at Cabela’s; 27 past psychiatric 

hospitalizations. 

332  20240628  Kennebec County 

SO 

30 -yr -old man threatening to shoot roommate. 

333  20240630  Penobscot County 

SO 

66 -yr -old man arguing with wife, shot out window, and put gun in his 

mouth threatening suicide. 

334  20240701  Sabattus PD  48 -yr -old man held gun to his head while threatening suicide, disclosed 

suicidal ideations to police, several firearms in house. 

335  20240703  Lewiston PD  58 -yr -old man called veterans crisis line during which he threatened to 

start killing Blacks if he was not given an appointment with a 

psychologist. 

336  20240703  Falmouth PD  19 -yr -old man whose mother shot and killed herself a year ago 

threatening to kill himself before his next birthday in three days. 

337  20240703  Hampden PD  77 -yr -old man threatened to start killing people when his terminally ill 

wife dies; made statements independently to son and daughter. 

338  20240703  Winslow PD  43 -yr -old man going through divorce held shotgun under his chin 

threatening suicide, admitted to police he needed help with mental 

health issues. 

339  202 40704  Old Orchard Beach 

PD 

24 -yr -old man called crisis threatening suicide with a knife and 

demanded a police response. 

340  20240707  Androscoggin 

County SO 

36 -yr -old law enforcement officer arguing with wife retreated outside 

and fired gun into ground when wife approached him. 

341  20240706  Kennebec County 

SO 

28 -yr -old man assaulted girlfriend and discharged gun inside gara ge

while threatening suicide. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

342  20240708  Bath PD  68 -yr -old man with suicidal ideations presented himself at hospital ER 

where he told a nurse he was going shoot himself; nurse notified police. 

343  20240709  Penobscot County 

SO 

33 -yr -old man committed DV aggravated assault; threatening to kill 

family members; he would make “the Lewiston shooter look like 

child’s play;” he’ll “make national news;” made homicidal and suicidal 

statements to hospital staff. 

344  202407 10  Waldoboro PD  27 -yr -old man with recent acute suicidal ideation with clear plan to 

shoot himself ; expressed past desires to commit violence against 

others. 

345  20240711  Androscoggin 

County SO 

43 -yr -old man digested “eight ball” of methamphetamine in suicide 

attempt; armed with pellet handgun and razor blade knife; told police 

he was going to challenge police with the handgun in order to “commit 

suicide by cop.” 

346  20240712  Old Orchard Beach 

PD 

21 -yr -old man threatening to strangle cat, shoot up a school, and kill 

himself. 

347  20240712  Brewer PD  41 -year -old man threatened to kill himself while arguing with his wife. 

348  20240714  Lincoln PD  57 -yr -old woman with history of extreme paranoia attempting to obtain 

a firearm to shoot persons she believes are stalking her and then kill 

herself. 

349  20240714  Scarborough PD  67 -yr -old woman during argument with husband discharged a firearm 

into the ground and then held it to her head. 

350  20240715  State Police  16 -yr -old boy told mother he was going to kill himself; she disarmed 

him of a firearm; history of suicidal ideation since age 13. 

351  20240715  Cumberland 

County SO 

39 -yr -old man in manic state dropped his 18 -month -old child off an 8 -

foot deck; armed with handgun and threatening suicide by cop; 

disarmed by off -duty Buxton police officer. 

352  20240716  Orono PD  36 -yr -old man told therapist he wanted to kill his wife and her 

boyfriend, the engage standoff with police. 

353  20240717  Bath PD  30 -yr -old man called veterans’ crisis line and said he had a gun to his 

head and was going to kill himself. 

354  20240718  Baileyville PD  33 -yr -old man with recurring suicidal thoughts; auditory and visual 

hallucinations; stopped taking psychiatric meds last April 

355  20240718  Kittery PD  60 -yr -old man with brain disease; history of discharging weapons near 

neighbors ; inability to avoid risk or to protect himself from impairment 

or injury. 

356  20240718  Lisbon PD  38 -yr -old man told mother he was going to kill himself, also threatened 

to harm four co -workers; criminal history of DV terrorizing and 

aggravated assault. 

357  20240719  South Portland PD  56 -yr -old man called police to say he was homicidal and suicidal 

because of uncertainty of world; wants to kill upstairs neighbors whom 

he believes are trying to kill him; threatened suicide by cop. 

358  20240720  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

63 -yr -old man insistent on killing himself with firearm to be with his 

deceased wife. 

359  20240720  Kennebec County 

SO 

25 -yr -old man shooting inside and outside home; armed with loaded 

firearm when police arrived; hearing voices; previous police interaction 

involved his claim of being covered by bugs. 

360  20240720  Franklin County 

SO 

73 -yr -old woman suffering from severe paranoia threatening to shoot 

persons she believes are stalking her; long history of similar mental 

health episodes and interactions with police. 

361  20240721  Androscoggin 

County SO 

18 -yr -old man told girlfriend he was going to get gun and kill himself 

threatened to engage high speed chase if police tried to stop him. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

362  20240726  Kennebec County 

SO 

28 -yr -old man assaulted wife, put rifle in his mouth and threatened 

suicide, taken into protective custody for suicidal threats a year ago but 

no weapons restriction order pursued then. 

363  20240727  Thomaston PD  27 -yr -old man threatening to kill family living upstairs, located by 

police in vehicle with open containers of gasoline in rear seat, claimed 

the homicidal threats were to “scare” the FBI agent he insisted was 

following him everywhere. 

364  20240727  Sanford PD  32 -year -old woman threatened to kill her boyfriend after assaulting 

him, arrested on a warrant on her way to boyfriend’s house to allegedly 

kill him. 

365  20240727  Sanford PD  18 -yr -old man threatened to kill girlfriend, also made multiple threats 

to kill himself if he had to go back to jail. 

366  20240729  York PD  21 -yr -old man threatening suicide after being driven from work where 

he was extremely intoxicated. 

367  2024 0729  Biddeford PD  60 -yr -old man threatening suicide with a gun ; sister too him to hospital 

where he continued to threaten suicide; history of suicidal ideations. 

368  20240730  Sanford PD  34 -yr -old woman attempted suicide by taking prescription drugs and 

trying to strangle herself with a belt; tried to shoot herself previously 

but gun was unloaded. 

369  20240730  Madawaska PD  28 -yr -old man threatened to kill his supervisor and a coworker after 

employment discipline; body armor seen in his vehicle at work. 

370  20240730  Lewiston PD  30 -yr -old man eloped from group home after threatening suicide and, 

once in protective custody, he threatened to commit a mass shooting of 

pedestrians. 

371  2024 0728  Lincoln PD  64 -yr -old man repeatedly threatened to shoot his neighbor in the head. 

372  20240731  York County SO  47 -yr -old man in act of trying to hang himself while cutting his wrists, 

tried to stab wife when she intervened, taken into protective custody by 

law enforcement. 

373  20240731  Winslow PD  22 -yr -old man threatening to kill others and commit suicide, armed 

with handgun when police found him and took him into protective 

custody. 

374  20240801  Augusta PD  47 -yr -old man reported by ex -wife to be suicidal, texted her an image 

of a gun. 

375  20240804  State Police  63 -year -old woman chasing persons delivering firewood with a knife, 

believing them to be stalking her, threatened to shoot them if they 

returned. 

376  20240806  State Police  62 -yr -old man threatening suicide with knife, past history of suicidal 

ideations. 

377  20240806  State Police  14 -yr -old boy threatening to kill elderly uncle with a pulp hook , put 

pulp hook to his own neck. 

378  20240806  Androscoggin 

County SO 

37 -yr -old man threatening suicide, put pistol in mouth, discharged 

shotgun x 4 behind house, evening before was in barn with rope to 

hang himself & and put shotgun to his head, assaulted nurse at hospital. 

379  202400807  Oakland PD  43 -yr -old man threatened father and discharged several rounds into a 

truck in yard upset over his chickens not well cared for while he was 

gone, threatened to steal cruiser, and run over officer, at hospital 

threatened to go to police department and kill himself. 

380  20240808  Bath PD  26 -yr -old woman texted multiple suicidal threats to family; repeated 

threats to EMS staff. 

381  20240810  Bath PD  26 -yr -old man arrested for disorderly conduct; for several days 

thereafter, focused his attention on intimating harm to law enforcement; WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

LE obtained Protective Custody warrant after being refused entry to 

home .

382  20240810  Wells PD  37 -yr -old man attempted to drown 15 -yr -old son in pool; recently 

released from out -of -state MH facility; reported to have recently held 

gun to wife’s head in NH; history of DV and drug offenses. 

383  20240811  Aroostook County 

SO 

28 -yr -old man claims phone has been hacked and he’s being harassed 

by women and men who serve women, i.e., husbands; hates all women; 

carries machete for protection against women. 

384  20240811  Lincoln PD  56 -yr -old man posting death threats against police on social media. 

385  20240806  Lincoln County SO  74 -yr -old man making multiple threats to shoot himself and threatening 

to shoot anyone who tries to take his guns. 

386  20240808  Yarmouth PD  31 -yr -old man threatening to cut artery with knife; when taken into 

custody, he had inflicted superficial cuts on arm and was in possession 

of large knife. 

387  20240813  Clinton PD  47 -yr -old woman threatening suicide; told hospital staff she would kill 

herself by overdosing on potassium. 

388  20240813  Piscataquis County 

SO 

59 -yr -old man making suicidal threats; ingested 600 -700 mg of THC 

gummies; told pol ice multiple times to kill him. 

389  20240814  State Police  32 -yr -old armed security guard with strong suicidal ideation in the 

wake of his father’s death by suicide and a brother’s accidental gunshot 

death. 

390  20240815  Androscoggin 

County SO 

56 -yr -old man f ollowing people he believes are spying on him, CIA 

and Masons are after him, making statements about killing people, 

including his brother. Attempted to kill himself twice in last year. 

391  20240816  Hampden PD  37 -yr -old man argued with girlfriend and then sent multiple texts 

threatening suicide; armed with handgun when police located him. 

392  20240816  Saco PD  64 -yr -old wants to kill Guatemala ns; took aim at persons outside his 

shed but did not shoot because he thought they may be police officers. 

393  20240816  Lisbon PD  56 -yr -old man making suicidal threats to wife while holding a gun to 

his body .

394  20240820  Houlton PD  32 -yr -old man with a plan to carry out suicide with a gun or commit 

“suicide by cop.” 

395  20240820  Somerset County 

SO 

70 -yr -old man called police to pick up his body because he was going 

to kill himself. 

396  20240820  Gorham PD  17 -yr -old boy strangling sister; went into woods as police arrived and 

discharged a firearm. 

397  2024 0821  Androscoggin 

County SO 

61 -yr -old man violated PFA by texting protected person that he was 

going to kill her and then himself. 

398  20240821  Oxford County SO  59 -yr -old man told daughter he was going to kill himself. 

399  20240823  State Police  51 -yr -old man with suicidal thoughts for past week; found in his car 

with hose from exhaust stuck in window; three prior suicide attempts. 

400  20240824  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

38 -yr -old msn stabbed himself in the chest several times creating 

superficial but bleeding wounds; threatened to stab police .

401  20240825  Auburn PD  23 -yr -old man threatened to shoot or hang himself ; communicated 

threats to mother and hospital staff. 

402  20240825  Falmouth PD  25 -yr -old man holding gun to his head; mother has photo of him with 

gun in his mouth. 

403  20240827  Windham PD  42 -yr -old woman with long history of mental illness; impaired 

judgment due to exacerbated depressive symptoms emailing a family 

member suicidal and homicidal statements. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

404  20240828  Houlton PD  34 -yr -old man attempting suicide by cutting arm with knife after two 

days of meth use; prior attempts at suicide. 

405  20240828  Waterville PD  49 -yr -old making escalating homicidal threats to kill domestic partner’s 

family and a family of Muslims in the neighborhood. 

406  20240829  State Police  30 -yr -old man pointed loaded gun at a person he believes is targeting 

and harassing him threatening to kill him; believes people are watching 

him through his telephone. 

407  20240901  Androscoggin 

County SO 

45 -yr -old man threatening to shoot imaginary “undercover cops” in his 

yard. 

408  20240902  Sabattus PD  49 -yr -old man tried to jump into moving traffic, said he would kill 

himself with a gun, threatened to kill wife and children and commit 

suicide by cop. 

409  20240903  Scarborough PD  34 -yr -old man threatened to kill himself, in possession of loaded 

handgun he had taken from someone else. 

410  20240904  Kennebec County 

SO 

42 -yr -old man hearing voices telling him lies, expressed desire to kill 

himself, left home with two firearms. 

411  202409 04  Sanford PD  48 -yr -old man threatened suicide by cop, disclosed that he tried to kill 

himself years earlier by stabbing himself in the stomach. 

412  20240905  Penobscot County 

SO 

40 -yr -old man made video with gun in his mouth to kill himself; 2 -yr -

old and 9 -yr -old in house. 

413  20240905  South Portland PD  36 -yr -old man threatening suicide, family removed firearms, but the 

man went to Cabela’s and purchased a handgun. 

414  2024 0906  Sanford PD  37 -yr -old woman with deteriorating mental health tried to slash another 

person with a knife, threatening to kill others .

415  20240906  Southwest Harbor 

PD 

58 -yr -old man told police officer he was going to shoot himself in the 

heard; history of depression. 

416  20240908  York County SO  25 -yr -old man made threats to ex -fiancé to kill himself with a gun; in 

possession of nine firearms. 

417  20240909  Cumberland PD  27 -yr -old man put barrel of revolver in his mouth threatening to kill 

himself; refused contact with police; protective custody warrant 

obtained and he was taken into custody. 

418  20240909  Sanford PD  64 -yr -old man told police after arrest he had a plan to kill himself with 

a gun. 

419  20240909  Hancock County 

SO 

35 -year -old man behaving violently, exhibiting extreme paranoid 

behavior, threatening to harm himself and others; told police to shoot 

him. 

420  20240910  Augusta PD  25 -yr -old woman left residence with handgun saying she was going to 

kill herself; history of suicidal ideations. 

421  20240910  Presque Isle PD  50 -yr -old woman arrested for assault, told police she was going to kill 

herself; history of suicidal ideations. 

422  20240910  East Millinocket 

PD 

26 -yr -old man threatening to created “suicide by cop” situation; history 

of suicidal ideations. 

423  20240910  Topsham PD  61 -yr -old man arrested for OUI, threatened to kill himself; history of 

threatening to shoot police; handgun in vehicle. 

424  20240910  Houlton PD  25 -yr -old man believes he’s being followed by the cartel, threated to 

shoot anyone following him, believes utility workers are cartel 

members. 

425  20240911  Lisbon PD  53 -yr -old man assaulted mother and threatened his two children, posted 

photo of revolver to his head, taken into custody after nine -hour 

standoff. 

426  20240911  Sanford PD  42 -yr -old man used kitchen knife to severely cut his arm; told police he 

did not want to live. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

427  20240911  Orono PD  34 -yr -old man called town officer and threatened to shoot up a school, 

referenced the Lewiston shootings. 

428  20240911  Bangor PD  42 -yr -old man threatened to shoot people he “could see waling 

around,” and then kill himself. 

429  20240912  Portland PD  34-yr -old man said the next person who showed up would get a bullet 

in the head; also threatened to kill himself ; arrested for DV terrorizing .

430  20240913  Sanford PD  54 -yr -old man threatened to stab himself or commit “suicide by cop” if 

necessary. 

431  20240913  Sabattus PD  24 -yr -old woman threatened to acquire firearm and “blow my brains 

out;” left suicide note. 

432  20240913  Warden Service  39 -yr -old man arrested on warrant and OUI, made threats to kill or 

harm law enforcement. 

433  20240914  Auburn PD  25 -yr -old woman threatening persons with a gun; previously threatened 

to kill herself. 

434  20240915  Cape Elizabeth PD  29 -yr -old man threatening to kill himself with a knife. 

435  20240916  Cumberland 

County SO 

70 -yr -old man armed with AR -15 “as a comfort measure” while 

watching Fox News about the Donald Trump assassination attempt; 

also armed with handgun on his person; experiences blind rages while 

watch Fox News. 

436  20240917  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

17 -yr -old girl threatening to kill herself; history of mental health 

episodes. 

437  20240917  Somerset County 

SO 

47 -yr -old man placed barrel of pistol in his mouth threatening t o kill 

himself. 

438  20240905  Richmond PD  60 -yr -old man threatened to shoot sister -in -law believing she 

encouraged his wife to use illegal drugs. 

439  20240910  York County SO  36 -yr -old man with suicidal ideations; requested wife and father -in -law 

to remove his firearms. 

440  20240828  Capitol Police  44 -yr -old man with chronic suicidal ideation; daily thoughts of killing 

himself, including acquiring a firearm to shoot himself. 

441  20240919  Lewiston PD  24 -yr -old man trying to get girlfriend to return his gun, making suicidal 

threats, including “suicide by cop;” history of suicidal ideations. 

442  20240919  Sanford PD  20 -yr -old woman threatening to “blow my brains out,” and several 

other suicidal threats. 

443  20240920  Wells PD  44 -yr -old woman told daughter and police she was going to buy a gun 

and kill herself. 

444  20240921  Penobscot County 

SO 

66 -yr -old woman told daughter she was going to shoot herself, husband 

took gun away from her after she threatened him with it. 

445  20240921  Brunswick PD  23 -yr -old man threatening to shoot himself or jump into traffic. 

446  20240922  Kennebec County 

SO 

39 -yr -old man making threats to kill himself with a gun, and threats to 

shoot others in town. 

447  20240922  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

33 -yr -old veteran with reported PTSD trying to get gun from lockbox 

to kill himself. 

448  20240923  Sanford PD  24 -yr -old man threatening to kill himself after argument with 

girlfriend; history of suicidal ideations. 

449  20240923  Kennebec County 

SO 

47 -yr -old man threatening to kill himself by overdosing; access to 

firearm and planning on purchasing another. 

450  20240923  York County SO  46 -yr -old man threatening to kill wife in New Hampshire, and then kill 

himself. 

451  20240923  Kennebec County 

SO 

54 -yr -old man making suicidal statements to wife while getting into 

gun safe; family members wrestled loaded gun away from him. 

452  20240924  Capitol Police  40 -yr -old man making homicidal and suicidal threats, states he has the 

personality of a school shooter. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

453  20240922  Hampden PD  47 -yr -old man left home with firearm verbalizing suicidal threats to 

wife. 

454  20240925  Augusta PD  52 -yr -old man with TBI attempted suicide by ingesting prescription 

medication; in possession of firearms. 

455  20240926  Biddeford PD  36 -yr -old man, in the wake of losing his job and his girlfriend, told his 

father and girlfriend he was going to kill himself. 

456  20240927  Kennebec County 

SO 

20 -yr -old man left suicide note citing the death of his dog as no reason 

for him to live; threatened to kill himself and a remaining pet dog. 

457  20240927  Clinton PD  35 -yr -old man texting wife with suicidal ideations and threatening to 

burn house down. 

458  20240930  Androscoggin 

County SO 

60 -yr -old woman called police to report husband trying to poison her to 

inherit her money and she may have to shoot him – “kill or be killed;” 

armed with handgun in waistband when police arrived. 

459  20240930  Rockland PD  47 -yr -old man making threats of violence and killing people at State 

Prison; made threats to kill police officers; claims to be a government 

assassin who’s worked for every president since Reagan. 

460  20240930  Winslow PD  38 -yr -old man threatened to kill police officers who were serving a 

PFA order ; made suicidal threats on social media. 

461  20240910  Skowhegan PD  43 -yr -old man making escalating threats to kill judges at Law Court 

and Skowhegan District Court for refusing to overturn his resisting 

arrest conviction. 

462  20241001  Scarborough PD  61 -yr -old man in declining mental health; focused of late on 

assassinations and mass shootings, including Lewiston; threats to kill 

people, including police officers who took his dog. 

463  20241001  Westbrook PD  52 -yr -old man threatening suicide; told police they failed to get help for 

the Lewiston shooter; willingly accepted protective custody 

464  20241001  Bangor PD  28 -yr -old man told his doctor he was going to kill himself with a gun; 

willingly accepted protective custody. 

465  20241001  Somerset County 

SO 

45 -yr -old woman threatening suicide; husband had wrestle gun from 

her; then threatened to kill herself in a vehicle crash. 

466  20241003  State Police  69 -yr -old woman evicted from home; sent suicide note to landlord and 

sisters; inability to care for herself. 

467  2024 1003  University of 

Maine PD 

19 -yr -old college student on phone with crisis stating he was going to 

harm himself, his girlfriend, and others; in possession of shotgun in 

dorm. 

468  20241006  Rumford PD  22 -22 -r-old man threatening suicide after girlfriend left him with their 

child, walking in roadway hoping to get struck by traffic , asked police 

to shoot him. 

469  20241008  Bangor PD  29 -yr -old man making suicidal statements; history of suicidal ide ations. 

470  20241005  Lincoln County SO  49 -yr -old man told brother he was going to kill his wife who he 

believed was having affairs with “little people,” asked brother to get 

him a g un. 

471  202410 07 Capitol Police  33 -yr -old man believes wife is having sex with a dog , shot and killed 

dog, while in custody threatening to kill cellmates and sexually assault 

other people. 

472  20241010  Brunswick PD  46 -yr -old man threatening to kill himself on brother’s front lawn; 

admitted to police he was suicidal. 

473  20241015  Wilton PD  19 -yr -old man called Crisis to say he was contemplating suicide with a 

rifle. 

474  20241010  Piscataquis County 

SO 

48 -yr -old man threatened to shoot friend and then himself with a 

handgun. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

475  20241011  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

24 -yr -old man threatened to kill pregnant girlfriend and others in the 

residence and then himself; assaulted girlfriends mother and two 

sisters. 

476  20241013  State Police  32 -yea r-old man threatened to kill brother and workers at a group 

home. 

477  20241013  Penobscot County 

SO 

30 -yea r-old man attempted to shoot himself with a shotgun , disarmed 

by a game warden. 

478  20241016  Hancock County 

SO 

30 -yr -old man arrested for DV crimes in the wake of assault on his 

mother and threatening to kill people in the residence. 

479  20241014  State Police  25 -yr -old man threatening to kill himself and others; armed with a 

knife; smashed face into ground after being arrested. 

480  20241016  Clinton PD  67 -yr -old man threatening others with machete; “I’ll slice jugular 

veins.” 

481  2024 1018  State Police  56 -yr -old man called Crisis threatening to kill himself; told police he 

would do so with a gun. 

482  20241018  Lewiston PD  30 -yr -old man threatened to kill himself in wake of breaking up with 

his live -in girlfriend. 

483  20241018  York County SO  50 -yr -old man texted photo to fiancé with gun in his lap and a threat to 

kill himself. 

484  20241018  Dover -Foxcroft PD  49 -yr -old woman threatening to shoot herself in lobby of medical 

practice; husband and son reportedly killed themselves in recent past. 

485  20241019  York County SO  25 -yr -old man texted photo to girlfriend holding pistol to his head and 

a threat to kill himself. 

486  20241019  Clinton PD  69 -yr -old man arrested for attempted murder after shooting his 

girlfriend in the neck during argument. 

487  20241010  Androscoggin 

County SO 

36 -yr -old man badly assaulted two co -workers unprovoked while in a 

manic state; believes that his dead mother is guiding him and he’s a 

prophet. 

488  202410 19 Gorham PD  50 -yr -old man struggling with girlfriend to retrieve handgun to shoot 

himself; 14 -yr -old son restrained him until arrival of police. 

489  20241020  Brunswick PD  39 -yr -old man arrested for DV crimes, expressed suicidal ideations, 

ready access to firearms, history of mental health issues. 

490  20241015  Franklin County 

SO 

51 -yr -old man made suicidal threats, discharged shotgun, mother and 

wife disarmed him, ready access to various firearms. 

491  20241021  Lincoln County SO  35 -yr -old man texted suicidal threats to wife; in possession of handgun 

when confronted by police. 

492  20241022  State Police  42 -yr -old man expressed desire to troopers to kill himself ; subject of 

search warrant for child pornography; told troopers he should have shot 

himself in the head when he saw them arrive .

493  20241022  Windham PD  33 -yr -old man at walk -in clinic expressing suicidal thoughts by 

overdosing, using a firearm, or carbon monoxide poisoning. 

494  20241023  Hampden PD  19 -yr -old man saying he’s going to k ill girlfriend’s father and wants the 

father to kill him; believes he’s being surveilled by the government. 

495  20241023  Kennebec County 

SO 

33 -yr -old woman expressing suicidal thoughts left house with gun; 

texted suicide note to teenage daughter. 

496  20241023  State Police  22 -yr -old man had plan to kill the boyfriend of his ex -girlfriend. 

497  20241023  Windham PD  36 -yr -old woman left home with a shotgun threatening suicide and after 

cutting herself. 

498  20241023  Cumberland 

Cou nty SO 

25 -yr -old man assaulted woman; in possession of guns in backpack in 

backpack ; holding gun to his head playing “Russian Roulette;” WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

499  20241023  Somerset County 

SO 

33 -yr -old man wanted on warrant for DV crimes; recently fired a gun 

within three feet of DV victim; told victim he would commit suicide –

“suicide by cop” if necessary – before going back to jail. 

500  20241024  Bath PD  23 -yr -old man believes his father raped and killed his biological mother 

years ago and that his father is planning to kill his stepmother; 

reportedly on suicide watch at work .

501  20241024  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

61 -yr -old woman made statements to caseworker that she was going to 

kill people and kill herself like Robert Card did; battling health issues 

and husband reportedly in hospital dying. 

502  20241025  Augusta PD  33 -yr -old man threatened suicide with firearm; told police he intended 

to kill himself but his girlfriend took the ammunition for his gun. 

503  20241025  Augusta PD  50 -yr -old man called Crisis to report that he was going to kill himself 

with a firearm. 

504  20241025  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

24 -yr -old Army reservist going through divorce made statements to 

other reservists that he was going to kill himself. 

505  20241025  Bangor PD  40 -yr -old man with suicidal thoughts told Crisis he thought it would be 

fun to commit a mass shooting; told police he did not want to hurt 

anyone but had thoughts of doing so. 

506  20241026  Sabattus PD  46 -yr -old man in vehicle with loaded gun threatening to kill himself; 

police successful in talking him out vehicle and taking him into 

protective custody. 

507  20241027  State Police  35 -yr -old man threatening to kill girlfriend and himself. 

508  20241025  Kennebunk PD  23 -yr -old man cutting his wrists and thighs and threatening to kill 

himself after breakup with girlfriend. 

509  2024 1027  Penobscot County 

SO 

57 -yr -old woman shot herself in the head. She was previously assessed 

and restricted in July 2023 . (#67 on this chart.) She later died from the 

self -inflicted wound. 

510  20241028  Androscoggin 

County SO 

46 -yr -old man believes his parents are “reanimated patients” who have 

died over 29 times; told his father he should have killed his mother who 

he believes died and is now “reanimated ;” mother fears for her safety. 

511  2024 1028  Augusta PD  68 -yr -old man arguing with wife in a bar; made several statements that 

he had a gun and was going to kill himself. 

512  20241029  Rumford PD  22 -yr -old man threatening suicide with a gun; family members 

restrained him until police arrived; told police he was “ready to go,” 

and disclosed that he tried to hang himself when 12 yrs old. 

513  20241028  Rumford PD  33 -yr -old man making threats to kill mother & siblings who he believes 

responsible for denying his multi -million dollar Irish inheritance. 

514  20241029  Sanford PD  54 -yr -old man ran from police who, when apprehended, expressed 

suicidal ideations, and continued to make suicidal threats to medical 

personnel. 

515  20241039  Windham PD  48 -yr -old woman making threats of killing herself; had gun in vehicle 

when interacting with police. 

516  20241030  Auburn PD  82 -yr -old man suffering from dementia threatened to kill himself unless 

he is allowed to drive his car. 

517  20241026  Rockport PD  50 -yr -old man threatening wife and others and believed to be suicidal; 

history of treatment for mental illness. 

518  20241030  Oxford PD  33 -yr -old man arguing with wife, left house saying he was going to kill 

himself; armed with firearm when located by police. 

519  20241031  Kennebunk PD  36 -yr -old man expressing suicidal ideations during domestic argument; 

asked police to shoot him. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

520  20241031  Brewer PD  85 -yr -old man experiencing hallucinations; people living in attic and 

walking thru walls; woman sucking flesh from his toes; military 

veteran in possession of and proficient with firearms. 

521  20241101  Wells PD  26 -yr -old man identifying as woman ; told caseworker she was going to 

acquire gun and kill herself; told police she was depressed over loss of 

insurance coverage. 

522  20241102  Scarborough PD  28 -yr -old man making suicidal statements; told police he had put gun 

in his mouth many times previously. 

523  20241101  Gorham PD  28 -yr -old man contacted online firearms dealer saying he was suicidal 

and “looking for an easy way out;” confirmed the contact with police; 

offered police $5 to shoot him. 

524  20241103  Cumberland 

County SO 

73 -yr -old man making threats to shoot himself; throwing away food ,

refusing to let wife shower, cancelling wife’s medical appointments. 

525  20241102  Lincoln County SO  43 -yr -old woman threatening to shoot herself; initially unable to locate 

her; police obtained protective custody warrant and located her next 

day. 

526  2024 1102  Penobscot County 

SO 

30 -yr -old man pointed pistol at head, threatening to shoot himself. 

527  20241103  Clinton PD  28 -yr -old man told his mother he was going to “blow my brains out;” 

hiding outside in bushes when police arrived. 

528  20241104  Androscoggin 

County SO 

71 -yr -old man, smoking crystal meth and consuming alcohol and 

threatened his roommate and the roommate’s girlfriend with a shotgun. 

529  20241105  Freeport PD  70 -yr -old woman told crisis worker she was going to kill herself with a 

gun. 

530  20241105  South Portland PD  25 -yr -old man texted image of bleeding arm to girlfriend, previously 

took handgun from girlfriend’s residence, said he would be found dead, 

threatened police with “suicide by cop.” 

531  20241105  Lewiston PD  33 -yr -old man threatened to “go postal” and shoot people at Togus VA, 

armed with handgun when confronted by police. 

532  2024 1105  State Police  43 -yr -old woman arrested for OUI (0.25%) , expressed desire to kill 

men, made suicidal statements. 

533  20241105  Oxford PD  33 -yr -old man threatened to “blow my brains out” in presence of co -

workers, fearful that President Trump will not support transgender 

rights. 

534  20241106  Hancock County 

SO 

38 -yr -old man Dx bipolar, off meds for three weeks, called uncle to say 

he was going to kill himself, upset over being charged by game 

warden. 

535  20241101  Lewiston PD  69 -yr -old assaulted adult stepdaughter at hospital and threated to shoot 

hospital staff if his wife was placed in facility she did not like. 

536  20241107  Bath PD  25 -yr -old man threatened to kill co -worker and assaulted others, 

threatened to shoot friend dating his ex -girlfriend, and then kill himself. 

537  20241106  Rumford PD  59 -yr -old man crashed vehicle into house, tried to set house afire, fired 

rounds at residence causing occupants to flee, shot and injured himself. 

538  2024 11 08  Lincoln PD  38 -year -old man called out -of -state friend at 5 a.m., acting bizarre and 

manic, then called friend’s 81 -yr -old father and threatened to kill him, 

made suicidal threats when taken into protective custody. 

539  202411 08  Cumberland 

County SO 

71 -yr -old man increasingly despondent over presidential election, 

resolved to end his life after completing ongoing household 

improvements. 

540  20241109  Biddeford PD  24 -yr -old man assaulted by friends made suicidal threats and threatened 

to shoot anyone who came to his house, ran from police. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

541  20241110  Ellsworth PD  22 -yr -old man held gun to his head threatening suicide, disarmed by 

girlfriend’s father. 

542  20241107  Auburn PD  32 -yr -old man texted girlfriend that he was going to kill himself, 

history of suicidal ideations, hospital called police to initiate weapons 

restriction process. 

543  20241110  State Police  33 -yr -old man sliced his arm with a boxcutter and waited to bleed out, 

history of suicide attempts. 

544  20241111  Scarborough PD  44 -yr -old man left home after telling wife he was going to put a bullet 

in his head; told police he would either shoot or hang himself. 

545  20241112  Winslow PD  43 -yr -old man threatened to shoot police officers and set them on fire; 

threatened to sexually assault female officer and medical staff. 

546  20241112  Rumfor d PD  59 -yr -old man crashed vehicle into house, tried to set house afire, fired 

rounds at residence causing occupants to flee, shot and injured himself. 

(Same case as #537 – DA did not initiate process for permanent order.) 

547  20241112  York County SO  45 -yr -old man put handgun to his head and pulled the trigger to 

demonstrate it was unloaded; later found lying naked on a public 

roadway doing snow angels. 

548  20241114  York County SO  46 -yr -old suicidal man failed to show up for work, located out -of -town 

with firearm in vehicle , admitted suicidal thoughts to police. 

549  20241 115  Winslow PD  38 -yr -old man made suicidal threats to co -worker, sent messages to 

family members that he was going to shoot himself in the mouth. 

550  20241 115  Knox County SO  37 -yr -old woman believes she is another person, threatening to shoot 

domestic partner , claims her cell phone detected her pregnancy 

resulting in miscarriage, history of manic episodes and prior 

involuntary hospitalization in another state. 

551  2024 1116  State Police  77 -yr -old man “feeling suicidal ,” stabbed himself in arm multiple 

times, previously hospitalized after stabbing himself in abdomen with 

scissors. 

552  20241 117  Portland PD  34 -yr -old woman making social media posts of wanting to shoot up 

schools and other places and wanting to eat people and eat herself. 

553  20241117  Waterville PD  30 -yr -old man arrested for driving while impaired repeatedly told 

police that he was “going to blow my head off as soon as I leave here.” 

554  20241118  Androscoggin 

County SO 

55 -yr -old man exhibiting increasing paranoid behavior, believes he’s 

being followed, threatened harm to a person be believe was following 

him, taking photos of persons he believes are following him, provoking 

physical confrontations. 

555  20241119  Cumberland 

County SO 

21 -yr -old man texting ex -girlfriend threatening suicide, told police he 

was in crisis over ex -girlfriend cheating on him. 

556  20241120  State Police  30 -yr -old man making suicidal threats to grandmother, found by 

trooper completely nude next to his vehicle, firearm in vehicle, 

admitted to using meth daily, admitted to earlier thoughts of suicide. 

557  20241120  Saco PD  63 -yr -old man in poor health stabbed himself in neck with knife ,

threatening to shoot police officers, assaulted EMS worker. 

558  20241120  Augusta PD  59 -yr -old man checked himself in hospital because of suicidal 

thoughts, armed at the time, attempted to leave hospital when police 

arrived. 

559  2024 1121  Wells PD  79 -yr -old man threatened to shoot granddaughter and her boyfriend, 

made similar threats in presence of police. 

560  20241121  Gorham PD  85 -yr -old woman distraught over death of pet dog, struck her 88 -yr -old 

husband in the head with a telephone, threatened to shoot husband and 

son -in -law. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

561  20241121  Windham PD  50 -yr -old man posted social media video waving a gun around and 

firing it into the air in residential area, threatening to hold police officer 

hostage. 

562  20241122  Belfast PD  61 -yr -old man threatening to “snap” and take a gun into workplace to 

“get rid of people,” claims it was only a joke , showing signs of 

significant stress. 

563  20241123  Old Town PD  27 -yr -old man hallucinating, sees imaginary people trying to destroy 

his truck , tried to shoot at the people but gun jammed. 

564  20241124  State Police  26 -yr -old man called 911 to report that he shot his mother in the face ,

reported being parked in his car with his firearm, located by trooper 

and taken into custody. 

565  20241124  York County SO  37 -yr -old man grabbed knife and threatened suicide in presence of 

girlfriend , history of suicidal ideations. 

566  20241125  Knox County SO  34 -yr -old woman arrested for assault and other charges, expressed 

desire to kill himself by shooting herself in the head, attempted suicide 

in the past. 

567  20241125  Kennebec County 

SO 

76 -yr -old man made statements to caseworker that he wanted to kill 

himself, admitted to police he wanted to die; when EMS arrived, he 

grabbed a knife to harm himself but was disarmed. 

568  20241125  Penobscot County 

SO 

48 -yr -old man on phone with girlfriend when she heard gunshot and 

believed her had shot himself; police found him intoxicated and 

unharmed on floor, said he tried to shoot himself but missed, wants to 

kill ex -wife and her boyfriend. 

569  20241126  University of 

Maine PD 

22 -yr -old man making threats to shoot up fraternity and local restaurant 

in response to what he perceived as racist comments; history of mental 

illness. 

570  20241125  Thomaston PD  20 -yr -old with violent past threatening to kill family and himself before 

Christmas; previously hospitalized for manic episodes. 

571  20241127  State Police  53 -yr -old man called daughter to say he was going to kill himself, shot 

round into ceiling, admitted to police he wanted to kill himself. 

572  20241127  Augusta PD  37 -yr -old woman armed with a gun threatening to kill herself, put 

barrel of gun in her mouth. 

573  20241127  Gorham PD  25 -yr -old man threatening suicide while arguing with mother and 

damaging items in the home, planned to purchase a firearm to kill 

himself. 

574  20241127  Belfast PD  53 -yr -old homeless man staying in a hotel room threatening hotel 

workers and making suicidal threats. 

575  20241128  Augusta PD  48 -yr -old woman making suicidal statements to parents, hospitalized in 

past for suicidal ideations. 

576  20241126  Somerset County 

SO 

47 -yr -old woman with history of suicidal ideations texted friend her 

intent to kill herself, texted husband image of her holding gun to her 

head; unable to initially find her, police obtained a protective custody 

warrant and later took her into custody. 

577  20241130  State Police  35 -yr -old man arguing with wife said he would kill himself if she left 

him , went to garage and retrieved a shotgun and locked himself in 

bedroom. 

578  20241130  Winslow PD  26 -yr -old man threatened suicide if wife sough divorce, admitted to 

police that he was suicidal and had a shotgun. 

579  20241201  Portland PD  31 -yr -old man in group home assaulted a staff member and threatened 

to kill him and threatened harm to other staff members while wielding a 

baseball bat. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

580  20241129  Kennebec County 

SO 

65 -yr -old woman grieving over death of husband shot herself in the 

head with a pellet gun and cut her wrist. 

581  20241202  Brunswick PD  40 -yr -old man told his doctor he wanted to kill his girlfriend’s 

neighbor, confirmed with police his desire to do so. 

582  20241117  Bangor PD  25 -yr -old man called police to take his guns because he was suicidial, 

attempted earlier in the day to hang himself at work. 

583  20241202  Lewiston PD  35 -yr -old man threatening to stab himself and create a “suicide by cop” 

situation and telling Crisis worker he wants to kill people; confronted 

police on bridge armed with a knife. 

584  20241202  Lincoln County SO  16 -yr -old boy with thoughts that he wants to kill his father and thought 

of doing so recently when on a hunting excursion with his father. 

585  20241202  Lewiston PD  42 -yr -old man making homicidal threats toward law enforcement and 

certain family members he thinks do not pay enough attention to him. 

586  20241202  Portland PD  51 -yr -old man in group home obtained gun to shoot a female resident 

he believes responsible for ruining his relationship with his girlfriend; 

threatened to blow up building. 

587  20241204  Waldo County SO  16 -yr -old boy with history of suicidal and homicidal threats and 

assaultive and self -harm behavior at home and school ; protective 

custody warrant obtained by law enforcement and taken into custody. 

588  20241203  Washington 

County SO 

68 -yr -old woman actively psychotic, manic with paranoia, bizarre 

behavior including homicidal ideations, texted images of firearms to 

her landlord with veiled threats of using them on “State of Maine” 

people. 

589  20241204  Cape Elizabeth PD  26 -yr -old man “out of control” and armed with handgun threatening 

suicide, told police he was holding gun to his head when stopped by 

police. 

590  20241205  Hancock County 

SO 

37 -yr -old man grabbed gun during DV incident with wife, claims he 

was going to use gun on himself, arrested for several DV -related 

crimes. 

591  20241205  Lewiston PD  72 -yr -old man depressed over death of son at hospital ER telling 

medical staff he intended to shoot himself. 

592  20241207  State Police  60 -yr -old man expressing suicidal ideations; posted image of himself 

on social media with a gun ; told police he wanted to harm himself. 

593  20241206  Kennebunk PD  20 -yr -old man ingested overdose of prescribed medication in suicide 

attempt; history of suicidal ideations and psychiatric hospitalization. 

594  2024 1206  State Police  36 -yr -old woman making suicidal threats while holding knife to wrist 

after making superficial cuts. 

595  20241207  Brewer PD  33 -yr -old man grabbed shotgun and threatened suicide while arguing 

with father, father managed to disarm him; history of suicidal ideations. 

596  20241207  State Police  60 -yr -old man signaling suicide and posting image on social media of 

him and a gun. 

597  2024 1207  Lewiston PD  24 -yr -old man threatening hospital staff with statements of “shooting 

places up,” and “it will be a blood bath; assaulted security person. 

598  20241209  Wells PD  47 -yr -old man expressing suicidal ideations, told police he had guns 

and contemplated that day killing himself; PTSD from military service. 

599  20241209  Fairfield PD  24 -yr -old man threatening to stab himself; contemplating “suicide by 

cop;” exclaimed to police that “hanging works if you can find a good 

tree branch.” 

600  20241210  Somerset County 

SO 

64 -yr -old man with plan to shoot himself, but instead ingested 90 blood 

pressure pills. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

601  20241211  Kennebec County 

SO 

37 -yr -old man making suicidal threats on anniversary of brother’s 

suicide; ingested overdose of prescription medications; tried to get to 

gun safe in garage but was thwarted by police. 

602  20241211  Cumberland 

County SO 

66 -yr -old woman told friend she had a gun and was going to kill 

herself ; stressed on anniversary of son’s death of 11 years ago. 

603  20241212  Kennebec County 

SO 

33 -yr -old man attempted suicide by ingesting 100 antidepressant and 

antihypertension tablets; prior attempts at suicide; history of psychiatric 

hospitalization. 

604  20241212  Scarborough PD  19 -yr -old man , multiple attempts at suicide and expressing both 

suicidal and homicidal thoughts .

605  20241212  Sanford PD  35 -yr -old man sent multiple messages to ex -girlfriend stating he was 

going to kill himself. 

606  20241213  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

35 -yr -old woman feeling suicidal and overwhelmed with family issues 

grabbed a shotgun and fled into the woods where she fired the weapon. 

607  20241215  Piscataquis County 

SO 

28 -yr -old volunteer firefighter went to fire station and told fire chief he 

was going shoot himself. 

608  20241217  Westbrook PD  27 -yr -old man with past suicide attempts and homicidal ideations 

called and left voicemail with business owner threatening to kill him. 

609  20241217  Piscataquis County 

SO 

35 -yr -old man texted image of gun to his ex -girlfriend and threatened 

to kill himself. 

610  20241219  Westbrook PD  15 -yr -old girl with 2023 journal detailing plans for a school shooting, 

including names of potential student targets; claims now she has no 

homicidal ideations but suicidal thoughts. 

https://www.pressherald.com/2024/12/20/westbrook -student -taken -

into -protective -custody -after -making -threats/ 

611  20241219  Old Orchard Beach 

PD 

34 -yr -old man threatened to kill credit card call takers, his mother, his 

dog, and himself; admitted to police a history of making similar threats. 

612  20241220  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

34 -yr -old man making repeated threats to kill himself. 

613  20241222  York County SO  44 -yr -old woman with handgun left home after telling her boyfriend 

she was going to kill herself. 

614  20241223  Clinton PD  38 -yr -old man told his mother he was going to attempt “suicide by 

cop” after earlier unsuccessful attempt at suicide by overdose. 

615  20241223  Waterville PD  57 -yr -old man sent text messages and images of gun to friend 

expressing intentions of killing himself. 

616  20241224  Waldoboro PD  39 -yr -old man armed with handgun and threatening to kill family and 

himself; discharged rounds in house; also in possession of AR -15. 

617  20241226  State Police  46 -yr -old man in possession of loaded shotgun making homicidal 

threats to his father. 

618  202412 27  Biddeford PD  38 -yr -old man intentionally crashed vehicle into tree in a suicide 

attempt; two firearms in vehicle and another at home. 

619  20241228  State Police  38 -yr -old woman ingested overdose of narcotics during verbal 

argument with boyfriend in an attempt to kill herself. 

62 0 20241229  Houlton PD  71 -yr -old man believes there are demons in his apartment he must 

shoot; tenants of apartment building evacuated after police found a 

grenade in his apartment. 

621  20241229  State Police  31 -yr -old woman seeking a firearm from a friend to kill her dogs and 

then herself. 

622  20241229  York County SO  52 -yr -old woman discharged shotgun at her head just as boyfriend 

deflected the discharged resulting in injury to the side of her head and 

ear. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

623  20241230  Portland PD  84 -yr -old man primary caregiver for wife in hospice told visiting nurse 

he had acquired a gun to kill his wife and then himself. 

624  20241228  Bar Harbor PD  36 -yr -old man arrested for OUI and stopped shortly after told officer he 

was waiting for his wife and kids to leave so he could go home and kill 

himself. 

625  20241230  Aroostook County 

SO 

36 -yr -old man believes people are telling lies about him and believes 

his deceased father is “secretly alive;” posting on social media that 

“everyone is going to die soon.” 

626  20241230  Somerset County 

SO 

62 -yr -old man threatening neighbor including pointing a handgun at 

him; expressed suicidal ideations to police. 

627  20241231  Auburn PD  43 -yr -old man making threats to shoot himself, told family members he 

intended to “blow my brains out.” 

628  2024123 0 Biddeford PD  75 -yr -old man shot himself in abdomen in suicide attempt; died two 

days later in hospital after surgery. 

629  202501 01  Buxton PD  63 -yr -old man with firearms threatening to kill himself; when 

confronted by police, he implored them to shoot him. 

630  20250102  Sanford PD  73 -yr -old transient told to leave apartment building hallway, told police 

he would acquire a gun and kill himself; admitted to past attempt at 

suicide by overdosing on prescription medication. 

631  202 50106  Veazie PD  46 -yr -old man making suicidal threats to family members; threatening 

to assault wife; threatened in the past to execute family members. 

632  202 50108  State Police  33 -yr -old man experiencing hallucinations of being followed by a black 

cow, as well as dogs in his car; self -care for mental and physical health 

perilously lacking; continuously discharging firearms in neighborhood; 

threatened to kill neighbor and her husband; Protective Custody 

Warrant obtained. 

633  20250110  Somerset County 

SO 

23 -yr -old man armed with shotgun during argument with wife; told 

wife if police were called, he would “go Waco” on them and her. 

634  20250110  Penobscot County 

SO 

50 -yr -old man with history of mental health issues and suicidal 

ideations; threatened to commit suicide to accomplish time travel. 

635  20250110  Washington 

County SO 

55 -yr -old man threatened to shoot wife or himself; history of threates 

of self -harm. 

636  20250110  Cumberland 

County SO 

36 -yr -old man threatening to burn house down and kill himself. 

637  20250112  Old Orchard Beach 

PD 

37 -yr -old Army Reservist reported by superior to be suicidal and 

threatening self -harm; history of suicid es in family; told police he 

thinks constantly of hanging himself with a belt. 

638  202 50108  York County SO  64 -yr -old woman threatening suicide with knife before being disarmed; 

attempted to gain access to firearm before eloping to woods where she 

was found by game wardens. 

639  20250110  Fort Kent PD  45 -yr -old texted father that he was going to kill himself to end “online 

harassment” and hearing voices. 

640  20250112  Kennebec County 

SO 

48 -yr -old suicidal man recently discharged from psychiatric unit 

experiencing hallucinations that listening devices are in home, as well 

as persons hiding in home to listen to him. 

641  20250112  Rumford PD  30 -yr -old woman armed with gun threatening to kill her husband and 

herself, d isarmed by mother -in -law ; husband claimed police taking his 

guns was 2 nd Amendment violation and he would live elsewhere in 

order to keep his guns. 

642  20250112  Old Town PD  47 -yr -old man threatening to commit suicide within the next three days 

by jumping off a bridge or shooting himself. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

643  20250113  State Police  48 -yr -old woman arrested in a stolen vehicle, told trooper she had cut 

her wrists several times in the past and expressed suicidal ideations to 

escape drug problems and bad relationship with boyfriend. 

644  20 250113  Portland PD  24 -yr -old man expressing suicidal and homicidal ideations on daily 

basis , thoughts of shooting or stabbing as many people as possible, 

extreme guilt over thoughts he may be a pedophile. 

645  20250113  Houlton PD  14 -yr -old boy wrote several pages expressing desire to kill himself in 

light of bad home life and romantic break -up. 

646  202501 13 Falmouth PD  40 -yr -old man with notebook of writings threatening to “kill millions 

of people and I’m not sorry ” in holy war “in the name of Jesus Christ 

and his stickmen; several previous mental health contacts with police. 

647  20250 114  Bangor PD  41 -yr -old man called and texted ex -wife his intentions to shoot himself; 

cautioned her to not call police and create a “bigger scene” than 

necessary. 

648  202 50114  Clinton PD  71 -yr -old man told police officer doing welfare checks that he want to 

shoot himself or overdose on medications. 

649  20250116  Buxton PD  89 -yr -old man shot himself in the chest in an attempt to commit 

suicide, called 911 for help when he decided he did not want to die; 

previous suicide attempt by driving into a truck .

650  20250116  Portland PD  31 -yr -old man attempted to purchase firearm, diagnosed as paranoid 

sch izophrenic, angry at world, delusional, said he need to kill an old 

friend. 

651  20250117  Bangor PD  61 -yr -old man called police expressing thoughts of suicide and said he 

was going to a hospital in Portland and shoot someone. 

652  20250117  Bar Harbor PD  30 -yr -old man sent several text messages to girlfriend saying he was 

going to into the woods and shoot himself in the head. 

653  2025 0117  Sanford PD  53 -yr -old woman diagnosed as paranoid and was prescribed 

medications; during welfare check, she said she was “going to blow my 

brains out;” armed with two pistols when taken into custody by police. 

654  20250117  Scarborough PD  19 -yr -old man “flipped out over pizza,” grabbed knife and threatened 

to kill himself, increasing mental health decline according to family; 

past thoughts of suicide. 

655  20250118  Sanford PD  23 -yr -old man in bed with girlfriend when he removed gun from under 

pillow, held it to his head saying he was tired to seeing dead people and 

needed to stop it. 

656  20250118  Portland PD  44 -yr -old man drove to hospital after attempt to shoot himself in the 

head failed; police recovered gun from his car. 

657  20250119  Jay PD  53 -yr -old man threatened to take gun to pharmacy to “make them 

listen.” 

658  20250119  Old Orchard Beach 

PD 

50 -yr -old man threatened to kill his mother and himself, put gun in his 

mouth during argument about ex -girlfriend. 

659  20250120  Piscataquis County 

SO 

56 -yr -old man sending text messages to his son of intention to kill 

himself; police removed 13 firearms from his home. 

660  20250121  Rumford PD  35 -yr -old man called Crisis to report he had a loaded firearm under his 

chin and was going to kill himself. 

661  20250117  Oxford County SO  33 -yr -old man making threats to kill his mother, determined by 

physician to be suffering mental illness. 

662  20240121  Cumberland 

County SO 

82 -yr -old man shot himself in the head with a gun he recently 

purchased from a firearms dealer; no prior signs or warning of suicidal 

ideations. 

663  20240122  Wells PD  79 -yr -old man told police officer he wanted to kill his stepson or at 

least beat him so bad he would not be able to move. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

664  20250122  Gorham PD  29 -yr -old man in child custody battle threatened to go to daycare center 

with a gun and “make a scene;” convicted felon but in possession of a 

firearm; significant past involvements with law enforcement; history of 

mental health issues. 

665  20250122  Fort Kent PD  77 -yr -old man with history of mental health issues threatened to kill 

neighbors; called Bath PD making threats to burn down buildings and 

kill people. 

666  20250121  Topsham PD  33 -yr -old man with history of psychiatric hospitalization called police ,

which generated a welfare check; threatened police officers with a 

machete which resulted in officers shooting and injuring the man. 

667  20250123  Androscoggin 

County SO 

64 -yr -old man called police to say he was going to Lewiston to shoot 

people; history of psychosis and substance use. 

668  20250124  Waldo County SO  50 -yr -old man threatened to shoot wife and dogs during domestic 

argument; fired a round through a window; consistently highly 

intoxicated with history of depression. 

669  20250124  Knox County SO  26 -yr -old man expressing homicidal thoughts and threats of suicide in 

wake of marriage breakup; police obtained Protective Custody warrant. 

670  20250125  Lewiston PD  24 -yr -old man asking others in shelter where he can acquire firearms to 

shoot up shelter; told companion he was going to shoot up a warming 

center with a ghost gun; previous psychiatric hospitalizations. 

671  20250127  Bar Harbor PD  40 -yr -old New York man reported to be in Bar Harbor with a firearm 

and an intention to kill himself; subject of NY ERPO for homicidal and 

suicidal ideations; history of depression. 

672  20250127  Augusta PD  59 -yr -old man told physician he wanted to kill himself with a gun; 

bipolar history. 

673  20250128  State Police  49 -yr -old man threatened suicide while being question in a computer 

crimes investigation; pistol found in vehicle, several more firearms 

found in home. 

674  20250130  Lewiston PD  57 -yr -old man made suicidal threats to wife, including “suicide by cop” 

if she called the police; armed with handgun when located by police. 

675  20240131  Cumberland 

County SO 

43 -yr -old woman told ex -husband she was going to kill herself with a 

gun he left in the residence. 

676  2025 0131  Scarborough PD  60 -yr -old man picked up handgun during argument with wife and 

threatened to shoot her and himself; threated “suicide by cop” if she 

called the police. 

677  20250201  State Police  30 -yr -old man threatening to obtain gun and kill himself, ran into road 

in front of moving vehicle, tried to retrieve knife; history of suicide 

attempts and psychiatric hospitalizations. 

678  20250129  State Police  39 -yr -old man told his sister that “someone is going to die tonight,” 

told his mother he was going to kill several people; threatened “suicide 

by cop” if police called; multiple past involvements with law 

enforcement. Protective custody warrant obtained. 

679  20250203  South Portland PD  31 -yr -old man made suicidal threats to police when his car was towed, 

similar statements to hospital ED staff; history of psychiatric 

hospitalizations. 

680  20250204  Auburn PD  27 -yr -old man told two persons he was going to shoot himself; in 

possession of pistol and AR -15. 

681  20250204  State Police  47 -yr -old man choked neighbor’s cat and, armed with a pistol, 

threatened to shoot neighbor and cat. 

682  20250205  Augusta PD  25 -yr -old man in physical altercation with parents retrieved gun and 

threatened to shoot them and himself. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

683  20250206  Penobscot County 

SO 

28 -yr -old man sent text messages to wife that hhe was going to kill 

himself. 

684  20250206  Lincoln County SO  52 -yr -old woman with deep lacerations of ear and neck self -inflicted 

after another argument with her mother; past suicidal ideations. 

685  20250207  Penobscot County 

SO 

92 -yr -old woman threatened to go to son’s residence and shoot him; 

she believes son is stealing from her; in possession of a .357 magnum 

revolver. 

686  20250207  Hampden PD  47 -yr -old man experiencing psychotic episode imploring family and 

police to let him die, armed with a knife. 

687  20250208  Androscoggin 

County SO 

43 -yr -old man seeking a gun to kill himself; depressed over recent 

arrest for OUI. 

688  20250209  Portland PD  50 -yr -old man threatened to shoot two young Black men who he 

claimed threatened to rape his wife and mother. 

689  2025 0209  Oxford County SO  47 -yr -old man experiencing paranoia , believes unknown persons are 

stalking him via social media, told co -workers he’s concerned he will 

hurt himself and others. 

690  20250210  Sanford PD  20 -yr -old man told friend of plan to commit suicide with a gun; 

previous attempt at suicide by overdosing. 

691  20250210  Sagadahoc County 

SO 

34 -yr -old man argued with girlfriend at home in CT, left suicide note 

and drove to Maine; past history of suicide attempts. 

692  20250211  Winslow PD  59 -yr -old man threatened to kill co -workers at job site, had list of 

targeted persons. 

693  20250212  Androscoggin 

County SO 

40 -yr -old man threatening suicide and “suicide by cop;” history of 

delusional and paranoid behavior, believes a device was implanted by 

the government when he was in jail in NH. 

694  20250213  Auburn PD  39 -yr -old man threatening to hurt his two roommates and “blow my 

brains out.” 

695  20250213  Sanford PD  69 -yr -old man threatening to kill operator of construction vehicle who 

he says was responsible for his son’s death; past hospitalization for 

suicide threat. 

696  20250214  Piscataquis County 

SO 

33 -yr -old man sending text messages to friend threatening to kill 

himself with a firearm. 

697  20250214  Winslow PD  63 -yr -old man threatened suicide, asked police to shoot him, told police 

if they had not shown up, he would not have made through the day. 

698  2025 0214  Somerset County 

SO 

30 -yr -old man expressing desire to kill his family “to save them;” 

increasing paranoid behavior. 

699  2025 0215  State Police  30 -yr -old man assaulted girlfriend and threatened to kill her, pointed 

gun at her face. 

700  20250215  Lincoln County SO  21 -yr -old man, during argument with girlfriend, put pistol to his head 

while driving with girlfriend and threatened to kill himself 

701  20250215  Augusta PD  39 -yr -old man threatened to kill wife with gun, fired a round in the 

house ; prohibited from possessing firearms due to prior DV conviction. 

702  20250216  South Portland PD  22 -yr -old man threatening family, and threatening neighbor while 

armed with a knife ; deteriorating mental condition. 

703  20250217  Cape Elizabeth PD  31 -yr -old man repeating to family members the desire to kill himself. 

704  20250218  York County SO  30 -yr -old man in live chat holding firearm to is head threatening 

suicide .

705  20250210  Bridgton PD  42 -yr -old woman arguing with husband, sent text message to friend 

with image of her holding a gun to her head threatening suicide. 

706  20250217  Waterville PD  35 -yr -old man called Crisis and said he had a loaded gun in his hand 

and was going to kill himself; confirmed his suicidal ideations with 

police. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

707  20250219  Cumberland 

County SO 

38 -yr -old man told sister he puts gun in his mouth every night with 

thoughts of killing himself. 

708  20250219  Augusta PD  30 -yr -old with history of threats to kill his father, chased father with 

scissors, alluded to “suicide by cop.” 

709  20250219  South Berwick PD  29 -yr -old man reported by mother to have pistol and is suicidal, 

confirmed suicidal ideations with police. 

710  20250220  Old Orchard Beach 

PD 

37 -yr -old man with known history of PTSD for 14 yrs, called Veteran’s 

Crisis and said he would go into woods and shoot himself; made 

homicidal threats against police. 

711  20250220  Biddeford PD  38 -yr -old man making repeated suicidal threats to wife; told police he 

wanted to kill himself. 

712  20250220  Windham PD  23 -yr -old man fled from traffic crash threatening to kill himself; 

admitted to police strong suicidal ideations. 

713  20250221  Knox County SO  60 -yr -old man told therapist he was going to kill himself by hanging, 

cutting his fingers off, or O Ding on pills & alcohol; protective custody 

warrant obtained; in possession of machete when taken into custody. 

714  20250222  Gardiner PD  50 -yr -old suicidal man told wife hw wanted to shoot her and their five 

children; cut his leg with a chainsaw; texted police that they had 

permission to kill him. 

715  202502 23  Oakland PD  71 -yr -old man told police dispatcher that head terminal cancer and 

wanted to “blow my brains out” while alluding to guns in house. 

716  20250223  Biddeford PD  28 -yr -old man arrested for DV assault, making series of suicidal threats 

during booking. 

717  20250224  State Police  55 -yr -old man in declining mental health threatened wife with a gun; 

protective custody obtained after several unsuccessful attempts to take 

him into protective custody. 

718  202 50225  Hancock County 

SO 

69 -yr -old man with dementia armed with gun in a pocket and 

experiencing hallucinations of unwanted people in his house trying to 

poison his cat ; refused to disarm resulting in police forcibly doing so. 

719  202 50227  Saco PD  18 -yr -old man with gun threatening to kill himself ; admitted to police 

putting gun to his head with intention of shooting himself. 

720  20250227  Piscataquis County 

SO 

31 -yr -old man making homicidal statements threatening to “take out” 

deputy sheriffs; claiming to be “Sir General Elliot Jensen,” and US 

Airborne Texas Ranger, NCIS, and US Space Force. 

721  202502 28  Kennebunk PD  13 -yr -old boy prohibited from participating in school wrestling 

threatened to “kill and gut” the school principal ; pocket knife found in 

backpack at school; made suicidal threats to mother. 

722  20250228  York County SO  23 -yr -old trans man threatened to kill himself, unable to access family 

gun safe, threatened to hang himself, armed with pellet gun when take 

into protective custody. 

723  20250228  Penobscot County 

SO 

23 -yr -old man trespassing in ex -girlfriend’s apartment, thereafter 

texting suicidal thoughts, told police he had suicidal thoughts. 

724  20250228  Westbrook PD  21 -yr -old man falsely claimed to have killed his grandparents and 

threatening to kill himself via “suicide by cop.” 

725  20250301  State Police  35 -yr -old man with self -inflicted injuries arrested for OUI and DV 

assault; made homicidal threats to DV victim. 

726  2025 0302  Waterville PD  24 -yr -old man told sister he wanted gun to kill himself, solicited gun on 

Facebook offering “cash at moment’s notice;” history of suicidal 

ideations and one prior attempt. 

727  20250 303  State Police  28 -yr -old man on MDMA (ecs tasy) stripped naked and set down in 

road in -10 degree weather after involvemen t in traffic crash; in 

company of wife and infant child; making delusional statements. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

728  20250304  Westbrook PD  35 -yr -old man called friend to say he wanted to shoot himself in the 

head; wanted his ex -girlfriend to find his body. 

729  20250304  Bar Harbor PD  55 -yr -old man held loaded rifle to wife’s head; told police he 

contemplated killing her and then himself. 

730  20250305  Androscoggin 

County SO 

58 -yr -old woman called 911 requesting help but said she would shoot 

anyone who showed u p at her house; inference of intend “suicide by 

cop.” 

731  20250305  Saco PD  57 -yr -old woman hearing voices telling her to kill her parents to inherit 

their money; engages in loud and angry dialogue with voices. 

732  20250305  Clinton PD  40 -yr -old man told police he wanted to kill himself; wife confirmed 

suicidal ideations; several firearms in residence. 

733  20250305  Lincoln County SO  14 -yr -old boy threatened to shoot himself when he learned temporary 

custody had been granted to father. 

734  20250306  Penobscot County 

SO 

28 -yr -old man threatening to harm ex -girlfriend ; threatening suicide; 

video of him placing barrel of rifle under his chin. 

735  20250306  Kennebec County 

SO 

56 -yr -old man believes “hacker” is out to kill him, also believes wife 

wants him dead to collect life insurance proceeds, extremely paranoid, 

admitted to Togus VA after driving to police station with a gun. 

736  20250306  State Police  15 -yr -old girl threatened suicide with knife, inflicted superficia l cuts .

737  20250309  Lincoln County SO  40 -yr -old man placed gun in wife’s hands and told her to shoot him; 

thereafter assaulted wife. 

738  20250310  South Portland PD  49 -yr -old man believes his life is dictated by persons placing aps on his 

phone and voices speaking to him; wants to kill himself; history of 

suicide attem pts; asked police to shoot him. 

739  20250303  State Police  46 -yr -old man believes his wife is pimping out their children; when 

challenged by wife, he threatened suicide; refuses medical attention for 

potentially septic infection; followed random vehicle believing his son 

was kidnapped. 

740  20250312  Saco PD  30 -yr -old man with psychotic symptoms for 3 weeks hearing voices; 

threatened to kill his father and threatened to kill himself. 

741  20250312  Augusta PD  23 -yr -old man threatening to shoot himself in wake of mother’s death; 

roommate told police his mental health been declining long before 

mother’s death. 

742  20250311  Wells PD  50 -yr -old NY woman in Maine making suicidal threats; left suicide 

note with sister in NY. 

743  20250314  Ellsworth PD  59 -yr -old woman threatening suicide via OD, firearm, or “suicide by 

cop ;” two prior suicide attempts. 

744  20250315  Freeport PD  22 -yr -old man threatening suicide in wake of girlfriend leaving him. 

745  20250315  Wells PD  30 -yr -old man texting suicidal threats to girlfriend; armed with 

handgun when police encountered him. 

746  20250317  Monmouth PD  22 -yr -old man told friend he wanted to live out his “dream” of “suicide 

by cop ” after another friend wrestled a gun from him that he was 

holding to his mouth. 

747  2025 0318  Westbrook PD  33 -yr -old man making suicidal threats while being verbally abusive to 

wife and young children; retrieved a life insurance policy and 

threatened to “blow my brains out.” 

748  20250318  Lincoln PD  25 -yr -old man retrieved gun during argument with wife and threatened 

to kill himself, all in the presence of wife and young children. 

749  20250319  State Police  26 -yr -old woman attempted suicide by cutting wrist with scissors after 

an argument with a family member. 

750  20250320  Augusta PD  43 -yr -old man making multiple suicidal statements, desire to use gun to 

kill himself. WEAPONS RESTRICTION ORDERS 

Since Effective Date of Statute on 07.01.2020 

# Date Agency Remarks 

> Brian MacMaster
> 4/22/2025

751  20250320  Saco PD  40 -yr -old man described as “chronically suicidal” told doctor he had 

purchased a gun, presumably to kill himself. 

752  20250321  Knox County SO  46 -yr -old man engaged in DV encounter with partner with loaded gun; 

threatened to kill himself and any police officer who showed up. 

753  20250322  Waldo County SO  50 -yr -old man assaulting wife and threatening to kill himself; fired 

several rounds from home when police arrived, but surrendered shortly 

after. 

754  20250323  Belfast PD  42 -yr -old man suffering from “severe PSTD” and in possession of 

numerous firearms threatened to kill himself if wife filed for divorce; 

wife concerned about “suicide by cop;” told police he would have no 

issues “killing bad people.” 

755  20250324  Fort Kent PD  53 -yr -old man suffering from paranoia, auditory hallucinations , and 

persecutory delusions threatened a random motorist at a traffic light 

with a baseball bat. 

756  20250324  Saco PD  56 -yr -old woman threatening to commit suicide with knife; access to a 

high -powered rifle in residence. 

757  20250325  Oxford County SO  55 -yr -old woman threatening suicide; two adult daughters wrestled 

firearm from her; earlier threatened to kill her husband and herself. 

758  20250325  Lewiston PD  26 -yr -old man texting suicidal threats to friends, in possession of 

firearms, hospitalized after ingesting rubbing alcohol and bleach. 

759  20250325  York County SO  34 -yr -old man on phone with Crisis “actively suicidal” and armed with 

a firearm. 

760  20250325  Brewer PD  29 -yr -old man making social media posts and texting his desire to see 

his grandmother and father dead and wanting to chop his neighbors into 

bits, and kill all Black and Jewish people. 

761  20250326  Damariscotta PD  48 -yr -old man met officer doing welfare check at door with rifle, 

dropped rifle and retreated back into residence, then came back out 

telling the officer to shoot him, found to have disconnected a propane 

gas line resulting in residence filling with gas. 

762  20250328  Lincoln County SO  49 -yr -old man threatened to shoot and kill wife; locked himself in 

bedroom and threatened “suicide by cop.” 

763  20250325  Saco PD  64 -yr -old man with Stage 4 cancer told healthcare provider he was 

going to kill himself, confirmed with police his suicidal intentions. 

764  2025 0330  State Police  17 -yr -old boy upset over paycheck not on time, assaulted mother, and 

threatened to go to workplace and “shoot them and kill themm;” history 

of violent behavior. 

765  20250330  Sabattus PD  23 -yr -old man sent text messages to family members inferring suicidal 

ideation after a family argument. 

766  20250330  State Police  36 -yr -old man assaulted girlfriend, assaulted arresting officer, assaulted 

EMS personnel; previously diagnosed as bipolar, unmedicated for two 

years.
