Title: Wyoming Capitol Evacuated, Locked Down After Report Of Suspected Explosive Device

URL Source: https://cowboystatedaily.com/2025/10/21/wyoming-capitol-cleared-locked-down-after-report-of-suspected-explosive-device/

Published Time: 2025-10-21T11:52:00-06:00

Markdown Content:
_UPDATE 12:30 p.m.: This story has been updated to include information that roads around the Capitol have been closed to traffic._

CHEYENNE — The Wyoming Capitol was evacuated and put on lockdown Tuesday morning after a report of a suspected improvised explosive device (IED) in the building, the Wyoming Highway Patrol reports.

It’s not immediately clear when the report came in, but by 11 a.m. there was a significant law enforcement presence around the Capitol.

That includes a large WHP mobile command center at the north end of the Capitol grounds.

“Right now, what we are seeing is we got a report of a suspected — and it’s important to include that word — suspected IED,” WHP public information officer Aaron Brown told Cowboy State Daily. “So, we evacuated the Capitol building … and we’re asking people to avoid the area.”

The incident also interrupted a legislative committee meeting, said Heather Kammerman, financial officer for the Legislative Services Office.

She was outside the Capitol walking to her vehicle to go home, saying they weren’t given an ETA as to when they might be allowed to return.

“I don’t know an ETA of how long it’s going to be, they just said, ‘Everyone evacuate,’” she said.

In the meantime, “I’m going home to work,” she said. “I have a laptop at home, so I’m going there to work because there’s really not much you can do here.”

By about noon, the area surrounding the Capitol was closed of to traffic, Brown said. Between Carey and Central avenues, the roads from 21st through 27th streets were closed.

"That is basivcally to keep people out of the investigation, but also to keep people safe," Brown said. "That's the big one for us, is making sure the public is safe as we're investigating."

In addition to the Capitol being evacuated, those working in the nearby Herschler Building are sheltering in place, Brown said.

*    

**Sweeping**
------------

While available information about what’s happening inside the Capitol is “a little chaotic right now,” Brown said the No. 1 priority is “making sure everyone’s safe.”

There also have been no reports of anyone being hurt, Brown said.

In addition to the Wyoming Highway Patrol, agencies responding include the Wyoming Division of Criminal Investigation, Laramie County Sheriff’s Office and a joint bomb squad operated by the LCSO and Cheyenne Police Department.

As the building is searched and swept for any possible IEDs or other devices, uniformed officers with dogs were observed patrolling around the outside of the Capitol campus.

While inconvenient, Kammerman said she’s grateful for the WHP and other agencies that have responded.

“They have to do their jobs, and I’d rather be safe than not, you know?” she said.

When the state Legislature is in session, the Capitol building is swept daily by two WHP troopers with dogs.

A little more than a year ago on Sept. 16, 2024, the Herschler Building on the Capitiol grounds was evacuated after a suspicious white power was found the Secretary of State's Office. That incident coincided with threats that day made to the secretaries of state of Iowa and Nebraska.

_This is a developing story and will be updated as more information is available._

_Jackson Walker can be reached at walker@cowboystatedaily.com and_ _Greg Johnson can be reached at greg@cowboystatedaily.com._

In case you missed it
---------------------
