Title: San Francisco Macy’s to close in devastating blow to downtown

URL Source: https://www.sfchronicle.com/realestate/article/sf-macys-close-18690200.php

Published Time: 2024-02-27T13:37:31Z

Markdown Content:
Macy’s will be closing its store at Union Square in San Francisco, though the timeline of the closure has not been revealed.

Juliana Yamada/Special to the Chronicle

Macy’s will close its massive flagship store in Union Square, San Francisco officials said Tuesday, a major setback to the city’s premier shopping district and its larger downtown recovery efforts during an election year.

The Essential Sale: 6 months for 99¢. Elevate your everyday with exceptional reporting.

The Essential Sale: 6 months for 99¢. Elevate your everyday with exceptional reporting.

ACT NOW

The store will remain open until the company finds a buyer for the property, Mayor London Breed said in a statement Tuesday morning. The Chronicle has learned that the store will remain open until at least 2025.

Article continues below this ad

“The process to undergo the sale of their building to a new owner with their own vision for this site will take time, and Macy’s will stay open for the foreseeable future and people will remain employed at the store,” Breed said. “Macy’s has expressed to me their commitment to remaining a part of Union Square and our City while they undergo this transition. The City will continue to work closely with Macy’s and any potential new owner to ensure this iconic location continues to serve San Francisco for decades to come.”

Mayor Breed speaks about San Francisco Macy’s closure

Mayor London Breed speaks to the media about the closure of Macy’s on Tuesday, February 27, 2024 in San Francisco, Calif.

San Francisco Chronicle

Concerns about the future of the store were rampant early Tuesday morning after Macy’s Inc. announced during an earnings call that it plans to shutter 150 “underproductive” stores across the country through 2026, including 50 by the end of the year. The move came in response to dropping sales and consumer demand shifting online. The company’s investor relations team declined to release the list of stores being closed.

The San Francisco Business Times was first to confirm the Union Square store’s closure.

Article continues below this ad

It was not immediately clear if the store would stay open beyond the 2026 deadline if the company does not find a buyer for the property. The company also owns the Bloomingdale’s in San Francisco’s downtown mall but it was unclear if that store would be affected by Tuesday’s moves.

Around 400 employees work at the Macy’s, according to their union, United Food and Commercial Workers Local 5.

Macy’s massive, 400,000-square-foot Union Square store— which spans nearly an entire block fronting Geary Street between Powell and Stockton streets— is the company’s last outpost in San Francisco. Macy’s presence in the city dates to 1947 and its store is a landmark on the south side of Union Square. Its loss marks one of the biggest retail closures the city has ever seen, on top of the loss of a nearby Nordstrom that had been open since 1988 and dozens of smaller retailers since the pandemic. The timing comes as Breed faces a tough reelection campaign this year, with voters worried about the city’s struggling downtown and a looming budget deficit.

“As someone who grew up in San Francisco, Macy’s has always meant a lot to the people of this city,” Breed said. “It’s where families came to shop for the holidays. It’s where many people from my community got their first jobs, or even held jobs for decades. It’s hard to think of Macy’s not being part of our city anymore.”

Union Square business stakeholders described the news as a “devastating blow” to a neighborhood that has struggled with commercial vacancies in the wake of the pandemic, but in recent months has been targeted for investment by the city and shown noticeable signs of improvement.

While most small storefronts that dot the Union Square area are filled, it’s the large spaces that are sitting dark. Following Forever 21’s departure in 2019 from a larger corner storefront at Powell and Market streets, H&M pulled the plug on its 35,000-square-foot flagship location on Powell Street in 2020. Others, like Uniqlo and T-Mobile, soon followed.

Article continues below this ad

“Those are some very large holes,” said Ali McEvoy, a leasing broker with Maven who is focused on Union Square. “And there aren’t many players to fill them.”

“The question is, ‘How relevant is a department store in the city of San Francisco today? ’ And is that really reflective of the consumers’ tastes,” said Alex Sagues, vice president for retail with brokerage CBRE.

Sagues described the news of the closure as “not great for Union Square, but also not overly surprising.”

“Retailers close stores that aren’t performing and the reason that stores don’t perform can be a multitude of reasons. It’d be impossible not to attribute some of the conditions in San Francisco, including crime and security, to some of the challenges to operating a business here. But that’s certainly not entirely responsible,” Sagues said. “At the end of the day, the biggest impact on sales is consumer demand. And I think if Macy’s is closing the store, it’s because the store is not performing, which is a reflection of the demand for what they’re selling.”

The Macy’s closure is the latest in a string of exits of prominent retailers from the city’s downtown core, highlighted by the five-story Nordstrom department store that anchored downtown’s Westfield San Francisco Centre mall for the past 35 years, but pulled out this summer after its lease expired. While the mall’s owners— who surrendered it to their lender in the fall— cited a lack of enforcement against criminal activity as a motivating factor for Nordstrom’s departure, they, for years, sought to convert portions of the property’s retail space into other uses.

Article continues below this ad

San Francisco Macy's closing

More than 30 retailers have exited their downtown San Francisco locations since the pandemic. Among the stores that have abandoned downtown in recent months: Saks Off Fifth, Old Navy, Adidas and Anthropologie.

Consumer shopping habits have shifted more toward online purchases in recent years, but San Francisco has also had to contend with the fallout of remote work. The city’s offices have hit a record high of 36% vacancy, with much of that attributed to people working elsewhere, or workforce attrition. The removal of such a large chunk of workers, as well as a decrease in tourism, has impacted the economic vitality of downtown San Francisco, with politicians and neighborhood associations working to find solutions to the problem, including a focus on crime and cleanliness.

Daniel Lurie, a nonprofit executive and Levi Strauss heir who is running against Breed for mayor, said in a statement Tuesday that “businesses and tourists won’t return unless we have clean and safe streets 365 days per year and not just when a conference is in town.”

While Lurie acknowledged that the Union Square Macy’s is just one of 150 stores closing nationwide, he said that other shopping centers in the city, including the Stonestown mall, are still doing well, and that he thinks types of attractions beyond retail need to come to the Union Square area. “We have to adapt. We have to evolve. We need to get people down here at all times of the day. So you can’t just be thinking about daytime and shopping, but how do we get restaurants and nightlife here and music and concerts down here activating Union Square?”

Article continues below this ad

The topic of what to do with the city’s downtown retail area has inspired much debate since Nordstrom announced it was leaving. Politicians and civilians have opined about how to revive the area, with ideas floated to revive the struggling city core that include focused entertainment attractions, planting a college downtown and turning the defaulted San Francisco Centre mall into a soccer stadium.

The Macy’s closures are designed to “accelerate our path to market share gains, sustainable, profitable growth and value creation for our shareholders,” said Macy’s new CEO Tony Spring in a statement. Spring took the helm of the company earlier this month amid a recent tussle for control with activist investors who have sought to take the company private.

“Our threshold to keep stores open has become more stringent,” Spring said during an earnings call with investors, adding that in 2023, stores selected for closure represented about 25% of Macy’s gross square footage, but less than 10% of its sales. “Having the right footprint and location is important. But we must also have the right product at a value that we know appeals to our customers.”

The company is dropping many of its large-format stores in favor of expanding smaller-format shops that will appeal to customers. The closures will leave Macy’s with 350 department stores that will be prioritized for investment. Macy’s also plans to add 15 Bloomingdale’s stores and 30 new stores for Bluemercury, its beauty chain, while others will be remodeled, in new and existing markets over the next three years. The luxury brands have been outperformers in its portfolio, the company said Tuesday.

The restructuring effort means that Macy’s will incur a “roughly $950 million non-cash asset impairment charge,” primarily related to the planned store closures.

Macy’s employees across the country will lose their jobs as the company redirects spending in an effort to generate consistent growth. Reports earlier this year indicated that Macy’s planned to lay off about 13% of its corporate staff and shutter five stores in a bid to trim costs.

“We took out layers of management, consolidated positions and offshored selected roles. The same time we remain focused on hiring the best talent to support our view of the future,” Spring said.

Macy’s last big restructuring effort came ahead of the pandemic in February 2020, when the company announced that it would shutter 125 stores and eliminate 2,000 jobs.

The Union Square closure marks the end of an era for Bay Area denizens, who year after year trekked into the city from miles away to be dazzled by the magic of Macy’s holiday window displays or partake in the company-led Christmas tree lighting ceremony to kick off the holiday shopping season. Yet, officials were quick to note that the store isn’t shuttering any time soon.

“Macy’s will remain open and could still be open for years to come. In all likelihood, there will be a Holiday shopping season and Macy’s great tree in 2024,” said Marisa Rodriguez, CEO of the Union Square Alliance in a statement. “Having said that, the situation is fluid and there is no getting around the fact that this announcement hurts. For generations, Macy’s has been synonymous with Union Square. I believe that we should work toward a solution that allows Macy’s to keep this iconic store open. However, if that does not come to pass, our expectation is that a new owner for this iconic site will come forward to continue a fresh and vibrant vision at this critical location.”

At the start of last year, Breed announced a sweeping plan for downtown’s revitalization that included ramping up public safety efforts, improving street conditions and attracting new businesses to fill the city’s increasingly vacant office towers and commercial spaces. She introduced legislation over the summer with Board of Supervisors President Aaron Peskin amending the city’s zoning rules to allow a broader mix of businesses and activities in Union Square.

“Macy’s was one of the last holdouts against the national trend of retail closures and consolidations, but as with every seeming blow to our downtown recovery, I see a potential opportunity,” Peskin said Tuesday in a statement. “This site is an opportunity development site, with potential for mixed-use, food & beverage and residential on the upper floors, even before the pandemic.”

The closure also represents the manifestation of one of Breed’s bigger concerns. The mayor, who faces reelection this year while balancing the enormous task of revitalizing downtown San Francisco as millions of square feet of commercial space sit vacant in the wake of the pandemic, mentioned offhandedly in 2022 that she feared Macy’s would one day abandon its Union Square post.

After a news conference Tuesday, Breed characterized Macy’s closure as an opportunity for San Francisco and Union Square to bring in a potential new business that would be more profitable than the long-struggling department store had been.She also emphasized that the retailer’s decision to close the Macy’s at San Francisco’s Union Square was not a sign of the doom loop, noting that crime had recently reduced in the area.

When asked about whether the news could be a harbinger of further closures of stores like Bloomingdale’s and Neiman Marcus, Breed was unequivocal, saying those retailers had expressed their commitments to staying in San Francisco and that many of Union Square’s luxury retailers were doing “really well.” But, she said, city residents would have to prepare for a “bit of a shift” downtown. But that shift could be one that made way for possibilities of universities, spas, and soccer stadiums.

_Correction: An earlier version of this story cited a San Rafael Chamber of Commerce official saying the Macy’s at the Northgate Mall in San Rafael would close. The Chamber of Commerce now says it has not received any such notification._

Roland Li, Danielle Echeverria, Sam Whiting and J.D. Morris contributed to this report _._

Get inside access to the deals and developments transforming San Francisco and the Bay Area.

Feb 27, 2024|Updated Feb 27, 2024 10:33 a.m.

Reporter

Laura Waxmann covers the business community with a focus on commercial real estate, development, retail and the future of San Francisco's downtown. Prior to joining The Chronicle in 2023, she reported on San Francisco's changing real estate and economic landscape in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic for the San Francisco Business Times.

Waxmann was born and raised in Frankfurt, Germany, but has called San Francisco home since 2007. She's reported on a variety of topics including housing, homelessness, education and local politics for the San Francisco Examiner, Mission Local and El Tecolote.
