Title: 

URL Source: https://www.eanet.asia/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/RSAP.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 04 Apr 2019 00:32:08 GMT

Markdown Content:
Review on the State of Air Pollution in East Asia February 2015 Task Force on Research Coordination (TFRC) Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) Acid Deposition Monitoring Network in East Asia (EANET) This document is a basis for an internal discussion on future development and expansion of the scope of the Acid Deposition Monitoring Network in East Asia (EANET). The contents and views expressed in this document do not represent the opinion and outlook of the EANET. i

# Table of Contents Table of Contents……………………………………………………………………………. i List of Lead Authors, Authors and Contributors to the Review on the State of Air Pollution in East Asia ……………………………………………………………………………………………….iv List of External Reviewers to the Review on the State of Air Pollution in East Asia ………………….vii Foreword………………………………………….………………………………………ix Executive Summary……………………………………………………………………….xi Chapter 1 Introduction………………………………………………………1 

References ………………………………………….………………………………………5 Chapter 2 Particulate Matter (PM) and Haze……………………………….7 2.1 Overview …………………………………………………………………………………7 2.2 Atmospheric measurement and modeling ………………………………………….10 

2.2.1 Spatial distribution and seasonal variation …………………………………………………...10 2.2.2 Long term trend and inter-annual variation…………………………………………………18 2.2.3 Source-receptor relationships……………………………………………………………….30 

2.3 Adverse impacts………………………………………………………………………34 

2.3.1 Impacts on human health……………………………………………………………………..34 2.3.2 Other impacts…………………………………………………………………………………38 

2.4 Summary………………………………………………………………………….……42 References ………………………………………….………………………………………43 Chapter 3 Tropospheric Ozone ……………………………………………59 3.1 Overview ………………………………………………………..………………………..59 3.2 Atmospheric measurement and modeling ………………………………………….60 

3.2.1 Spatial distributions and seasonal variations ………………………………………………..60 3.2.2 Long-term trends and inter annual variations ……………………………………………71 3.2.3 Source-receptor relationships…………………………………………………………………78 

3.3 Adverse impacts………………………………………………………………….…89 

3.3.1 Impacts on human health…………………………………………………………………..89 3.3.2 Effects on agricultural crops………………………………………………………………94 3.3.3 Effects on forests………………………………………………………………………….102 

3.4 Summary………………………………………………………………………….……108 References…………………………………………………………………………………110 Chapter 4 Acidification and Eutrophication………………………………131 4.1 Overview ………………………………………………………………………………131 4.2 Sulfur and nitrogen deposition monitoring and modeling ………………………132 ii 

4.2.1 Spatial distribution and seasonal variation …………………………………………………132 4.2.2 Long term trend and inter-annual variation…………………………………………………138 4.2.3 Source-receptor relationships………………………………………………………………..144 4.2.4 Biogeochemical cycle………………………………………………………………………148 

4.3 Impacts on ecosystem…………………………………………………………………154 

4.3.1 Effects on forests……………………………………………………………………………154 4.3.2 Effects on inland water……………………………………………………………………..168 4.3.3 Other impacts ……………………………………………………………………………….181 

4.4 Summary………………………………………………………………………….……183 References…………………………………………………………………………………184 Chapter 5 Air Toxics …………………………………………………………………205 5.1 Overview……………………………………………………………………………205 5.2 Atmospheric contamination levels and monitoring……………………………….207 5.3 Modeling of persistent organic pollutants in the atmospheric environment……..213 

5.3.1 Persistent Organic Pollutants(POPs)…………………………………………………….213 5.3.2 Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)………………………………………………….222 

5.4 Adverse impact………………………………………………………………………226 

5.4.1 Initial POPs………………………………………………………………………………….226 5.4.2 New POPs…………………………………………………………………………………..229 5.4.3 POPs under consideration…………………………………………………………………..232 

References…………………………………………………………………………………234 Chapter 6 Emission Inventories…………………………………………….237 6.1 Overview………………………………………………………………………………237 6.2 Emissions from natural sources and biomass burning……………………………238 

6.2.1 Natural biogenic sources…………………………………………………………………..238 6.2.2 Natural dust aerosol emissions…………………………………………………………….249 6.2.3 Biomass burning sources…………………………………………………………………..256 6.2.4 Volcano………………………………………………………………………………..275 

6.3 Anthropogenic emissions …………………………………………………………….277 

6.3.1 Introduction………………………………………………………………………………..277 6.3.2 SO 2 ………………………………………………………………………………………….281 6.3.3 NO x .....................................................................................................................................282 6.3.4 Non-mathane volatile organic compounds……………………………………………….283 6.3.5 CO………………………………………………………………………………………284 6.3.6 NH 3 ………………………………………………………………………………………286 6.3.7 C H 4 … … … … …… … … … …… … … … …… … … … …… … … … …… … … … ……2 8 7 6.3.8 Primary Particulate Matter………………………………………………………………288 6.3.9 Persistent Organic Pollutants(POPs)……………………………………………………..293 iii 

6.3.10 Mercury…………………………………………………………………………………...295 6.3.11 Summary and discussion for 6.3………………………………………………………...297 

6.4 Summary………………………………………………………………………………299 References………………………………………………………………………………….300 Chapter 7 Mitigation technologies of air pollutant emissions in East Asia ………………………………………………………………………………………….315 7.1 Introduction…………………………………………………………………………315 7.2 Current application of mitigation technologies………………………………….317 

7.2.1 Energy saving technologies………………………………………………………………317 7.2.2 End-of-pipe control technologies……………………………………………………..323 

7.3 Scenarios for the future application of mitigation technologies…………………347 

7.3.1 Development of energy scenarios………………………………………………………348 7.3.2 Development of emission scenarios……………………………………………………..350 7.3.3 Effects of mitigation measures on air pollutants emissions ………………………………354 

7.4 A review of future scenarios in the literature………………………………………..359 7.5 Summary………………………………………………………………………………363 References…………………………………………………………………………………364 Chapter 8 Climate interaction and co-benefits/co-control approaches ………………………………………………………………………………………….371 8.1 Overview……………………………………………………………………………371 8.2 Interaction of climate change and air pollution in East Asia…………………..372 

8.2.1 The effects of air pollution on climate change …………………………………………….373 8.2.2 The effects of climate change on air pollution………………………………………………375 

8.3 SLCPs co-benefits/co-control approach……………………………………………..378 

8.3.1 UNEP’s assessment for near-term global warming and benefits for human health and crop yields…………………………………………………………………………………379 8.3.2 Other studies………………………………………………………………………382 8.3.3 Recent policy initiatives for SLCPs co-benefit approach …………………………383 

8.4 Summary………………………………………………………………………………388 References………………………………………………………………………………….389 Chapter 9 Conclusions and Recommendations ……………………………… 397 Abbreviations List …………………………….…….………….……………………….402 Members of the Reviewing Committee on the Status of Air Pollution in East Asia …………….409 Secretariats of the Reviewing Committee on the Status of Air Pollution in East Asia ………….…….411 iv 

# List of Lead Authors, Authors and Contributors to the Review on the State of Air Pollution in East Asia 

Chapter 1 

* Dr. Hajime Akimoto Director General Asia Center for Air Pollution Research (ACAP) Japan 

Chapter 2 

*Prof. Joshua S. Fu (2.1, 2.2, 2.4) Professor Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering University of Tennessee USA Dr. Guoshun Zhuang (2.2) Distinguished Professor Center for Atmospheric Chemistry Study Department of Environmental Science and Engineering Fundan University China Dr. Kan Huang (2.2) Research Assistant Professor Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering University of Tennessee USA Prof. Yasushi Honda (2.3.1) Professor Doctoral Program in Human Care Sciences Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences University of Tsukuba Japan Dr. Hiroyuki Sase (2.3.2) Head Ecological Impact Research Department Asia Center for Air Pollution Research (ACAP) Japan Dr. Ken Yamashita (2.3.1, Contributor) Guest Researcher Asia Center for Air Pollution Research (ACAP) Japan 

Chapter 3 

*Dr. Hiroshi Tanimoto (3.1, 3.2.2, 3.4) Head Global Atmospheric Chemistry Section Center for Global Environmental Research National Institute for Environmental Studies Japan Dr. Yugo Kanaya (3.2.1, 3.2.4) Deputy Director Department of Environmental Geochemical Cycle Research Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology Japan Dr. Tatsuya Nagashima (3.2.3) Senior Researcher Regional Atmospheric Modeling Section Center for Regional Environmental Research National Institute for Environmental Studies Japan Dr. Hitoshi Irie (3.2.4) Associate Professor Center for Environmental Remote Sensing Chiba University Japan Prof. Zifa Wang (3.2) Director State Key Laboratory of Atmospheric Boundary Layer Physics and Atmospheric Chemistry Institute of Atmospheric Physics Chinese Academy of Sciences China Prof. Yasushi Honda (3.3.1) Professor Doctoral Program in Human Care Sciences Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences University of Tsukuba Japan v

Prof. Takeshi Izuta (3.3.2, 3.3.3) Professor Institute of Agriculture Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology. Japan Dr. Masahiro Yamaguchi(3.3.2, 3.3.3) Assistant Professor Institute of Environmental Studies Graduate School of Fisheries Science and Environmental Studies Nagasaki University Japan Dr. Yoshihisa Kohno(3.3.2) Emeritus Research Advisor Environment Science Research Laboratory Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry Japan Dr. Ken Yamashita (3.3, Contributor) Guest Researcher Asia Center for Air Pollution Research (ACAP) Japan 

Chapter 4 

*Prof. Seogyeon Cho (4.1, 4.4) Professor Dept. of Environmental Engineering Inha University Republic of Korea Dr. Yu Morino (4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3) Senior Researcher Regional Atmospheric Modelling Section Center for Regional Environmental Research National Institute for Environmental Studies Japan Prof. Junko Shindo (4.2.4, 4.3.2) Professor Graduate School of Medicine and Engineering Department of Environmental Sciences University of Yamanashi Japan Prof. Wilfredo M. Carandang (4.3.1) Professor and Assistant to the Chancellor Institute of Renewable Natural Resources College of Forestry and Natural Resources University of the Philippines Los Banos College Philippines Dr. Hiroyuki Sase (4.3.1, 4.3.2) Head Ecological Impact Research Department Asia Center for Air Pollution Research (ACAP) Japan 

Chapter 5 

* Dr. Takuya Shiozaki (5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4) Deputy Director Environmental Sciences Department Japan Environmental Sanitation Center Japan Dr. Yayoi Inomata (5.3) Senior Researcher Atmospheric Research Department Asia Center for Air Pollution Research (ACAP) Japan 

Chapter 6 

* Dr. Toshimasa Ohara (6.1, 6.4) Fellow Planning Department National Institute for Environmental Studies Japan Dr. Junghun Woo (6.2.1) Associate Professor/Department Chair Dept. of Advanced Technology Fusion Konkuk University Republic of Korea Dr. Hyeon-Kook Kim (6.2.1) Postdoctoral Researcher Dept. of Advanced Technology Fusion Konkuk University Republic of Korea vi 

Dr. Savitri Garivait (6.2.3) Associate Professor/Chairperson of Environment Division Environment Division The Joint Graduate School of Energy and Environment (JGSEE) King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi (KMUTT) Thailand Dr. Junichi Kurokawa (6.2.4, 6.3.1~6.3.8) Senior Researcher Atmospheric Research Department Asia Center for Air Pollution Research (ACAP) Japan Dr. Yayoi Inomata (6.3.9, 6.3.10) Senior Researcher Atmospheric Research Department Asia Center for Air Pollution Research (ACAP) Japan 

Chapter 7 

* Prof. Shuxiao Wang Professor Division of Air Pollution Control School of Environment Tsighua University China 

Chapter 8 

*Dr. Hajime Akimoto (8.1, 8.3.1, 8.3.2) Director General Asia Center for Air Pollution Research (ACAP) Japan Prof. Rokjin Park (8.2) Professor, School of Earth and Environmental Sciences Seoul National University Republic of Korea Prof. Katsunori Suzuki (8.3.3) Director/Professor Environment Preservation Center Kanazawa University Japan 

Chapter 9 

*Prof. Seogyeon Cho Professor Dept. of Environmental Engineering Inha University Republic of Korea * : Lead Author vii 

# List of External Reviewers to the Review on the State of Air Pollution in East Asia 

Chapter 2 

Prof. Chul Han Song Professor Department of Environmental Science and Engineering Gwangju Institute Science & Technology Republic of Korea Prof. Min Hu Professor State Key Joint Laboratory of Environmental Simulation and Pollution Control College of Environmental Science and Engineering Peking University China Prof. Tzung-May Fu Assistant Professor Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences School of Physics Peking University China 

Chapter 3 

Dr. Dan Jaffe Professor and Chair Physical Sciences Division School of Science and Technology University of Washington-Bothell USA Prof. Lisa Emberson Centre Director Stockholm Environment Institute at York Senior Lecture Environment Dept. University of York United of Kingdom Prof. Oliver Wild Reader Lancaster Environment Centre Lancaster University United of Kingdom Prof. Tzung-May Fu Assistant Professor Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences School of Physics Peking University China viii 

Chapter 4 

Prof. Yunting Fang Professor Institute of Applied Ecology Chinese Academy of Science China 

Chapter 6 

Dr. Greet Janssens-Maenhout Scientific Officer Climate Change Unit, Institute for Environment and Sustainability Joint Research Center Italy 

Chapter 7 

Dr. Zbigniew Klimont Research Scholar Mitigation of Air Pollution and Greenhouse Gases International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis Austria 

Whole of the RSAP 

Mr. Mylvakanam Iyngararasan Project Coordinator United Nations Environment Programme Mr. Krzysztof Olendrzynski Environmental Affairs Officer LRTAP Convention Secretariat Transboundary Cooperation Section, Environment Division UN Economic Commission for Europe ix 

# Foreword East Asian countries are making considerable efforts for their economic growth with increasing consumption of natural resources and implementation of industrial technologies. Historical experience of the world and North-East Asian region indicates that this development is almost always accompanied with negative changes in air quality and adverse impacts of air pollution on human health, agricultural production and natural ecosystems that need to monitor and do mitigate. The Acid Deposition Monitoring Network in East Asia (EANET) is an important intergovernmental regional network operating from 1998 to address acid deposition and related air pollution problems in East Asia under the promoting cooperation among countries of region. Following its goal and mission, EANET has been conducting monitoring, analysis and evaluation of data and information from several dozen monitoring sites in the 13 participating countries as well as periodic assessment of the state of acid deposition for whole region. The network also conducts capacity building and promotes scientific research and public awareness on acid deposition and related air pollution problems with relevant efforts to assist policy makers in decision making to mitigate atmospheric pollution and its impacts based on scientifically assessed information. The EANET has gained international recognition for its success in promoting regional cooperation on acid deposition monitoring in East Asia and facilitation of inter-regional information exchange on measurement data and assessments of the state of acid deposition. However, acid deposition and its negative effects are only parts of the atmospheric pollution problems. Many other topics and pollutants are explored by scientific community and organizations being realized into international agreements, world-scale assessments and research activity programs of different successes. East Asia as the region of high intensive industrial development could not be untouched by these processes, and participation of countries of region in the Minamata Convention on Mercury and Stokholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants demonstrates a wish to move further and look wider. Recently the expansion of the EANET’s scope was put in agenda for discussions at the Sessions of the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC), the Working Group on Future Development of the EANET (WGFD) and the Intergovernmental Meeting (IG). To recognize the current level of knowledge and information availability on those problems in EANET region the relevant reviewing process on the air pollution in East Asia was initiated two years ago. Ad hoc “Reviewing Committee on the Status of Air Pollution of Air Pollution in East Asia (RC)” was established under the Task Force on Research Coordination (TFRC) of the EANET, subsidiary body of the SAC with the task to provide the comprehensive review as the scientific reference material for further using by EANET. x

This “ Review on the State of Air Pollutant in East Asia ” (RSAP) is the precious result of kind common work by all of RC members, lead authors and contributors, external reviewers and technical assistants. The scientific papers published in peer-reviewed international journals were reviewed in the RSAP according to the main principle of information mining. Other types of literature sources, for example, international and national reports, however, were referred as well in some research fields such as emission inventories and mitigation measures. The target area of the RSAP is East Asia, in particular, the participating countries of the EANET and the temporal scope of the RSAP was limited for the period since 2000. The Review is filled with scientific findings and outcomes, and expected to be a basis for the internal discussions on future development and scope expansion of the EANET. Dr. Sergey Gromov Chair, Task Force on Research Coordination xi 

# Executive Summary 

“Review on the State of Air Pollution in East Asia (The RSAP)” aims at synthesizing best scientific knowledge on the present status on air pollution and its environmental impacts, focusing mainly on East Asia. It is expected to be a basis for discussions on the future development and expansion of scope for the EANET. The present status of Particulate Matter (PM) and Haze, Oxidants, and Acidification and Eutrophication, including their environmental impacts, are reviewed in Chapters 2, 3 and 4, respectively. In addition to these issues, air toxics such as Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) are also reviewed in Chapter 5, reflecting recent international concerns. Chapters 6 and 7 present a review of emission inventories and mitigation technology of air pollutants. Finally, a review on climate-air pollution interaction and co-benefit/co-control approaches, which have recently been raised by UNEP/WMO and for which international policy initiatives have already started, are included in Chapter 8. Prior to the above-mentioned chapters, Chapter 1 introduces an overview of the RSAP. This chapter is a brief on the status of air pollution in East Asia in the last couple of decades and its contribution to global anthropogenic air pollution. This chapter shows a total air pollution scheme identifying processes such as emissions, transport, chemical and physical transformation, cloud uptake and deposition, and includes environmental impacts and the behaviors of each pollutant in the process. 

Particulate Matter(PM) and Haze 

<Atmospheric Measurement and Modeling> 

1. High level of PM 2.5 mainly distributed in eastern, southeastern, northern and northwestern China, northern India and part of Southeast Asia. The highest PM 2.5 could be up top over 80 g/m 3 .2. Aerosol loadings increased over all continents between 1979 and 2006. South and East Asia showed the most obvious increasing trends. This explains the declining trends of surface solar radiation across China in recent decades. 3. According to satellite data analysis, Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) showed the positive trend in China in past decades. 4. The trend of AOD, and aerosol sulfate in East Asia countries would be affected by those of China. For example, increasing trends of the aerosol sulfate concentrations at all EANET sites have been observed after 2002, except for one site in Republic of Korea (Kanghwa). This increasing trend was generally consistent with that of the annual SO 2 emission in China. <Adverse Impact> 5. According to several investigations on the short-term effect of PM on human health in China, the Republic of Korea and Japan, the resulting increase in mortality rates varies with cities and countries. 6. Studies on the long term effect of PM in China and Japan showed inconsistent results, partly because the studies were not designed for evaluating air pollution effect. Cohort studies specifically designed for air pollution effect evaluation with sufficient scope are needed. 7. Asian dust is another type of transboundary PM pollution. According to the systematic review paper of nineteen epidemiologic studies on Asian dust, the effect of Asian dust has been inconsistent; some studies showed hazardous effect, whereas others showed no effect. 8. Possible impacts of particulate depositions on tree species have been reported in East Asia, as xii 

well as in Europe and North America. Occlusion of stomata due to deposited particles may occur resulting in acceleration of water loss from leaf surface. Relatively coarse particles (> several 

μm) may mainly be related to this mechanism, although aggregation of fine particles should also be considered. 9. Effects of fine particles (< 2.5 μm) on tree species are still not clear in the region, although both hygroscopic particles such as (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 and solid particles such as Black Carbon (BC) may have the potential. Flux measurement of fine particles and laboratory test in the ambient level of the flux should be promoted in East Asian forests. 10. Atmospheric aerosols and regional haze may decrease agricultural crop yields due to a reduction in surface irradiance, while diffuse radiation that enhances photosynthesis may be increased. Both negative (by reduction of total radiation) and positive (by increase of diffuse radiation) effects should be considered to evaluate the net effects of radiation changes on crop yields. 

Tropospheric Ozone 

< Atmospheric measurement and modeling > 11. According to several surface ozone observation and the global and regional scale model simulations, seasonal patterns of tropospheric ozone in East Asia has a relationship with the seasonality of the continental outflow. 

12. The recent research on the tropospheric NO 2 column, which is a key precursor of tropospheric ozone, showed a rapidly increasing trend in China and India. 13. According to the studies on long-term trend of tropospheric ozone using an ozone sonde, surface observations and aircraft campaigns in East Asia, especially in China and Japan, there is growing evidence that tropospheric ozone has been increasing in Asia over the past decades. 14. According to the studies on contribution of sources outside of Asia using a global scale transportation model, the contributions from North American and European sources show the seasonal variation. Both sources show the peak in spring, but in winter European sources show second peak and North American sources show the similar level to spring peak. 15. Emissions inside East Asia have the largest influence on East Asian O 3 itself with 60% of East Asian surface O 3 .< Adverse Impacts > 16. Daily health effect of ozone in East Asia was considered to be comparable with western multi-city studies with some reservations (using the different methods of the studies). The burden of disease for ozone in East Asia was considered substantial. 17. Several papers on the effects of ambient level ozone on Japanese, Chinese and Indian crops and a few studies on Southeast Asia showed that the exposure to ambient level ozone induces visible foliar injury, reduction in growth and yield, and inhibition of physiological functions such as photosynthesis in agricultural crops. In addition, there are major differences in sensitivity to ozone between crop species or among the cultivars of a crop. 18. Studies on yield and/or economic loss assessment of field crops in Asia using model simulation suggests that surface ozone pollution has a potential threat for agricultural production regardless of estimated value differences among the studies. 19. Ozone is considered to be one of the environmental stresses relating to forest decline and tree xiii 

dieback. Experimental studies on the effects of ozone on growth and physiological functions such as photosynthesis of Japanese forest tree species have been reported in the last decade. But very little information is available on the effects of ozone on tree species native to the other Asian countries. 20. There is a significant difference in ozone sensitivity for different tree species. 21. In general, forest tree species are adversely affected not only by ozone, but also by the other environmental stresses such as drought, high air temperature and excessive atmospheric nitrogen deposition. 

Acidification and Eutrophication 

< Sulfur and nitrogen deposition monitoring and modeling > 22. Deposition of both sulfur and nitrogen increased in China and Japan from the1980s to the 2000s, most likely due to increased emissions of SO 2 and NO x in China. Recently, some researchers suggested that sulfur deposition started decreasing after 2006. 23. Anthropogenic inputs of sulfur and reactive nitrogen to terrestrial ecosystems are now comparable to the natural input and can have profound and manifold impacts on soils and fresh waters. Sulfur retention in soil, long-term changes in nitrogen cycle in forested ecosystems, and so on have been investigated and some hypotheses were developed. 24. Asian data is available only for Japan and China, where the biogeochemical cycles are shown to be different from those in Europe and North America due to warm and humid weather and different soil and vegetation types. < Impacts on ecosystem > 25. Soil acidification, likely due to high acid loads, was observed in parts of China and Japan, as well as in Europe and North America. Acidification observed in the region seemed to be explained by the acid neutralizing capacity (ANC) of respective soils types, and buffering mechanisms for acids, as observed in the cases of Europe and North America. 26. The molar ratio of base cations to aluminum (BC/Al) in soil solution has been discussed as an index for the potential risk of soil acidification to plant growth according to the experience in Europe. However, there are still uncertainties regarding the applicability of its threshold value in Europe (1.0) to Asian tree species. 27. Forest cover decline has been observed in East Asia particularly in China and Japan. However, there has only been little research conducted in the region whose results directly attribute the occurrence of such phenomena to rainfall acidity in those areas. 28. Much research has been conducted documenting the adverse morphological, physiological and biochemical effects of direct contact with simulated acid rain (SAR). This approach has been found to be a potent means for determining the sensitivity of forest species to regional rainfall. 29. Inland water acidification, probably due to high acid loads, occurred over the last several decades in China, Japan and Russia, and both SO 42− and NO 3− contributed to the acidification in the region. ANC of the bedrock geology is one of the most important factors for manifestation of inland water acidification. 30. Based on input–output measurements conducted in Japan and China, the majority of ecosystems have high retention ability for nitrogen, whereas nitrogen saturation occurred in some particular xiv 

forested ecosystems. Spatial distribution of nitrate concentrations in stream water in Japan showed that there were some areas with high concentration in the vicinity of large cities and intensive agricultural areas. 31. Much of the above literature suggests that SO 2 was the predominant factor in atmospheric corrosion. In particular, under sheltered conditions (without rain), the effect of SO 2 seemed to be clear. However, in most cases, atmospheric corrosion was severer under unsheltered conditions (with rain) than the sheltered condition. In actual field conditions (without rain shelter), it seemed that changes in surface wet conditions, such as washout of corrosion product, time of wetness and wet-dry cycle, might accelerate atmospheric corrosion. 32. Dose-reaction functions have been estimated in several studies. Accumulation of air concentration data as well as acid deposition data may allow us to discuss regional assessment and/or cost estimation of the damage for atmospheric corrosion of historical buildings and materials in future. 

Air Toxics 

33. The monitoring methodologies have been already established in advanced countries (Japan, the Republic of Korea, Singapore and China). 34. Individual monitoring for POPs in core media (background air, human blood and breast milk, and aquatic environment) has been implemented in Japan, the Republic of Korea and China. 35. Trend of existence of POPs chemicals in the environmental samples has been evaluated under the Global Monitoring Plan of the Stockholm Convention (GMP). The Asia and the Pacific Regional Organization Group (Chair: China) summarized the first Regional Report in December 2008. The second Regional Report will be finalized in 2015. 36. From 2002, Japan organized the POPs Monitoring Project in East Asian Countries (POPSEA project). Participating countries are Cambodia, Indonesia, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Mongolia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam. The background air monitoring activities were launched in 2004. The capacity building of background air sampling for 10 countries has been implemented since 2004. 37. The POPs monitoring under the POPSEA project is limited to carry out with the active sampling and the monitoring frequency is still low. The introduction of passive sampling, which enables sample collection much more easily, should be considered. 38. United Nations University (UNU) also conducts the POPs monitoring capacity building project, especially focused on aquatic environment. 39. Limited monitoring activities can be conducted in the East Asian region because of the smaller capacity of POPs monitoring in developing countries. Vietnam and 6 other countries proposed a POPs monitoring capacity building project to Global Environment Facility (GEF), and the proposal was endorsed as a full-scale project under the management of United Nations Environment Plan (UNEP). 40. The target POPs chemicals under the POPSEA project is 9 initial POPs pesticides. Any other POPs chemicals have still not monitored under this project. On the other hand, since the GEF/UNEP project is focusing in whole POPs chemicals and whole core media, the close relationship and coalition of these POPSEA and GEF/UNEP project are effective and practical xv 

for POPs monitoring in accordance with the GMP. 41. The participation of China, as a technically advanced country, is strongly anticipated to contribute to the strengthening of POPs monitoring capacities in East Asian sub-region. 42. The participation of Myanmar, as the frontier country of East Asian sub-region, is also highly recommended for identifying the long range transport of POPs via atmospheric environment. 

Emissions Inventories 

< Emission from natural sources and biomass burning > 43. All of the reviewed Asian biogenic emission inventory studies have used the empirical model algorithms suggested by Guenther et al. (e.g., light and temperature dependent emissions). Some studies have made efforts to create localized model input datasets and employ inventive or alternative computation methods for some algorithm parameters. 44. Many factors, such as model platforms, sources of model input data, versions of model algorithms, and others, can result in significantly different estimations for terpenoids emissions. It should be noted that these kinds of assessments might be very uncertain due to spatially and temporally limited number of emission estimations at Asia regional/national/provincial scales. 45. Among naturally emitted aerosols in Asia, the Asian dust aerosol is one of the prominent aerosol sources originating from northern China, Mongolia and Central Asia in the wide arid and semi-arid regions. The presently estimated annual total Asian dust emission by Asian Dust Aerosol Model2 (ADAM2) was found to be 493.4 Tg for the year 2010. 46. There are several global emission inventories from biomass burning which are all based on satellite detection of fire occurrence. Most used global biomass burning inventories, including Global Fire Assimilation System (GFAS), Global Fire Emissions Database (GFED), and Fire Inventory from NCAR (FINN). Annual global fire emission estimates compared well between GFAS and GFED, while FINN was structurally about 30% lower, but regional differences between GFAS and GFED can also be substantial. 47. The review of the state of biomass burning emissions in Asia using GFEDv3.1 data showed that they are dominated by emissions occurring in South East Asia, with Indonesia as the leading emitter followed by Myanmar. GFEDv3.1 enabled emissions assessment for biomass burning in South East Asia, in particular the inter-annual variability. However, uncertainties persist and are still high due to a lack of country/region specific data on biomass burning emission parameterization, i.e. type of vegetation, combustion completeness, and EFs. < Anthropogenic Emissions > 48. The trends of anthropogenic emissions in East Asia are dominated by China for all species. Although growth rates are smaller than China, anthropogenic emissions in Southeast Asia also generally show increasing trends due to the increased energy consumptions. On the contrary, emissions from Northeast Asia outside China show different trends. In Japan, and the Republic of Korea, recent emissions generally show decreasing trends due to the effects of emission regulation measures and relatively small economic growth. 49. For most species, the majority of emissions in 1970 were from Europe and North America and relative ratios of East Asian emissions were small. For several species such as SO 2 and primary aerosols, emissions in Europe and North America decreased rapidly after the 1990s while xvi 

emissions from other regions were increased. In the 2000s, relative ratios of emissions in East Asia became almost comparable or surpassed those of Europe and North America, especially due to the rapid growth of anthropogenic emissions in China. 50. Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) are emitted into the atmosphere by incomplete combustion or pyrolysis of organic matter such as coal, oil, petroleum gas, and biomass. The global total annual atmospheric emission of 16PAHs in 2007 was 504Gg. East Asia, South Asia, and Southeast Asia contributed half of the global total PAH emissions. The highest emission was from China, followed by India. 51. Global total PAH emissions peaked in 1995 and declined gradually in 2008. The PAH emissions of developed countries peaked in the early 1970s, in contrast, that of the developing country reached its peak around 1995. 52. Emissions of anthropogenic Hg from East Asia have been increasing rapidly in recent years due to an increase in emissions from China. It is estimated that Asian countries contributed about 67% to the global Hg emissions from anthropogenic sources in 2005. 53. During the period from 1995 to 2006, global emissions of Hg from anthropogenic sources gradually increased due to the contribution from the Asian region. It is anticipated that emissions from natural sources (re-emission) will continue to increase due to the increasing anthropogenic emission and deposition in the region. 

Mitigation technologies of air pollutant emissions in East Asia 

54. Major countries and regions in East Asia (e.g., China, Japan, and the Republic of Korea) have implemented considerable policies for energy conservation and air pollution mitigation. Particularly, the Chinese government set targets to reduce energy consumption per unit GDP and total SO 2 emissions by 20% and 10%, respectively, measured in 2010 against 2005 levels. In the long term, China aims to reduce CO 2 emissions per unit GDP by 40%-45% by 2020 compared with the 2005 levels. Japan has taken substantial actions to achieve the target of 6% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from 1990 to 2008-2012, required by the Kyoto Protocol. 55. From 2005 to 2010, emissions of SO 2 and PM 2.5 in East Asia decreased by 15% and 11%, respectively, mainly attributable to the large scale deployment of flue gas desulfurization (FGD) for China’s power plants, and the promotion of highly efficient PM removal technologies in China’s power plants and cement industry. During this period, the emissions of NO X and Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds (NMVOC) increased by 25% and 15%, driven by the rapid increase in the emissions from China owing to inadequate control strategies. In contrast, NO X and NMVOC emissions in East Asia except China decreased by 13-17% mainly due to the implementation of strict vehicle emission standards in Japan and Republic of Korea. 56. The successful implementation of the control policies set in China’s 12 th Five Year Plan, the recently released emission standards for various industrial sources, and slowly strengthened control measures after 2015 (defined as “progressive” end-of-pipe control strategy) could significantly reduce China’s emissions of NO x , SO 2 , and PM 2.5 . The resulting NO x , SO 2, and PM 2.5 emissions would be 16-26% lower than the 2010 levels by 2020, and even lower by 2030. Therefore, it is essential to support and monitor the progress of the implementation of this legislation. xvii 

57. The contributions of advanced energy saving measures to the reduction of SO 2 and PM 2.5 emissions will exceed those of progressive end-of-pipe control measures by 2030. The energy saving measures would play an irreplaceable role in the further reduction of air pollutant emissions. 58. The full application of best available technologies could reduce the emissions of NO x , SO 2 , and PM 2.5 in East Asia to only about one quarter and NMVOC to one third of the levels of the baseline projection. There are still large reduction potentials for major air pollutants using currently known control technologies. 59. Control policies for NMVOC emissions are presently lacking in China and Republic of, the simultaneous enforcement of energy saving measures and progressive end-of-pipe control measures (mainly assuming enforcement of European standards) could reduce 38% of the total NMVOC emissions from the levels of baseline projection. Even so, large reduction potential still remains. Relative policies should be carefully optimized to efficiently and effectively reduce NMVOC emissions. 

Climate interaction and co-benefits/co-control approaches 

60. Although air pollution and climate change issues have been treated separately until recently, scientific research has revealed that climate change significantly affects air quality and vice versa. 61. The impact of climate change on air quality is best known as “the climate penalty“, which means that for example ozone air quality is aggravated by the temperature increase accompanying global warming. 62. According to a global 3-D chemical transport model, the increase of surface ozone concentration (climate penalty) over the eastern part of China driven by climate change in 2050 arises from the combination of enhanced biogenic emissions of ozone precursors and changes in meteorological conditions, whereas the decrease of surface ozone (climate benefit) over the western part of China can be attributed to the reduced ozone background concentration as a result of accelerated ozone destruction due to the increase of humidity. The increase in emissions coinciding with temperature contributes to the increase of ozone dominantly. 63. In general, PM 2.5 changes correspond well with changes in precipitation. Similar to ozone, the simulated changes in PM 2.5 are also dominated by future changes in emissions. 64. Ozone is expected to increase in East Asia in the future owing to the increase in NO x emissions, which implies increasing regional warming by ozone forcing. The effects of aerosols on climate are complex, depending on the chemical compositions of aerosols. Typical scattering aerosols such as ammonium sulfate and nitrate result in significant surface cooling, whereas absorbing aerosols including BC and brown carbon aerosols cause atmospheric heating. 65. Based on the seven-year analysis of AErosol RObotic NETwork (AERONET), observations at Gosan, the Republic of Korea, a relatively low single scattering albedo was evident for February-May, which is indicative of moderate to high absorbing aerosols and supportive of the large surface dimming and equally large atmospheric heating in this area. 66. Understanding the effect of radiative forcing by ozone and aerosols on regional climates is challenging because the atmospheric responses are very complex. In addition, the interaction xviii 

between air pollution and climate is known to be highly nonlinear. Along with this interaction, a more accurate projection of future emission changes is crucial to prepare an adaptation strategy for future environmental changes. The development of a framework of integrated studies with improved models and extensive observations suited for East Asia to improve our knowledge of regional changes is recommended for the future. 67. The Short-Lived Climate Pollutants (SLCPs) co-benefit/co-control approach has recently attracted much attention as a new policy tool to mitigate near-term climate change and improve air quality simultaneously. Justification of SLCPs control from a climate change mitigation perspective is that, while the CO 2 emission reduction is essential for alleviating long-term global warming and climate change, it does not help for the near-term mitigation because of its long atmospheric lifetime. Mitigation of near-term climate change can only be achieved by reducing emissions of SLCPs. Early introduction of SLCPs control coupled with the stringent CO 2 control can also bring the leveling-off of future global mean temperature at a lower level. On the other hand, from an air quality improvement side, more stringent emission reduction of air pollutants can be achieved with less cost by combining with the CO 2 reduction policy, e.g. improvement of combustion efficiency, fuel conversion, etc. than controlling air pollutants alone. As SLCPs with positive radiative forcing, BC and tropospheric ozone are identified. 68. UNEP/WMO (2011) and UNEP (2011) report specified BC and methane (CH 4 ) as an O 3precursor for SLCFs to be controlled. Co-benefit effects for human health and vegetation are analyzed in terms of premature mortality and crop yield loss by continent. They also showed the percentage change in anthropogenic emissions of other anthropogenic air pollutants in 2030 relative to 2005 for the CH 4 , BC and CH 4 +BC measures scenario. According to their analysis, the SLCP mitigation scenario is expected to achieve large emission reduction for most of other air pollutants such as CO 2 , CO, NO x , SO 2 , PM 2.5 and so on. 69. There are several model simulation papers showing that global reduction of NO x emissions will increase CH 4 concentrations due to the reduction of OH radical concentration. However, it is also shown that simultaneous reduction of NO x together with NMVOC and CO will not cause the increase of CH 4 and the reduction of tropospheric O 3 will reduce radiative forcing to help climate mitigation. 70. In order to mitigate the much more serious O 3 air pollution in East Asia as compared to Europe and North America, reduction of NO x/NMVOC together with CH 4 is recommended as SLCP co-control approach in order to reduce surface O 3 concentration more immediately and effectively together with the global reduction of radiative forcing. 71. Recent policy initiatives for SLCPs co-benefit approach have been reviewed which included Asia Co-benefit Partnership (ACP), Climate and Clean Air Coalition to Reduce Short-Lived Climate Pollutants (CCAC), and other relevant initiatives in Asia, e.g. Project Surya, Atmospheric Brown Clouds (ABC) Asia, and the Integrated Programme for Better Air Quality (IBAQ). Chapter 9 sums up the comprehensive conclusion by describing the recommendations from earlier chapters. This chapter identifies the areas which require further scientific study, and provides scientific recommendations and suggestions for discussions on future development, and the scope of EANET expansion. 1

# Chapter 1 Introduction 

Historically, air pollution has long been a problem in industrial nations mostly in Europe and North America, and only in early industrialized countries in Asia such as Japan. However, over the last couple of decades, air pollution has become an emerging problem in most Asian developing counties as well. This situation can be well understood from Figure 1.1.1, which shows historical emission trends of NO x by continent. As shown in Figure 1.1.1, although European and North American emissions were predominant until the 1980s, cross over of Asian emissions to those of Europe and North America occurred in the middle of 1990s (Akimoto, 2003). Due to continuing rapid economic growth in Asia, after 2000 Asian contribution now accounts for most emissions. Figure 1.1.2 illustrates shares of emission of anthropogenic NO x by continent in 2005, showing that East Asia alone in Asia now shares a quarter of global emission almost equally with Europe and North America. The actual status quo of global air pollution can be seen by the satellite views of the tropospheric columns of NO 2 and SO 2 as shown in Figure 1.1.3. The upper image in Figure 1.1.3 reveals that the three major NO 2 pollution regions in the world are the eastern region of United States, the middle region of Europe spanning from southern UK, Benelux, Germany to central Europe, and northeast Asia, covering central east China, the Republic of Korea, and Japan. Other than those areas, NO xpollution in many megacities in East Asia and other parts of the world are also distinct. In the case of SO 2 , most of Eastern Europe, a region of northern Siberia (Norilsk, a mining-metallurgic complex) and some parts of China are conspicuous, together with other parts of the world, mostly reflecting volcanic activities. 

Figure 1.1.1 Trends of anthropogenic emission of NO xby continent. Europe includes former Soviet Union, and Asia includes East, South and West Asia. (prepared based on GA 4 2) 

Figure 1.1.2 Shares of global anthropogenic emissions of NO x by continent as of 2008. (prepared based on EDGAR 4.2). 2

Intensive emissions of NO x and SO 2 cause not only air pollution themselves, but also various types of air pollution coupled with emissions of other pollutants such as NH 3 , VOC, CO, BC, OC, dust and sea salt. Figure 1.1.4 illustrates a conceptual chart of total air pollution scheme identifying processes such as emissions, transport, chemical and physical transformation, cloud uptake and deposition, and including environmental impacts. As shown in Figure 1.1.4, anthropogenic air pollutants are emitted from industries and power plants, automobiles, agricultural waste burning, and others, in the form of gaseous pollutants (NO x , SO 2 , NH 3 , VOC, CO, etc.) and in particulate form (particularly, BC and OC as primary PM 2.5 ). Dust and sea salt are emitted from natural sources partly in PM 2.5 but mostly as 

Figure 1.1.3 Satellite views of tropospheric column of NO 2 (May 2004-April 2005) by SCIAMACHY (Martin et al., 2006) (upper panel),and SO 2 (1996-2002) by GOME (Khokhar et al., 2005) (lower panel). 3

PM 10 . Here, PM 2.5 and PM 10 are particulate matters whose diameters are smaller than 2.5 and 10 m, respectively. The gaseous pollutants are oxidized in the atmosphere to form secondary pollutants such as ozone and other oxidants (e.g. H 2 O2 and PAN), nitric and sulfuric acid, and oxygenated organic compounds. Some of these species turn to secondary aerosols (particulate matters) by physical transformation in the form of sulfuric acid, ammonium sulfate, ammonium nitrate, and organic aerosols. These secondary aerosols are the most important component of PM 2.5 together with the primary fine particles directly emitted from combustion. The total of these primary and secondary, and gaseous and particulate, air-born species combine to define “air quality” The right side of Figure 1.1.4 illustrates the uptake of air-born aerosols and gases into cloud and rainwater. Further oxidation reaction of SO 2 proceeds in the liquid phase in the co-existence of O 3 and H2 O2 to form extra H 2 SO 4 . The resulting ion balance between anions (SO 4 2- , NO 3- , HCO 3- , etc.) and cations (NH 4+ , Ca 2+ , Na + , K + etc.) determines the pH (acidity) of cloud and rainwater. Removal of these species in rainwater on the ground is called “wet deposition”. In contrast, direct deposition of aerosols and gases on the ground is called “dry deposition”. When the pH of rainwater is lower than 5, it is called “acid rain”, and wet and dry deposition of acidic species is in general called “acid deposition”. It should also be noted that cloud uptake of BC and OC are also an important scavenging process for these species, and affects atmospheric concentrations of PM 2.5 .Both “air quality” and “acid deposition” are concerned with environmental impacts. It has been well 

Figure 1.1.4 Schematic chart of air pollution showing emissions, atmospheric transport and transformation, cloud uptake, wet and dry depositions and environmental impacts. 4

known that primary pollutant gases, such as SO 2 , NO 2 and CO, and the bulk of aerosols referred sometimes as TSP, PM 10 , or SPM, are toxic for human health. More recently, PM 2.5 and O 3 are the focus of concern because of their environmental impacts. PM 2.5 and O 3 are known to cause respiratory and cardiac diseases. PM 2.5 is recognized as a major cause of health impacts caused by air pollution in many developing and developed countries. O 3 is also recognized as a major air pollutant affecting human health in parallel with PM 2.5 in many countries. The adverse impacts of O 3 on agricultural crop yields and forest trees are also fairly well established. In the catchment scale, acid deposition has long been of concern as having adverse impacts to aquatic as well as terrestrial ecosystems under certain conditions. Recently, “eutrophication,” caused by excess deposition of nitrogenous species on soil and water, are also causing concern as a potential cause of adverse impacts on ecosystems. According to the above understanding, this report reviews the present status of air pollution and its environmental impacts focused mainly on East Asia. Specifically, the present status of PM and Haze, Oxidants, and Acidification and Eutrophication, including their environmental impacts, are reviewed in Chapters 2, 3 and 4, respectively. In addition to these issues, and reflecting recent international concerns, air toxics such as POPs are also reviewed in Chapter 5. Chapters 6 and 7 present the review of emission inventories and mitigation technology of air pollutants. Finally, a review of climate-air pollution interaction and co-benefit/co-control approaches are included in Chapter 8. Historically, climate and air pollution issues have been discussed as essentially separate issues in both scientific communities and mitigation policy measures. However, much of the concern regarding this topic has recently been raised by UNEP/WMO (2011), and international policy initiatives have already started for the co-benefit approach. Figure 1.1.5 shows continental shares of CO 2 emission contributing to the global total in 2010. As illustrated in Figure 1.1.5, the share of East Asia is even higher than in the case of NO x as shown in Figure 1.1.2. Total Asian contributions from East Asia, South Asia and the Middle East account for almost half of world emissions of CO 2 . Considering the serious deterioration of air quality, and the large contribution to global concentration increase of CO 2 , Chapter 8 provides basic information on air pollution and climate interaction for potentially co-beneficial measures, as well as a co-control approach for addressing air pollutants and CO 2 emissions. 

Figure 1.1.5 Share of global emissions of CO 2 by continent as of 2010 (prepared base on the United Nations data, 2012). 5

References 

Akimoto, H. 2003. Global Air Quality and Pollution, Science, 302, 1716-1719,. Khokhar, M. F., C. Frankenberg, M. Van Roozendael, S. Beirle, S. Kühl, A. Richter, U. Platt and T. Wagner. 2005. Satellite Observations of Atmospheric SO 2 from Volcanic Eruptions during the Time Period of 1996 to 2002, Adv. Space Res., 36, 5, 2005, 879-887 Martin, R., C. Sioris, K. Chance, T. Ryerson, T. Bertram, P. Wooldridge, R. Cohen, J. Neuman, A. Swanson, and F. Flocke. 2006. Evaluation of space-based constraints on global nitrogen oxide emissions with regional aircraft measurements over and downwind of eastern North America. J Geophys Res,111 (D15), D15308, 10.1029/2005JD006680 TF-HTAP (Task Force on Hemispheric Transport of Air Pollution, Hemispheric Transport of Air Pollution), Eds. F. Dentener, T. Keating and H. Akimoto. 2010. UNECE Information Service United Nations. 2012. “United Nations Statistics Division”. Retrieved 67

# Chapter 2 Particular Matter (PM) and Haze 2.1 Overview 

According to a 2014 WHO report, air pollution in 2012 caused the premature deaths of around 7 million people worldwide (WHO, 2014). It was estimated that if the aerosol level could be reduced to the safety level, about 300,000 to 700,000 persons could be prevented from premature death in developing countries, and that most cases will occur in China and India (Seinfeld and Pandis, 2006). In addition, aerosol directly influences radiative forcing through the scattering and absorption of the sun radiation. It can also serve as cloud condensation nuclei to change the microphysics and lifetime of clouds, thereby indirectly changing radiative forcing and hydrological circulation. In recent decades, dramatic human activities caused by fast industrialization, urbanization, and motorization were sharply destroying the global biogeochemical balance at an unprecedented scale. The impact of human activities on the environment and climate change has become increasingly significant, and aerosol research has become a key field of atmospheric science. Aerosol is closely related to the degradation of environment and the quality of human life. The related climatic and environmental issues to atmospheric aerosols cover wide areas, such as land use, desertification, dust storms, acid rain, air pollution and other aspects. Haze is a weather phenomenon where visibility is severely reduced due to enhanced aerosol concentrations in the presence of high humidity . In the clean atmosphere, atmospheric visibility can reach about 200 km. But in the polluted atmosphere, visibility will be significantly reduced, often to just a few kilometers. The increasing haze not only affects cloud processes, but also public health and agricultural production, and also affects global climate change, which has been attracted the attention of the scientists all over the world (Anderson et al., 2003; Molina and Molina, 2004 ; Yadav et al., 2003 ).Aerosol could form atmospheric brown clouds in high-altitudes of the atmosphere. The Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) observation experiment from 1995 to 1999 found approximately 3 km thick Atmospheric Brown Clouds (ABC) shrouding the Indian Ocean, South Asia, Southeast Asia, and southern China, with an area of about 900 square kilometers ( Ramanathan et al, 2007 ). The ABC contains a large amount of carbonaceous particles, organic particles, sulfates, nitrates, and ammonium salts. The international community has launched a series of large observational experiments and numerical simulations to study the chemical and atmospheric aerosol optical properties and their spatial and temporal distribution (Jacob et al., 2003; Kinne et al., 2003; Zhang et al., 2003), such as the Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE-1) in the Southern Hemisphere over the South Australian waters (Bates et al., 1998), ACE-2 over the Northeast Atlantic waters ( Raes et al., 2000 ), INDOEX over the Indian Ocean ( Ramanathan, 2007 ), ACE-Asia over the Pacific Northwest ( Huebert et al., 2003 ), the East Asian Study of Tropospheric Aerosols and their Impact on Regional Climate (EAST - AIRC) (Li et al., 2011), and so on. One large brown cloud existed over the entire Indo-Asian-western Pacific region. East Asia (including China, Thailand, Viet Nam and Cambodia) is one of the five major regional hot spots where anthropogenic aerosol optical depth exceeded 0.3 and the absorption AOD exceeded 0.03. The ABC could reduce the annual mean surface solar radiation as much as 10 Wm -2 or more (Ramanathan et al., 2007). Haze often forms over the North China Plain (NCP) of 8eastern China with different formation mechanisms and contrasting chemical and physical properties (Tao et al., 2012). The formation of haze is closely related to the meteorological conditions and the concentration of atmospheric pollutants (Watson, 2002). The formation of haze is mostly caused by the large number of particles from the gas to particle conversion process. Li et al. (2007b) studied the aerosol optical characteristics at Xianghe, a site about 70 km east of Beijing. Very high yearly mean aerosol optical depth of 0.82 at 500 nm and very large aerosol radiative effect at the surface of 24 Wm -2 was observed. Less aerosol radiative effect at the top of the atmosphere was found, thus resulting in a dramatic heating rate during the day, which may affect atmospheric stability and cloud formation. Strong absorption of aerosol was observed in the urban regions of North China (NC), with the single scattering albedo ranging from 0.89 ± 0.04 (at 440 nm) to 0.83 ± 0.05 (at 1020 nm) (Xia et al., 2005). Similar results of low single scattering albedo (0.81 in the morning and 0.85 in the afternoon) was observed at Xianghe in another study (Li et al., 2007a). Kang et al (2004) analyzed the characteristics of PM 2.5 during the haze weather in Seoul, Korea, and found that soluble ions (NO 3- , SO 42- , NH 4+ ) and organic components were the two highest constituents in PM 2.5 . Episodic haze is usually caused by accumulated emission and unfavorable meteorological conditions, resulting in extremely high concentrations of fine particles, secondary aerosol and hazardous trace metals (Fu et al., 2008). A comprehensive study of haze types in a Chinese mega-city summarized that secondary inorganic aerosol, biomass burning, and dust were the major sources for the formation of haze (Huang et al., 2012a). Secondary organic carbon was also important for the formation of haze in the Chinese mega-cities (Hou et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2012b).The desertification of the Gobi desert in China is increasing at an annual rate of 2,460 square kilometers and trends towards further deterioration. Dust aerosol could be transported to regions far away from the desert source region, such as Shanghai (Huang et al., 2010a) ，Hong Kong (Fang et al., 1999), Korea (He et al., 2003; In and Park, 2002), Japan (Kanayama et al., 2002; Zhou et al., 1996), and even the remote North Pacific (Duce et al., 1980; Uematsu et al., 1983). The interaction of dust with pollutants and its effect on the accumulation of pollutants has been extensively demonstrated (Huang et al., 2010a; Huang et al., 2010b; Sun et al., 2004; Sun et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2011a; Wang et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2007; Yuan et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2010b). During long-range transport, dust aerosol interacts with pollutants, such as SO 2 , nitrogen oxides from coal burning and traffic exhausts. The mixing of mineral aerosol with pollution precursors not only affects the regional environment, but also has a profound impact on the global climate and the biogeochemical cycle. Due to the toxic and hazardous substances from anthropogenic aerosol which are mixed and interact with dust during transport, the hazards of the mixed aerosol to human health and the environment go beyond dust storms. Chameides et al. (1999) indicated that China's food production, such as rice and wheat, would decrease 5-30% attributed to anthropogenic aerosols and haze. By using the Community Atmosphere Model (CAM) 3.0 model, it was demonstrated that both sulfate and BC aerosols from China could weaken East Asia monsoons in both the summer and winter seasons (Liu et al., 2009). High concentrations of aerosols would significantly alter the heating rate of vertical profile, and influence atmospheric stability and dynamics within the lower troposphere (Liu et al., 2012). Aircraft measurement in NC revealed that the highly efficient coating of dust particles by acidic pollutants could provide 9predominant source of cloud condensation nuclei, forming widespread haze - clouds over China (Ma et al., 2010). Atmospheric aerosol affects the global energy radiation balance mainly through two mechanisms. First, aerosol exerts direct radiative forcing on the earth-atmosphere system through the scattering and absorption of shortwave and longwave radiations; Second, aerosol can act as cloud condensation nuclei and participate in the cloud formation, evolution and dissipation processes, changing cloud microphysical structure and lifetime of the cloud optical properties, affecting the cloud droplet sizes, cloud lifetime and precipitation efficiency, called indirect radiative forcing. The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)’s Fifth Assessment Report summarized radiative forcing (RF) by species from the AeroCom II studies (Boucher et al., 2013). For sulphate, AeroCom II models give a RF range (5 to 95% uncertainty) of -0.31 (-0.58 to -0.11) Wm -2 for the 1850–2000 period, and -0.34 (-0.61 to -0.13) Wm -2 for the 1750 - 2010 period. RF from BC has large uncertainties from the mass absorption cross-section, underestimated simulated BC concentrations, and internal mixing. An expert estimate of BC RF from fossil fuel and biofuel is +0.4 (+0.05 to +0.8) Wm 2 . RF from SOA is -0.03 (-0.27 to +0.20) Wm -2 and from the primary OA from fossil fuel and biofuel is estimated to be -0.09 (-0.16 to -0.03) Wm -2 , respectively. RF from nitrate aerosol is -0.11 (-0.3 to -0.03) Wm -2 . Estimates of the RF from anthropogenic mineral aerosols are highly uncertain. Change in mineral aerosol RF including both natural and anthropgenic changes during 1750 - 2000 is estimated to be -0.14 ± 0.11 Wm 2 .The indirect effect of aerosol also received widespread attention. Compared to the forcing directly from anthropogenic aerosol, interactions of aerosols in and with clouds affect precipitation, thus further affecting the climate system, and changing the Earth's water cycle (Solomon et al., 2007). Many studies have found that the increase of aerosols also increase cloudiness and cloud reflectivity. Chameides et al (Chameides et al., 1999) found that the spatial distribution of modeled anthropogenic aerosol is very similar to that of cloud optical thickness retrieved from International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP). The column concentration of aerosol shows a significant linear correlation (r 2 > 0.6) with the cloud optical thickness. More than 60% of the cloud optical thickness change is shown to be caused by the change of the anthropogenic aerosol. In 1977, Twomey proposed that increased aerosol could result in an increase in cloud droplet concentrations, the reduction of the radius of cloud droplets, and the increase of cloud albedo. This effect is also known as the first indirect effect or “Twomey effect” (Twomey, 1977). The most direct evidence of the “Twomey effect” was observed in the stable weather conditions. Satellite observed higher cloud albedo along steamship routes than the surrounding clouds (Coakley et al., 1987). Kruger and Grassl (2002) found that in the early 1980s, a significant increase in particle number concentration, black carbon content and the amount of secondary aerosols, increased the cloud albedo. In the late 1990s, the cloud particle size and its absorption effect were reduced along with the emission reduction of particulate matter and sulfur dioxide. However, not all the study results are consistent. Some other studies showed that the penetration of anthropogenic aerosol into the cloud can lead to decreases of cloud water content and cloud reflectivity. Satellite observation showed that the aerosol indirect effect may be mainly due to an increase in cloud cover, rather than the increased cloud albedo (Kaufman and Nakajima, 1993). Xu et al (2001) and Menon et al (2002) point out that in South China (SC), the impact of aerosols on precipitation may be greater than the increased SST over the South China Sea and the Indian Ocean. 10 The heating effect of black carbon aerosols may lead to the rise of winter and spring temperatures in Eastern China (Yu et al., 2001), and exacerbated the tendency of southern floods and northern droughts (Menon et al., 2002). Negative correlations were found between the rain frequency and air pollutants such as NO 2 and fine mode AOD for Eastern China from 1998 to 2009. Two major rain frequency reduction bands – one in the Yellow River region and the other along the Yangtze River region – lay where anthropogenic activities were the strongest (Lin et al., 2011). Asia’s emissions, which have surpassed those from North America and Europe, contributed a significant portion to the total global air pollution (Akimoto, 2003; Bond et al., 2007; Novakov et al., 2003). The trends of emissions in Asia are quite variable, mainly due to local government policies. For instance, the SO2 emissions in China increased by 53% from 2000 to 2006 with an annual growth rate of 7.3%. After 2006, the emissions began to decrease mainly due to the wide application of flue-gas desulfurization (FGD) devices in power plants (Lu et al., 2010). In opposition to this, the emissions of NO x and NMVOC in China increased by 25 and 15% from 2005 to 2010, respectively. In contrast, in Japan and Republic of Korea, their NO x and NMVOC emissions had decreases of 13– 17%, mainly due to the implementation of stringent vehicle emission standards (Wang et al., 2014). To address the importance of Asian emission on global air quality and initial sound policy, it is important to illustrate the spatial-temporal distribution, inter-annual variation, and the sources and sinks of aerosol. Chan and Yao (2008) presented a comprehensive review on the status of air pollution of China before 2005, mainly focusing on Beijing, Shanghai, and the Pearl River Delta region including Guangzhou, Shenzhen and Hong Kong, and their immediate vicinities. In the review, particulate pollution is the major environmental problem in those Chinese mega-cities. It is pointed out that the quantitative relationship between the aerosol chemical compositions and their sizes is not well established. In addition, the role of biomass burning needs to be addressed. Most importantly, long-term measurement data such as SO 42- is very limited. PM 2.5 standards have been established in many countries in the world. In China, API (Air Pollution Index) was the official data released by the Ministry of Environment Protection of China (MEP) for routinely reporting the air quality before 2012. However, PM 2.5 was not included as part of API. Since February, 2012, MEP released the official (trial) revisions to its air quality standards and made AQI (Air Quality Index) as the standard of air pollution level, which was a notable shift from its previous form as API. Specially, PM 2.5 was included as part of AQI at the first time. As of January 1, 2013, MEP started to release data of six air pollutants (SO 2 , NO 2 , PM 10 , PM 2.5 , CO, and O 3 ) at 74 cities of China. 

2.2 Atmospheric measurement and modeling 2.2.1 Spatial distribution and seasonal variation 

Due to the limited coverage of ground-based measurement sites, a global picture of surface PM 2.5 level is unclear. Although remote sensing from space could provide a wide coverage of global aerosol information such as AOD, the relationship between surface aerosol concentration and column aerosol concentration is still not clear. Recently, by using the global 3-D chemical transport model GEOS-Chem, the relationship between the spatial and temporal distribution of surface aerosol mass and column AOD was obtained (van Donkelaar et al., 2010). By using the satellite data from NASA's Multi-angle Imaging Spectroradiometer (MISR) that flies on NASA's Terra satellite 11 and the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) instrument that flies on both NASA's Aqua and Terra satellites, a global map of surface PM 2.5 concentrations was created as shown in Figure 2.2.1. As shown in this figure, high PM 2.5 concentrations in Asia were mainly distributed in eastern, southeastern, northern and northwestern China, northern India, and parts Southeast Asia. The spatial distribution of fine mode aerosols over East Asia is closely associated with human activities (Su et al., 2010). The highest PM 2.5 concentrations could be up to over 80 

μg/m 3 , far exceeding the WHO threshold of the PM 2.5 concentrations (10 μg/m 3 ) that will have considerable effects on human health. Asia has become one of the most polluted continents in the world. 

Figure 2.2.1 Global satellite-derived map of PM 2.5 averaged over 2001-2006 (http://www.nasa.gov/topics/earth/features/health-sapping.html). 

Figure 2.2.2 shows the spatial distribution of every five years mean visibility since 1960s in China (Zhang et al., 2012). As shown in this figure, before the 1980’s, very few areas showed mean surface visibility less than 15 km. As the years passed, visibility has reduced in large areas while the spatial pattern of visibility didn’t change significantly. The low visibility zones are mainly distributed in areas with more human population. It is noted that the low visibility zone over the western China was due to high dust concentration from the Taklamakan Desert. By using the rotated empirical orthogonal function (REOF) method, nine regions were identified with similar visibility trends. Four major regions were considered as the major regional haze areas in China, i.e. the NCP, Eastern China, the Pearl River Delta, and Sichuan Basin. 12 

Figure 2.2.2 Every five year mean visibility changes since 1960. (Zhang et al., 2012) 

Satellite observations have been widely used to derive the spatial distribution and seasonal variation of aerosols. Optical extinction is more sensitive to particles of sizes under 1 μm. Although PM 10 has decreased by 26 % in China from 2000 to 2011, aerosol optical extinction has increased by 18% in China during the above same period (Wang et al., 2012). A satellite observation study using a combination of Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) and MODIS found that maximum AOD (about 0.40) was observed in winter while the minimum AOD (about 0.18) occurred in autumn over Northeast China. The maximum in winter in the northern China was likely caused by the increase of coal burning for heating (Guo et al., 2011). At the regional scale in Beijing, the seasonal pollution level was also typically higher during the heating season from November to the following March. In addition, the high pollution in winter was also attributed to coal burning (Zhang et al., 2011). Within the framework of the Chinese Sun Hazemeter Network (CSHNET), aerosol optical depth and aerosol types were investigated over various ecosystems in China based on three years’ measurement (Wang et al., 2011b). In most parts of China, AOD showed a maximum in spring or summer and a minimum in autumn or winter (Xia et al., 2007). In the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau, the remote northeast corner of China, the northern forest ecosystems and Hainan Island, AOD values were the lowest, at 0.10 to 0.20. Over desert and oasis areas, as well as the desertification grasslands in northern China, AOD values were higher of 0.25 to 0.30. The annual mean AOD over the Loess Plateau is moderately high at 0.36. Over those regions where there was high density of agricultural and industrial activities (e.g., the central-eastern, southern and eastern coastal regions of China), AOD values were the highest ranging from 0.50 to 0.80. At another four 13 ground-based sites as part of CSHNET over the China’s Bohai Rim, the seasonal variation of AOD showed higher aerosol loading and larger particle sizes in the spring and summer than in the autumn or winter (Xin et al., 2011). A climatology study at four Asian sites of Aerosol Robotic Network (AERONET) also showed similar results of the seasonal variation. AOD at all sites generally show a maximum in spring and/or summer, while showing a minimum in winter (Eck et al., 2005). In Shanghai, based on the MODIS measurements from 2004 to 2007, mean AOD from Terra was 1.00, 0.98, 0.69, and 0.66 for spring, summer, autumn, and winter, respectively. And the mean AOD from Aqua is 1.06, 0.97, 0.73, and 0.72 for the four seasons, respectively (Xu et al., 2011). Obvious seasonality was noted as higher in spring and summer while lower in autumn and winter. In spring, frequent dust storms originating from NC could transport large number of coarse particulate matters to downwind regions, leading to high AOD values. In summer, the typical hot and wet weather in Eastern China was beneficial for the gas-to-particle transformation process and the hydroscopic increase of water-soluble aerosol components. While in autumn and winter, cold high pressure dominated over this area and the prevailing of westerly and northerly winds lead to favorable dispersion of the airborne pollutants. Thus, lower AOD in autumn and winter was observed (Xu et al., 2011). In a climatology study examining the of aerosol optical parameters at three cities in the Republic of Korea over the decade from February 2000 to February 2010 (Panicker et al., 2012), seasonal climatological variations of AOD showed similar results of higher values in spring and summer while lower values in autumn and winter. For the fine mode fraction and Angstrom exponent, a minimum was generally observed in spring due to the intrusion of dust aerosols. Zhang et al. (2012) presented aerosol chemical composition at 16 urban, rural and remote sites in various regions of China from 2006 to 2007. Figure 2.2.3 shows the monthly average concentrations of major aerosol chemical species in PM 10 at various regions within the framework of CMA (Chinese Meteorological Administration) Atmosphere Watch Network (CAWNET). 14 

Figure 2.2.3 The monthly averaged concentrations of major aerosol chemical species in various regions from the CAWNET network (Zhang et al. ,2012). 

In general, higher bulk PM 10 mass concentrations were found during the winter half year from the autumn to winter and lower in summer, with a secondary peak in spring. Large usage of coal for residential heating accounted for higher PM concentrations during the winter. As for the chemical species, mineral aerosol showed relatively higher concentration levels in the spring, due to influence from the Asian dust storm. It declined in the autumn from June to August, and then rose again from September to December to a similar level as the spring. A contributing factor to the higher mineral concentration in autumn was found to be urban coal-ash and other fugitive dust during heating from mid-autumn to winter. The monthly mean OC at urban and rural sites showed similar seasonal variation. Its highest level occurred in winter with two major peaks from May to June and October, respectively. Its minimum was found in summer. Fossil fuel combustion was the major contributor to the winter peak, and agricultural waste burning accounted for the other two peak periods as illustrated above. The monthly variation of EC concentrations was generally consistent with that of OC, suggesting their common sources. A clearer picture of the spatial distribution of carbonaceous aerosol in China is presented in another study by Zhang et al (2008). Figure 2.2.4 shows the annual concentrations of OC and EC at 18 stations in China located at various rural, urban and remote locations during 2006. 15 

Figure 2.2.4 Annual averaged concentrations of EC and OC during 2006 at all locations from CAWNET. The concentrations at Shangdianzi, Zhenbeitai, Akdala and Shangri-La, Zhuzhang are from 2004 to 2005. (Zhang et al.,2008) 

The annual mean concentration levels were found to be 0.35 ± 0.01 μg EC m 3 and 3.0 ± 0.21 μg OC m3 for the remote background sites; 3.6 ± 0.93 μg EC m 3 and 16.1 ± 5.2 μg OC m 3 for the regional sites; and 11.2 ± 2.0 μg EC m 3 and 33.1 ± 9.6 μg OC m 3 for the urban sites, respectively. The inland sites in northern China generally showed higher OC and EC levels. In southern China, lower levels of carbonaceous aerosol were observed, except in Panyu in the Pearl River Delta, where high local emission dominated. Higher levels of the carbonaceous aerosol in northern China than southern China were mainly ascribed to an increase in coal combustion for heating in winter. Although Lasha in Tibet had negligible anthropogenic emission, it showed moderate levels of carbonaceous aerosol. This is probably due to the influence from the biofuel and biomass burning from the northern part of Indian Peninsula and nearby regions of Southeast Asia (Engling et al., 2011). As for sulfate, its monthly pattern was similar to that of carbonaceous aerosols. The major difference is the secondary peak of sulfate observed in summer, due to strong photochemistry. However, no such peak was observed for nitrate. This is probably due to the competition between sulfate and nitrate for NH 3 and the neutralization of acidic sulfate is more favored. Also, higher temperatures in summer do not favor nitrate ammonium formation. Emissions of OC and EC in China have significant uncertainties. By using the state-of-the-science Chinese “bottom-up” emissions, EC and OC simulated from GEOS-Chem was underestimated by 56% and 76%, respectively. It was pointed out that there were major flaws in the current bottom-up inventories of Chinese carbonaceous aerosols (Fu et al., 2012). A regional air quality model system (RAQMS), incorporated with a comprehensive aerosol model, investigates the regional characteristics of carbonaceous aerosols over China during the summer (Han et al., 2008). OC shows larger spatial variability than that of EC. High OC values of 7.5 - 15.0 μg m -3 were simulated 16 in the areas along the Yangtze River from Chongqing to Shanghai, portions of the central China, the Yangtze River Delta, Beijing and Tianjin districts, as well as some parts of the northeastern China. High EC values of 2.5 to 5.0 μg m -3 were simulated over the eastern parts of China between the Yangtze and Yellow River, a part of Sichuan province and the northern Huabei Plain. As simulated by a global three dimensional Goddard Earth Observing System (GEOS) chemical transport model (GEOS-Chem), PM 2.5 , NO 3- , BC, and OC exhibited the highest concentrations in January and the lowest in July. In contrast, sulfate showed a different seasonal pattern of having the maximum concentration in October, which could be attributed to the net effect of photochemical reactions and wet deposition (Zhang et al., 2010a). A smaller number of studies has been conducted in the region of Southeast Asia. Oanh et al. (2006) compared the PM levels at six Asian metropolitan regions, for example, the Bangkok Metropolitan Region (BMR, Thailand), Bandung (Indonesia), Beijing (China), Chennai (India), Metro Manila Region (Philippines), and Hanoi Metropolitan Region (Viet Nam) from 2001 to 2004. Figure 2.2.5 shows the average concentrations of PM 2.5 and PM 10 at these six cities during the dry season. 

Figure 2.2.5 Average concentrations of PM 2.5 (a) and PM 10 (b) in the dry season in six cities (Oanh et al., 2006) 

With the exception of Beijing, which is outside of Southeast Asia, Hanoi and Chennai showed the highest levels of PM 2.5 and PM 10 . The PM levels of the other three cities, Bangkok, Bandung, and 17 Manila, were comparable. The major chemical components of PM 2.5 across six cities are organic matter, soot, NH 4+ , NO 3−, and SO 42−.

Figure 2.2.6 Monthly average concentrations of aerosol chemical components ( μgm -3 )in PM 2.5 at 13 monitoring sites with simulated concentrations from March to April, 2006. Red, yellow and green bars denote the average values during March, April, and May, respectively (Huang et al. 2013). 

A recent modeling project utilizing EANET’s observational data in Southeast Asia shows the levels of aerosol chemistry at multiple sites in Southeast Asia (Figure 2.2.6, Huang et al., 2013). The aerosol chemical species measured in PM 2.5 include SO 42- , NO 3- , NH 4+ , K + and OC. K + is a good indicator for biomass burning. K + showed highest levels at two sites in Viet Nam, Hanoi and Hoa Binh. As for the four sites in Thailand, highest K + levels were observed at Chiang Mai and Nakhon Ratchasima in March, about 2 - 3 times higher than at Bangkok and Patumthani. Chiang Mai is located in northern Thailand, and close to Myanmar, where biomass burning was most active. Nakhon Ratchasima is close to Cambodia, which also showed strong biomass burning signals. 18 Bangkok showed relatively low K + levels. It is located in the gulf of Thailand along the south sea coast, far away from the intense biomass burning regions. As for the two sites in Philippines (Manila and LosBanos), their concentrations were the lowest among all sites as because the biomass burning emissions there usually started to be active from May to October, but not in the spring. By using the CMAQ air quality model, SO 42- , NO 3- , and NH 4+ at Hanoi were most significantly underestimated while they were overestimated for Hoa Binh. At other sites in Southeast Asia, the model performances were moderate. It was found that both local biomass burning and anthropogenic emissions needed to be improved. 

2.2.2 Long term trend and inter-annual variation 

Figure 2.2.7 shows the shortwave radiation trends at various ground stations in China during the period from 1971 to 2000 (Streets et al., 2008). It is clear that most of the areas in China have been going through decreasing trends of shortwave radiation. In addition, the greatest decreases occurred in the central and eastern coastal regions of China where coal-based industrial development was highest. While in western China and some southern and north-eastern regions associated with less development and/or favorable meteorology, much less decrease was observed. 

Figure 2.2.7 Changes in shortwave pyranometer measurements at stations in China during the period from 1971 to 2000, units are in Wm −2 decade -1 . (Streets et al., 2008). 19 

Figure 2.2.8 Annual frequencies of consecutive good (a) and bad (b) visibility events and their linear trend coefficients (c and d; station passing the t-test of significance at the 0.01 confidence level are circled (Fu et al., 2013) 

Fu et al. (2013) used the annual frequency of consecutive extreme visibility events as an index of air quality (Figure 2.2.8). The lowest frequency of consecutive good visibility events, under 5five times per year, occurred in the southern region of northeastern China, the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River, and the western region of Guangdong province. Except some parts of northern China and southwestern China, the eastern part of northwestern China and the middle of Xinjiang, other regions of China all experienced distinct trends of decreasing frequency of consecutive good visibility. An inverse pattern was shown for the frequency of consecutive bad visibility events. The trends of the frequency of consecutive good and bad visibility events implied a decrease in consecutive clean air events as well as an increase of severe consecutive air pollution events in almost the whole of China, except southwestern China, during the past 50 years. The annual mean ratio of global solar radiation at surface and at top decreased 3.12% per decade from 1961 to 1992 for all stations in China. On the contrary, a significant increasing trend has been found for diffuse solar radiation during the same time period under cloud-free skies. Increased aerosol loading from pollutant emissions is most likely responsible for the reduced global solar radiation and increased diffuse radiation for this time period under cloud-free skies (Qian et al., 2007). In China from 1954 to 2001, the total cloud cover and low cloud cover have decreased 0.88% and 0.33% respectively per decade. Correspondingly, the number of cloud-free days increased 0.60% while that of overcast days decreased 0.78% per decade during the same period. However, solar radiation decreased 3.1 W/m 2 and pan evaporation decreased 39 mm per decade. It is 20 speculated that increased air pollution may have produced a fog-like haze that could reflect or absorb radiation, despite concurrent increasing trends in cloud-free sky over China (Qian et al., 2006). Using quality-controlled solar radiation data at all 96 radiation stations, and extending to all 716 China Meteorological Administration (CMA) routine stations by using a physical model, the trend of solar radiation across China in recent decades was investigated (Tang et al., 2011). A decrease in radiation between 1961 and 1989 was observed with the annual rate of −0.25 ± 0.11 Wm -2 yr -1 . However, the linear trend between 1990 and 2006 is negligible with the value of 0.04 ± 0.16 Wm -2 yr -1 , suggesting that there was no evident transition from dimming to brightening after the 1990s, which was different from previous studies (Che et al., 2005; Liang and Xia, 2005; Wild, 2009). Wang et al. (2009) concluded that aerosol loadings increased over all continents between 1979 and 2006. South and East Asia showed the most obvious increasing trends, explaining the declining trends of surface solar radiation across China in recent decades. The region of southeastern China shows the largest decreases in sunshine duration and largest increases in aerosol extinction coefficient (Kaiser and Qian, 2002). Based on observation data of visibility on sunny days in 543 stations of China from the 1960s, it was found that sunny visibility distinctly decreased in large and mid-sized cities from 1960s to the early 1990s, while the trend was unremarkable and weak in small cities. However, since the middle of the 1990s, sunny visibility presented inverse tendencies such that it ascended slowly in large and mid-sized cities while distinctly decreasing in small cities. The most significant decreasing trend of visibility were observed in the delta regions of Pearl River and Yangtze River, with a climatic trend of 10 km/10a (Wu et al., 2012). Satellite observations have been widely used to address the trend analysis of aerosol given its long-term availability of data and wide coverage. Figure 2.2.9 shows the comparisons of global and regional annual trends by using the SeaWiFS AOD at 550 nm from January 1998 to December 2010 (Hsu et al., 2012). As shown in the figure, on the global scale, the trends were negligible. However, on the regional scale, the trends could be considerable. With the exception of the Arabian Peninsula, the three regions of China (i.e. northern, southern, and eastern) showed the largest positive trends (note that red bars represent AOD trend statistically significant at more than 90% confidence, while blue bars indicate regions where there were no statistically significant trends). Figure 2.2.10 further analyzes the seasonal trends of AOD. Over East Asia in the spring, AOD exhibited negligible trends of no statistical significance (0.0006 ± 0.0034 yr-1) during the active dust outbreak season. The mineral dust aerosol decreased from 1998 to 2004–2005, while it rose from 2006 to 2010. The large inter-annual variability of the dust aerosol caused insignificant trends of AOD during the spring. However, during the heavy winter haze season (DJF), significant upward trends were observed in eastern and southern China with annual increasing rates of 0.0078 ± 0.0023 yr-1 and 0.0047 ± 0.0020 yr-1, respectively. In contrast to the relatively unstable conditions during the boreal spring and pre-monsoon months, which partly accounted for the weak tenden cies of AOD, relatively stable conditions during the dry winter and post-monsoon period favored the accumulation of aerosols. Thus, the upward trends in winter can probably be attributed to the increases of local/regional emission. 21 

Figure 2.2.9 Comparisons of global and regional annual trends based upon deseasonalised monthly anomaly of SeaWiFS AOD at 550 nm from January 1998 to December 2010. Red bars represent regions with AOD trend statistically significant (exceeding 90% confidence), while blue bars indicate regions where statistically significant trend are not found. Error bars denote the uncertainty associated with the calculated trend. (Hsu et al., 2012). 

Figure 2.2.10 Seasonal trends of SeaWiFS AOD anomaly from January 1998 to December 2010. (Hsu et al., 2012) 

> By using the TOMS, a decreasing tendency of AOD at 500 nm was observed in NC from 1980 to 1991. Later, a reverse tendency was observed from 1997 to 2001, especially for spring AOD in 22

northeast China (Xie and Xia, 2008). A combined usage of TOMS (1980 - 2001) and MODIS (2000 - 2008) examined annual trends of AOD at 550 nm over eight typical regions in China (Guo et al., 2011). From 1996 to 2001, a discernible ascending tendency was observed with an annual increasing rate of 0.01/decade. Since 2000, a weak upward trend was observed with a rate of 0.004/decade. The large increases from 1996 to 2001 are presumably consequences of large increases in industrial activities. Among the eight regions studied in China, Jingjinji (Heibei – Tianjian - Beijing), the Yangtze River Delta and the Pearl River Delta had the strongest upward trends of AOD from 2000 to 2008. Similarly, over China’s Bohai Rim, a “dimming” trend was also observed from a six year study of AOD from 2004 to 2010 (Xin et al., 2011). Analysis of the long-term trend of AOD derived from SeaWiFS in the Pearl River Delta found the seasonal trends of AOD are all positive except in summer. It was assumed that the removal processes of aerosol (e.g. strong monsoon and frequent rain) would possibly cause the decrease of AOD in summer. In addition, frequent cloud occurrence in summer over this region likely disturbed the retrieval of cloud-free aerosol and therefore may have skewed the trend analysis (Yoon et al., 2011). Using a ten-year (2000–2009) data assimilation (DA) quality Terra MODIS and MISR aerosol products, as well as 7 years of Aqua MODIS, both regional and global aerosol trends over the oceans were studied (Zhang and Reid, 2010). A statistically negligible global trend of ±0.003/per decade was found from both MODIS and MISR. However, the trends were distinct on the regional scales. On the east coast of Asia, increasing trends of 0.06 and 0.038 per decade were detected by MODIS and MISR, respectively. Different from most of the other studies on trend analysis using long-term satellite data, this study also analyzed the annual trend of fine mode anthropogenic AOD (AODa) based on an updated algorithm by Yu et al (2009) from Kaufman et al. (2005)’s method. The average annual trend of AODa for coastal China was calculated to be 0.078 per decade. Compared to its trend of the total AOD, it was concluded that the primary influence on the trends of total AOD over the coastal China was from the anthropogenic fine mode optical depth. Figure 2.2.11 shows another study of AOD trends over the East China Sea and the Sea of Japan from 2001 to 2010 (Itahashi et al., 2012). As shown in the top panel of the figure, a significant increase of the fine mode AOD (0.004 - 0.013 yr -1 , 3 - 8% yr -1 ) between 2001 and 2005 occurred over most of the ocean, attributed to a continuous increase of pollutant emissions in China. A turning point showed around 2005–2006. In the following years from 2006 to 2010, fine mode AOD decreased at a rate of 0.005 - 0.01 yr -1 (2 - 7% yr -1 ), attributed to the emission reduction from China. 23 

Figure 2.2.11 Top panel: the slope of the linear regression of fine mode AOD from MODIS/Terra from 2001 to 2005; Bottom panel: same as the top panel but from 2006 to 2010. (Itahashi et al. ,2012). 

From a global chemical transport model GOCART, the trend of AOD over China rose from a value of about 0.25 in 1980, to a peak value of 0.305 in 1996, before declining to about 0.29 by 2000. The simulation suggested that the trend of AOD was dominated by sulfate aerosol (Streets et al., 2008). Figure 2.2.12 shows the monthly variation of extinction coefficient and AOD observed by MODIS and CALIOP and simulated by a regional air quality CMAQ from 2004 to 2012, respectively (Hara et al., 2012). Three regions of China were investigated - north, south and middle parts of China. AOD in the northern part of China exhibited an increasing trend from 2004 to 2007. Although AOD decreased in 2008 and 2009, an increasing trend was still found after 2008. In the middle part of China, the annual trend was indiscernible. However, a decreasing trend was found in the southern part of China, especially from 2007 to 2011. 24 

Figure 2.2.12 Temporal variations of the monthly average extinction coefficient AOD at (a) North (b) Middle and (c) South part of China. The black, red and green line represents AOD observed from MODIS, CALIOP and simulated by CMAQ (Hara et al., 2012). 

Another global simulation using GEOS-Chem modeled the trend of aerosol secondary composition from 2000 to 2006 in China (Wang et al., 2013). The total secondary inorganic aerosol increased significantly by about 10 μg m -3 . The most significant increases distributed in the east, particularly over NC, SC and SCB (Sichuan Basin). The increase of sulfate was the strongest in SCB by more than 6 μg m -3 , compared with that of 4 μg m -3 in NC and SC. The percentage increases of sulfate in NC, SC and SCB were 49 %, 64% and 86%, respectively, in 2006 compared to 2000, corresponding almost linearly to the relative increase of SO 2 emissions in these regions. For nitrate, it increased most in NC by about 4 μg m -3 , compared to that of 1–2 μg m -3 in SC and SCB. The percentage increase of nitrate ranged from 40% to 60%, but was much less than the relative increase of NO x25 emissions. In addition to the impact of increased emissions on air quality, it was found that the strength of the East Asian Summer monsoon concentrations have strong negative correlations with aerosol simulated by GEOS-Chem (Wang et al., 2013). The summertime surface PM 2.5 concentration over Eastern China can be 17.7% higher in the weakest monsoon years than in the strongest monsoon years. The weakening of the East Asian Summer monsoon from 1986 to 2006 was another potential factor for the increasing aerosol concentrations (Zhu et al., 2012). In addition to the trend analysis on the continental and regional scale, some studies of trend analysis were also performed on the local scale. For example, a long-term trend study in Beijing (Zhang et al., 2011) found that SO 2 , dustfall, B[a]P, NO 2 and PM 10 exhibited decreasing trend patterns, while on the other hand, NO x showed an upward trend. For some other pollutants such as CO, Ozone, total suspended particulate (TSP), as well as Pb fit the flat trend. The cause of trends of different pollutants is related to the energy structure of Beijing. The predominant usage of coal has been changed to a mix of traffic exhaust and coal burning. Improved energy efficiency with the changes of industrial structure, the use of clean energy and implementation of advanced environmental standards were the major reasons for contributing to the alleviation of air pollution, particularly since 1998. Figure 2.2.13 gives a clear picture of how air pollutants changed during the past 30 years in Beijing (Zhang et al., 2011). Due to the usage of low sulfur coal and improved energy efficiency, the concentration of SO 2 has decreased over the past two decades. While the quantity of motor vehicles in Beijing increased from 0.14 million in 1983 to more than 3.07 million in 2007 with an annual growth of about 14%, which has resulted in the increase of nitrogen oxide. The opposite trend of SO 2 and NO x /NO 2 resulted in a significant increasing trend of the ratio of NO x /SO 2and NO 2 / SO 2 as shown in the figure. The ratio of TSP to SO 2 and PM 10 to SO 2 was 2.26 and 1.61 in 1991 and 1998, respectively. It increased to 5.78 and 3.15 in 2001 and 2007, respectively. This reflected the increasing impact of particulate matter. 26 

Figure 2.2.13 The annual changes of the ratios of NO x /SO 2 , NO 2/ SO 2 , TSP/SO 2 , PM 10 /SO 2 in Beijing. (From Zhang et al., 2011). 

Figure 2.2.14 shows the long-term variation of spherical monthly averaged AOD based on the ground/space lidar measurements (National Institute for Environmental Studies (NIES) Lidar & Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations (CALIPSO)), MODIS and AOD simulated by a regional air quality model Community Multi-scale Air Quality Model (CMAQ) at Beijing from 2004 to 2011 (Hara et al., 2012). Generally, different satellite sensors and the model agreed relatively well with each other regarding the annual and seasonal trends. From 2004 to 2008, AOD measured by the NIES Lidar and MODIS both showed a significant increasing trend with an annual increasing rate of 0.028 yr -1 and 0.016 yr -1 , respectively. After that, the increasing trend was much lower than the increasing rate of 0.003 yr -1 and 0.002 yr -1 , respectively. 

Figure 2.2.14 Same as Figure 2.2.12 with the blue line representing the AOD measured by a NIES Lidar set up in Beijing. (From Hara et al., 2012) 

An analysis of AERONET data from Beijing over 9 years showed an increasing trend in the single scattering albedo by ∼0.02, corresponding to a decrease of aerosol absorption caused by a reduction in local black carbon emissions (Lyapustin et al., 2011). Okuda et al. (2008) investigated the trends of hazardous trace metal concentrations in aerosols collected in Beijing from 2001 to 2006. The crustal elements, such as Al, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, and Co, did not show obvious annual variation. Several hazardous trace metals, such as anthropogenic elements Cu, Zn, As, Cd, and Pb showed 27 evident annual increase of 4.9 - 19.8% (p < 0.001). In particular, the Cd and Pb concentrations increased remarkably with the largest increase rates of 19.0 and 19.8%, respectively. It was hypothesized that the change during the process of coal burning, such as using higher temperatures, could result in the increased emissions of these metals. The concentration of As in Beijing was about one or two orders higher than those in some other cities in the world. Coal burning was responsible for the majority of the As source in aerosol. In Shanghai, a “renewed dimming” period decreased the direct surface solar radiation ( DiSR ) after the 1980s following a “dimming” period from the late 1960s to the mid-1980s and a“stabilization”/“slight brightening” period from the mid-1980s to the mid-1990s was revealed (Xu et al., 2011). In contrast, the diffuse surface solar radiation (DfSR) brightened significantly under clear-sky conditions. AOD significantly correlated with DfSR, and anti-correlated with DiSR in all four seasons, indicating that the increase (decrease) of AOD will influence the atmospheric transparency, and that aerosol emission had an important role on decadal variation of surface solar radiation over this area. Figure 2.2.15 shows the long-term variation of spherical monthly averaged AOD based on the ground/space lidar measurements (NIES Lidar & CALIPSO), MODIS and AOD simulated by regional air quality model CMAQ at two sites of Japan, Hedo and Tsukuba, respectively, from 2004 to 2011 (Hara et al. 2012). Different from Figure 2.2.12, decreasing trends of AOD were observed in downwind regions from the Asian emission in recent years. Since the main composition of spherical aerosol around Japan is sulfate (Itahashi et al., 2012), this decreasing trend should be caused by the reduction of SO 2 emission due to the wide application of FGD devices in China. 

Figure 2.2.15 Same as Figure 2.2.12 but for Hedo and Tsukuba in Japan (Hara et al. 2012). 

Inter-annual trends of SO 42- in PM at 13 EANET sites from 2001 to 2007 are shown in Figure 2.2.16, with the dashed lines representing the linear trends (Lu et al., 2010). Increasing trends of the aerosol 28 sulfate concentrations at all EANET sites have been observed after 2002 except for one site in the Republic of Korea (Kanghwa). This increasing trend was generally consistent with that of the annual SO 2 emission in China as shown in Figure 2.2.17. Afterwards, the increasing trend in sulfate for most sites leveled off and turned to a decreasing trend around 2005 to 2006. The consistent annual trends of aerosol sulfate in various regions of Japan implied a strong influence from outside emission sources given that SO 2 emissions in Japan tended to stabilize during the study period. 

Figure 2.2.16 Inter-annual trends of aerosol SO 42- at 13 EANET sites from 2001 to 2007. Dashed lines represent the linear regressions. (Lu et al., 2010). 

Decadal climatology of aerosol optical parameters in the Republic of Korea was examined using MODIS during the decade from February 2000 to February 2010 (Panicker et al., 2012). Contrary to the annual trends of China as stated in many studies above, significant decadal decreases of AOD at 550nm were found at Seoul and Busan with around 22% and 18.7% decreases, respectively. At Jeju, there was negligible change found. Parameters of fine mode fraction and Angstrom exponent both showed a significant decadal reduction, likely indicating the decrease of anthropogenic aerosols. 10 years TSP composition data between March 1992 and February 2002 at Gosan, Korea shows higher average non-sea-salt-(nss)-sulfate concentration (6.74 μg m -3 ) than many other background areas in the world. The decreasing trend of the concentration ratio of nss-sulfate to nitrate was due to the increase of the nitrate concentration. This was suggested to be mainly caused by the emission trend change in China (Park et al., 2004). As stated in Section 2.1, Southeast Asia is one of the regions of high AOD hotspots. The biomass burning due to forest fires, agricultural waste residue and savannah burning has been a major concern in SE Asia (Southeast Asia). Figure 2.2.17 depicts the monthly (February, March, April) total biomass burning carbon emissions based on GFED and corresponding precipitation over Southeast Asia (8 - 26 N, 90 - 110 E) during the dry season from 1997 to 2010 (Tsay et al., 2013). Both the biomass burning emissions and precipitation show sizable inter-annual variations. 29 Meteorology and climate are important factors affecting the magnitudes of the biomass burning emissions. Less precipitations cause higher biomass burning emissions, usually in March during every year. During the ENSO periods (1998/1999, 2004, 2007, and 2010), stronger biomass burning emissions are also found. 

Figure 2.2.17 Monthly (February, March, April) total biomass burning carbon emissions based on GFED and corresponding precipitation over Southeast Asia (8 - 26 N, 90 - 110 E) during the dry season from 1997 to 2010 (Tsay et al., 2013). 

Figure 2.2.18 shows the inter-annual variability of MODIS AOD and the MODIS-detected fire pixel counts over the northern Southeast Asia region (92 - 104E, 18 - 24N) (Gautam et al., 2013). AOD typically peaks during March - April and exceed 0.5 during each year. The aerosol loading significantly diminishes and drop from Maye with the onset of the wet season. The fire peak counts well correlated with the peak AOD period during February – April, indicating smoke due to forest fire/crop burning as a major cause of the seasonal peak in the AOD in Southeast Asia. 30 

Figure 2.2.18 Inter-annual variability of MODIS AOD and the MODIS-detected fire pixel counts over the northern Southeast Asia region (92 - 104E, 18 -24N) 

With the exception of long-term records from space remote sensing measurements and historical biomass burning emissions, there are very few studies on ground-based long-term measurements of aerosol and gases in this region. This is partly due to that the scientific technologies in most Southeast Asia countries fall behind other countries in Asia, and also partly due to that the atmospheric science in this region is at an early stage of development. Recently, two intensive field campaigns, BASE-ASIA (Biomass-burning Aerosols in South-East Asia: Smoke Impact Assessment) and the Seven South East Asian Studies (7-SEAS) Mission, have been established to characterize aerosol-meteorological interactions around South East Asia. The 7-SEAS program was organized through a collaborative effort with active Southeast Asian regional science partners, NASA’s Radiation Science, Tropospheric Chemistry, Air Quality, and Oceanography programs, as well as the Office of Naval Research (ONR), Office of Naval Research-Global (ONRG), and the US State Department. An overview paper (Lin et al., 2013, and references herein) has extensively summarized the results from the two field campaigns. 

2.2.3 Source-receptor relationships 

Yu et al. (2008) developed an approach to estimate the anthropogenic aerosol fluxes from satellites, which lined up quite well with the simulations by the Goddard Chemistry Aerosol Radiation and Transport (GOCART) and Global Modeling Initiative (GMI) models. It is estimated that amounts of 31 about 18 Tg/yr of anthropogenic aerosol could be exported from East Asia to the northwestern Pacific Ocean, of which about 25% reached the west coast of North America during a four year study (2002 to 2005). The imported flux of 4.4 Tg/yr to North America accounted for about 15% of local emissions from the United States and Canada. Seasonally, the pollution fluxes were largest in spring while smallest in summer. In the early 1980s to 1990s, continuous measurements were made at Midway Island in the Pacific Ocean. It was found that the concentration of mean anthropogenic sulfate in springtime from 1993 to 1994 was 1.85 times higher than in 1981 and 1983. Anthropogenic sulfate increased at a rate approximately the same as SO 2 emissions from East Asia (Prospero et al., 2003). Figure 2.2.19 shows the annual fine mode AOD over the Sea of Japan observed by MODIS and simulated by CMAQ, along with that of SO 2 emission from several different inventories and SO 2column concentration from The Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment (GOME) / Scanning Imaging Absorption Spectrometer for Atmospheric Chartography (SCIAMACHY) (Itahashi et al., 2012). It could be found that SO 2 emission from various inventories generally had a clear increasing trend from 2000 to 2006. An increasing trend in AOD from both observation and simulation was constantly shown during this period. Since 2007, which was a turning point, SO 2 emissions from China had a sharp reduction with corresponding decrease in AOD (-4.1%/yr). In the right panel of the figure, annual AOD values from both observation and simulation had significant linear correlations with annual SO 2 emission from China. This evidence indicated that the change of Chinese emission had great impact on the air quality of East Asia. 

Figure 2.2.19 (a) Temporal plots of the annual mean AODf over the Sea of Japan by CMAQ (black line) and MODIS/Terra (green line), SO 2 emissions from China based on the REAS emissions inventory (red bars) and Lu et al. (pink bars), and SO 2 VCD over Central Eastern China using GOME/SCIAMACHY (orange bars). (b) Scatterplots of AODf from CMAQ (black diamonds) and AODf from MODIS/Terra (green circles) against the SO 2 emissions from China based on REAS, (top-left axis) SO 2 VCD from GOME/SCIAMACHY with the SO 2 emissions from REAS (red squares), and Lu et al. (pink squares). The numbers near each graph indicate the year (i.e. 5 means the year 2005). (Itahashi et al, 2012). 

Regional transport of air pollution has been widely observed and examined. A Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF)-Chem simulation during the 2006 summer Campaigns of Air Quality 32 Research in Beijing and Surrounding Regions (CAREBeijing) campaign found out the spatial variations of elemental carbon (EC) was mainly controlled by local scale emissions, i.e. within 100 km around Beijing during the preceding 24 hours, while that of sulfate was mainly controlled by the regional scale emissions, i.e. within 500 km around Beijing over the preceding 3 days (Matsui et al., 2010). Based on the US EPA's Models-3/CMAQ model simulation over the Beijing region, it was estimated that about 34% of PM 2.5 on average and 35–60% of ozone during high ozone episodes can be attributed to transport of Beijing’s outside regions, e.g. Hebei, Shandong Provinces and the Tianjin Municipality. It was suggested that controlling only local sources in Beijing will not be sufficient to attain the air quality goal set for the Beijing Olympics (Streets et al., 2007). At an offshore island (Kinmen) off southeastern China, high winter PM level was partly attributed to the transport from inland anthropogenic sources (Hsu et al., 2010). Background sites located in different regions of China generally traced back the similar pollutant sources. For instance, the Waliguan Baseline Observatory situated at the edge of northeastern part of the Qinghai-Xizang (Tibet) Plateau in western China revealed higher particle number concentrations from the east than those coming from other directions (Kivekas et al., 2009). The Shangdianzi regional background station located in the northern part of NCP observed the highest particle mass concentration while air masses prevailed from the southeast (Shen et al., 2011). Figure 2.2.20 shows the percentage change of annual SO 2 concentration at about 1000 sites in the Japan National Air Monitoring Network between 2000 and 2007 (Lu et al., 2010). In most Japanese cities, SO 2 concentrations evidently decreased after 2000. This was attributed to the decrease of both volcanic and local anthropogenic SO 2 emission in Japan. On the other hand, an increasing trend was shown at those sites close to the Asian continent (e.g., sites in southwestern Japan) as shown in the inset of the figure). The inset plot shows the percentage change of SO 2 versus longitude at each site. Generally, a decreasing of the SO 2 percentage change varied with the increasing of longitude. This meant that the further the site is away from the Asian continent, the greater the SO 2 concentration decreases. In other words, those sites located at lower longitudes were more easily influenced by the continental outflows. The result clearly demonstrated that, in spite of the relatively short tropospheric lifetime of SO 2 , the transported SO 2 from the Asian continent could possibly partially counteract the local reduction of SO 2 emission downwind, and even overrides it in some southwest areas of Japan. 33 

Figure 2.2.20 Percentage change of annual SO 2 concentration at around 1000 sites of the Japan National Air Monitoring Network between 2000 and 2007 (from database of Japan NIES). The inset plots the percentage change of SO 2 versus longitude for each individual site (Lu et al., 2010). 

A 10 year time-series of water-soluble chemical components and sulfur isotopic ratios of sulfate in aerosol samples were collected from 1993 to 2003 at Tsuruoka, Japan, a coastal area on the Sea of Japan (Akata et al., 2010). It was found that the non-sea-salt sulfur isotopic ( 34 δS) in fall to spring coincided with the average sulfur isotope ratios of coal used in northern China, indicating the possibility of the long-range transport of sulfate from the Asian continent to Japan. Annual variations in nitrogen wet deposition across Japan within the frame of EANET from 1989 to 2008 were analyzed (Morino et al., 2011). The wet deposition rates of NO 3- across Japan increased at a rate of 2–5%/yr. Sensitivity simulations by using a chemical transport model (the Models ‐3Community Multiscale Air Quality) indicated that the increased NO 3- wet deposition in Japan was mostly (61%–94%) attributed to the increased emissions from China. On Mt. Tateyama in central Japan from January 1999 to February 2009, volume concentrations from winter to spring increased signi fi cantly at a confidence level of 95%. Simulated by a global chemical transport model, the Chinese anthropogenic emissions contributed about 60-80% of total anthropogenic aerosols observed at Mt. Tateyama (Osada et al., 2009). A long-term study (March 1992-February 2002) of TSP composition and backward trajectory analysis was conducted at Gosan (Park et al., 2004). The average non-sea-salt-(nss)-sulfate concentration reached 6.74 μg m -3 , higher than many other background areas in the world. The ratio of nss-sulfate to nitrate presented a decreasing trend due to the increase of the nitrate concentration. It was suggested that this trend is mainly caused by the emission change in China. At another background site on Jeju Island, Republic of Korea, when air masses came from China, the observed △BC/ △CO slope of 9.7 ng m -3 ppbv -1 coincided reasonably 34 with the BC/CO emission ratios over northeastern China (Sahu et al., 2009). A nitrogen isotopic study found out higher mean δ15 N values of total nitrogen (+16.9‰ ± 4.5‰) and remained N (mostly NH 4+, +20.2‰ ± 5.2‰) in summer (June–August) whereas lower δ15 N values (+12.9‰ ± 3.4‰ and +11.3‰± 5.1‰, respectively) in winter (December–February). It is explained by the enhanced contribution of δ15 N enriched emissions from agricultural straw burning in China in the harvest season (summer and autumn) (Kundu et al., 2010). 

2.3 Adverse impacts 2.3.1 Impacts on human health 

The effect of PM is obvious when the exposure level is high; the London smog episode in 1952 clearly showed the relation between black smoke and excess mortality (Bell et al., 2003). The effect of much lower concentration has also been studied extensively, and the WHO air quality guideline for PM 10 was set to be 20 g/m 3 for annual mean and 50 g/m 3 for 24-hour mean, and that for PM 2.5 was 10 

g/m 3 and 25 g/m 3 , respectively (WHO, 2005). Although extensive studies have been done in the US and Europe, it is not obvious whether or not the effect in East Asian countries is similar to western countries. Therefore, we need studies that evaluate the relation between the PM level in East Asian countries and health outcomes. One of the problems of comparing studies, especially among those dealing with short-term impact, is that each study has its own statistical method. The method in general is called time-series analysis, and it usually is an extension of ordinary linear regression, but some studies use the linear Poisson model (Ng et al., 2013), others used GAM (Dominici et al., 2002), and most of the studies address lag time, as in, impact that carries over days, with different method and length of lag. Due to this inconsistency, area comparison was difficult. During the last several years, however, East Asian researchers have been trying to conduct collaborative study. Out of these collaborations, some papers have been already accepted for publication (Lee et al., to be published). The main source of PM can be roughly divided into two – local and transboundary PM. Also, in terms of the time scale of the impact, we can divide the effect into short-term and long term effect. In the following, we first review the short-term effect, and then review the long-term effect, which was due mainly to local pollution; studies on the long-term effect due to transboundary air pollution will be conducted in the future. In China, daily mean concentration of PM 10 exceeds 100 g/m 3 in many cities, including Anshan, Beijing, Hangzhou, Lanzhou, Shanghai, Shenyang, Taiyuan, Urumqi, Wuhan and Xi'an (Chen et al., 2012), although the observation period varies with cities (several years between 1996-2008). After adjusting for year trend and season, percent increase in mortality for every 10 g/m 3 increase in 2-day moving average of PM 10 among 16 cities in China was summarized using Bayesian hierarchical model, i.e., 0.35 (95% Posterior Interval = 95%PI: 0.18-0.52) for total mortality, 0.44 (95%PI: 0.23- 0.64) for cardiovascular mortality and 0.56 (95% PI: 0.31-0.81). A 2004–2008 study in Xian showed that increases of 2.29% (95% confidence interval: 0.83, 3.76) for all-cause mortality and 3.08% (95% confidence interval: 0.94, 5.26) for cardiovascular mortality were associated with an interquartile range increase of 103.0 μg/m 3 in lagged 1-2 day PM 2.5 exposure (Huang et al., 2012). When multi-pollutant models were used by adding sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide, the estimate became lower, but still significantly higher than null. The lag pattern analyses showed only several days of carry-over effect. Probably due to short observation period, they observed significant heterogeneity in effect size among the cities. 35 In contrast to this, Chen and his coworkers' earlier study in Chonqing showed negative effect of PM 2.5, whereas they showed positive effect of sulfur dioxide(Venners et al., 2003). Kan and his coworkers' interpretation for this inconsistent result is that there were less days measured for PM 2.5 compared with sulfur dioxide, and this sparse PM 2.5 data may have yielded less power (Kan. et al., 2012). In the Republic of Korea, daily mean concentration of PM 10 was 64.8 g/m 3 in Seoul, from 1999 to 2004, and 71.2 in Incheon, from 1995 to 1996. The percent increase in mortality per 10 g/m 3 increase of PM 10 was 0.37 (95% Confidence Interval = 95%CI: 0.23-0.52) in Seoul(Bae & Park, 2009) and 0.70 (95%CI: 0.11-1.30) in Incheon (Hong et al., 1999). These studies used time-series analysis, but Yi et al.(Yi, Hong, & Kim, 2010) showed lower estimate when they used case-crossover analysis, i.e., 0.24 (95%CI:0.07-1.04). In Japan, suspended particulate matter (= SPM), instead of PM 10 , has been measured. The difference between PM 10 and SPM is as follows: SPM cuts all the particulates with the diameter > 10 m, whereas PM 10 allows 50% of such particulates. In this regard, SPM can be considered as PM 7(Minoura et al., 2006). The median of the daily concentration of SPM level in Tokyo, 1990-1994 was 44 g/m 3 in urban areas and 39 g/m 3 in suburban areas (Murakami. et al., 2006). This level can be considered to be lower than Korean cities, even after taking account of the difference between PM 10 and SPM. The first multi-city short-term SPM impact study was conducted for 1990-1994, and the percent increase in mortality per 10 g/m 3 increase in SPM concentrations among subjects more than 65 years old was 0.8 for all-causes, 1.1 for respiratory diseases, and 0.9 for cardiovascular diseases, after the control of other pollutants, temperature and humidity (Omori et al.,, 2003). They also reported that the carry-over effect lasted for two days for all-cause and respiratory diseases, and at least 5 days for cardiovascular diseases. Causes of death with which positive association with SPM were reported include heart disease (Ueda et al., 2009), ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke (Yorifuji & Kashima, 2013). It was also found that infant mortality was associated with gestational exposure to PM; hazard ratio of infant all-cause mortality was 1.53 (95%IC:1.22-1.90) and that of respiratory mortality was 3.15 (95%CI: 1.26-7.85) for PM2.5 per interquartile range increase(Son. et al., 2011). Regarding morbidity, Lim et al. reported the relation of PM10 with depression among elderly (Lim.Y.-H et al., 2012). Japan has recently begun to measure PM 2.5 . According to Ueda et al. (Ueda et al., 2009), the mean concentration for 2000-2004 in 20 selected cities ranged from 11.8 g/m 3 to 22.8 g/m 3 . Using both ordinary time-series analysis and case-crossover analysis, they reported that a 10 g/m 3 increase in PM 2.5 for the single pollutant model at lag 1 was associated with a 0.53% and 0.88% increase in all-cause mortality among 65+ years old subjects for the generalized additive model analysis and case-crossover analysis, respectively; the results were similar to the US study (Ostro, Broadwin, & Green, 2006), although the model details were somewhat different. Long-term PM effect has been investigated in the US and Europe, which the WHO summarized as follows: "Chronic exposure to particles contributes to the risk of developing cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, as well as of lung cancer (WHO, 2011)." In East Asia, however, the situation has been somewhat different: In Japan, using the cohort data, NIPPON DATA80 for 1985-2004, Ueda et al. (Ueda et al., 2012) reported that the hazard ratios for a 10 g/m 3 increase of SPM were 0.98 (95%CI:0.92-1.04), 0.90 (95%CI:0.81-1.00), 0.92 (95%C:0.73-1.17), 0.86 (95%CI:0.74-1.01) for all-causes, cardiovascular diseases, coronary heart diseases, and stroke, respectively. Another cohort study (JPHC study) for middle-aged subjects investigated incidence as well as mortality (Nishiwaki et 36 al., 2013). Although they found positive association among smokers (adjusted hazard ratio per 10 

g/m 3 increase in PM was 1.39 for coronary heart disease incidence and 1.37 for myocardial infarction incidence) and women (1.63 and 1.99), but when they excluded one of the 7 areas, the positive association disappeared. They did not find positive association with lung cancer either. In China, one cohort study for middle-aged subjects reported a positive association of total suspended particulate with cardiopulmonary diseases (0.3% increase per 10 g/m 3 increase) and lung cancer (1.5%)(Cao Jie. et al., 2011). However, the effect sizes of this Chinese study were much lower than the corresponding sizes of the US study (Pope & Dockery, 2006). The problem with the Japanese and Chinese studies is that the cohorts were not originally designed to evaluate air pollution effect; NIPPON DATA80 was designed for circulatory diseases. Although JPHC study cohort was designed such that multiple outcomes can be evaluated, it originally was focused on nutrition as a main exposure variable. The Chinese cohort was designed to focus on hypertension. We need further studies on long-term air pollution effects that focus on air pollution effects. So far, we have reviewed local PM pollution. One recent concern in East Asia, however, is transboundary air pollution. A natural source of transboundary air pollution is Asian dust. Anthropogenic sources has also been causing problems with downstream countries such as the Republic of Korea and Japan. During the 2012-2013 winter season, newspapers frequently reported high PM 2.5 levels in Chinese cities, and subsequent high concentration in the Republic of Korea and Japan. Japan has begun a new comprehensive aerosol study, called ASEPH, which tries to investigate aerosol from sources to destination and the impact of aerosols on plants and human health. This project has just finished its 5-year term, and begun publishing some results. Among them, Kaneyasu et al. (Kaneyasu & Takami, 2010) reported that the higher level of PM 2.5 in northern Kyushu (the southern part of Japan) in spring 2009 was largely attributed to transboundary pollution. This conclusion was based on high concentration of PM 2.5 in Jeju Island, followed by the peak concentration in Fukue Island and Fukuoka City; non-sea salt sulfate concentrations were even higher in Fukue Island, where there is no large source of pollution, than in Fukuoka City, which has a population of over 1 million. The health effects which can be attributed to transboundary pollution was now under investigation. Unlike anthropogenic transboundary pollution, Asian dust has been studied extensively; based on systematic review, nineteen epidemiologic studies published between 1980 and 2009 were identified (Hashizume et al., 2010). Among them, mortality studies in the Republic of Korea showed positive relation with all-cause, respiratory and circulatory diseases, but some results were not statistically significant and no studies provided concrete definition of "Asian dust" day. The results of the studies on morbidity or respiratory functions were inconsistent, partly due to diversity of analytical method and partly due to small number of Asian dust days. After this review, some papers on Asian dust were published. One Japanese incidence study found that only atherothrombotic brain infarction was associated with Asian dust (Kamouchi et al., 2012). Some of the studies used a novel method to identify Asian dust days, i.e., Light Detection And Ranging (LIDAR) with a polarization analyzer. This method can distinguish spherical dust from non-spherical dust; Natural Asian dust particles are usually non-spherical, whereas anthropogenic PMs are usually spherical. Among these studies, Kanatani et al.(Kanatani et al., 2010), reported increased child asthma hospitalizations during Asian dust days in Toyama (adjusted odds ratio was 1.71 with 95%CI 1.18–2.48), and Kashima et al. (Kashima et al., 2012) reported t he percent increase in mortality per 10 g/m 3 increase in mean 37 concentration of the current to the previous 2 days was 0.6 (95% CI: 0.1-1.1) for heart disease, 0.8 (95% CI: 0.1-1.6) for ischaemic heart disease, 2.1 (95% CI: 0.3-3.9) for arrhythmia and 0.5 (95% CI: 0.2-0.8) for pneumonia. This type of study, which uses LIDAR data, will increase in number in the future. In terms of attributable burden, PM can be regarded as one of the most serious environmental factors; at least 3 million deaths per year in the world, and East Asia is a region which feels serious impact (Lim.S. S. et al., 2012)(Anenberget al, 2010) (Figure 2.3.1). For future projections, Nawahda et al. reported as follows: In 2020 in East Asia, if the policy failed, the number of deaths attributable to PM 2.5 would be 832,700, much larger than the successful policy case, 313,438(Nawahda et al., 2012). The effect of technology was estimated by Wang and Mauzerall: If there were no air pollution controls, the cost estimated with the "willingness-to-pay" method would be 16% of the GDP of Zaozhuang in 2020, whereas it would be reduced to 13% if "best available emission control technology" were implemented and to 8% if the "advanced coal gasification technologies" were implemented (Wang & Mauzerall, 2006). The topics not covered here include the relation between chemical components of PM and health outcome. There have been only two studies on this topic in Asia, one in Republic of Korea (Son et al., 2012) and one in China (Cao et al., 2012), and both studies focused on a single-city. Although they found some positive results, we should wait for some other studies to reach conclusion. In the Chinese study, they used ED-XRF spectrometry to measure some components, which is suitable for everyday measurements. Using this new method, more studies can be expected in the near future. 

Figure 2.3.1 Estimated annual premature mortalities attributed to anthropogenic PM 2.5 when no upper or lower concentration threshold is assumed, for cardiopulmonary mortalities per 1,000 km 2 (A), rate of cardiopulmonary mortalities per 10 6 people ( B), lung cancer mortalities per 1,000 km 2 (C), and rate of lung cancer mortalities per 10 6 people ( D). (Anenberg et al., 2010) 38 

2.3.2 Other impacts 2.3.2.1 Possible impacts of particulate deposition on trees 

PM were not generally considered harmful to vegetation, because acute plant disease was infrequently ascribed particle contamination (Smith, 1977). However, it has been well known that various kinds of PM were adsorbed (deposited) on leaf surface of trees, garden plants or agricultural crops, which could be observed by using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Such adsorbed particulate matters have been discussed as a possible cause of alterations of leaf surface conditions, such as degradation/erosion of epicuticular wax (leaf surface wax) and stomata occluded with particles, which could be also observed by SEM (e.g. Smith, 1977; Grill et al., 1983; Cape, 1983; Crossley et al., 1986; Sase et al., 1998; Burkhart, 2010). As possible impacts of particulate matters on trees, the following mechanisms have been discussed: i) Malfunction of stomata due to occlusion with particles ii) Increase of wettability with degradation of surface conditions iii) Shading of light or increase of leaf temperature due to deposition of solid fine particles 

i) Malfunction of stomata due to occlusion with particles 

Stomata occluded by particulate matters have been observed using SEM for European tree species (Smith, 1977; Grill et al., 1983; Crossley et al., 1986) and also for Japanese cedar ( Cryptomeria japonica ) (Sase et al., 1998; Takamatsu et al., 2001). In the case of a polluted area in UK, 26% of the recorded stomata in Scots pine ( Pinus sylvestris ) were occluded with pulverized fuel-ash type particles, while less than 1% was only occluded in a reference area (Crossley et al., 1986). It was suggested that uncontrolled water loss would be accelerated due to incomplete closure of stomata. Takamatsu et al. (2001) found that such stomata in C. japonica leaves could not close guard cells completely even if the leaves were dipped in a abscisic acid solution (plant hormon regulating stomatal closure): 30 −70% of the stomata were malfunctioned in 2-year leaves from urban area (Tokyo and Saitama Prefecture), while less than 5% were malfunctioned in those from amountainous area (Ibaraki Prefecture). Moreover, the fraction of such unhealthy stomata and Sb concentrations in leaf-surface particles showed significant correlation (Takamatsu et al., 2001). It was suggested that accelerated water loss due to malfunction of stomata and recent dry meteorological conditions may be a siginifcant factor causing the deline of C. japonica trees observed in Kanto Plain near Tokyo (Sase et al., 1998; Takamatsu et al., 2001). The size of trees’ stomata is relatively large, although the actual size may depend on species: epistomatal chamber (a front hollow of the stomata) was approx. 15 μm in length and 5 μm in width in P. sylvestris and approx. 20 μm in length and 10 μm in width in C. japonica according to the SEM images by Crossley et al. (1986) and Takamatsu et al. (2001), respectively. Therefore, most of the particles observed in the stomatal chamber were several μm in diameter. Relatively coarse particles (> several μm) may mainly be related to occlusion of stomata with particulate matters, although aggregation of fine particles can also be considered. 

ii) Increase of wettability with degradation of surface conditions 

Although epicuticular wax must be hydrophobic in general, the leaf surface may become wettable with degradation/erosion of the wax (Cape, 1983; Cape, 1986; Sase et al., 1998; Takamatsu et al., 39 2001). Deposition of hydrophilic particulate matters may also contribute to increase of wettability (Cape, 1986). In fact, leaf wettability decreased with wax amount and increased with amounts of particulate matters on the leaf surface (Cape et al., 1989). Moreover, it has been suggested that hygroscopic fine particles, such as (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 , increased wettability of leaf surface (Burkhardt et al., 1994; Burkhardt, 1995; Burkhardt, 2010). Hygroscopic fine particles deposited around stomata may absorb water vapor from the stomata and become deliquescent, resulting in forming “thin water films” on leaf surface (Burkhardt et al., 1994; Burkhardt, 1995). Deliquescent and recrystallization/combination of hygroscopic particles may occur repeatedly with changing humidity (Burkhardt, 2012) and this may increase leaf surface wettability (Cape, 2007). Increase in leaf wettability may accelerate transpiration rate (Burkhardt, 1995), deposition of gaseous pollutants, such as SO 2 (Cape, 1996; Matsuda et al., 2006), ion exchange (e.g. N uptake, cation leaching) on leaf surface (Sase et al., 2008; Adriaenssens et al., 2011) and the possibility of pathogen infection (Pinon et al., 2006). It has also been hypothesized that continuous water films connecting to the interior of the stomata along the stomatal wall would cause liquid water to flow from the leaf apoplast to the outer surface like a wick, which was called the ‘‘hydraulic activation of stomata’’ (HAS) (Burkhardt, 2010). It was suggested that acceleration of water loss due to HAS was one of possible causes of forest decline in Europe (Burkhardt, 2010). Experimental data supporting the HAS theory have also been reported recently ( Pariyar et al., 2012; Burkhardt et al., 2012). Studies on the deposition of hygroscopic fine particles (< 2.5 μm) are still limited in East Asian forests (e.g. Matsuda et al. 2010). Moreover, no chamber data has been disclosed for East Asian species. Dry deposition of the hygroscopic particles to tree species should be investigated in East Asia on the laboratory scale as well as on the field scale. 

iii) Shading of light or increase of leaf temperature due to deposition of solid fine particles 

Experimental studies on the direct effects of fine particles have been limited for crop species as well as tree species. Hirano et al. (1995) investigated the direct effects of fine dust powders on crops such as cucumber ( Cucumis sativus ) in Japan. They reported that the stomatal conductance of cucumber leaves decreased in light conditions and increased in dark conditions by exposure to volcanic soil (Kanto loam, KL) particles (coarse, 100 μm at the 90 th percentile; fine, 40 μm; ultrafine, 5 μm) and that the effects became larger by exposure to finer particles. They suggested that occlusion of stomata with the particles caused the above effects, which seemed to be conincident with mechanism i) above. In the same study, they also reported that the relative photosynthetic rate (compared to the control) decreased with the increase of the KL particle load and that the effects were larger (the relative rate is smaller) when the finer particles were applied. They suggested that reduction of the photosynthic rate was due to shading effect of the adsorbed particles. Moreover, Hirano et al. (1995) reported that leaf temperature increased with increase of black carbon (BC) particles (0.03 −0.20 μm in diameter) load and the effects were larger in the dark-colored BC treatment than in the light-colored KL treatment. They also noted that the transpiration rates were larger in the BC-treatment leaves than those in the control leaves. In the case of BC treatment, the shading had little effect on stomata1 conductance and so transpiration rate (Hirano et al., 1995). The study above by Hirano et al. (1995) was the first experimental evidence indicating direct impacts of solid fine particles, such as BC, on plants. As possible mechanisms, “shading of light” and “increase of leaf temperature” were suggested in addition to “occlusion of stomata”, although 40 “increase of leaf temperature” only was observed for very fine BC particles (< 1 μm). Moreover, the applied load of the particles by Hirano et al. (1995) was relatively large, 0.7 −4.0 g m −2 and 0.4 −1.3 g m−2 on a leaf-area basis for KL and BC particles respectively, which were designed as the same level as those observed near power plant or motorway. On the other hand, Yamaguchi et al. (2012) exposed seedlings of four Asian tree species, namely Japanese beech (Fagus crenata ), chinquapin (Castanopsis sieboldii ), Japanese larch (Larix kaempferi ) and C. japonica to fine BC particles for two growing seasons and measured physiological parameters and growth. They reported that physiological parameters and growth did not change significantly by the BC treatment for the four species’ seedlings for the two growing seasons. However, the BC particles accumulated on leaf surface were 0.13 −0.58 mg m −2 on a leaf area basis (Yamaguchi et al. 2012), which were significantly small amounts compared to those applied by Hirano et al. (1995). There is a large gap on the accumulated amount of BC, larger than 1,000 times, in between two studies above, although sensitvities of the respective species may be different. In the field observational studies, Fukazawa et al. (2012) reported that the BC amounts accumulated on leaf surface in young trees of hybrid larch ( Larix gmelinii × L. kaempferi ) were 2.3 μg cm −2 and 0.6 μg cm −2 on a leaf area basis in the upper (3 m high) and lower (1.5 m high) branches, respectively, in September just before defoliation in Northern Japan. Mostly half of the BC on the leaf surface was not washed out by water but could be extracted by chloroform melting epicuticular wax. Such BC particles strongly adsorbed on leaf surface (leaf-surface BC) were 0.9 −1.4 μg cm −2and 0.2 −0.8 μg cm −2 on the upper and lower branches, respectively (Fukazawa et al. 2012). Similarly, Takamatsu et al. (2000) reported that heavy metal contents in leaf-surface particles were higher in higher branches than in lower branches. Sase et al. (2012) also measured leaf-surface BC for C. japonica in Central Japan, and the predominant three species ( Shorea henryana , Hopea ferrea ,and Dipterocarpus turbinatus ) in a dry evergreen forest (DEF), one of the predominant species (Pterocarpus macrocarpus ) in a dry deciduous forest (DDF), and a representative plantation species (Acacia mangium , an evergreen species) in Northeastern Thailand. The annual accumulation level of the leaf-surface BC was 26.8 mg m −2 , 10.0 mg m −2 , 9.3 mg m −2 , and 10.8 mg m −2 in C. japonica ,DEF species (mean of three species), P. macrocarpus and A. mangium , respectively (Sase et al., 2012). The BC amounts accumulated on leaf surface in the experimental studies and field observational studies above are summarized in Table 2.3.1. Although the leaf-surface BC in the observational studies varied among tree species, the level seemed to be in approx. 10 − 30 mg m −2 on a leaf area basis. Unfortunately, the range has not been covered by the experimental studies. Further investigation by experimental studies is necessary to clarify effects of leaf-surface BC in actual fields. 41 

Table 2.3.1 BC amounts accumulated on leaf surface and its effects in experimental studies and observational studies                                                                  

> Species applied BC on leaf surface (mg m −2)*1 Effects of BC accumulation Reference Experimental study Crops Cucumis sativus 400 −1,300 leaf temperature increase Hirano et al. (1995) Trees Fagus crenata 0.13 None Yamaguchi et al. (2012)
> Castanopsis sieboldii 0.69 None Ibid.
> Larix kaempferi 0.32 None Ibid.
> Cryptomeria japonica 0.58 None Ibid. Observational study Trees Hybrid larch *2 , 3.0 m high 9−14 Unknown Fukazawa et al. (2012) Hybrid larch *2 , 1.5 m high 2−8Unknown Ibid.
> Cryptomeria japonica , 5 m high 26.8 Unknown Sase et al. (2012)
> Shorea henryana, 10-15 m high 23.5 Unknown Ibid.
> Hopea ferrea *3 6.0 Unknown Ibid.
> Dipterocarpus turbinatus *3 0.4 Unknown Ibid.
> Pterocarpus macrocarpus *3 9.3 Unknown Ibid.
> Acacia mangium *3 10.8 Unknown Ibid. Note. *1 Chloroform extractable leaf-surface BC (strongly adsorbed on epicuticular wax); *2 hybrid larch, Larix gmelinii ×L. kaempferi ;*3 Leaf samples of tropical species in Thailand were collected from the branches at height of 10-15 m by climing.

2.3.2.2 Possible impact of aerosols/haze on surface irradiance and yields of agricultural crops 

Atmospheric aerosols and regional haze may influence plant growth and carbon cycling due to reduction of surface irradiance (Chameides et al., 1999). It has been estimated that surface irradiance over China was reduced by a few percent to 30% during a summer season due to the direct effect of regonal haze (Chameides et al., 1999). According to their crop response model simulation, when solar irradiance decreases (increases) by 1%, yields of winter wheat and rice may decrease (increase) by approx. 1% and 0.7%, respectively. On the other hand, Gu et al. (2003) reported that volcanic aerosols caused by the Mount Pinatubo erruption in 1991 caused an increase in diffuse radiation and this enhanced photosynthesis of a deciduous forest in Harvard Forest by 23% in 1992 and 8% in 1993 under cloudless conditions. Although the actual effects of diffuse radiation are still under discussion, global simulations by Mercado et al. (2009) also indicated that an increase in diffuse radiation contributed to enhancement of carbon sink in ecosystems, 1.18 PgC year −1 and 0.04 PgC year −1 in 1992 and 1993, respectively. Xia et al. (2007) suggested that heavy aerosol loading in the atmosphere caused a significant reduction in surface global irradiance in the Yangtze Delta region of China and estimated direct and diffuse radiations separately: the annual mean effects by aerosols were −112.6 W m −2 , 67.1 W m −2 and −45.5 W m −2 in direct, diffuse and global surface shortwave radiation (SWR), respectively and those on photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) were −65.2 W m−2 , 42.1 W m −2 and −23.1 W m −2 , respectively. It should be considered that the net effects of the 42 radiation changes on photosynthesis depends on balance between the reduction in total PAR and the increase in the diffuse fraction of the PAR (Mercado et al., 2009). 

2.4 Summary Atmospheric measurement and modeling 

Atmospheric measurement has developed quickly in East Asia during the past decade. However, the number of monitoring sites is still limited in East Asia compared to North America and Europe. Most sites are established by local research institutes, universities and colleges. There are no unified protocols and the date quality could be varied among different institutes. The official authorities (e.g. the Ministry of Environmental Protection of the People’s Republic of China) did operate a considerable number of monitoring sites, however, most of the data is not accessible. Additionally, the official sites mainly focus on the routine measurement of regular pollutants but rarely focus on the atmospheric chemistry, as compared to various government established networks in the Untied States, such as CASTNET (Clean Air Status and Trends Network), IMPROVE (Interagency Monitoring of Protected Visual Environments), STN (Speciated Trends Network) and so on. The long-term measurement data are also very limited in most countries of East Asia. Based on the literature, satellite products from remote sensing are mostly commonly used for the trend analysis. However, there are discernible uncertainties and considerable discrepancies observed among different satellite sensors. In addition, most satellite sensors can only measure the column concentration/density but not the surface levels. Additionally, measurements from satellite are often influenced by a lot of factors, e.g. meteorological conditions (clouds, rain, fog, snow), terrain, surface albedo and so forth. Currently, EANET set up their measurement sites mainly in Japan and Southeast Asia. There are only several sites in China which contributed the largest pollutant emission in Eastern Asia. Of which, most of them are background sites. It is suggested that additional sites will be set up in some proper locations of the North China Plain and Eastern China, where the strongest human activities occur. As for the aerosol measurement within the framework of EANET, it is suggested that the speciation of aerosol chemical species to be supplemented and the time resolution to be improved. Currently, aerosol speciation from filter measurement of EANET mainly includes inorganic ions. Organic aerosol (OC & EC) measurement is suggested to be added as organic aerosol is playing a more dominant role in the formation of haze. Also, it will help improve the model simulation of organic aerosol as most models currently tend to strongly underestimate it. The sampling resolution of filters at most EANET sites ranges from weekly to bi-weekly. The coarse time resolution could cause smoothing of typical short pollution episodes and difficulties of analyzing temporal variations, employment for model evaluation and so on. 

Adverse impacts 

Short-term effects of PM on human health varies among cities and countries. In East Asia, rapid industrialization and increase in cars on the continent have contributed to the recent increases of PM concentrations. This increase subsequently has increased the PM levels of downstream countries. The health effects attributable to transboundary PM pollution has not been well investigated. 43 Asian dust is another type of transboundary PM pollution. The effect of Asian dust has been controversial. Some studies showed hazardous effect, whereas other studies showed no effect whatsoever. The chemical composition of PM varies with areas and emission sources, hence the study on the effect of PM chemical composition should be investigated for different areas. This type of investigation also makes it possible to distinguish local PM and transboundary PM, which leads to the study on transboundary PM attribution. 

References 

Adriaenssens, S., Staelens, J. Wuyts, K., de Schrijver, A., Van Wittenberghe, S., Wuytack, T., Kardel, F., Verheyen, K., Samson, R., Boeckx, P. 2011. Foliar nitrogen uptake from wet deposition and the relation with leaf wettability and water storage capacity. Water, Air and Soil Pollution 219, 43–57. 

Akata, N., Yanagisawa, F., Kotani, T., Ueda, A., 2010. Ten-year observation of sulfur isotopic composition of sulfate in aerosols collected at Tsuruoka, a coastal area on the Sea of Japan in northern Japan. Geochem J 44, 571-577. Akimoto, H., 2003. Global air quality and pollution. Science 302, 1716-1719. Anderson, T. L., R. J. Charlson, S. E. Schwartz, R. Knutti, O. Boucher, H. Rodhe, and J. Heitzenberg, 2003, Climate forcing by aerosols—a hazy picture, Science 300: 1103-1104. Anenberg, S. C., Horowitz, L. W., Tong, D. Q., & West, J. J. 2010. An estimate of the global burden of anthropogenic ozone and fine particulate matter on premature human mortality using atmospheric modeling. Environmental health perspectives, 118(9), 1189–95. doi:10.1289/ehp.0901220 Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, in: Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor and H.L. Miller (eds.) (Ed.). the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. Bae, H. J., & Park, J. (2009). Health benefits of improving air quality in the rapidly aging Korean society. The Science of the total environment, 407(23), 5971–7. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2009.08.022 Bell, M. L., Davis, D. L., & Fletcher, T. 2003. A Retrospective Assessment of Mortality from the London Smog Episode of 1952: The Role of Influenza and Pollution. Environmental Health Perspectives, 112(1), 6–8. doi:10.1289/ehp.6539 Bond, T.C., Bhardwaj, E., Dong, R., Jogani, R., Jung, S.K., Roden, C., Streets, D.G., Trautmann, N.M., 2007. Historical emissions of black and organic carbon aerosol from energy-related combustion, 1850-2000. Global Biogeochem Cy 21, doi:10.1029/2006gb002840. Boucher, O., D. Randall, P. Artaxo, C. Bretherton, G. Feingold, P. Forster, V.-M. Kerminen, Y. Kondo, H. Liao, U. Lohmann, P. Rasch, S.K. Satheesh, S. Sherwood, B. Stevens and X.Y. 44 Zhang, 2013: Clouds and Aerosols. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. Burkhardt, J. 1995. Hygroscopic salts on the leaf surface as a possible cause of forest decline symptoms. Water Air and Soil Pollution 85, 1245–1250. Burkhardt, J. 2010. Hygroscopic particles on leaves: nutrients or desiccants? Ecological Monographs 80, 369-399. Burkhardt, J., Basi, S., Pariyar, S., Hunsche, M. 2012. Stomatal penetration by aqueous solutions −

an update involving leaf surface particles. New Phytologist 196: 774-787. Burkhardt, J., Eiden, R. 1994. Thin water films on coniferous needles. Atmospheric Environment 28, 2001–2011. Cao, Jie, Yang, C., Li, J., Chen, R., Chen, B., Gu, D., & Kan, H. 2011. Association between long-term exposure to outdoor air pollution and mortality in China: a cohort study. Journal of hazardous materials, 186(2-3), 1594–600. doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2010.12.036 Cao, Junji, Xu, H., Xu, Q., Chen, B., & Kan, H. 2012. Fine particulate matter constituents and cardiopulmonary mortality in a heavily polluted Chinese city. Environmental health perspectives, 120(3), 373–8. doi:10.1289/ehp.1103671 Cape, J. N., Paterson, I.S. and Wolfenden, J. 1989. Regional variation in surface properties of Norway spruce and Scots pine needles in relation to forest decline. Environmental Pollution 58: 325-342. Cape, J.N. 1983. Contact angles of water droplets on needles of Scots pine ( Pinus sylvestris )growing in polluted atmosphere. New Phytologist 93: 293-299. Cape, J.N. 1986. Effects of air pollution on the chemistry of surface waxes of Scots pine. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 31: 393-399. Cape, J.N. 1996. Surface wetness and pollutant deposition. In: Plant Cuticles. Kerstiens, G., Ed. Bios Publishers, Oxford. pp. 238–300. Cape, J.N. 2007. Secondary Air Pollutants and Forests − New Perspectives. The Scientific World Journal 7(S1): 9–14 Chameides, W. L., Yu, H., Liu, S. C., Bergin, M., Zhou, X., Mearns, L., Wang, G., Kiang, C.S., Saylor, R.D., Luo, C., Huang, Y., Steiner, A. and Giorgi, F. 1999. Case study of the effects of atmospheric aerosols and regional haze on agriculture: An opportunity to enhance crop yields in China through emission controls?. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 96: 13626-13633. Chan, C.K., Yao, X., 2008. Air pollution in mega cities in China. Atmos Environ 42, 1-42. 45 Che, H.Z., Shi, G.Y., Zhang, X.Y., Arimoto, R., Zhao, J.Q., Xu, L., Wang, B., Chen, Z.H., 2005. Analysis of 40 years of solar radiation data from China, 1961-2000. Geophys Res Lett 32, doi: 10.1029/2004gl022322. Chen, L.W., Chow, J.C., Doddridge, B.G., Dickerson, R.R., Ryan, W.F., Mueller, P.K., 2003. Analysis of a summertime PM2.5 and haze episode in the mid-Atlantic region. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association 53, 946-956. Chen, R., Kan, H., Chen, B., Huang, W., Bai, Z., Song, G., & Pan, G. 2012. Association of particulate air pollution with daily mortality: the China Air Pollution and Health Effects Study. American journal of epidemiology, 175(11), 1173–81. doi:10.1093/aje/kwr425 Coakley, J.A.J., Bernstein, R.L., Durkee, P.A., 1987. Effect of Ship-Stack Effluents on Cloud Reflectivity. Science 237, 1020-1022. Crossley, A., Fowler, D. 1986. The weathering of Scots pine epicuticular wax in polluted and clean air. New Phytologist 103, 207- 218. Dominici, F., McDermott, A., Zeger, S. L., & Samet, J. M. 2002. On the use of generalized additive models in time-series studies of air pollution and health. American journal of epidemiology, 156(3), 193–203. Duce, R.A., Unni, C.K., Ray, B.J., Prospero, J.M., Merrill, J.T., 1980. Long-Range Atmospheric Transport of Soil Dust from Asia to the Tropical North Pacific - Temporal Variability. Science 209, 1522-1524. Eck, T.F., Holben, B.N., Dubovik, O., Smirnov, A., Goloub, P., Chen, H.B., Chatenet, B., Gomes, L., Zhang, X.Y., Tsay, S.C., Ji, Q., Giles, D., Slutsker, I., 2005. Columnar aerosol optical properties at AERONET sites in central eastern Asia and aerosol transport to the tropical mid-Pacific. J Geophys Res-Atmos 110, doi:0.1029/2004jd005274. Engling, G., Zhang, Y.N., Chan, C.Y., Sang, X.F., Lin, M., Ho, K.F., Li, Y.S., Lin, C.Y., Lee, J.J., 2011. Characterization and sources of aerosol particles over the southeastern Tibetan Plateau during the Southeast Asia biomass-burning season. Tellus B 63, 117-128, doi: 110.1111/j.1600-0889.2010.00512.x. Fang, M., Zheng, M., Wang, F., Chim, K.S., Kot, S.C., 1999. The long-range transport of aerosols from northern China to Hong Kong － a multi-technique study. Atmos. Environ. 33, 1803-1817. Feingold, G., Cotton, W.R., Kreidenweis, S.M., Davis, J.T., 1999. The Impact of Giant Cloud Condensation Nuclei on Drizzle Formation in Stratocumulus: Implications for Cloud Radiative Properties. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 56, 4100-4117. Fu, Q.Y., Zhuang, G.S., Wang, J., Xu, C., Huang, K., Li, J., Hou, B., Lu, T., Streets, D.G., 2008. Mechanism of formation of the heaviest pollution episode ever recorded in the Yangtze River Delta, China. Atmos Environ 42, 2023-2036. 46 Fu, T.-M., Cao, J. J., Zhang, X. Y., Lee, S. C., Zhang, Q., Han, Y. M., Qu, W. J., Han, Z., Zhang, R., Wang, Y. X., Chen, D., and Henze, D. K., 2012. Carbonaceous aerosols in China: top-down constraints on primary sources and estimation of secondary contribution, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 12, 2725-2746, doi:10.5194/acp-12-2725-2012. Fukazawa, T., Murao, N., Sato, H., Takahashi, M., Akiyama, M., Yamaguchi, T., Noguchi, I., Takahashi, H., Kozuka, C., Sakai, R., Takagi, K., Fujinuma, Y., Saigusa, N. and Matsuda, K. 2012. Deposition of Aerosols on Leaves in a Cool-temperate Larch Forest in Northern Hokkaido, Japan. Asian Journal of Atmospheric Environment 6: 281-287. Grill, D., and Golob, P. 1983. SEM-investigations of different dust depositions on the surface of coniferous needles, and the effect on the needle-wax. Aquilo Ser. Bot. 19: 255–261. Gu, L., Baldocchi, D.D., Wofsy, S.C., Munger, J.M., Michalsky, J.J., Urbanski, S.P. and Boden, T.A. 2003. Response of a deciduous forest to the Mount Pinatubo eruption: enhanced photosynthesis. Science 299: 2035–2038. Gautam, R., Hsu, N. C., Eck, T. F., Holben, B. N., Janjai, S., Jantarach, T., Tsay, S. C., and Lau, W. K.: Characterization of aerosols over the Indochina peninsula from satellite-surface observations during biomass burning pre-monsoon season, Atmos Environ, 78, 51-59, DOI 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2012.05.038, 2013. Guo, J.P., Zhang, X.Y., Wu, Y.R., Zhaxi, Y.Z., Che, H.Z., La, B., Wang, W., Li, X.W., 2011. Spatio-temporal variation trends of satellite-based aerosol optical depth in China during 1980-2008. Atmos Environ 45, 6802-6811. Han, Z.W., Zhang, R.J., Wang, Q.G., Wang, W., Cao, J.J., Xu, J., 2008. Regional modeling of organic aerosols over China in summertime. J Geophys Res-Atmos 113, doi: 10.1029/2007jd009436. Hara, Y., Uno, I., Shimizu, A., Sugimoto, N., Matsui, I., Ohara, T., Itahashi, S., Recent inter-annual trend of spherical aerosol in East Asia based on integrated analysis of remote sensing and a chemical transport model. Presented at the 11th Annual CMAS Conference, Chapel Hill, NC, October 15-17, 2012. Hashizume, M., Ueda, K., Nishiwaki, Y., Michikawa, T., & Onozuka, D. 2010. Health effects of Asian dust events: a review of the literature. Nihon Eiseigaku Zasshi, 65(3), 413–21. He, Z., Kim, Y.J., Ogunjobi, K.O., Hong, C.S., 2003. Characteristics of PM2.5 species and long-range transport of air masses at Taean background station, South Korea. Atmos Environ 37, 219-230. Hirano, T., Kiyota M., Aiga, I. 1995. Physical effects of dust on leaf physiology of cucumber and kidney bean plants. Environmental Pollution , 89, 255-261. Hong, Y., Leem, J., Ha, E., & Christiani, D. C. 1999. PM10 Exposure , Gaseous Pollutants , and Daily Mortality in Inchon , South Korea. Environmental Health Perspectives, 107(11), 873– 878.Kamouchi, M., Ueda, K., Ago, T., Nitta, H., & Kitazono, T. 2012. Relationship between 47 asian dust and ischemic stroke: a time-stratified case-crossover study. Stroke, 43(11), 3085–7. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.672501 Hou, B., Zhuang, G.S., Zhang, R., Liu, T.N., Guo, Z.G., Chen, Y., 2011. The implication of carbonaceous aerosol to the formation of haze: Revealed from the characteristics and sources of OC/EC over a mega-city in China. J Hazard Mater 190, 529-536. Hsu, N.C., Gautam, R., Sayer, A.M., Bettenhausen, C., Li, C., Jeong, M.J., Tsay, S.C., Holben, B.N., 2012. Global and regional trends of aerosol optical depth over land and ocean using SeaWiFS measurements from 1997 to 2010. Atmos Chem Phys 12, 8037-8053, doi: 8010.5194/acp-8012-8037-2012. Hsu, S.C., Liu, S.C., Tsai, F., Engling, G., Lin, I.I., Chou, C.K.C., Kao, S.J., Lung, S.C.C., Chan, C.Y., Lin, S.C., Huang, J.C., Chi, K.H., Chen, W.N., Lin, F.J., Huang, C.H., Kuo, C.L., Wu, T.C., Huang, Y.T., 2010. High wintertime particulate matter pollution over an offshore island (Kinmen) off southeastern China: An overview. J Geophys Res-Atmos 115, doi: 10.1029/2009jd013641. Huang, K., Zhuang, G., Lin, Y., Fu, J.S., Wang, Q., Liu, T., Zhang, R., Jiang, Y., Deng, C., Fu, Q., Hsu, N.C., Cao, B., 2012a. Typical types and formation mechanisms of haze in an Eastern Asia megacity, Shanghai. Atmos Chem Phys 12, 105-124, doi:110.5194/acp-5112-5105-2012. Huang, K., Zhuang, G., Lin, Y., Wang, Q., Fu, J.S., Zhang, R., Li, J., Deng, C., Fu, Q., 2012b. Impact of anthropogenic emission on air quality over a megacity - revealed from an intensive atmospheric campaign during the Chinese Spring Festival. Atmos Chem Phys 12, 11631-11645, doi:11610.15194/acp-11612-11631-12012. Huang, K., Zhuang, G.S., Li, J.A., Wang, Q.Z., Sun, Y.L., Lin, Y.F., Fu, J.S., 2010a. Mixing of Asian dust with pollution aerosol and the transformation of aerosol components during the dust storm over China in spring 2007. J Geophys Res-Atmos 115, doi:10.1029/2009jd013145. Huang, K., Zhuang, G.S., Lin, Y.F., Li, J.A., Sun, Y.L., Zhang, W.J., Fu, J.S., 2010b. Relation between optical and chemical properties of dust aerosol over Beijing, China. J Geophys Res-Atmos 115, doi:10.1029/2009jd013212. Huang, K., Fu, J.S., Christina Hsu, N., Gao, Y., Dong, X., Tsay, S.-C., Lam, Y.F. 2013, Impact assessment of biomass burning on air quality in Southeast and East Asia during BASE-ASIA, Atmospheric Environment, 78, 291 – 302, doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2012.03.048. Huang, W., Cao, J. J., Tao, Y. B., Dai, L. Z., Lu, S. E., Hou, B., Wang, Z., and Zhu, T., 2012. Seasonal Variation of Chemical Species Associated With Short-Term Mortality Effects of PM2.5 in Xi'an, a Central City in China, Am J Epidemiol, 175, 556-566, Doi 10.1093/Aje/Kwr342. Huebert, B. J., Bates, T., Russell, P. B., Shi, G. Y., Kim, Y. J., Kawamura, K., Carmichael, G., and Nakajima, T., 2003, An overview of ACE-Asia: Strategies for quantifying the relationships between Asian aerosols and their climatic impacts, J Geophys Res-Atmos, 108, Doi 10.1029/2003jd003550. 48 In, H.J., Park, S.U., 2002. A simulation of long-range transport of Yellow Sand observed in April 1998 in Korea. Atmos Environ 36, 4173-4187. Itahashi, S., Uno, I., Yumimoto, K., Irie, H., Osada, K., Ogata, K., Fukushima, H., Wang, Z., Ohara, T., 2012. Interannual variation in the fine-mode MODIS aerosol optical depth and its relationship to the changes in sulfur dioxide emissions in China between 2000 and 2010. Atmos Chem Phys 12, 2631-2640, doi: 2610.5194/acp-2612-2631-2012. Jacob, Daniel, J., Crawford, James, H., Kleb, Mary, M., Connors, Vickie, S., Bendura, Richard, J., Raper, James, L., Sachse, Glen, W., Gille, John, C., Emmons, Louisa, Heald, Colette, L., 2003. Transport and Chemical Evolution over the Pacific (TRACE-P) aircraft mission: Design, execution, and first results : NASA global tropospheric experiment transport and chemical evolution over the Pacific (TRACE-P): Measurements and analysis (TRACEP1). American Geophysical Union, Washington, DC, ETATS-UNIS. John H. Seinfeld, S.N.P., 2006. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics - From Air Pollution to Climate Change, 2nd edition ed. Wiley, John & Sons, Incorporated. Kaiser, D.P., Qian, Y., 2002. Decreasing trends in sunshine duration over China for 1954-1998: Indication of increased haze pollution? Geophys Res Lett 29, doi: 10.1029/2002gl016057. Kamouchi, M., Ueda, K., Ago, T., Nitta, H., & Kitazono, T. 2012. Relationship between asian dust and ischemic stroke: a time-stratified case-crossover study. Stroke, 43(11), 3085–7. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.672501 Kan, H., Chen, R., & Tong, S. 2012. Ambient air pollution, climate change, and population health in China. Environment international, 42, 10–9. doi:10.1016/j.envint.2011.03.003 Kanatani, K. T., Ito, I., Al-Delaimy, W. K., Adachi, Y., Mathews, W. C., & Ramsdell, J. W. 2010. Desert dust exposure is associated with increased risk of asthma hospitalization in children. American journal of respiratory and critical care medicine, 182(12), 1475–81. doi:10.1164/rccm.201002-0296OC Kanayama, S., Yabuki, S., Yanagisawa, F., Motoyama, R., 2002. The chemical and strontium isotope composition of atmospheric aerosols over Japan: the contribution of long-range-transported Asian dust (Kosa). Atmos Environ 36, 5159-5175. Kaneyasu, N., & Takami, A. 2010. Long-range Transport of PM sub (2. 5) in Northern Kyushu Area in Spring. Journal of Japanese Society of Atmospheric Environment, 45(5), 227–234. Kang, C.-M., Lee, H.S., Kang, B.-W., Lee, S.-K., Sunwoo, Y., 2004. Chemical characteristics of acidic gas pollutants and PM2.5 species during hazy episodes in Seoul, South Korea. Atmospheric Environment 38, 4749-4760. Kashima, S., Yorifuji, T., Tsuda, T., & Eboshida, A. 2012. Asian dust and daily all-cause or cause-specific mortality in western Japan. Occupational and environmental medicine, 69(12), 908–15. doi:10.1136/oemed-2012-100797 49 Kaufman, Y.J., Koren, I., Remer, L.A., Tanre, D., Ginoux, P., Fan, S., 2005. Dust transport and deposition observed from the Terra-Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer ( MODIS) spacecraft over the Atlantic ocean. J Geophys Res-Atmos 110, doi: 10.1029/2003jd004436. Kinne, S., Lohmann, U., Feichter, J., Schulz, M., Timmreck, C., Ghan, S., Easter, R., Chin, M., Ginoux, P., Takemura, T., Tegen, I., Koch, D., Herzog, M., Penner, J., Pitari, G., Holben, B., Eck, T., Smirnov, A., Dubovik, O., Slutsker, I., Tanre, D., Torres, O., Mishchenko, M., Geogdzhayev, I., Chu, D.A., Kaufman, Y., 2003. Monthly averages of aerosol properties: A global comparison among models, satellite data, and AERONET ground data. J. Geophys. Res. 108, 4634. Kivekas, N., Sun, J., Zhan, M., Kerminen, V.M., Hyvarinen, A., Komppula, M., Viisanen, Y., Hong, N., Zhang, Y., Kulmala, M., Zhang, X.C., Deli-Geer, Lihavainen, H., 2009. Long term particle size distribution measurements at Mount Waliguan, a high-altitude site in inland China. Atmos Chem Phys 9, 5461-5474, doi:5410.5194/acp-5469-5461-2009. Kruger, O., Grassl, H., 2002. The indirect aerosol effect over Europe. Geophysical Research Letters 29, 19, 31-1-31-4. Kundu, S., Kawamura, K., Lee, M., 2010. Seasonal variation of the concentrations of nitrogenous species and their nitrogen isotopic ratios in aerosols at Gosan, Jeju Island: Implications for atmospheric processing and source changes of aerosols. J Geophys Res-Atmos 115, doi: 10.1029/2009jd013323. Lee, H., Kim, H., Honda, Y., Lim, Y.-H., & Yi, S. (n.d.). Effect of Asian Dust Storms on Daily Mortality in Seven Metropolitan Cities of Korea. Atmospheric environment. Li, C., Marufu, L.T., Dickerson, R.R., Li, Z.Q., Wen, T.X., Wang, Y.S., Wang, P.C., Chen, H.B., Stehr, J.W., 2007a. In situ measurements of trace gases and aerosol optical properties at a rural site in northern China during East Asian Study of Tropospheric Aerosols: An International Regional Experiment 2005. J Geophys Res-Atmos 112, doi 10.1029/2006jd007592. Li, Z.Q., Li, C., Chen, H., Tsay, S.C., Holben, B., Huang, J., Li, B., Maring, H., Qian, Y., Shi, G., Xia, X., Yin, Y., Zheng, Y., Zhuang, G., 2011. East Asian Studies of Tropospheric Aerosols and their Impact on Regional Climate (EAST-AIRC): An overview. J Geophys Res-Atmos 116, doi: 10.1029/2010JD015257. Li, Z.Q., Xia, X.G., Cribb, M., Mi, W., Holben, B., Wang, P.C., Chen, H.B., Tsay, S.C., Eck, T.F., Zhao, F.S., Dutton, E.G., Dickerson, R.R., 2007b. Aerosol optical properties and their radiative effects in northern China. J Geophys Res-Atmos 112, doi 10.1029/2006jd007382. Liang, F., Xia, X.A., 2005. Long-term trends in solar radiation and the associated climatic factors over China for 1961-2000. Ann Geophys-Germany 23, 2425-2432. Lim, S. S., Vos, T., Flaxman, A. D., Danaei, G., Shibuya, K., Adair-Rohani, H., … Aryee, M. 2012. A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and 50 risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet, 380(9859), 2224–60. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61766-8 Lim, Y.-H., Kim, H., Kim, J. H., Bae, S., Park, H. Y., & Hong, Y.-C. 2012. Air pollution and symptoms of depression in elderly adults. Environmental health perspectives, 120(7), 1023–8. doi:10.1289/ehp.1104100 Lin, Y., Min, Q., Zhuang, G., Wang, Z., Gong, W., Li, R., 2011. Spatial features of rain frequency change and pollution and associated aerosols. Atmos Chem Phys 11, 7715-7726, doi:7710.5194/acp-7711-7715-2011. Lin, N. H., Tsay, S. C., Maring, H. B., Yen, M. C., Sheu, G. R., Wang, S. H., Chi, K. H., Chuang, M. T., Ou-Yang, C. F., Fu, J. S., Reid, J. S., Lee, C. T., Wang, L. C., Wang, J. L., Hsu, C. N., Sayer, A. M., Holben, B. N., Chu, Y. C., Nguyen, X. A., Sopajaree, K., Chen, S. J., Cheng, M. T., Tsuang, B. J., Tsai, C. J., Peng, C. M., Schnell, R. C., Conway, T., Chang, C. T., Lin, K. S., Tsai, Y. I., Lee, W. J., Chang, S. C., Liu, J. J., Chiang, W. L., Huang, S. J., Lin, T. H., and Liu, G. R.: An overview of regional experiments on biomass burning aerosols and related pollutants in Southeast Asia: From BASE-ASIA and the Dongsha Experiment to 7-SEAS, Atmos Environ, 78, 1-19, DOI 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2013.04.066, 2013 Liu, J.J., Zheng, Y.F., Li, Z.Q., Flynn, C., Cribb, M., 2012. Seasonal variations of aerosol optical properties, vertical distribution and associated radiative effects in the Yangtze Delta region of China. J Geophys Res-Atmos 117, doi:10.1029/2011jd016490. Liu, Y., Sun, J.R., Yang, B., 2009. The effects of black carbon and sulphate aerosols in China regions on East Asia monsoons. Tellus B 61, 642-656. Lu, Z., Streets, D.G., Zhang, Q., Wang, S., Carmichael, G.R., Cheng, Y.F., Wei, C., Chin, M., Diehl, T., Tan, Q., 2010. Sulfur dioxide emissions in China and sulfur trends in East Asia since 2000. Atmos Chem Phys 10, 6311-6331, doi: 6310.5194/acp-6310-6311-2010. Lyapustin, A., Smirnov, A., Holben, B., Chin, M., Streets, D.G., Lu, Z., Kahn, R., Slutsker, I., Laszlo, I., Kondragunta, S., Tanre, D., Dubovik, O., Goloub, P., Chen, H.B., Sinyuk, A., Wang, Y., Korkin, S., 2011. Reduction of aerosol absorption in Beijing since 2007 from MODIS and AERONET. Geophys Res Lett 38, doi: 10.1029/2011gl047306. Ma, J.Z., Chen, Y., Wang, W., Yan, P., Liu, H.J., Yang, S.Y., Hu, Z.J., Lelieveld, J., 2010. Strong air pollution causes widespread haze-clouds over China. J Geophys Res-Atmos 115, doi:10.1029/2009jd013065. Matsuda, K., Fujimura, Y., Hayashi, K., Takahashi, A., and Nakaya, K. 2010. Deposition velocity of PM 2.5 sulfate in the summer above a deciduous forest in central Japan. Atmospheric Environment 44, 4582 -4587. Matsuda, K., Watanabe, I., Wingpud, V., Theramongkol, P., and Ohizumi, T. 2006. Deposition velocity of O3 and SO2 in the dry and wet season above a tropical forest in northern Thailand. Atmospheric Environment 40: 7557-7564. 51 Matsui, H., Koike, M., Kondo, Y., Takegawa, N., Fast, J.D., Poschl, U., Garland, R.M., Andreae, M.O., Wiedensohler, A., Sugimoto, N., Zhu, T., 2010. Spatial and temporal variations of aerosols around Beijing in summer 2006: 2. Local and column aerosol optical properties. J Geophys Res-Atmos 115, doi: 10.1029/2010jd013895. Menon, S., Hansen, J., Nazarenko, L., Luo, Y., 2002. Climate Effects of Black Carbon Aerosols in China and India. Science 297, 2250-2253. Mercado, L.M., Bellouin, N., Sitch, S., Boucher, O., Huntingford, C., Wild, M. and Cox, P.M. 2009. Impact of changes in diffuse radiation on the global land carbon sink. Nature 458: 1014-1017. Minoura, H., Takahashi, K., Chow, J. C., & Watson, J. G. 2006. Multi-year trend in fine and coarse particle mass, carbon, and ions in downtown Tokyo, Japan. Atmospheric Environment, 40(14), 2478–2487. doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2005.12.029 Molina, M. J., and Molina, L. T.2004, Megacities and atmospheric pollution, J Air Waste Manage, 54, 644-680. 

Morino, Y., Ohara, T., Kurokawa, J., Kuribayashi, M., Uno, I., Hara, H., 2011. Temporal variations of nitrogen wet deposition across Japan from 1989 to 2008. J Geophys Res-Atmos 116, doi: 10.1029/2010jd015205. Murakami, Y., & Ono, M. (2006). Myocardial infarction deaths after high level exposure to particulate matter. Journal of epidemiology and community health, 60(3), 262–6. doi:10.1136/jech.2005.038315 Nawahda, A., Yamashita, K., Ohara, T., Kurokawa, J., & Yamaji, K. 2012. Evaluation of Premature Mortality Caused by Exposure to PM2.5 and Ozone in East Asia: 2000, 2005, 2020. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution, 223(6), 3445–3459. doi:10.1007/s11270-012-1123-7 Ng, C. F. S., Ueda, K., Nitta, H., & Takeuchi, A. 2013. Seasonal variation in the acute effects of ozone on premature mortality among elderly Japanese. Environmental monitoring and assessment. doi:10.1007/s10661-013-3211-6 Nishiwaki, Y., Michikawa, T., Takebayashi, T., Nitta, H., Iso, H., Inoue, M., & Tsugane, S. 2013. Long-term exposure to particulate matter in relation to mortality and incidence of cardiovascular disease: the JPHC Study. Journal of atherosclerosis and thrombosis, 20(3), 296– 309. Novakov, T., Penner, J.E., 1993. Large Contribution of Organic Aerosols to Cloud-Condensation-Nuclei Concentrations. Nature 365, 823-826. Novakov, T., Ramanathan, V., Hansen, J.E., Kirchstetter, T.W., Sato, M., Sinton, J.E., Sathaye, J.A., 2003. Large historical changes of fossil-fuel black carbon aerosols. Geophys Res Lett 30, doi:10.1029/2002gl016345. Oanh, N. T. K., Upadhyaya, N., Zhuang, Y. H., Hao, Z. P., Murthy, D. V. S., Lestari, P., Villarin, J. T., Chengchua, K., Co, H. X., Dung, N. T., and Lindgren, E. S.: Particulate air pollution in six 52 Asian cities: Spatial and temporal distributions, and associated sources, Atmospheric Environment, 40, 18, 3367-3380, 2006. Okuda, T., Katsuno, M., Naoi, D., Nakao, S., Tanaka, S., He, K.B., Ma, Y.L., Lei, Y., Jia, Y.T., 2008. Trends in hazardous trace metal concentrations in aerosols collected in Beijing, China from 2001 to 2006. Chemosphere 72, 917-924. Omori, T., Fujimoto, G., Yoshimura, I., Nitta, H., & Ono, M. 2003. Effects of Particulate Matter on Daily Mortality in 13 Japanese Cities. Journal of epidemiology, 13(6), 314–322. Osada, K., Ohara, T., Uno, I., Kido, M., Iida, H., 2009. Impact of Chinese anthropogenic emissions on submicrometer aerosol concentration at Mt. Tateyama, Japan. Atmos Chem Phys 9, 9111-9120, doi:9110.5194/acp-9119-9111-2009. Ostro, B., Broadwin, R., & Green, S. 2006. Fine particulate air pollution and mortality in nine California counties: results from CALFINE. Environmental health perspectives, 114(1), 29– 33. doi:10.1289/ehp.9281 Panicker, A.S., Lee, D.I., Kumkar, Y.V., Kim, D., Maki, M., Uyeda, H., 2012. Decadal climatological trends of aerosol optical parameters over three different environments in South Korea. International Journal of Climatology, doi: 10.1002/joc.3557. Pariyar, S., Eichert, T., Goldbach, H.E., Hunsche, M., Burkhardt, J. 2012. The exclusion of ambient aerosols changes the water relations of sunflower (Helianthus annuus) and bean ( Vicia faba )plants. Environmental and Experimental Botany 88: 43–52. Park, M.H., Kim, Y.P., Kang, C.H., Shim, S.G., 2004. Aerosol composition change between 1992 and 2002 at Gosan, Korea. J Geophys Res-Atmos 109, doi: 10.1029/2003jd004110. Pinon, J., Frey, P., and Husson, C. 2006. Wettability of poplar leaves influences dew formation and infection by Melampsora larici-populina . Plant Disease 90: 177-184. Pope, C. A., & Dockery, D. W. 2006. Health Effects of Fine Particulate Air Pollution: Lines that Connect. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 56(6), 709–742. doi:10.1080/10473289.2006.10464485 Prospero, J.M., Savoie, D.L., Arimoto, R., 2003. Long-term record of nss-sulfate and nitrate in aerosols on Midway Island, 1981-2000: Evidence of increased (now decreasing?) anthropogenic emissions from Asia. J Geophys Res-Atmos 108, doi: 10.1029/2001jd001524. Qian, Y., D. P. Kaiser, L. R. Leung, and M. Xu, 2006, More frequent cloud-free sky and less surface solar radiation in China from 1955 to 2000, Geophys. Res. Lett., 33, L01812, doi:10.1029/2005GL024586. Qian, Y., W. Wang, L. R. Leung, and D. P. Kaiser, 2007, Variability of solar radiation under cloud-free skies in China: The role of aerosols, Geophys. Res. Lett., 34, L12804, doi:10.1029/2006GL028800. 53 Raes, F., Bates, T., McGovern, F., and Van Liedekerke, M., 2000. The 2nd Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE-2): general overview and main results, Tellus B, 52, 111-125, DOI 10.1034/j.1600-0889.2000.00124.x. Ramanathan, V., Li, F., Ramana, M.V., Praveen, P.S., Kim, D., Corrigan, C.E., Nguyen, H., Stone, E.A., Schauer, J.J., Carmichael, G.R., Adhikary, B., Yoon, S.C., 2007. Atmospheric brown clouds: Hemispherical and regional variations in long-range transport, absorption, and radiative forcing. J Geophys Res-Atmos 112, doi 10.1029/2006jd008124. Rosenfeld, D., Lohmann, U., Raga, G.B., O'Dowd, C.D., Kulmala, M., Fuzzi, S., Reissell, A., Andreae, M.O., 2008. Flood or Drought: How Do Aerosols Affect Precipitation? Science 321, 1309-1313. Sahu, L.K., Kondo, Y., Miyazaki, Y., Kuwata, M., Koike, M., Takegawa, N., Tanimoto, H., Matsueda, H., Yoon, S.C., Kim, Y.J., 2009. Anthropogenic aerosols observed in Asian continental outflow at Jeju Island, Korea, in spring 2005. J Geophys Res-Atmos 114, doi: 10.1029/2008jd010306. Sase, H., Matsuda, K., Visaratana, T., Garivait, H., Yamashita, N., Kietvuttinon, B., Hongthong, B., Luangjame, J., Khummongkol, P., Shindo, J., Endo, T., Sato, K., Uchiyama, S., Miyazawa, M., Nakata, M. and Lenggoro, I. W. 2012. Deposition process of sulfate and elemental carbon in Japanese and Thai forests. Asian Journal of Atmospheric Environment 6: 246-258. Sase, H., Takahashi, A., Sato, M., Kobayashi, H., Nakata, M., Totsuka, T. 2008. Seasonal variation in the atmospheric deposition of inorganic constituents and canopy interactions in a Japanese cedar forest. Environmental Pollution 152: 1- 10. Sase, H., Takamatsu, T., Yoshida, T., Inubushi, K. 1998. Changes in properties of epicuticular wax and the related water loss in Japanese cedar ( Cryptomeria japonica ) affected by anthropogenic environmental factors. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 28: 546- 556. Seinfeld J. H, Pandis, S. N., 2006. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics - From Air Pollution to Climate Change, 2nd edition ed. Wiley, John & Sons, Incorporated. Schichtel, B.A., Husar, R.B., Falke, S.R., Wilson, W.E., 2001. Haze trends over the United States, 1980-1995. Atmospheric Environment 35, 5205-5210. Shen, X.J., Sun, J.Y., Zhang, Y.M., Wehner, B., Nowak, A., Tuch, T., Zhang, X.C., Wang, T.T., Zhou, H.G., Zhang, X.L., Dong, F., Birmili, W., Wiedensohler, A., 2011. First long-term study of particle number size distributions and new particle formation events of regional aerosol in the North China Plain. Atmos Chem Phys 11, 1565-1580, doi: 1510.5194/acp-1511-1565-2011. Smith, W.H., 1977. Removal of Atmospheric Particulates by Urban Vegetation: Implications for Human and Vegetative Health. The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine 50: 185-197. Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, R.B. Alley, T. Berntsen, N.L. Bindoff, Z. Chen, A. Chidthaisong, J.M. Gregory, G.C. Hegerl,, M. Heimann, B.H., B.J. Hoskins, F. Joos, J. Jouzel, V. Kattsov, U. 54 Lohmann, T. Matsuno, M. Molina, N. Nicholls, J., Overpeck, G.R., V. Ramaswamy, J. Ren, M. Rusticucci, R. Somerville, T.F. Stocker, P. Whetton, R.A. Wood and D. Wratt, 2007. Technical Summary. In: Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Son, J.-Y., Bell, M. L., & Lee, J.-T. 2011. Survival analysis of long-term exposure to different sizes of airborne particulate matter and risk of infant mortality using a birth cohort in Seoul, Korea. Environmental health perspectives, 119(5), 725–30. doi:10.1289/ehp.1002364 Son, J.-Y., Lee, J.-T., Kim, K.-H., Jung, K., & Bell, M. L. 2012. Characterization of fine particulate matter and associations between particulate chemical constituents and mortality in Seoul, Korea. Environmental health perspectives, 120(6), 872–8. doi:10.1289/ehp.1104316 Streets, D.G., Fu, J.S., Jang, C.J., Hao, J.M., He, K.B., Tang, X.Y., Zhang, Y.H., Wang, Z.F., Li, Z.P., Zhang, Q., Wang, L.T., Wang, B.Y., Yu, C., 2007. Air quality during the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games. Atmos Environ 41, 480-492. Streets, D.G., Yu, C., Wu, Y., Chin, M., Zhao, Z., Hayasaka, T., Shi, G., 2008. Aerosol trends over China, 1980-2000. Atmos Res 88, 174-182. Su, X., Goloub, P., Chiapello, I., Chen, H., Ducos, F., Li, Z., 2010. Aerosol variability over East Asia as seen by POLDER space-borne sensors. J Geophys Res-Atmos 115, doi:10.1029/2010jd014286. Sun, Y., Zhuang, G.S., Yuan, H., Zhang, X.Y., Guo, J.H., 2004. Characteristics and sources of 2002 super dust storm in Beijing. Chinese Sci Bull 49, 698-705. Sun, Y.L., Zhuang, G.S., Huang, K., Li, J.A., Wang, Q.Z., Wang, Y., Lin, Y.F., Fu, J.S., Zhang, W.J., Tang, A.H., Zhao, X.J., 2010. Asian dust over northern China and its impact on the downstream aerosol chemistry in 2004. J Geophys Res-Atmos 115, doi:10.1029/2009jd012757. Takamatsu, T., Sase, H., Takada, J. 2001. Some physiological properties of Cryptomeria japonica 

leaves from Kanto, Japan: potential factors causing tree decline. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 31: 663- 672. Takamatsu, T., Takada, J., Matsushita, R., and Sase, H. 2000. Aerosol elements on tree leaves -Antimony as a possible indicator of air pollution-. Global Environmental Research 4: 49-60. Tang, W.J., Yang, K., Qin, J., Cheng, C.C.K., He, J., 2011. Solar radiation trend across China in recent decades: a revisit with quality-controlled data. Atmos Chem Phys 11, 393-406, doi: 310.5194/acp-5111-5393-2011. Tao, M.H., Chen, L.F., Su, L., Tao, J.H., 2012. Satellite observation of regional haze pollution over the North China Plain. J Geophys Res-Atmos 117, doi 10.1029/2012jd017915. Tsay, S. C., Hsu, N. C., Lau, W. K. M., Li, C., Gabriel, P. M., Ji, Q., Holben, B. N., Welton, E. J., Nguyen, A. X., Janjai, S., Lin, N. H., Reid, J. S., Boonjawat, J., Howell, S. G., Huebert, B. J., Fu, J. S., Hansen, R. A., Sayer, A. M., Gautam, R., Wang, S. H., Goodloe, C. S., Miko, L. R., 55 Shu, P. K., Loftus, A. M., Huang, J., Kim, J. Y., Jeong, M. J., and Pantina, P.: From BASE-ASIA toward 7-SEAS: A satellite-surface perspective of boreal spring biomass-burning aerosols and clouds in Southeast Asia, Atmos Environ, 78, 20-34, 2013. Twomey, S., 1974. Pollution and Planetary Albedo. Atmospheric Environment 8, 1251-1256. Twomey, S., 1977: The Influence of Pollution on the Shortwave Albedo of Clouds. J. Atmos. Sci., 34, 1149–1152, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/1520-0469(1977)034<1149:TIOPOT>2.0.CO;2 Ueda, K., Nagasawa, S.-Y., Nitta, H., Miura, K., & Ueshima, H. 2012. Exposure to particulate matter and long-term risk of cardiovascular mortality in Japan: NIPPON DATA80. Journal of atherosclerosis and thrombosis, 19(3), 246–54. Ueda, K., Nitta, H., & Ono, M. 2009. Effects of fine particulate matter on daily mortality for specific heart diseases in Japan. Circulation journal : official journal of the Japanese Circulation Society, 73(7), 1248–54. Ueda, K., Nitta, H., Ono, M., & Takeuchi, A. 2009. Estimating Mortality Effects of Fine Particulate Matter in Japan: A Comparison of Time-Series and Case-Crossover Analyses. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 59(10), 1212–1218. doi:10.3155/1047-3289.59.10.1212 Uematsu, M., Duce, R.A., Prospero, J.M., Chen, L., Merrill, J.T., Mcdonald, R.L., 1983. Transport of Mineral Aerosol from Asia over the North Pacific-Ocean. J Geophys Res-Oc Atm 88, 5343-5352. van Donkelaar, A., Martin, R.V., Brauer, M., Kahn, R., Levy, R., Verduzco, C., Villeneuve, P.J., 2010. Global Estimates of Ambient Fine Particulate Matter Concentrations from Satellite-Based Aerosol Optical Depth: Development and Application. Environ Health Persp 118, 847-855, doi:810.1289/ehp.0901623. Venners, S. A., Wang, B., Peng, Z., Xu, Y., Wang, L., & Xu, X. 2003. Particulate Matter, Sulfur Dioxide, and Daily Mortality in Chongqing, China. Environmental health perspectives, 562(4), 562–567. doi:10.1289/ehp.5664 Wang, K.C., Dickinson, R.E., Liang, S.L., 2009. Clear Sky Visibility Has Decreased over Land Globally from 1973 to 2007. Science 323, 1468-1470, doi: 1410.1126/science.1167549. Wang, K.C., Dickinson, R.E., Su, L., Trenberth, K.E., 2012. Contrasting trends of mass and optical properties of aerosols over the Northern Hemisphere from 1992 to 2011. Atmos Chem Phys 12, 9387-9398, doi:9310.5194/acp-9312-9387-2012. Wang, S. X., Zhao, B., Cai, S. Y., Klimont, Z., Nielsen, C. P., Morikawa, T., Woo, J. H., Kim, Y., Fu, X., Xu, J. Y., Hao, J. M., and He, K. B., 2014. Emission trends and mitigation options for air pollutants in East Asia, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 14, 6571-6603, doi:10.5194/acp-14-6571-2014. Wang, Q.Z., Zhuang, G.S., Li, J.A., Huang, K., Zhang, R., Jiang, Y.L., Lin, Y.F., Fu, J.S., 2011a. Mixing of dust with pollution on the transport path of Asian dust - Revealed from the aerosol over Yulin, the north edge of Loess Plateau. Sci Total Environ 409, 573-581. 56 Wang, X., & Mauzerall, D. L. 2006. Evaluating impacts of air pollution in China on public health: Implications for future air pollution and energy policies. Atmospheric Environment, 40(9), 1706–1721. doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2005.10.066 Wang, Y., Zhang, Q.Q., He, K., Zhang, Q., Chai, L., 2013. Sulfate-nitrate-ammonium aerosols over China: response to 2000-2015 emission changes of sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and ammonia. Atmos Chem Phys 13, 2635-2652, doi: 2610.5194/acp-2613-2635-2013. Wang, Y., Zhuang, G.S., Tang, A.H., Yuan, H., Sun, Y.L., Chen, S.A., Zheng, A.H., 2005. The ion chemistry and the source of PM2.5 aerosol in Beijing. Atmospheric Environment 39, 3771-3784. Wang, Y., Zhuang, G.S., Tang, A.H., Zhang, W.J., Sun, Y.L., Wang, Z.F., An, Z.S., 2007. The evolution of chemical components of aerosols at five monitoring sites of China during dust storms. Atmos Environ 41, 1091-1106. Wang, Y.S., Xin, J.Y., Li, Z.Q., Wang, S.G., Wang, P.C., Hao, W.M., Nordgren, B.L., Chen, H.B., Wang, L.L., Sun, Y., 2011b. Seasonal variations in aerosol optical properties over China. J Geophys Res-Atmos 116, doi:10.1029/2010jd015376. Watson, J.G., 2002. Visibility: Science and Regulation. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association 52, 628-713. WHO. 2005. WHO Air quality guidelines for particulate matter, ozone, nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide: Global update 2005. Genebra. 20p (pp. 1–21). Geneva: WHO. WHO. 2011. Air quality and health. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs313/en/ WHO, 2014. 7 million premature deaths annually linked to air pollution, retrieved from http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2014/air-pollution/en/ Wild, M., 2009. Global dimming and brightening: A review. J Geophys Res-Atmos 114, doi: 10.1029/2008jd011470. Wu, J., Fu, C.B., Zhang, L.Y., Tang, J.P., 2012. Trends of visibility on sunny days in China in the recent 50 years. Atmos Environ 55, 339-346. Xia, X., Chen, H., Goloub, P., Zhang, W., Chatenet, B., Wang, P., 2007. A compilation of aerosol optical properties and calculation of direct radiative forcing over an urban region in northern China. J Geophys Res-Atmos 112, doi:10.1029/2006jd008119. Xia, X., Li, Z., Holben, B., Wang, P., Eck, T., Chen, H., Cribb, M. and Zhao, Y. 2007. Aerosol optical properties and radiative effects in the Yangtze Delta region of China. Journal of Geophysical Research 112: D22S12. Xia, X.A., Chen, H.B., Wang, P.C., Zong, X.M., Qiu, J.H., Gouloub, P., 2005. Aerosol properties and their spatial and temporal variations over North China in spring 2001. Tellus B 57, 28-39. 57 Xie, J.X., Xia, X.G., 2008. Long-term trend in aerosol optical depth from 1980 to 2001 in north China. Particuology 6, 106-111. Xin, J.Y., Wang, L.L., Wang, Y.S., Li, Z.Q., Wang, P.C., 2011. Trends in aerosol optical properties over the Bohai Rim in Northeast China from 2004 to 2010. Atmos Environ 45, 6317-6325. Xu, J., Li, C., Shi, H., He, Q., Pan, L., 2011. Analysis on the impact of aerosol optical depth on surface solar radiation in the Shanghai megacity, China. Atmos Chem Phys 11, 3281-3289, doi:3210.5194/acp-3211-3281-2011. Xu, Q., 2001. Abrupt change of the mid-summer climate in central east China by the influence of atmospheric pollution. Atmospheric Environment 35, 5029-5040. Yadav, A.K., Kumar, K., Kasim, A.M.B.H.A., Singh, M.P., Parida, S.K., Sharan, M., 2003. Visibility and incidence of respiratory diseases during the 1998 haze episode in Brunei Darussalam. Pure and Applied Geophysics 160, 265-277. Yamaguchi, M., Otani, Y., Takeda, K., Lenggoro, W., Ishida, A., Yazaki, K., Noguchi, K., Sase, H., Murao, N., Nakaba, S., Yamane, K., Kuroda, K., Sano, Y., Funada, R., and Izuta, T. 2012. Effects of long-term exposure of black carbon particles on growth and gas exchange rates of 

Fagus crenata , Castanopsis sieboldii , Larix kaempferi and Cryptomeria japonica seedlings. Asian Journal of Atmospheric Environment 6: 259-267. Yi, O., Hong, Y., & Kim, H. 2010. Seasonal effect of PM 10 concentrations on mortality and morbidity in Seoul , Korea : A temperature-matched case-crossover analysis. Environmental Research, 110(1), 89–95. doi:10.1016/j.envres.2009.09.009 Yoon, J., von Hoyningen-Huene, W., Vountas, M., Burrows, J.P., 2011. Analysis of linear long-term trend of aerosol optical thickness derived from SeaWiFS using BAER over Europe and South China. Atmos Chem Phys 11, 12149-12167, doi: 12110.15194/acp-12111-12149-12011. Yorifuji, T., & Kashima, S. 2013. Associations of Particulate Matter With Stroke Mortality: A Multicity Study in Japan. Journal of occupational and environmental medicine. doi:10.1097/JOM.0b013e3182973092 Yu, H.B., Chin, M., Remer, L.A., Kleidman, R.G., Bellouin, N., Bian, H.S., Diehl, T., 2009. Variability of marine aerosol fine-mode fraction and estimates of anthropogenic aerosol component over cloud-free oceans from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS). J Geophys Res-Atmos 114, doi: 10.1029/2008jd010648. Yu, H.B., Remer, L.A., Chin, M., Bian, H.S., Kleidman, R.G., Diehl, T., 2008. A satellite-based assessment of transpacific transport of pollution aerosol. J Geophys Res-Atmos 113, doi: 10.1029/2007jd009349. Yu, S., Saxena, V.K., Zhao, Z., A Comparison of Signals of Regional Aerosol-Induced Forcing in Eastern China and the Southeastern United States. Geophys. Res. Lett. 28. 58 Yuan, H., Zhuang, G.S., Li, J., Wang, Z.F., Li, J., 2008. Mixing of mineral with pollution aerosols in dust season in Beijing: Revealed by source apportionment study. Atmos Environ 42, 2141-2157. Zhang, J., Ouyang, Z.Y., Miao, H., Wang, X.K., 2011. Ambient air quality trends and driving factor analysis in Beijing, 1983-2007. J Environ Sci-China 23, 2019-2028, doi: 2010.1016/S1001-0742(2010)60667-60665. Zhang, J., Reid, J.S., 2010. A decadal regional and global trend analysis of the aerosol optical depth using a data-assimilation grade over-water MODIS and Level 2 MISR aerosol products. Atmos Chem Phys 10, 10949-10963, doi: 10910.15194/acp-10910-10949-12010. Zhang, L., Liao, H., Li, J.P., 2010a. Impacts of Asian summer monsoon on seasonal and interannual variations of aerosols over eastern China. J Geophys Res-Atmos 115, doi: 10.1029/2009jd012299. Zhang, Meigen, Uno, Itsushi, Carmichael, Gregory, R., Akimoto, Hajime, Zifa, W., Youhua, T., Woo, Jung, H., Streets, David, G., Sachse, Glen, W., Avery, Melody, A., Weber, Rodney, J., Talbot, Robert, W., 2003. Large-scale structure of trace gas and aerosol distributions over the western Pacific Ocean during the transport and Chemical Evolution Over the Pacific (TRACE-P) experiment : NASA global tropospheric experiment transport and chemical evolution over the pacific (TRACE-P): Measurements and analysis (TRACEP1). American Geophysical Union, Washington, DC, ETATS-UNIS. Zhang, W.J., Zhuang, G.S., Huang, K., Li, J.A., Zhang, R., Wang, Q.Z., Sun, Y.L., Fu, J.S., Chen, Y., Xu, D.Q., Wang, W., 2010b. Mixing and transformation of Asian dust with pollution in the two dust storms over the northern China in 2006. Atmos Environ 44, 3394-3403. Zhang, X.Y., Wang, Y.Q., Niu, T., Zhang, X.C., Gong, S.L., Zhang, Y.M., Sun, J.Y., 2012. Atmospheric aerosol compositions in China: spatial/temporal variability, chemical signature, regional haze distribution and comparisons with global aerosols. Atmos Chem Phys 12, 779-799, doi:710.5194/acp-5112-5779-2012. Zhang, X.Y., Wang, Y.Q., Zhang, X.C., Guo, W., Gong, S.L., 2008. Carbonaceous aerosol composition over various regions of China during 2006. J Geophys Res-Atmos 113, doi: 10.1029/2007jd009525. Zhou, M., Okada, K., Qian, F., Wu, P.M., Su, L., Casareto, B.E., Shimohara, T., 1996. Characteristics of dust-storm particles and their long-range transport from China to Japan -Case studies in April 1993. Atmos Res 40, 19-31. 59 

# Chapter 3 Tropospheric Ozone 3.1 Overview 

Tropospheric ozone (O 3 ) is one of the most important constituents of the Earth’s atmosphere. While stratospheric ozone is recognized as “good” ozone that protects life on Earth from harmful solar ultraviolet radiation, tropospheric ozone is recognized as “bad” ozone, which causes global warming by absorbing terrestrial infrared radiation, and does damage to human health, forest cover, and agricultural crops. Associated with observed evidence for the increases of ozone in the northern hemisphere over recent decades, environmental and climatic impacts of tropospheric ozone are increasing. In the northern hemisphere, Asia is now the only region where man-made pollutant emissions continue to substantially increase. Emissions of air pollutants from Asia are estimated to have increased rapidly during the past several decades, in contrast to those from Europe and North America, which have shown decreasing and stabilizing trends, respectively (Akimoto, 2003). Especially in China, emissions of ozone precursors (nitrogen oxides (NO x =NO+NO 2 ) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs)) have greatly increased in recent decades (Ohara et al., 2007). The growth of NO x emissions in China has been more dramatic since 2000 than during the 1990’s, in qualitative agreement with satellite observations of tropospheric NO 2 columns over east-central China (Richter et al., 2005). These changes would have significant influence on the levels, variability, and trends of tropospheric ozone in local, regional and hemispheric scales. Therefore, the resulting impact needs to be assessed quantitatively. In spite of this importance, there have been fewer efforts to understand the distribution and variability of ozone in Asia than in Europe and North America, where the European Monitoring and Evaluation Programme (EMEP) and the Clean Air Status and Trends Network (CASTNET) have been operated, respectively. Measurements by ozone soundings have often been used to analyze spatial and temporal variations of ozone in the troposphere over the past decades (Logan et al., 1999; Naja and Akimoto, 2004; Oltmans et al., 2006). Beginning in the mid-1990s, the number of “regionally representative” monitoring sites for surface ozone have increased in Japan. Most of the stations became well established around 2000, and now a decade of continuous data is available for analysis. Since ozone has very strong oxidation effect, it reaches deep into the lungs and injures living cells in various ways when it is inhaled. It is well known that ozone causes respiratory diseases such as asthma, and cardiology diseases such as heart failure. Air quality standards (called also “criteria” in some countries and guidelines by WHO) are in general set based on human health impact. There is no common worldwide standard because of differences in the legal implications of air quality standards from country to country. The standards based on 8-hour averaged values are common rather than 1-hour averaged ones, because it is now recognized that the former can give more stabilized indices for adverse effects. For example, WHO (WHO, 2006), EU (EU-EEA, 1998) and United States (USEPA, 2008) all adopted 8-hour averaged indexes. In Japan, one-hour averaged values of 60, 120 and 240 ppb were set as environmental, warning, and alert standard (JEA, 1973). In addition to the above-mentioned aggravation of diseases, premature deaths due to the increase of ozone are also one of the important health impacts. WHO guidelines (WHO, 2006) suggest that the daily mortality rate increases 1–2% for 50 ppb and 3–5% for 80 ppb in the 8-hour average value. 60 The detrimental impacts of O 3 on terrestrial ecosystems are also well known. Once ozone is taken into leaves through stomata, it causes visual injury and growth retardation due to its strong oxidative physiological effect. Therefore, the impact of ozone on vegetation is determined by the magnitude of ozone deposition flux from air into leaves, as well as the physiological detoxification and restoration effect. Indexes to estimate the impact of ozone on vegetation include AOT40 (an accumulated amount over time of incremental ozone concentration above 40 ppb and exposure time) adopted in Europe (Fuhrer et al, 1997), and SUM06 (an accumulated amount over time of ozone concentration when it exceeds 60 ppb and exposure time) used in United States (USEPA, 2006). More recent studies proposed new indexes based on accumulating deposition flux exceeding certain values (Touvinen et al. 2009). Using these indexes, global yield loss due to ozone for four major agricultural crops, wheat, rice, corn and soybean, in 2000 have been estimated (Van Dingenen et al, 2008) to be 7–12, 3–4, 3–5, and 6–16% amounting to 140–160 billion USD of economic loss. Although uncertainty is still high for these estimates, it is suggested that the impacts of ozone on agriculture could be higher than those due to climate change. On the other hand, the impacts of ozone on forest cover have shown that there is strong correlation between AOT40 and growth retardation, and that there is large difference in the impact among different species (Karlsson et al. 2004). Forest tree decline and dieback are seen in various part of the world. Dieback of pine trees in California has been identified to be mainly due to ozone. For other forest decline and dieback cases, although ozone is suspected to be one of the causes, other impacts such as natural stress and acid fog are also possible (Karmosky et al., 2007). In Japan, forest decline has been observed widely, such as in Oku-nikko (Gunma Prefecture), and Tanzawa mountain district (Kanagawa Prefecture). Since ozone concentration is high in these regions, it is suspected as the main cause, but secondary impacts by other causes such as acid fog cannot be excluded. Ozone is also a strong greenhouse gas that absorbs infrared spectrum in the terrestrial radiation, and is often said to be the third most important greenhouse gas. Radiative forcing of tropospheric ozone has been estimated to be 0.35 W m –2 (0.25-0.65 W m –2 ) for a global average as an ensemble average of many chemical-climate models (IPCC, 2007). This value is the third among the greenhouse gases next to methane. However, since the lifetime (residence time) of ozone is rather short (a few days to a couple of weeks), the spatial distribution of ozone is not homogeneous. Therefore, radiative forcing of ozone varies by region. For example, emissions of air pollutants in the northern hemisphere are much larger than in the southern hemisphere, which gives nearly 30% larger radiative forcing by tropospheric ozone in the northern hemisphere than the global average. Therefore, ozone is the second most important greenhouse gas exceeding methane in the northern hemisphere. Along with black carbon (BC), tropospheric ozone is classified as a short-lived climate pollutant (SLCP) in comparison to long-lived greenhouse gases such as CO 2 and methane. Recently, much attention has been paid to SLCP from the viewpoint of climate change mitigation policy. Thus, simultaneous mitigation of air pollution and climate change can be improved by controlling emissions of ozone precursors (NO x ,VOC, etc.) and BC. This approach is called co-benefit and co-control and is thought to be an important global warming mitigation strategy for developing countries. 

3.2 Atmospheric measurement and modeling 3.2.1 Spatial distributions and seasonal variations 3.2.1.1 Surface and aircraft observations in Asian Pacific rim 61 Intensive field observation of ozone in the troposphere was initiated as a part of NASA field campaigns at a ground-based station on the island of Oki during the Pacific Exploratory Mission -West-A (PEM-West A) in 1991 (Akimoto et al., 1994), followed by PEM-West B in 1994 (Kajii et al., 1997). Based on this experience, ground-based observations were extended to several sites (Oki, Happo, Okinawa) in parallel to the start-up of EANET activity around 2000. Photochemical activity in the troposphere dominates ozone variations in springtime at Mt. Happo (Kajii et al., 1998). Tanimoto et al. (2002a, b) reported that long-range transport of photochemically produced ozone is dominant for the springtime ozone levels at Rishiri. It was revealed that the Rishiri site was affected by biomass burning from Siberia (Tanimoto et al., 2000, 2008). Pochanart et al. (2002) summarized characteristics of ozone at four sites (Oki, Okinawa, Rishiri, Ogasawara), and evaluated its impacts on ecosystems using AOT40. At mountainous sites, the observations were made at Mt Fuji (Tsutsumi et al., 1994, 1998). The aforementioned big field campaigns made by international consortiums were supplemented with aircraft surveys. Airborne measurements were further enhanced in TRACE-P and ACE-Asia in 2001. Following these international campaigns, several aircraft campaigns were conducted by Japanese scientists to explore the impacts of biomass burning on tropospheric ozone (BIBLE in 1998 and 2000) (Kondo et al., 2002, and references therein), and outflow from continental Asia (PEACE in 2002) (Kondo et al., 2004). Surface observations were also extensively made by JMA as a part of the WMO/GAW Programme. Ozone observations at regionally representative locations in Japan are made at three sites (Ryori, Yonagunijima, and Minamitorishima). In addition, several sites where ozone is monitored for research perspectives are present. Fukue Island (32.75°N, 128.68°E, 80 m a.s.l.), located in western Japan, is one of the sites. Ozone and related parameters have been measured since 2009 for more than 4 years (Kanaya et al., to be submitted, 2013). Clear seasonal patterns with spring and autumn maxima and summer minima are seen from monthly averages (Figure 3.2.1). 

Figure 3.2.1 Seasonal variations in the monthly averaged O 3 concentrations observed at Fukue Island. (Kanaya et al., 2013) 62 Spring peaks (57 ‒69 ppb as monthly averages) occurred in April or May, and autumn peaks (48 ‒52 ppb) occurred in October, in relation to the seasonality of the continental outflow. Tanimoto et al. (2005) reported a latitudinal gradient in the timing of the springtime maximum around the Asian Pacific rim, as a balance between photochemical activity and the efficiency of continental outflow. Global and regional scale chemical transport model simulations are used to describe seasonal and spatial variability in East Asia, after careful validation using the observational data mentioned above. For example, Itahashi et al. (2013) used Community Multi-scale Air Quality (CMAQ) modeling system version 4.7.1 with an updated emission inventory, the Regional Emission Inventory in Asia (REAS) ver. 2.1, to simulate seasonal variations in ozone concentrations in northeast Asia (Figure 3.2.2). While regions with relatively high ozone mixing ratios are limited to lower latitudes (<30°N) in winter, continental outflow in mid-latitudes (30 ‒40°N) becomes important in spring when regions with high ozone mixing ratios (>60 ppb) become widespread. Under the influence of the summertime monsoon, O 3 mixing ratios are only high in the North China Plain (NCP). In fall, the pattern in the mid-latitude is similar to spring but the mixing ratios are lower. 

Figure 3.2.2 Spatial distribution of simulated O 3 concentrations in four seasons. Vectors denote the wind field. (Itahashi et al., 2013) 

3.2.1.2 Surface observations in China 

To clarify the status of regional-scale air pollution, short-term (or intensive) and long-term observations of O 3 have been made at regionally representative sites in China. Xu et al. (2008) summarized surface O 3 data from the Lin’an Regional Background Station, Zhejiang Province in the Yangtze delta region, during six periods between August 1991 and July 2006 (Luo et al., 2000; Wang 63 et al., 2001; Wang et al., 2004). The seasonal cycle (Figure 3.2.3) shows two peaks in monthly mean ozone at around 40 ‒50 ppbv, with the primary peak in May and the secondary peak in October. A maximum hourly mean O3 concentration of 156 ppbv occurred in June 2006. Intensive field campaigns including measurements of O 3 , CO, NO y , SO 2 , and VOCs were performed at Lin’an, in 1999 ‒2000 and in spring 2001 (Wang et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2004) and key emission factors (e.g., CO/NO x ) were studied. They observed highest CO/NO y ratios (30 ‒40 ppbv ppbv −1 ) in September ‒December 1999 and June 2000. Based on the strong correlation between CO and a biomass burning tracer in fall, they suggested that the burning of biofuels and/or crop residues was a major source for the elevated CO observed at their site (Wang et al., 2002). 

Figure 3.2.3 Average seasonal cycle of surface ozone at Lin’an, China. The red circles indicate monthly mean concentrations calculated from the monthly mean ozone concentrations of the same months of different years. The vertical bars represent one standard deviation of the climatology monthly mean concentrations. The blue and black lines represent the monthly mean ozone concentrations of the periods 1994–1995 and 2005–2006, respectively. The grey crosses represent hourly mean ozone concentrations from all periods. (Xu et al., 2008) 

Observations at Shangdianzi (a rural site in northern Central East China (CEC), about 150 km from the urban area of Beijing) showed that the average maximum hourly O 3 concentration in June exceeded 120 ppbv (Lin et al., 2008). Meng et al. (2009) provided monthly average concentrations during 2003 ‒2006 (Figure 3.2.4). Overall, the seasonal variation of O 3 at Shangdianzi shows a double-peak pattern, with the primary and secondary peaks being in June and September, respectively, controlled by photochemical production of O 3 during the period of intensive solar radiation and the influence of the Asian monsoon, although the seasonal variation pattern was different from year to year, depending on meteorological conditions. 64 

Figure 3.2.4 Monthly average concentrations of trace gases at Shangdianzi during 2003–2006. (Meng et al., 2009) 

Kanaya et al. (2013) compiled past observations made at mountain sites in the North China Plain (NCP) conducted by JAMSTEC and IAP/CAS from 2004 to 2007. They identified seasonal variations in surface O 3 at three mountain sites in CEC: at Mt. Tai (36.26°N, 117.11°E, 1534 m a.s.l., Shandong Province), Mt. Hua (34.48°N, 110.08°E, 2065 m a.s.l., Shaanxi Province), and Mt. Huang (30.16° N, 118.26°E, 1840 m a.s.l., Anhui Province). From the results, they found that the O 3 concentration was highest at Mt. Tai, with a monthly peak in June, followed by Mt. Hua and Mt. Huang, for which the peaks were smaller and appeared earlier, in late spring (Li et al., 2007), as shown in Figure 3.2.5. The highest concentration of O 3 at Mt. Tai was coincided with the spatial distribution of emissions of O 3precursors, NO x , and VOCs, obtained in the emission inventory database (Ohara et al., 2007). The data shows that Mt. Tai is in the middle of the highest emission area, Mt. Hua is at the western edge, and Mt. Huang is just outside the heavy emission area. 65 

Figure 3.2.5 Year-round observations of O 3 at Mt. Tai and other mountain sites. Data for Mt. Tai in June are surrounded by squares. (Kanaya et al., 2013) 

An intensive field campaign called MTX2006 (Mount Tai Experiment 2006) was conducted during June 2006 at the summit of Mt. Tai, China in June 2006, to seek the causes of the sharp peak in O 3concentration in June, by including comprehensive measurements of precursors. Mt. Tai is located at the center of the NCP, and is expected to provide regionally representative data for CEC. The obtained data and its subsequent analysis are presented in a special issue of Atmos. Chem. Phys. In 2008 (The Mount Tai Experiment 2006 (MTX2006): regional ozone photochemistry and aerosol studies in CEC). Prior to the campaign, the lack of measurements of O 3 precursors prevented detailed studies, although using the nested air quality prediction modeling system (NAQPMS), Wang Z. et al. (2006) suggested that transport of O 3 and its precursors from the Yangtze delta caused the high-O 3 episode at Mt. Tai and Mt. Huang in May 2004. The measured gaseous species and relevant parameters are O 3 , NO x /NO y, NMHC (non-methane hydrocarbons), VOCs, CO and spectral actinic flux. Two different three-dimensional chemical transport models (3-D CTM) were used for post-analysis; one is NAQPMS, developed by Wang Z. et al. (2006), and the other is CMAQ (Byun and Ching, 1999). Figure 3.2.6 shows the 1-month time series of hourly concentrations of O 3 and related species at Mt. Tai. Very high O 3 concentrations, with an hourly maximum of 160 ppbv and a monthly average of 82 ppbv, were observed at the top of Mt. Tai in June 2006. Such high hourly concentrations of O 3 have rarely been reported, even at sites influenced by urban plumes. In the north outskirts of Beijing, for example, Wang T. et al. (2006) presented O 3 data for a mountainous area (Changping) 50 km north of Beijing, for June ‒July 2005 with a monthly average of about 60 ppbv and an hourly maximum record of 285 ppbv. Wang et al. (2008a) reported an hourly maximum of about 170 ppbv with monthly averages of about 67 ppbv at Miyun, a rural site approximately 80 km northeast of Beijing, for June, July, and August 2006. The monthly maximum concentrations occurred in June, the same as at Mt. Tai. The monthly average O 3 mixing ratio at Mt Tai is therefore similar to or even higher than those at two sites on the outskirts of Beijing. Ding et al. (2008) analyzed O 3 profiles obtained over Beijing from 66 1995 to 2005 by the Measurement of Ozone and Water Vapor by Airbus In-Service Aircraft (MOZAIC) program. The maximum of O 3 concentrations in the lower troposphere (<2 km) over Beijing was about 110 ppbv in summer. 

Figure 3.2.6 Overall time series of O 3 , CO, benzene, CO 2 , NO, NO 2 , NO x, NO y, and NO z

at Mt. Tai. Hatched areas indicate two episodes with strong influences from open crop residue burning. (Kanaya et al., 2013) 

They identified that the cause of the high O 3 concentrations during the two episodes, on June 6 ‒7 and 12 ‒13 (Figure 3.2.6) was regional-scale intense biomass burning after the harvest of winter wheat, as evidenced by the coincident measurement of tracers (CO, BC, levoglucosan, K + , CH 3 Cl, CH 3 CN, and lowered stable carbon isotope ratios ( 13 C)). The impact of open crop residue burning (OCRB) on O 3 ,CO, BC, and Organic Carbon(OC) concentrations over CEC during Mount Tai Experiment MTX2006 was evaluated using a regional chemical transport model, CMAQ, employing estimated daily emissions from OCRB, based on hotspot data obtained from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) (Yamaji et al., 2010). The average impacts of OCRB emissions contributed 6% of O 3 , 20% of CO, 43% of EC, and 53% of OC concentrations over CEC for the whole month of June. Li et al. (2008) showed from NAQMS-based model simulations coupled with an online tracer tagging module that 60% of the O 3 observed at Mt. Tai originated from large areas over the CEC regions, suggesting the significance of the regional-wide air pollution affecting air quality even at the top part of the planetary boundary layer. Using photochemical box model simulations, Kanaya et al. 67 (2009) suggested that the in-situ ozone formation is normally limited by NO x , rather than VOCs. 

3.2.1.3 Surface observations in Southeast Asia 

Pochanart et al. (2001) observed the mixing ratios of surface ozone at two rural/remote sites in Thailand, Inthanon and Srinakarin, from 1996 to 1998. They observed a dry season maximum and wet season minimum with a large seasonal amplitude at the two locations. At Inthanon, the monthly averaged O 3 mixing ratios range from 9 to 55 ppb, with an annual average of 27 ppb. The ozone mixing ratios at Srinakarin are in the similar range, 9 ‒45 ppb with an annual average of 28 ppb (Figure 3.2.7). 

Figure 3.2.7 Monthly statistical plots of O 3 mixing ratios at Inthanon and Srinakarin. For each month, the down triangle, lower cap, bottom of the box, middle line, top of the box, upper cap, and up triangle represent 1st, 5th, 25th, 50th (median), 75th, 95th, and 99th percentile, respectively. The solid square in the middle indicates the monthly mean. The bottom dot and top dot indicate the lowest and the highest hourly mixing ratios of that month. The numbers on the upper axis show the total monitoring hours in each month. (Pochanart et al., 2001) 

J.S. Fu et al. (2012) evaluated the impact of biomass burning from Southeast Asia on East Asia, using data from NASA’s 2006 Biomass-burning Aerosols in South-East Asia: Smoke Impact Assessment 68 (BASE-ASIA), and found that the impact of biomass burning mainly concentrated in Southeast Asia and southern China in March, while in April the impact becomes slightly broader and could even reach the Yangtze River Delta region. Nara et al. (2011) reported detection of plumes of peat burning in 2006 during cargo ship observations between Japan and Australia/New Zealand, and found that O 3enhancement is small relative to CO. Ou-Yang et al. (2013) reported continuous measurements of surface ozone at Dongsha Island, in the northern South China Sea, and suggested that Asian continental outflows can affect latitudes as far south as Dongsha. 

3.2.1.4 Satellite observations in Asia 

Since tropospheric ozone represents only 10% of the total column, satellite observations of tropospheric ozone or its near-surface concentrations have long been difficult. Recently however, several approaches have successfully derived tropospheric ozone quantities and provided spatial and seasonal variations. One of the approaches is to calculate residuals of total ozone after careful subtraction of the stratospheric amounts, both of which are measured by individual satellite sensors (for example, OMI and MLS). Figure 3.2.8 illustrates the spatial distribution of the tropospheric ozone column, showing features of intercontinental transport of ozone in July and in October (Ziemke et al. 2006). Measurements of ozone absorption in the IR at very high spectral resolution, as achieved by TES (Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer), also provide some information for the vertical location of ozone in the atmosphere (Worden et al., 2007). Recently more advanced retrieval methods are under development where observations from multiple satellite sensors measuring UV/vis and IR, for example, are synergistically used to optimally estimate a single vertical profile of ozone concentration. Depending on the information content, retrievals of lower tropospheric ozone column (0–6km for example) have been reported (e.g., Cuesta et al., 2013). Beginning with the 1995 launch of the Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment (GOME) onboard ERS-2 followed by the SCanning Imaging Absorption spectroMeter for Atmospheric CartograpHY (SCIAMACHY) onboard ENVISAT (Bovensmann et al., 1999), the Ozone Monitoring Instrument (OMI) onboard EOS-Aura (Levelt et al., 2006), and GOME-2 onboard Metop-A and -B (Callies et al., 2000), research focused on tropospheric NO 2 columns has been accelerated, as NO 2 is a key precursor of tropospheric ozone. Richter et al. (2005) developed a state of the art retrieval algorithm and were the first to demonstrate that space-based measurements provide a tropospheric NO 2 column data set that is useful for trend analysis. It was clearly demonstrated that a highly significant increase in tropospheric NO 2 columns of 50% occurred over Central East China (CEC; 30º–40ºN and 110º–123ºE) between 1996 and 2004, due to an increase in industry and traffic. van der A et al. (2008) utilized a ten-year record of tropospheric NO 2 column data from GOME and SCIAMACHY and revealed significant decreasing trends for NO 2 in Europe and the eastern United States (up to 7% per year) and a rapidly increasing trend in China (up to 29% per year) from 1996 to 2006. The discrepancy in the NO 2 growth rate between satellite and emission inventory was investigated by inverse modeling with a chemistry-transport model and satellite measurements from GOME and SCIAMACHY from 1996 to 2006 (Stavrakou et al., 2008). Satellite products have been used to further validate air quality models and to assess the accuracy of emission inventories. Ma et al. (2005) compared GOME-derived and model-simulated tropospheric NO 2 columns to test different emission inventories over China. 69 

Figure 3.2.8 Example of tropospheric ozone columns determined by the residual from OMI observations of total column O 3 , and MLS observations of stratospheric O 3 (Ziemke et al. , 2006). This figure is taken from HTAP2010 report (Figure 2.3). 

He et al. (2007) performed a numerical analysis of the interannual and seasonal variability of tropospheric NO 2 columns based on the combination of a regional chemical transport model and satellite observations from GOME and SCIAMACHY over East Asia for 1996–2005. Their analysis confirmed the sharp increase in NO 2 columns over CEC after the year 2000. Most studies suggest that emission inventories have underestimated China’s NO x emissions (Uno et al., 2007; Shi et al., 2008; Lin et al., 2010; Han et al., 2009, Han et al., 2011). In another interesting investigation, Beirle et al. (2011) presented a method for the simultaneous determination of megacity NO x emissions and lifetimes from OMI measurements by analyzing the downwind patterns of NO 2 for different wind conditions. Daytime lifetimes are approximately 4 hours at low and mid-latitudes, but in Moscow, lifetimes are approximately 8 hours in the winter. The derived NO x emissions are generally in good agreement with existing emission inventories, but are higher by a factor of three for the Saudi Arabian capital Riyadh. More recently, Hilbol et al. (2013) developed a method to combine data sets from different satellite instruments, such as GOME and SCIAMACHY, by explicitly accounting for the instruments’ differences in ground pixel size. They showed that tropospheric NO 2 columns strongly increased over China, the Middle East, and India, with values over east-central China tripling from 1996 to 2011 (Figure 3.2.9). The developed world, including Western Europe, the United States, and Japan, showed significant decreasing trends of tropospheric NO 2 columns during the same time period. On a megacity level, increasing NO 2 trends in Dhaka and Baghdad were 30% and 20% per year, respectively, whereas Los Angeles showed a very strong decrease of 6% per year. Most megacities in China, India, and the Middle East showed increasing NO 2 columns of 5–10% per year, leading to doubling or tripling of NO 2 columns within the study period (approximately 15 years). Dufour et al. (2010) analyzed IASI 70 observations of tropospheric ozone over the Beijing, Shanghai and Hong Kong areas during one year (2008), probing seasonal and day-to-day variations of lower tropospheric ozone (0–6 km partial columns) on the regional scale of highly populated areas in China. 

Figure 3.2.9 Mean annual VCD trop NO 2 normalized to 1996 for the regions central East Coast US, Western Europe, US, east-central China, Japan, Middle East, and north-central India. Values for 1996-2002 are from GOME; values from 2003-2011 are from SCIAMACHY measurements. The first five regions are defined as in Richter et al. (2005). The y-axis has been modified to make relative changes above and below 1 more comparable (Hilboll et al., 2013) 

Wittrock et al. (2006) presented the first global simultaneous observations of glyoxal (CHOCHO) and formaldehyde (HCHO) columns retrieved from measurements by SCIAMACHY and compared them with model calculations. HCHO and CHOCHO are important trace gases in the atmosphere, serving as tracers for the oxidation of VOCs. The global distribution of CHOCHO is similar to that of HCHO. High values are observed over areas with large biogenic isoprene emissions (Central Africa, parts of South America, and Indonesia). Regions with biomass burning and anthropogenic pollution also exhibit elevated levels of CHOCHO. The ratio of the columns of CHOCHO to HCHO is generally on the order of 0.05 in regions with biogenic emissions, which is in reasonable agreement with the understanding of the oxidation of hydrocarbons emitted by the biosphere. De Smedt et al. (2008) presented global tropospheric HCHO columns retrieved from near-UV radiance measurements by GOME and SCIAMACHY. A special effort was made to ensure the coherence and quality of the HCHO dataset covering the period 1996–2007. A comprehensive error analysis was conducted, including errors in the slant columns retrieval and the air mass factors. Although many efforts have been made to characterize satellite data products, we still need to validate them with independent measurements for a more quantitative study. To quantify the biases in the tropospheric NO 2 data from SCIAMACHY, OMI, and GOME-2 in a consistent manner, Irie et al. (2012) performed ground-based Multi-Axis Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy (MAX-DOAS) observations at several sites in Japan and China from 2006 to 2010. Examination of 71 various spatial coincidence criteria indicated that the comparison could be influenced by the spatial distribution of NO 2 . Biases in these satellite products were estimated to be small and insignificant. However, consistency among satellites has not yet been tested, and validation observations and numerical simulations (including the emission inventory) have yet to be performed. Further comprehensive studies would be beneficial. 

3.2.2 Long-term trends and interannual variations 

In contrast to Europe and North America, long-term ozone measurements are still limited in Asia. However, there is growing evidence that tropospheric ozone has been increasing in Asia over the past decades (Parrish et al., 2012). Until the 1990s, the primary sources of information on long-term changes of tropospheric ozone were the ozonesonde records from Japanese locations. However, continuous measurements at ground-based stations in remote and rural areas operated as a part of international programs (e.g., EANET, WMO/GAW), and data from commercial aircraft equipped with ozone analyzers arriving at international airports (i.e., MOZAIC) have been publically available since 2000. Table 3.2.1 summarizes the trends in tropospheric ozone in Asia. In Japan, there were extensive reports in the 1990s based on ozonesondes at Sapporo (43 °N), Tateno (Tsukuba) (36 °N), Kagoshima (32 °N), and Naha (26 °N). Akimoto et al. (1994) reported an increase of 1.5–2.5%/yr for 1969–1990 based on ozonesondes at Sapporo, Tateno, and Kagoshima. Logan (1994) analyzed Japanese ozonesondes at Sapporo, Tateno, and Kagoshima, reporting an increase of <1%/yr at 5.5 km for 1970–1991 in all seasons, in good accordance with Akimoto et al. (1994). For the period 1980–1991, the increase is much larger at Kagoshima than at Tateno and Sapporo, likely caused by increases in surface emissions on the Asian continent, but care is needed for data at Kagoshima. Logan et al. (1999) updated their previous analysis, and reported increases near the surface of 1–1.5%/yr for 1970–1996, and decreases with increasing altitude. Oltmans et al (1998) reported an annual trend of 0.93%/yr for 1.5–2.5 km over Tateno during 1970–1995. Lee et al. (1998) analyzed relatively new ozonesondes data at Naha, Okinawa, Japan, and reported an increasing trend of 2.5%/yr in the lower troposphere (0–2 km) for 1989–1997. In the 2000s, Naja and Akimoto (2004) reported springtime ozone increases in the boundary layer from the period 1970–1985 to the period 1986–2002 at three ozonesonde sites (Figure 3.2.10). However, in more recent years until 2006, no increase in the boundary layer ozone has occurred at these sites. The analysis of Oltmans et al. (2006) reported that the overall trend has been slightly downward at all of the Japanese ozonesondes since the beginning of the 1990s, with perhaps somewhat larger declines in the most recent years. This lack of change, in spite of the rapid industrialization in China and the documented rise in NO x emissions in East Asia, remains largely unexplained, as also pointed out by Naja and Akimoto (2004). 72 

Table 3.2.1 Summary of tropospheric ozone trends in East Asia 

Reference Trend (ppbv/yr) Season Period Site Altitude (km) Method Akimoto et al, 1994 0.8 0.4 Annual 1969-1990 Sapporo, Tateno, Kagoshima 0 – 2 2 – 5 Sondes Logan et al, 1999 ~0.8 ~0.4 Annual 1970-1996 Sapporo, Tateno, Kagoshima 0 – 2 2 – 5 Sondes Lee et al, 1998 1.0 Except Summer 1989-1997 Naha 0 – 2 Sondes Naja & Akimoto, 2004 0.5-1.0 Annual 1970-2002 Sapporo, Tateno, Kagoshima, Naha 3.5 – 5 Sondes Oltmans et al, 1998 0.3-0.4 Annual 1970-1995 Tateno 1.5 – 2.5 Sondes Oltmans et al, 2006 ~0.5 Annual 1970-2004 Sapporo, Tateno, Kagoshima 0 – 2.5 Sondes Tsutsumi et al, 2006 0.4-0.7 Annual 1998-2004 Yonagunijima <0.1 Surface Tanimoto et al, 2009 ~0.5 Spring 1998-2007 Rishiri, Tappi, Sado, Oki, Okinawa, Yonagunijima, Ogasawara, Minamitorishima, Mt. Happo <0.1 Surface Tanimoto, 2009 ~1 Spring 1998-2007 Mt. Happo 1.85 Mountain Kurokawa et al, 2009 ~0.4 Spring 1981-2005 Western Japan <0.1 Surface Zbinden et al, 2006 ~0.3 ~0.5 Except Summer 1994-2002 Tokyo, Osaka, Nagoya 0 – 2 2 – 8 Aircraft Ding et al, 2008 ~1 Annual 1995-2005 Beijing 0 – 2 Aircraft Chan et al, 2004 ~2 Annual 1984-1999 Hong Kong <0.1 Surface Wang et al, 2009 0.58 Annual 1994-2007 Hong Kong <0.1 Surface Chou et al, 2006 0.71 0.58 Spring 1994-2003 WanLi YangMing <0.1 0.95 Surface Based on ground-based measurements, Tsutsumi et al. (2006) reported the surface ozone trend at Yonagunijima (24 °N), Japan, to be 1–1.7% (0.4–0.7 ppbv)/yr for 1998–2004. In more recent years, continuous measurements at Mt. Happo (37°N, 1850 m asl) in western Japan, a rural elevated site representative of regional air masses and downwind of the Asian continent, show springtime ozone 73 

Figure 3.2.10 The long-term changes of ozone in regionally polluted air masses at Tsukuba, Kagoshima, and Naha and in Eurasian air masses at Sapporo during (a) DJF and (b) AMJJ in the boundary layer. Estimates of 5 year period data are shown with large open symbols. Curve fittings are made with a polynomial function of the third degree, except in the case of Naha, where a linear fit is used. Average ozone from individual sonde data at four sites are also shown with small solid symbol. (Naja and Akimoto, 2004) 

increases at a rate of approximately 1 ppbv/year during 1991–2006 (Tanimoto, 2009) (Figure 3.2.11). By using commercial aircraft measurements over Tokyo, Osaka, and Nagoya, Zbinden et al. (2006) reported positive trends with an increase of 1%/yr for 2–8 km and 0.3–0.5%/yr for 0–2 km except summer over Japan. The overall trend of tropospheric ozone column over Japan derived from MOZAIC is +0.8%/yr for 1995–2001. Parrish et al. (2012) compared long-term trends of tropospheric ozone among Europe, North America, and Asia, where Japanese data was used (Mt. Happo from 1991-2009, and the marine boundary layer sites (Rishiri Island, Cape Tappi, and Sado Island) on the west coast of Japan from 1998-2009). During the 1990s and up to 2010, Mt. Happo has generally experienced larger O 3 increases than those seen 74 over Europe and North America. The authors noted that relatively rapid increases are also found in free tropospheric data over North America and in particular in air masses originating from Asia. These larger increases over Asia are likely attributable to the rapid increase in O 3 precursor emissions that have occurred in East Asia. More recently, Oltmans et al. (2013) noted that ozone levels are largely unchanged above Japan. In China, an ozone increase of 5–8 ppbv in the boundary layer over Beijing was reported between 1995–1999 and 2000–2005, as measured by MOZAIC aircraft profiles (Ding et al., 2008) (Figure 3.2. 12). In southern China, average yearly ozone increased by approximately 50% between the late 1980s and 1990s at an urban site in Hong Kong (22 °N) (Chan et al., 2004). A coastal site southeast of Hong Kong shows an ozone increase of 0.58 ppbv/year for 1994–2007 (Wang et al., 2009). 

Figure 3.2.11 Daily (24-hour) mean ambient mixing ratios of ozone observed at Mt. Happo (dots) for the period 1998 to 2006. Also shown are the trend component (solid line) of the best-fit curve for daily means and its uncertainty range (gray region) since 1999. (Tanimoto, 2009) 75 

Figure 3.2.12 Comparisons of mean O 3 profiles in the lower troposphere over Beijing between 1995–1999 and 2000–2005. The solid lines are annual mean values, and the dashed lines on the right hand side represent the data collected in summer afternoons (at LT 15:00–16:00 in MJJ). (Ding et al., 2008) 

Far fewer reports are available for long-term ozone measurements in India. Naja and Lal (1996) reported the increase of surface ozone from 1955 to 1992, with the increasing rate of 1.45%/yr, at Ahmedabad (23 °N), India. However, Saraf and Beig (2004) found no significant increase of lower tropospheric ozone using profiles from three ozonesonde sites in tropical and subtropical India from 1989–2001. Beig and Singh (2007) analyzed tropical tropospheric ozone columns from the TOMS satellite from 1979 to 2005, reporting an increasing trend of 0.5%/yr over Bay of Bengal. Daytime average surface ozone in Delhi, India (29 °N) increased at the rate of 1.3 ppbv/year from 1997–2004 (Ghude et al., 2008). Kulkarni et al. (2010) reported increases of tropospheric ozone columns after 1990 over three major Indian cities: Delhi, Hyderabad and Bangalore. The observed trends were analyzed in comparison to chemistry-transport models. Tanimoto et al. (2009) examined springtime ozone trends at nine remote locations in Japan from 1998 to 2007 (Figure 3.2.13). The observed decadal ozone trends are relatively small at surface sites but are substantially larger at mountainous sites. A regional chemistry-transport model (the Models-3, CMAQ) with yearly-dependent regional emissions provided by the REAS inventory successfully reproduces the levels, variability, and interannual variations of ozone at all surface sites. It predicts increasing trends at mountainous sites, suggesting that increasing Asian anthropogenic emissions account for about half of the observed increase. However, the discrepancy between the observations and model results after 2003 suggests significant underestimation of the actual growth of the Asian anthropogenic emissions and/or inadequacy in the modeling of pollution export from East Asia. Kurokawa et al. (2009) showed 76 a fairly strong trend in oxidants (O x ) observed across southern Japan from 1985–2005 (although uncertainty lies on direct comparison of O x to ozone), and analyzed the influence of meteorological variability on the interannual variations of springtime boundary layer ozone over Japan (Figure 3.2.14). These model runs showed that year-to-year variations were larger than the annual rate of increase of the long-term trend. When the anomaly in surface pressure over the Pacific Ocean east of Japan has a large negative value, polluted air masses from continental Asia tend to be transported directly to Japan by westerly winds. In contrast, when the anomaly has a large positive value, the influence of the outflow from continental Asia tends to be small because the westerly components of wind fields around Japan are comparatively weak. Consequently, springtime ozone over Japan is higher than in ordinary years when the anomaly has a large negative value, and lower when it has a large positive value. In general, the interannual variation of springtime ozone over Japan is sensitive to the outflow from continental Asia. In Parrish et al. (2014) chemistry-climate model outputs were compared to the observed trends in northern mid-latitudes up to the year 2011. The authors found that the trend in Asia recently flattened. The models were qualitatively in good agreement with the observations, but did not reproduce the degree of increase quantitatively. 77 

Figure 3.2.13 Trends of springtime tropospheric ozone from 1998 to 2007. Plotted are the annual mean ozone mixing ratios observed at Japanese stations (black), and overlaid with regional chemistry-transport model simulations with year-dependent anthropogenic emissions in Asia (gray). Observed trends are shown by median (black lines) and interquartile range (vertical bars), and the modeled trends by median (gray lines) and interquartile range (shaded). RIS, Rishiri Island; TPI, Cape Tappi; SDO, Sado Island; OKI, Oki Island; ONW, Okinawa Island; YON, Yonagunijima Island; OGS, Ogasawara Island; MNM, Minamitorishima Island; HPO, Mt. Happo. The coefficient of determination (r 2 ), slopes (s) and intercepts for the year 2000 (i) with their 95% confidence limits obtained by t-test are given for observations (obs) and model (mdl) results.(Tanimoto et al., 2009) 78 

Figure 3.2.14 Time series of anomalies of springtime observed surface Ox (blue points) and simulated BL O 3 for the EyyMyy (black line) and E00Myy (red line) scenarios averaged over WCJ during 1981–2005. The “E” and “M” stand for Emissions and Meteorology, respectively. The subscripts “yy” and “00” stand for individual year and 2000, respectively. Anomalies are defined as deviations from the values averaged over 1985–2005. The blue regression line and correlation coefficient (r) are for observations, and the black ones are for simulations by EyyMyy. Emissions of NOx and NMVOC over WCJ and those over CEC are also shown. Note that the whiskers denote 1 standard deviation. The standard deviation of the observations was calculated from the springtime-averaged values at each station, and that of the simulations was based on the values of springtime mean at each grid point over WCJ. (Kurokawa et al., 2009) 

3.2.3 Source-receptor relationships 3.2.3.1 Source-receptor relationships and source attribution 

The source-receptor relationship is defined as the response of the concentration of an air pollutant at a given receptor location to a perturbation in emissions from a source region. A similar but conceptually different idea is source attribution or source apportionment, which separates the concentration of an air pollutant at a given location into a number of components, each of which represents the contribution of a source region. These two concepts are useful from a scientific and policy point of view, because they provide an estimate of how much individual source regions contribute to air pollution at a receptor location, which is fundamentally important in understanding the physical and chemical mechanisms governing air quality in that location and is also essential information to design effective measures to improve the air quality in that location. According to the definition, the change in air pollutant emissions in a given source region is necessary to estimate the source-receptor relationship. However, source attribution is estimated under one specific emission scenario and any change in emission will result in a different source attribution. In fact, the two concepts are usually quantified with quite different approaches by using a chemical transport model. Many source attribution studies of ozone (O 3 ) have employed the tagged tracer approach where the contribution of a source region is 79 calculated as the concentration of a hypothetical O 3 tracer in the model which is allowed to be chemically produced only inside that source region (Wang et al., 1998; Fiore et al., 2002; Auvray and Bey, 2005; Sudo and Akimoto, 2007; Li et al., 2008; Nagashima et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2011). For quantification of source-receptor relationships for O 3, an emission sensitivity approach is generally used involving two simulations with and without a perturbation in O 3 precursor emissions in a source region, and the difference between the calculated O 3 concentrations is considered as the contribution of that source region (Jacob et al., 1999; Wild and Akimoto, 2001; Wild et al., 2004; Fiore et al., 2009; Yoshitomi et al., 2011). In this way, the two quantities are derived from different procedures and are based on different concepts, and therefore they represent different perspectives on the role of each source region at a specific receptor location, especially for a component such as O 3 whose concentration is controlled through a non-linear chemical system. However, studies to evaluate the contribution of air pollution sources at receptor locations have been advanced with heterogeneous mixture of both concepts (TF HTAP, 2007). Therefore, although the review of the oxidant source-receptor relationship in Asia is the theme of this section, results from source attribution studies are also included in the following review. 

3.2.3.2 Contribution of sources outside of Asia 

The impacts of long range intercontinental transport of air pollutants on air quality in Asia have been studied by using global scale chemistry transport models. Wild et al. (2004) estimated the impact from European and North American sources on surface O 3 concentration over Central Asia and Japan by looking at the response to removal of O 3 precursor emissions in these source areas. They reported that contributions from both sources are largest in spring (March–April), reaching about 3.0–3.5 ppb at Mondy (52N, 101E) in Central Asia and about 2.5 ppb in Happo (37N, 138E) in central Japan, and decrease towards summer minimum when the East Asian summer monsoon flow brings air from the ocean, then increase through the fall. In winter, however, contributions of Europe and North America on Asia are different as the European contribution gets decreased from fall to winter and increases again from winter to spring, but North American contribution does not show such seasonal transition from fall to spring, it is rather constant during those seasons (Figure 3.2.15). Holloway et al. (2008) showed that such differences in the seasonal evolution of European and North American contributions 

Figure 3.2.15 Impacts of northern midlatitude fossil fuel sources on O3 at Mondy, Siberia (left) and Happo, Japan (right). Error bars show 1-σ variability based on 3-hourly data. (Adapted from Figures 8 and 9 in Wild et al. (2004)) 80 is also evident in central- and southeastern China and the Korean Peninsula. Wild and Akimoto (2001) showed similar seasonal dependencies of the contribution of Europe and United State sources on surface O 3 over East Asia. Liu et al. (2002) reported that the maximum European influence (<5 ppb) along the Pacific Rim of East Asia occurs in spring in the lower-troposphere (below 4 km). Sudo and Akimoto (2007) demonstrated the large contributions of 1–3 ppb from European, Central Eurasian, and North American sources in non-summer seasons at Sapporo (43N, 141E) in the northern part of Japan. They also showed similar but much smaller contributions from those sources at Kagoshima (32N, 131E) in the southern part of Japan, which clearly demonstrated the greater influence of those Northern Hemisphere remote sources on the northern part of Asia than on the southern part. This is due mainly to the more northerly path of flow around the Siberian High from those sources to Asia (Wild and Akimoto, 2001; Wild et al., 2004). These estimates for the effect of intercontinental transport on surface O 3 over Asia can differ by more than factor of two (TF HTAP, 2007), and they are not directly comparable because of the different choices of methodology, definitions of source and receptor regions, reported metrics, and time period of analysis. With this background, the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) Convention in Long Range Transboundary Air Pollution (CLRTAP) Task Force on Hemispheric Transport of Air Pollution (TF HTAP) (TF HTAP, 2007; Fiore et al., 2009) conducted multi-model simulations with coordinated approaches (20% reduction of source emission), region definitions, and target year for analysis to quantify and estimate uncertainties in the source-receptor relationships for O3 and other air pollutants. Fiore et al. (2009) summarized the TF HTAP results on the source-receptor relationship for O 3. 

Figure 3.2.16 Annual and seasonal mean contribution to total surface O3 in East Asia from Europe (green) and North America (red) from TF HTAP study (thick vertical bars with white circle) and from studies in the published literature (thin vertical bars for ranges across studies; squares where one value is reported). The white circles represent the multi-model median value. (Adapted from Figure 11 in Fiore et al. (2009)) 81 

Figure 3.2.16 shows the contributions of Europe and North America to the annual and seasonal mean surface O 3 in East Asia from the TF HTAP study and from individual model studies. The coordinated multi-model results clearly show a narrower range in the estimated contributions of the remote sources on East Asia than in the literature, and a strong seasonal variation. The median values of the contribution from North America among HTAP models have a peak in winter, decreases through the spring to a summer minimum, and then an increase in fall. Those from Europe show a similar seasonal cycle, but have a peak contribution in spring, as pointed out in Wild et al. (2004) and Holloway et al. (2008). The TF HTAP study has shown the advantage of a coordinated approach for improved estimation of source-receptor relationships, but there are still uncertainties stemming from the major inputs and processes represented in the models (emissions, transport, gas phase and heterogeneous chemical reactions, and wet and dry deposition) and from numerical aspects (e.g., horizontal and vertical grid resolution). Among these uncertainties, Lin et al. (2010) analyzed the effect of model horizontal resolution on the impact of Europe to East Asia in spring by comparing the response of global and regional chemical models to a 20% reduction in European emissions. They found a large spatial variability in the response of O 3 to changes in European emissions in both models, with the global model showing higher peak values and a larger area of impact. They also found that the high-resolution regional model estimates 40–50% weaker responses for O 3 to European emission perturbations in highly populated Asian megacities, as compared to global model estimates (Figure 3.2.17). Fu et al. (2012) also examined the impact of 20% reduction in NO x emission in North America, South Asia and Europe to East Asia for winter (January) and summer (July) using a regional chemical model. The estimated impact on monthly mean surface O 3 over East Asia is about 0.1–0.2 ppbv and is larger in summer than in winter, which is consistent with the results obtained in the TF HTAP global model study (Fiore et al., 2009). They compared this remote impact on East Asia with the impact from a domestic NO x emission reduction of the same size (20%), and found that the remote impact is generally smaller than the domestic impact on monthly mean O 3 , but the remote impact on daily maximum O 3 could be as large as the local impact on monthly mean O 3 , which highlights the importance of emission reduction in remote region on the air quality in East Asia. 82 

Figure 3.2.17 Monthly mean O 3 response to a 20% reduction in European anthropogenic emissions of O 3 precursors for March 2001 simulated with a global chemistry model (MOZART: top) and a regional chemistry model (CMAQ; bottom). (Adapted from Figure 7 in Lin et al. (2010)) 

3.2.3.3 Intra-continental source-receptor relationship in Asia 

The TF HTAP study has shown the importance of foreign sources (North America, Europe and South Asia) on East Asian surface O 3 , but also revealed that emissions originating in East Asia have the largest influence on East Asian O 3 itself; they showed that the response of annual mean East Asian surface O 3 to a 20% reduction in anthropogenic O 3 precursor emissions in East Asia can be 1.5 times larger than the sum of the responses to 20% reduction in the emissions in foreign sources (TF HTAP, 2010). Therefore it is highly important to study source-receptor relationships between sub-regions inside East Asia. Nagashima et al. (2010) examined the source attribution inside East Asia by using a global chemistry transport model with tagged tracers for the early 2000s. Figure 3.2.18 is the estimated seasonal mean relative contribution (%) from source regions to receptor area in East Asia for spring 83 and summer. In spring, the contribution of in-region (domestic) sources accounts for the largest portion of surface O 3 in most receptor areas; over 40% in the center to south of China and around 20% 

Figure 3.2.18 Seasonal mean relative contribution (%) from source regions to receptor areas in East Asia for spring (top) and summer (bottom). Source regions are Japan (JPN), China (CHN), the Republic of Korea (KOR), adjacent marine regions (ASea), E. Siberia (ECB), SE Asia (IDC+), other N. Hemispheric mid-latitude regions (RMT), the free troposphere (FT) and stratosphere (STR). Receptor regions include NE China (CHN-NE), the North China Plain (CHN-NCP), Yangtze River basin (CHN-YRB), SE China (CHN-SE), the Republic of Korea and mainland Japan (JPN-E+W). (Nagashima et al. (2010)) 

in the Korean Peninsula and Japan. In summer, the share of domestic sources increased in every receptor area, and the share almost doubled from spring to summer in Japan, the Korean Peninsula, and the northern part of China. The contribution of China to the Korean Peninsula (approximately 20%) and Japan (approximately 10%) was similar in both seasons and the Korean contribution to Japan was about 6% in spring and less than 5% in summer. These estimated contributions of China or the Republic of Korea to Japan were consistent with the early estimation by Tanimoto et al. (2005), or the recent estimation by Itahashi et al. (2013). Similar to other studies, contributions from remote 84 source regions such as Europe and North America to each of the East Asian receptor areas were larger in spring than in summer and increased with latitude. In addition, contribution from the stratosphere was quite significant in spring, matching the domestic contribution (approximately 20%) in Japan and the Republic of Korea, but was greatly diminished in summer. It should be noted that source regions adjacent to East Asia have a significant influence on surface O 3 over China; East Siberia and the Indochina Peninsula can account for about 17% and 11% of surface O 3 in the northern and southern part of China, respectively. More spatially detailed estimations of the contributions from surrounding sources to a particular receptor have been made for several locations in East Asia. The source-receptor relationships for O 3 in highly populated Asian megacities have been reported by Yoshitomi et al. (2011) for the Tokyo area, and by Oh et al. (2010) for the Seoul metropolitan region. Recently, trans-city cluster transport was found to be responsible for several high-pollution episodes in China (Li et al., 2013), due to the rapid urbanization of China. By using a global chemistry transport model, Wang et al. (2011) separated the contributions of background and domestic pollution to surface O 3 over China with a set of emission perturbation simulations. They further estimated source attributions in four sub-regions in China; north (NC), south (SC), west (WC), and northeast China (NEC); as well as the contributions from source regions outside of China with tagged tracers. They described the exchange of O 3 between the sub-regions in China. For example, the NC region (east of 110E and north of the Yangtze River) has a peak contribution of 6 ppb over SC in fall, while a similar maximum contribution from SC is found over NC in May to June; and that the WC region (west of 110E) and NEC (north of 42N) make significant contributions only over their own regions, but NC and SC have non-negligible influence over NEC and WC, respectively, in summer (Figure 3.2.19). 85 

Figure 3.2.19 Monthly mean mixing ratios of tagged ozone tracers over the four Chinese regions. NC, SC, NEC, and WC denote North, South, Northeast, and West China, respectively. Chinese tracers are shown in the left panels (a, c, e, g) and non-Chinese tracers in the right panels (b, d, f, h). Non-Chinese tracers displayed are North America (NA), Europe (Eur), Southeast Asia (SEA), India (Ind), Japan and the Republic of Korea (JaKr), stratosphere (Strat), and the rest of the world (ROW). Note the different scale of the y-axis between the left and right panels. (Wang et al., 2011) 86 In the North China Plain (NCP), where the largest city cluster in China is located, two seasonal peaks of surface ozone appear in May-June and September-October. NO x concentrations were lower in summer than in spring (Meng et al., 2009). Using a regional chemical transport model (NAQPMS), Li et al. (2007) evaluated the regional ozone budget and found that regional net photochemical production in NCP dominated this seasonal variation at Mt. Tai (31.8 ppbv/day), a regional background site in the central part of NCP. A further simulation with an on-line tracer tagging showed that in-situ chemistry only contributed 12% of ozone at Mt. Tai in June, while regional transport from the southern part of NCP played the most important role (32.4 ppbv, 37.9% of total ozone) (Li et al., 2008) (Figure 3.2.20). The regional-scale spatial pattern of surface ozone in NCP was controlled by regional transport. In the northern rim of NCP, transport from the southern part reached 5-10 ppbv (Li et al., 2008). In Beijing, the largest megacity in NCP, model simulation has shown that 35–60% of ozone during high ozone episodes at the Olympic Stadium site was attributed to sources outside Beijing (Streets et al., 2008). In a substantial assessment by Wang et al (2009) using the OSPM model, the average increase of ozone due to traffic control in surrounding provinces was 25.2% in Beijing in 2008 Olympic Games. The simulation also revealed that transport of Beijing emissions contributed a lot to surface ozone in downwind regions in summer and that mobile emission was the greatest source in cities (Wang et al., 2003). Agriculture crop burning had also remarkable impacts on the ozone maximum in June in NCP, and ozone increased 26% (Yamaji et al., 2010). In VOC-limited regions, biogenic emissions were important, with a contribution of 15–30 ppbv (Wang et al., 2008). Gas-aerosol interaction was reported to greatly affect the level of oxidants in NCP. In summer, by altering the photodissociation rates of tracer gases, aerosols decreased surface OH, HO 2 and O 3 in NCP by 51%, 22.2% and 5.4% respectively (Li et al., 2011). In 2010, heterogeneous chemistry on mineral dust reduced ozone by 30% in a super-dust storm (Li et al., 2012). In Yangtze River Delta (YRD) region, one of the three largest city clusters in China, seasonal variation of surface ozone was different from that in NCP. At YRD, the highest ozone was in May (Li et al., 2008). Li et al. (2007) found that import from outside of YRD was of comparable importance to regional chemistry over the YRD at Mt. Huang. Weather conditions played an important role in high ozone episodes in YRD (Tie et al., 2009). Model simulation showed that a weak sub-tropical high-pressure system in the western Pacific resulted in high ozone mixing levels (100-130 ppbv) in YRD due to regional inflow transport from ocean to land produced by a noticeable noontime sea-breeze (Tie et al., 2009). Under favorable weather conditions, ozone in YRD could be transported northwards to another city cluster (NCP) in China. A simulation by Wang et al. (2006b) found that trans-city clusters from a weak high-pressure system over the East China Sea contributed 20–50% of ozone in NCP in an episode. This transport even changed the diurnal cycle of ozone in cities. In this episode, nighttime ozone in central Jinan city in NCP, which has a population of 5 million, reached 60–120 ppbv, which was 10–20 times that in normal periods. Transport from YRD was responsible (Shan et al., 2008). Besides ozone, transport of other pollutants, like particular matter, from YRD was also reported (Li et al., 2013). In the Pearl River Delta (PRD) region, which contributes nearly 10% of GDP in China, the highest ozone was frequently observed in autumn (Zheng et al, 2010). Li et al. (2012) investigated source apportionment of O 3 in detail using a regional chemistry transport model. 87 

Figure 3.2.20 Spatial distributions of contributions (shaded: ppbv; contours: %) to monthly mean near-grounded (<1.5 km) ozone in June in NCP from a) all photochemical production in NCP, b) Shandong and Hebei Province+Beijing and Tianjin city c) Anhui and Jiang province, d) Shanxi and Henan province, e) Lateral boundary, and f) top boundary. Mt. Tai is marked by the dark solid cycles. (Li et al., 2008) 

They showed the relative contributions from different geographical regions and different source categories on O 3 in several cities in the PRD in summer (July) and fall (November) of 2006. While the contribution from outside the PRD is dominant under mean O 3 condition, sources nearby in the PRD are responsible for high O3 events, contributing approximately 50% in fall and even up to approximately 70% in summer. Their results showed that mobile emission is the highest contributing source category to high O 3 events in the PRD (Figure 3.2.21). Shen et al. (2011) evaluated two widely 88 used regional chemical transport models (CMAQ and CAMx) by comparing with observations at 12 stations in October in 2004. They concluded that both models reproduced the magnitudes and variations of ozone at most stations over the PRD. However, the average simulated result of CMAQ was about 17% lower than that of CAMx. The differences in dry deposition, reaction parameters and vertical transport accounted for the differences in the results of the two models (Shen et al., 2011). Model simulation showed that horizontal transport and vertical diffusion were the main contributors to the O 3 increase in YRD (Jiang et al., 2010). In high pollution episodes, regional transport contributed 40–90% of O 3 at urban and rural areas of Hong Kong during the study period (Wang et al., 2006a). An observation-based model demonstrated that anthropogenic VOCs dominated OH radical reactivity (Lou et al., 2009). 

Figure 3.2.21 Ozone source apportionments by different source regions (left) and different source categories (right) from 21 to 24 July 2006 in Guangzhou. Source regions are Zhaoqing (ZQ), Foshan (FS), Jiangmen (JM), Zhongshan (ZS), Dongguan (DG), Huizhou (HZ), Shenzhen (SZ), Guangzhou (GZ), Macau and Zhuhai (M&ZH), PRD water (PRDw), Hong Kong (HK), and Non-PRD (Super-regional). Source categories are biogenic, HK mobile (hkmv), PRD movile (prdmv), shipping (marine), point sources (point), and the other sources in PRD (area). (Adapted from Figures 9 and 11 in Li et al. (2012)) 

Recently, there has been discussion about the contribution of anthropogenic sources to the unique seasonal pattern of surface O 3 at remote sites on the northeastern edge of the Tibetan Plateau (Zhu et al., 2004; Ma et al., 2005; Ding and Wang, 2006; Li et al., 2009). In contrast to most remote stations in northern hemispheric mid-latitudes, observations at Waliguan (100°540E, 36°170N, 3810 m asl.) show a broad summer maximum, similar to that found at rural sites in industrialized areas (Zhu et al., 2004). This pattern is distinctly different from the spring maximum found on the southern part of the Tibetan Plateau. Zhu et al. (2004) suggested that this distinct pattern was caused by long-range transport of anthropogenic pollution from eastern and central China, central and south Asia, and even Europe. However, using meteorological simulations, Ding and Wang (2006) argued that stratosphere-to-troposphere exchange (STE) contributed to higher summertime surface O 3 at Mt. Waliguan. Ma et al. (2005) pointed out the importance of summer-intensive convection on the Tibetan 89 Plateau which brings upper tropospheric air to the surface. In 2009, a simulation with online tagged tracers provided the first quantification of the transport of surface anthropogenic emissions to Mt. Waliguan and found that regional transport of photochemically produced ozone in China was responsible for the summer maximum on the northern Tibetan Plateau, with a contribution of 10–25 ppbv in summer (Figure 3.2.22). However, due to the challenging nature of topographic effects of the Tibetan plateau and the difficulty of reliably attributing stratospheric contribution in this region, further studies are needed. 

Figure 3.2.22 Monthly variation of observed and predicted surface O 3 with contributions from stratospheric ozone (ST), lateral boundary (LB), and ozone production in China (CHN). (Ma et al., 2005) 3.3 Adverse impacts 3.3.1 Impacts on human health 

Oxidants and ozone are different, but usually more than 90% of the oxidants generated as air pollutant are ozone. Therefore, we will review the health impact of ozone below. Unlike PM, ozone is a single chemical, and its pathophysiological effects are well studied. For example, Samet and Bell (Samet & Bell, 2010) note that: "Short-term exposure to ozone for healthy adults has been associated with temporarily decreased lung function, increased airway resistance, and increased respiratory symptoms, such as coughing and wheezing." In addition, "People with asthma are especially susceptible to the effects of ozone, because ozone inflames the airway linings and can trigger asthmatic attacks." They also raised concerns about susceptible populations, particularly children who have narrow airways and are therefore more vulnerable. The above pathophysiological features of ozone have been reflected in epidemiological studies. Here, we review the metrics first, and then the impacts of ozone. In ozone impact studies, several metrics are used. Specifically, 1-hour maximum, 8-hour maximum and daily average are used, and ppb and g/m 3as units of concentration were used. According to Schwartz, 1 ppb is equivalent to 1.96 g/m 3, and concentration of 1-hour maximum: that of 8-hour maximum: that of daily average = 20:15:8 (Schwartz, 1997). Epidemiological evaluation of ozone effects in western countries has been extensively studied and the results were recently summarized. In the "Air Pollution and Health: A Combined European and North American Approach" (APHENA) project, a time-series study on the association between air pollution 90 and adverse health outcomes in 125 cities in Europe, the US, and Canada was conducted using a two-stage approach. They used semi-parametric Poisson regression models allowing for overdispersion, and controlled for seasonality. An overall estimate of excess mortality due to ozone was based on hierarchical models. Potential effect modifiers included other ambient air pollutants, which varied from one city to another, weather, socioeconomic status, and the vulnerability of the population. The pooled risk estimates were similar in Europe and the US, but those from Canada were higher. The pooled estimated excess relative risk associated with a 10 g/m 3 increase in 1 hour daily maximum O 3 was 0.26 % (95% CI, 0.15%- 0.37%). The author claimed that these findings were comparable with previously reported results and relatively robust to the method of data analysis with no indication of strong effect modification by age or ecologic variables evaluated in the study. It would be worth comparing this APHENA result with the previous meta-analysis by Bell et al. (Bell et al, 2005). First, the APHENA summary estimate, 0.26% for 10 g/m 3 increase of 1 hour daily maximum can be converted as follows using Schwartz method described above: 

This 0.20 can be compared with Bell et al.(2005)'s result because they reported percent increase in the risk per 10-ppb increase in daily average ozone. In doing so, they used Schwartz' method to convert the metrics. Bell et al.(2005)'s summary estimate at short term lags was 0.87 (95%CI: 0.55-1.18) in their meta-analysis, and this figure was similar to the previous papers that conducted meta-analyses: 1.12 (95%CI: 0.32-1.92) by Stieb et al.(Stiebet al., 2003), 0.98 (95%CI: 0.59-1.38) by Levy et al.(Levyet. al. 2001), and 1.11 (95%CI: 0.55-1.67) by Anderson et al.(Anderson et al., 2004). The authors also noted that their National Morbidity, Mortality, and Air Pollution Study (NMMAPS) result was 0.25 (95%CI: 0.12-0.39) and their conclusion was meta-analyses usually suffer from publication bias and thus have higher estimates. The APHENA result was similar to this NMMAPS study. It is understandable that both NMMAPS and APHENA studies used data from many cities which were otherwise excluded due to their small size or negative results. Based on these findings, about 0.2% increase per 10-ppb increase in daily average ozone can be regarded as representative of western cities. In China, Yan et al. (2013) conducted a meta-analysis and found that the percent change for non-accidental mortality, cardiovascular mortality, and respiratory mortality were 0.42% (95%CI, 0.32-0.52%), 0.44% (95%CI, 0.17-0.70%) and 0.50% (95%CI, 0.22-0.77%) per 10 g/m 3 increase in maximum 8-h average concentration of ozone, respectively. The non-accidental cause risk appears comparable to the above mentioned western meta-analyses. Lai et al. (2013) systematically reviewed the ozone effect not only for mainland China and Hong Kong, but also for Taiwan * . A unique feature was that they included papers written in Chinese as well as those in English. Using these cities, annual mean ozone concentration ranged from 34-86 g/m 3 , but the lowest concentration was observed in the city of Taiwan; on the mainland, 50+ g/m 3 in Suzhou was lowest. The percent change in risk per 10 * This expression of 'Taiwan' was not authored by the authors or contributors of the RSAP but quoted from the original paper. 91 

g/m 3 increase was 0.42(95%CI, 0.31-0.53) from all causes, 0.51(95%CI, 0.25-0.77) from cardiac diseases, and 0.48(95%CI, 0.19-0.76) from respiratory diseases. They did not indicate whether this concentration is 8-hour maximum daily concentration or daily average concentration. Although their relationships were positive among the mainland cities, Taiwan cities showed negative relationships (Table 3.3.1). 

Table 3.3.1 Percentage change per 10 g/m 3 ozone increase by city. 

City Period Risk Foshan 2006-2008 0.36 Guanzhou 2006-2008 0.64 Hong Kong 1996-2002 0.34 Kaohsiung 1994-2000 -0.2 Shanghai 2001-2004 0.31 Suzhou 2006-2008 0.36 Taipei 1994-1998 -0.05 Wuhan 2000-2004 0.29 Zhongshan 2006-2008 0.61 Zhuhai 2006-2008 0.22 Note: Adapted from Lai et al. 2013. The reason for this negative relationship in Taiwanese cities is unclear, but it is possible that the ozone concentration level is low in Taiwan compared with mainland cities, and the confounding effect could have easily biased the risk estimates. Their conclusion was that the Chinese summary estimate was comparable with western studies. However, when we compared the percent change increase in risk, their estimate was comparable to those obtained from the meta-analyses. If this is the case, their result should also suffer from publication bias as Bell et al. indicated in their evaluation, but the test for publication bias in this Chinese meta-analysis was not significant. As Lai et al. admitted, the number of cities was small for evaluating publication bias in their meta-analysis, and it is possible that their estimate obtained from the meta-analysis was higher than the APHENA or NMMAPS studies because of publication bias. Another possibility is that the concentration of other co-pollutants such as particulate matter and sulfur oxides may have damaged the respiratory system and caused a stronger effect at a unit increase of ozone concentration. In the Republic of Korea, Son et al.(Son et al., 2012) reported the ozone effect on mortality in Seoul for the period from 2000-2007, but it was not statistically significant: 0.51 (95%CI, -0.44-1.46) percentage increase per interquartile range increase of daily maximum 8-hour moving average ozone concentration. They reported the average ozone concentration as being 28 ppb during the study period, 92 but did not provide the quartiles of ozone concentration, and therefore it was impossible to convert to percentage increase per 10-ppb increase. Another mortality study was done by Son et al. using postneonatal mortality from all causes among firstborn infants as an outcome variable for Seoul, the Republic of Korea, during 1999-2003. However, the relative risk of postneonatal mortality from all causes was 0.984 (95% CI = 0.977-0.992) for each 1-unit increase of air pollution level. As for morbidity in the Republic of Korea, it had a stronger effect when compared with particulate on depression of the elderly was observed (Y.-H. Lim et al., 2012). In Japan, Ng et al.(Ng et al. 2013) conducted a multi-city study of the 65+ years old age group: a 10-ppbv increase of daily maximum 8-hour average ozone concentration in the previous 3 days was associated with 0.69% (95 % confidence interval (CI): 0.27-1.10), 1.07% (95%CI, 0.34-1.82), and 1.77% (95%CI, 0.78-2.77) increases in daily all-cause, cardiovascular, and respiratory mortality, respectively. They also reported that the results were generally independent of fine particulate matter and nitrogen dioxide. Taking into account the difference in the following points: (i) between ppb and 

g/m 3 ; (ii) between 8-hour average and daily average; and (iii) age group involved, their results are considered to be comparable with the estimates of the multi-city studies in western cities from APHENA and NMMAPS. The health effect by increasing surface ozone in 2000 is estimated in conjunction with exposure attributable to concentration changes since 1860 † (Figure 3.3.1). Industrial ozone is associated with 0.21 million respiratory mortalities per year in Southeast Asia and East Asia (Fang et al., 2013). † Simulation 2000CL1860EM is the same as the 2000 simulation except it uses 1860 emissions of short-lived species; simulation 1860CL2000EM is also the same as the 2000 simulation, but its sea surface temperature(SST), sea ice cover(SIC), well-mixed greenhouse gases (WMGG) and ozone-depleting substances (ODS) concentrations are set to 1860 levels; simulation 1860ALL2000EM is the same as 1860CL2000EM, but its global mean CH 4 concentration is specified at 1860 levels for tropospheric chemistry calculation. 93 

In terms of attributable burden, Lim et al. (2012) estimated 152,434 deaths worldwide in 2010 (Lim S. S. et al., 2012) and Anenberg et al. (2010) estimated 0.7 million deaths worldwide in 2000 (Anenberg et al., 2010) (Figure 3.3.2). The difference is due to their assumptions and used model – for example, the resolution of the chemical transport model used in the calculation – but the impact is serious enough in either case. Policy implication in terms of health effects to select three scenarios (policy failure, reference, policy successful) based on emission inventory in China in 2020 (Ohara et al., 2007) was provided by Nawahda et al. (2012): If policy fails, the estimated attributable number of deaths would be 202,439, whereas it would be 137,365 if policy were successful (Nawahda et al., 2012). 

Figure 3.3.1 Annual cardiopulmonary (a, d, g, j), lung cancer (b, e, h, k) and respiratory mortalities (c, f, i, l) (unit: deaths/1000km2) attributed to total changes in PM 2.5 and O 3 from preindustrial to present (“2000” minus “1860” simulations) (row 1, a, b and c); changes in PM 2.5 and O 3 over that time interval due to increases in short-lived anthropogenic air pollutant emissions only (“2000” minus “2000CL1860EM” simulations) (row 2,d,e and f); due to climate change only (“2000” minus “1860CL2000EM” simulations) (row 3, g, h and i); and due to the impact of CH4 increases on tropospheric chemistry only (“1860CL2000EM” minus “1860ALL2000EM” simulations) (row 4, j, k and l). (Fang et al., 2013) 94 Though the study of the risk assessment is important to quantitatively assess the impact on human health, such studies have not progressed enough because of the lack of essential, significant data such as monitored concentration of air pollutants, and demographic and illness data in East Asia. The implementation of epidemiological studies is also encouraged to estimate the reliable relative risk factor in this region based on essential data, so that use of the relative risk factor of other regions such as Europe or the United States is not necessary. 

3.3.2 Effects on agricultural crops 3.3.2.1 Effects of O 3 on Japanese crops 

Since 2000, there have been several papers published concerning the effects of O 3 on Japanese crops such as rice (Yamaguchi et al., 2008; Inada et al., 2008; Frei et al., 2008; Frei et al., 2010; Frei et al., 2011; Frei et al., 2012; Sawada and Kohno, 2009; Tsukahara et al., 2012), wheat (Inada et al., 2012) and soybean (Ahsan et al., 2010). Yamaguchi et al . (2008) and Inada et al . (2008) reported the effects of O 3 on growth, yield, leaf gas exchange rates, photosynthetic components and radical scavenging system of two Japanese cultivars of rice ( Oryza sativa L.). Two rice cultivars (Koshihikari and Kinuhikari) were grown in plastic boxes filled with flooded andisol and were daily exposed to charcoal-filtered air or O 3 at 60 or 100 nl l -1 (ppb) (10:00-17:00) from 30 May to 20 September 2007. The reduction rates of grain yield by the exposure to O 3 at 60 and 100 ppb were 3% and 23% in Koshihikari, respectively, and 18% and 34% in Kinuhikari, respectively. During the early vegetative period, the exposure to O 3 significantly reduced net photosynthetic rate and stomatal diffusive conductance, regardless of the leaf position. The sensitivity to O 3 of the yield components, growth parameters and leaf gas exchange rates were not significantly different between Koshihikari and Kinuhikari. The concentrations of chlorophyll in the lower leaves on the main stem of the two cultivars were significantly reduced by the exposure to 100 ppb O 3 , while the exposure to O 3 significantly increased the activities of ascorbate peroxidase (APX), monodehydroascorbate reductase (MDAR) and glutathione reductase (GR) regardless of the leaf position in the two cultivars. Sawada and Kohno (2009) reported differential sensitivity to O 3 of rice cultivars as indicated by visible injury and grain yield. The sensitivity to O 3 of rice cultivars evaluated 

Figure 3.3.2 Estimated annual premature mortalities attributed to anthropogenic O 3when no upper or lower concentration threshold is assumed, for respiratory mortalities per 1,000 km 2 (A), rate of respiratory mortalities per 10 6 people ( B). (Anenberg, Horowitz, Tong & West, 2010) 95 by visible injury did not coincide with that evaluated by the reduction in the grain yield. Inada et al . (2012) investigated the effects of chronic exposure to ambient levels of O 3 on gas exchange rates, activity and concentration of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco), activity of reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging enzymes and concentration of antioxidants of the flag leaf in two cultivars (Norin 61 and Shirogane-komugi) of Japanese winter wheat ( Triticum aestivum L.). Although the net photosynthetic rate of the flag leaf in Norin 61 was not significantly reduced by exposure to O 3 , in Shirogane-komugi it was significantly reduced by the exposure to O 3 during the anthesis and early grain-filling stages. The exposure to O 3 induced significant reductions in the activity and concentration of Rubisco, activities of catalase (CAT) and MDAR and concentrations of reduced form of ascorbate and total glutathione of the flag leaf in Shirogane-komugi. It was concluded that the sensitivity of net photosynthesis of flag leaf to O 3 is higher in Shirogane-komugi than in Norin 61, and that this difference in the sensitivity to O 3 is mainly due to the fact that the effects of O 3 on the detoxification capability of ROS are mainly determined by the ROS scavenging enzymes such as CAT and MDAR. 

3.3.2.2 Effects of O 3 on Chinese crops 

Several papers concerning the effects of O 3 on Chinese rice cultivars have been published since 2000 (Feng et al., 2003; Chen et al., 2008; Pang et al., 2009; Shi et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2012a; Wang et al., 2012b; Wang et al., 2013). Feng et al. (2003) reported the effects of ground-level O 3 on the yields of rice in the Yangtze River Delta using open-top chambers (OTC). Their results showed that compared to the control treatment, the exposure to 200 ppb, 100 ppb and 50 ppb O 3 caused a 49.1%, 26.1% and 8.2% decrease in grain yield per rice plant, respectively. Shi et al. (2009) conducted an experiment for the first time in the world with rice using free-air concentration enrichment (FACE) system at Xiaoji town, Jiangdu County, Jiangsu Province, China in 2007. Four Chinese rice cultivars, Wujing 15 (WJ15, inbred japonica cultivar), Yangdao 6 (YD6, inbred indica cultivar), Shanyou 63 (SY63, three-line hybrid rice cultivar) and Liangyoupeijiu (LYPJ, two-line hybrid rice cultivar), were grown at ambient or elevated (target at 50% above ambient) O 3 concentration under a nitrogen application rate of 15 g N m-2 . Among the cultivars tested, SY63 and LYPJ exhibited significant yield loss by the exposure to O 3(-17.5%, -15%, respectively), while WJ15 and YD6 showed no responses. The results of this experiment indicated that yield loss due to exposure to O 3 differs between rice cultivars and hybrid cultivars (i.e., SY63 and LYPJ) exhibiting greater yield loss than inbred cultivars (i.e., WJ15 and YD6), which could be attributed to the suppression of spikelet formation in the hybrid cultivars under O 3stress. Experimental studies on the effects of O 3 on growth, yield and physiological functions of Chinese wheat cultivars have recently been conducted in China (Feng et al. 2007; Biswas et al., 2008a; Biswas et al., 2008b; Biswas et al., 2009; Oue et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2011; Feng et al. 2011; Feng et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2012a). Feng et al. (2007) reported the response of gas exchange and yield components of field-grown wheat to elevated ozone in China. To assess photosynthetic and yield components’ response of field-grown wheat to increasing O 3 concentration (based on diurnal pattern of ambient O 3 )in China, winter wheat (cv. Jia 403) was planted in open- top chambers and exposed to three different O3 concentrations: O 3 -free air (CF), ambient air (NF) and O 3 -free air with additional O 3 (CF+O 3 ). Diurnal changes of gas exchange and net photosynthetic rate (PN) in response to photosynthetic 96 photon flux density (PPFD) of flag leaves were measured at the filling grain stage, and yield components were investigated at harvest. High O 3 concentration altered the diurnal course of net photosynthetic rate, stomatal conductance and intercellular CO 2 concentration and significantly decreased their values with the exception of intercellular CO 2 concentration. Apparent quantum yield, compensation irradiance and saturation irradiance were significantly decreased, suggesting photosynthetic capacity was also altered, characterized as reduced photon-saturated photosynthetic rate. The limit of photosynthetic activity was probably dominated by non-stomatal factors in combination with stomatal closure. The significant reduction in yield was observed in CF+O 3treatment as a result of a marked decrease in the ear length and the number of grains per ear, and a significant increase in the number of infertile florets per ear. Biswas et al. (2009) reported the impacts of methods and sites of plant breeding on the sensitivity to O 3 in winter wheat cultivars. The 20 Chinese winter wheat cultivars bred using four breeding methods (viz. introduction, reselection, conventional breeding and hybridization) at four breeding sites having different levels of O 3 exposures were exposed to charcoal-filtered (CF) air or high O 3 (82 ppb, 7 h day -1 ) for 21 days. Despite the highest potential capacity for O 3 tolerance, hybridization displayed the lowest O 3 tolerance as represented by antioxidative activities, oxidative stress, photosynthesis and growth. They suggested that the sensitivity to O 3 in Chinese winter wheat cultivars was related to breeding methods, but not to O3 concentrations in breeding sites. Feng et al. (2011) reported differential responses in two varieties of winter wheat to elevated O 3 concentration under fully open-air field conditions. Two modern cultivars (Yangmai 16 and Yangfumai 2) of winter wheat with almost identical phenology were investigated to determine the impacts of elevated O 3 concentration (E-O 3 ) on physiological characters related to photosynthesis under fully open-air field conditions in China. The plants were exposed from the initiation of tillering to final harvest, with E-O 3 of 127% of the ambient O 3 concentration (A-O 3 ). In Yangfumai 2, E-O 3 significantly accelerated leaf senescence, as indicated by increased lipid oxidation as well as faster declines in pigment amounts and photosynthetic rates. The lower photosynthetic rates were mainly due to non-stomatal factors, such as lower maximum carboxylation capacity, electron transport rates and light energy distribution. In Yangmai 16, the effects of E-O 3 were observed only at the final stage of flag leaf ageing. Since the two cultivars had almost identical phenology and very similar leaf stomatal conductance before senescence, the greater impacts of E-O 3on cultivars Yangfumai 2 than Yangmai 16 cannot be explained by differential stomatal O 3 uptake. Feng et al. (2012) reported stomatal O 3 flux and flux-response relationships were derived for winter wheat grown under fully open-air ozone fumigation in China. Judging from both flux- and concentration-based relationships, the cultivars investigated seem to be more sensitive to O 3 than European cultivars. There are several papers concerning the combined effects of O 3 and other environmental stresses such as drought, salinity, cadmium and elevated CO 2 concentration on growth, yield and physiological and biochemical functions of Chinese wheat cultivars (Xu et al., 2007; Biswas et al., 2011; Zheng et al., 2011; Zheng et al., 2012; Guo et al., 2012; Biswas et al., 2013). Biswas et al. (2013) reported the modification of photosynthetic and growth responses to elevated CO 2 by O 3 in two cultivars of Chinese winter wheat with different years of release. An old (cv. Beijing 6, O 3 tolerant) and a modern (cv. Zhongmai 9, O 3 sensitive) winter wheat cultivar were exposed to elevated CO 2 (714 ppm) and/or O3 (72 ppb, for 7 h day -1 ) in open-top chambers for 21 days. Elevated CO 2 completely protected both 97 cultivars against the deleterious effects of O 3 under elevated CO 2 and O 3. The modern cultivar showed a greater relative loss of elevated CO 2 -induced growth stimulation due to higher stomatal O 3 uptake and greater O 3 -induced photoinhibition than the old cultivar at elevated CO 2 and O 3 . Their findings suggest that the elevated CO 2 -induced growth stimulation in the modern cultivar (Zhongmai 9), attributed to higher energy capture and electron transport rate, can be compromised by its higher stomatal O 3 uptake and greater O 3 -induced photoinhibition under elevated CO 2 and O 3 exposure. 

3.3.2.3 Effects of O 3 on Indian crops 

Since 2000, there have been several papers published concerning the effects of O 3 on growth, yield and physiological functions of Indian crops such as rice (Rai and Agrawal, 2008; Rai et al., 2010; Sarkar and Agrawal, 2012), wheat (Ambasht and Agrawal, 2003; Rai et al., 2007; Sarkar and Agrawal, 2010; Mishra et al., 2013), mustard (Singh et al., 2009; Singh et al., 2012; Tripathi and Agrawal, 2012), carrot (Tiwari et al., 2006), linseed (Tripathi and Agrawal, 2013) and palak (Kumari et al., 2013). Sarkar and Agrawal (2012) assessed the impact of ambient (present) and elevated (future) O3 concentrations on two cultivars of Indian rice (cv. Malviya dhan 36 and Shivani). The shoot and root lengths, number of leaves and total leaf area were severely affected by both ambient and elevated concentrations of O 3. Net photosynthetic rate, stomatal conductance and photosynthetic efficiency (Fv/Fm) were also reduced by O 3 with more drastic effects under elevated levels of O 3 . Leaf proteome showed reduction of some major proteins due to the exposure to O 3. Pollen viability, viable florets per plant and economic yield also showed significant negative impact under O 3 -exposure in both cultivars. The experimental findings depict that both cultivars of Indian rice demonstrate differential response against O 3 . Tiwari et al . (2006) conducted an experiment to evaluate the impact of ambient air pollution on carrot ( Dacus carota var. Pusa Kesar) plants using open-top chambers ventilated with ambient (NFCs) or charcoal-filtered air (FCs) at a suburban site of Varanasi, India. Air monitoring data clearly showed high concentrations of SO 2 , NO 2 and O 3 in the ambient air at the study site. The concentrations of SO 2 and NO 2 were higher during the early growth stages of carrot, whereas atmospheric concentration of O 3 was highest during the later growth stages. The shoot length, number of leaves per plant, leaf area and root and shoot weights increased significantly upon filtration of ambient air. Total nitrogen decreased significantly in the roots, but increased significantly in the shoot of carrot plants grown in the NFCs. Total contents of P, Mg, Ca and K decreased significantly in carrot plants grown in the NFCs, compared to those of the plants grown in the FCs. The individual pollutant concentrations were below threshold for plant injury, but the combined effect of all the three seems to act synergistically in causing greater adverse impact on dry weight and physiological functions of carrot plants. The study clearly indicates that air pollutants are high enough in the ambient air to cause significant unfavorable impact on carrot plants in India. Kumari et al . (2013) investigated morphological, biochemical and yield responses of palak ( Beta vulgaris L. cv. Allgreen) to ambient and elevated levels of CO 2 and O 3, alone and in combination. They concluded that ambient level of CO 2 is not enough to counteract O 3 impact. 

3.3.2.4 Effects of O 3 on crops cultivation in South and Southeast Asian countries 

At the present time, very little is known about the effects of O 3 on crops cultivation in South and Southeast Asian countries. Limited information is available on the effects of O 3 on crops cultivation in 98 Pakistan (Wahid, 2006), Bangladesh (Akhtar et al., 2010a; Akhtar et al., 2010b), Malaysia (Ishii et al., 2004a; Ishii et al., 2004b), Thailand (Ariyaphanphitak et al., 2005; Thwe et al., 2013) and Viet Nam (Van et al., 2009a; Van et al., 2009b). Ishii et al. (2004b) investigated the physiological and morphological responses of locally grown Malaysian rice cultivars (MR84 and MR185) to different O 3 concentrations. The two cultivars were grown in greenhouse chambers and exposed to four different levels of O 3 from 28th August 2001 to 22nd January 2002. Four O 3 levels were selected in close relation to the Malaysian peri-urban ambient level (approximately 30 ppb, 8-h mean), the Malaysian guideline level (approximately 60 ppb) and possible future higher O 3 levels (approximately 90 ppb). The MR84 responded to O 3 relatively quickly and altered its morphology to compensate for the effects on growth and yield, while MR185 responded to O3 stress slowly which resulted in more severe impacts on growth and yield parameters. Ariyaphanphitak et al. (2005) reported the effects of O 3 on Thai Jasmine rice cultivars. Four cultivars of Thai Jasmine rice were exposed to O 3 for 7 hours day -1 in a closed chamber for 113 days, beginning from seedling until harvest. The concentration of O 3 in each chamber was controlled at 0, 50, 100 or 150 ppb and at the ambient level. The exposure to O 3 reduced leaf area index, shoot biomass, shoot length, root length, chlorophyll content, carotenoid content, net photosynthetic rate and yield components. Akhtar et al. (2010a) investigated the effects of O 3 on growth, yield and leaf gas exchange rates of four Bangladeshi cultivars (BR11, BR14, BR28 and BR29) of rice. The four cultivars were exposed daily to charcoal-filtered air or O 3 at 60 and 100 ppb (10:00-17:00) from 1 July to 28 November 2008. The whole-plant dry mass and grain yield per plant of the four cultivars were significantly reduced by the exposure to O3 . The exposure to O 3 significantly reduced net photosynthetic rate of the 12th and flag leaves of the four cultivars. The sensitivity to O 3 of growth, yield and leaf gas exchange rates was not significantly different among the four cultivars. Wahid (2006) reported the influence of atmospheric pollutants on wheat varieties in Pakistan. The performance of three wheat varieties (Inqilab-91, Punjab-96 and Pasban-90) was investigated in open-top chambers with charcoal-filtered air (FA), unfiltered air (UFA) and unchambered field plots (AA) during the 2003-2004 season at a semi-urban site in Lahore, Pakistan. The 8-h daily mean O 3 ,NO 2 and SO 2 concentrations in the UFA and AA remained 72, 28 and 15 ppb, respectively. Grain yield recorded after a full season of growth was drastically reduced in the UFA with 43% for Pasban-90, 39% for Punjab-91 and 18% for Inqilab-91 compared with the FA control plants. Nutritional quality of seeds was significantly reduced in the UFA and AA with respect to starch, but not in protein and vitamin-E contents when compared with the FA plants. Akhtar et al. (2010b) reported the effects of O 3on growth, yield and leaf gas exchange rates of two Bangladeshi cultivars of wheat. Two wheat cultivars (Sufi and Bijoy) were grown in plastic boxes and exposed daily to charcoal-filtered air or O 3at 60 and 100 ppb (10:00-17:00) from 13 March to 4 June 2008. The whole-plant dry mass and grain yield per plant of the two cultivars at the final harvest were significantly reduced by the exposure to O 3.Net photosynthetic rate of flag leaf was significantly reduced by the exposure to O 3 . The sensitivity of growth, yield, yield components and leaf gas exchange rates to O 3 was not significantly different between the two cultivars. Van et al. (2009b) conducted an open-top chamber experiment study to assess the effects of ground level O 3 on local peanut cultivar ( Arachis hypogaea L.) in Viet Nam. A simple portable open-top chamber O 3 fumigation system was applied to investigate the phytotoxic effects of ground level O 3 on 99 a local peanut cultivar in Viet Nam. The system was installed directly in the peanut field in a peri-urban area of Hanoi. Peanut L14 was exposed to O 3 during the flowering stage for 7 hours per day, 7 days per week. Five different treatments were used, namely, non-filtered ambient air as the control, and with 7-h mean concentrations of 32 ppb, 62 ppb, 85 ppb and 113 ppb, respectively. Leaf area, dry weight and yield components of the peanut cultivar were adversely affected by the exposure to O 3 .Thwe et al. (2013) investigated shoot and root growth at different developmental stages of Thai tomato (Solanum lycopersicum Mill.) under acute O 3 stress. Leaf injuries were higher in the younger plants than in the older ones depending on leaf rank. The O 3 -induced reduction in the internode growth rate suggested that the short term extremely high concentration exposure to O3 at 500ug m-3 (255ppb) could delay the plant growth just after exposure to O 3 . The O 3 -induced reduction in the root growth was observed in both young and old tomato plants. 

3.3.2.5 Crop yield loss assessment 

There are some reports which discuss yield and/or economic loss of field crops in the Asian monsoon region. As the market price varies with social/economic conditions, and estimates for those published days involve large uncertainties, the following section describes the estimate of amount of crop production due to surface ozone pollution. Aunan et al. (2000) estimated Chinese agricultural crop loss (wheat, soybean, corn and rice) due to elevated ozone concentration in 2020, using exposure response functions by three different indices; daily seasonal mean (7 or 12 hrs d -1 , ppb), SUM06, and AOT40 (ppb-hr). Rice production loss estimated for 1990, and even 2020 was quite low. However, estimates for wheat, soybean and corn differ considerably depending on the type of function applied. For example, spring wheat varies from 8.2% by mean ozone concentration function by to 29.3% by SUM06 and AOT40 function.. Dingenen et al. (2009) evaluated the global impact of surface ozone on four types of agricultural crops. The study is based on modelled global hourly ozone fields for the year 2000 and 2030, using the global 1 °× 

1°2-way nested atmospheric chemical transport model (TM5). Projections for the year 2030 are based on the “current legislation (CLE) scenario,” which assumes that currently approved air quality legislation will be fully implemented by the year 2030. Applied relative yield loss functions were Wang and Mauzerall (2004) for M7 and M12, or Mills et al (2007) for AOT40. Relative yield loss due to ozone damage is evaluated based on two different indices (AOT40 and seasonal mean daytime ozone concentration, respectively). Present day global relative yield losses are estimated to range between 7% and 12% for wheat, between 6% and 16% for soybean, between 3% and 4% for rice, and between 3% and 5% for maize. Under the 2030 CLE scenario, the global situation is expected to deteriorate mainly for wheat (additional 2–6% loss globally) and rice (additional 1–2% loss globally). On a regional-scale, significant reductions in crop losses by CLE-2030 are only predicted in Europe (soybean) and China (wheat). Avnery et al. (2011a, b) estimated year 2000 global yield reductions of three key staple crops (soybean, maize, and wheat) due to surface ozone exposure using hourly O 3 concentrations simulated by the Model for Ozone and Related Chemical Tracers version 2.4 (MOZART-2). Calculation of crop losses, according to two metrics of ozone exposure, seasonal daytime (08:00e19:59) mean O 3 (M12) and accumulated O 3above a threshold of 40 ppb (AOT40), and predict crop yield losses using crop-specific O3concentration-response functions established by field studies. Results indicated that year 2000 O 3-induced 100 global yield reductions ranged, depending on the metric used, from 8.5 to 14% for soybean, 3.9 to 15% for wheat, and 2.2 to 5.5% for maize. Global crop production losses totaled 79 to 121 million metric tons. There are two trajectories of O 3 pollution: the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (IPCC SRES) A2 and B1 storylines represent upper- and lower-boundary projections, respectively, of most O 3 precursor emissions in 2030. In the A2 scenario, in 2030, global yield wheat loss due to O 3 exposure ranges from 5.4 to 26%, 15 to 19% for soybean, and 4.4 to 8.7% for maize depending on the metric used. Under the B1 scenario, still substantial reductions in yields were estimated at 2030: 4.0 to 17% for wheat, 9.5 to 15% for soybean, and 2.5 to 6.0% for maize. Results suggest that, even under an optimistic scenario of future ozone precursor emissions, O 3 pollution poses a growing threat to global food security. Hollaway et al.(2012) applied four metrics (AOT40, M7, M12, W126) to assess the impacts of 100% reductions in anthropogenic NOx emissions from North (N) America, South East (SE) Asia and Europe on global and regional exposure of 6 major agricultural crop types to surface ozone, and resultant crop production losses during the year 2000 growing season. Global atmospheric chemistry model calculations showed that wheat, rice, cotton and potato in SE Asian tend to produce the greatest global reduction in crop production losses (42.3–95.2 %). However, the emission reduction scenarios induce different results between the metrics. Recently, Nawahda et al. (2013) estimated the possible effect of surface ozone on soybean, wheat, rice, and maize crops in East Asia in 2000, 2005, and 2020. Spatial distribution and temporal variation of surface ozone concentrations are simulated using the Models-3 Community Multiscale Air Quality Modeling System coupled with the Regional Emission Inventory in Asia (CMAQ/REAS). The effect of surface ozone on main crops in East Asia is evaluated based on AOT40 during a period of 3 months of the growing season. Ozone concentrations are calculated based on three scenarios of emission reduction policies in 2020: policy success case (PSC), reference case (REF), and policy failure case (PFC). Assuming no future changes in land use or cropping patterns from 2000 to 2020, Relative yield losses for wheat are estimated to range between 17 and 35 % in 2000, 21 and 49 % in 2005, 18 and 36 % in 2020 (PSC), 20 and 46 % in 2020 (REF), and 22 and 62 % in 2020 (PFC). It is also noted that the estimated effect on crops depends on the indexes used in studies (Figure 3.3.3). These reports in common suggested surface ozone pollution has a potential threat for agricultural production regardless with estimated value differences. Also those estimates are highly dependent on crop sensitivity to O 3 . Further efforts to reduce surface O 3 concentration, providing an excellent opportunity to increase global grain yields without the environmental degradation associated with the additional and/or proper fertilizer application or land cultivation, and introducing tolerant species and/or cultivars will be required. 101 

Figure 3.3.3 The estimated yield losses of main crops in China in 2020 for the 2020 PFC scenario, without classification of crops based on growing season or location. Estimates are based on different indexes from Wang and Mauzerall (2004) (W), Aunan et al. (2000) (A), and Nawahda et al. (2012) (AOT40*). (Nawahda et al., 2012) 102 

3.3.3 Effects on forests 3.3.3.1 Forest decline and O 3

From spring to autumn in Japan, relatively high concentrations of O 3 above 100 nl l -1 (ppb) have been frequently observed in several mountainous areas (Aihara et al., 2004; Takeda and Aihara, 2007; Kohno et al., 2005). Based on the results of experimental studies and field surveys, O 3 is considered to be one of a major environmental stress relating to tree dieback and forest decline observed in Japan (Yonekura et al., 2001a; Yonekura et al., 2001b; Aihara et al., 2004; Kohno et al., 2005; Takeda and Aihara, 2007; Yamaguchi et al., 2007a; Suto et al., 2008; Kume et al., 2009). Takeda and Aihara (2007) showed that O 3 negatively affects growth and photosynthetic parameters of Japanese beech (Fagus crenata ) grown under field condition at Tanzawa Mountains (Kanagawa Prefecture) where severe decline of Japanese beech forest has been observed. Kume et al. (2009) suggested the possibility that the recent increase in atmospheric O 3 concentration is a major factor in the decline of the Japanese beech population at Mt. Tateyama (Toyama Prefecture) based on the results of their field surveys. These results suggest that current ambient levels of O 3 in the forested areas of Japan are high enough to adversely affect growth and physiological functions such as photosynthesis of Japanese forest tree species with relatively high sensitivity to O 3 such as Japanese beech. Therefore, we must investigate the effects of O 3 on forests not only in Japan, but also in other Asian countries. At the present time, however, we cannot evaluate the adverse effects of O 3 on forests in Asia because there is not enough information on the effects of O 3 on Asian forest tree species. 

3.3.3.2 Effects of O 3 on Japanese tree species (1) Effects of O 3 on growth of Japanese tree species 

Since 2000, there have been several papers published concerning the effects of O 3 on the growth of Japanese forest tree species based on results obtained from experimental studies using gas exposure chambers (Yamaguchi et al., 2011; Watanabe et al., 2011). The exposure to O 3 reduces carbon absorption and dry matter production, and changes phenological characteristics of Japanese forest tree species (Yonekura et al., 2004; Watanabe et al., 2010a). Nakaji and Izuta (2001) and Nakaji et al. (2004) reported that dry masses of needles and fine roots and the whole-plant dry mass of Japanese red pine (Pinus densiflora) seedlings were reduced by the exposure to O 3 at 60 ppb. Yonekura et al. (2001a) and Yonekura et al. (2001b) reported that the exposure to O 3 at 60 ppb for one growing season reduced the dry masses of bud, leaf, stem, root and the whole-plant and the annual ring width of Japanese beech seedlings. Matsumura (2001) conducted the multi-year experiments. Young trees of 14 species were exposed to charcoal-filtered air (CF) or non-filtered air (NF) for three growing seasons at two different sites in Kanto districts of Japan (Chiba and Gunma Prefectures; 12-h (6:00-18:00) seasonal mean concentration of O 3 from April to September during the experimental period in CF treatments: 8 and 12 ppb, respectively; those in NF treatments: 26 and 37 ppb, respectively). The exposure to O 3 reduced the whole-plant dry mass of Japanese red pine, Japanese larch ( Larix kaempferi ), Veitch’s silver fir ( Abies veitchii ), Japanese white birch ( Betula platyphylla ), Japanese beech and Japanese zelkova ( Zelkova serrate ) at the both sites. Matsumura et al. (2005) investigated the difference in the sensitivity of growth to O 3 among 5 Japanese forest tree species. As a result, the sensitivity of the whole-plant dry mass to O 3 was relatively high in Japanese red pine, Japanese beech 103 and Japanese white birch as compared with Japanese mountain birch ( Betula ermanii ) and Japanese cedar ( Cryptomeria japonica ). Kohno et al. (2005) summarized the results of several experimental studies conducted for multiple growing seasons on the effects of O 3 on forest tree species. The relative sensitivity of tree species to O 3 was classified into high, moderate and low O 3 -sensitivity groups based on the response of the whole-plant dry mass to O 3 . Japanese larch and Japanese beech were classified into the high O 3 sensitivity group; Japanese white birch and Nikko fir were classified into the moderate O 3 sensitivity group; Japanese cedar and Japanese cypress ( Chamaecyparis obtusa ) were classified into the low O 3 sensitivity group. At the present time, there are few studies on the effects of O 3 on phenological characteristics not only of Japanese forest tree species, but also Asian forest tree species. Yonekura et al. (2004) reported that the exposure of Japanese beech seedlings to O 3 during the one growing season changed phenological characteristics such as delay in the timing of bud break and reduced leaf number per bud and growth in the following growing season. 

(2) Effects of O 3 on physiological functions of Japanese tree species 

Physiological and biochemical functions such as photosynthesis and nitrogen metabolism of Japanese forest tree species are adversely affected by exposure to O3 (Yamaguchi et al., 2011). Net photosynthetic rate of the leaves or needles of Japanese red pine, Japanese larch, Quercus serrata and 

Castanopsis sieboldii was reduced by the exposure to O 3 (Nakaji and Izuta, 2001; Nakaji et al., 2004; Watanabe et al., 2006; Watanabe et al., 2007; Watanabe et al., 2008). When net photosynthetic rate was reduced by the exposure to O 3 , O 3 -induced simultaneous reductions in the carboxylation efficiency, CO 2 -saturated net photosynthetic rate and/or maximum quantum yield of photosystem II occurred. Increases in the stomatal conductance to water vapor were also observed in the leaves or needles of Japanese forest tree species (Yonekura et al., 2001a; Yonekura et al., 2001b; Nakaji and Izuta, 2001; Watanabe et al., 2005; Yamaguchi et al., 2007a). The exposure to O 3 reduced the concentration and activity of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco) and chlorophyll concentration in the leaves or needles of Japanese forest tree species (Nakaji and Izuta, 2001; Nakaji et al., 2004; Yonekura et al., 2001a; Watanabe et al., 2005; Watanabe et al., 2007; Yamaguchi et al., 2007a; Yamaguchi et al., 2007b; Watanabe et al., 2013). Yonekura et al. (2001b) reported that the O 3 -induced reduction in net photosynthetic rate was firstly due to the reduction in the quantity and/or activity of Rubisco in the leaves of Japanese beech seedlings. Therefore, there is a possibility that exposure to O 3initially reduces carbon fixation capacity in chloroplasts resulting in stomatal closure in response to relatively high intercellular CO 2 concentration of the leaves or needles of Japanese forest tree species. Exposure to O 3 has been shown to reduce the concentration of total soluble protein (TSP) in the leaves of Quercus serrata and Japanese beech (Watanabe et al., 2007; Yamaguchi et al., 2007a; Yamaguchi et al., 2007b). Watanabe et al. (2007) and Yamaguchi et al. (2007a) reported that exposure to O 3 reduced photosynthetic nitrogen use efficiency in the leaves of Quercus serrata and Japanese beech seedlings. In the case of Japanese beech seedlings, exposure to O 3 did not significantly affect the leaf concentration of nitrogen (N), suggesting that O 3 induces alterations in the leaf N metabolism and a reduction in the leaf N availability for photosynthesis (Yamaguchi et al., 2007b). There is very limited information on the effects of O 3 on N metabolism in the leaves or needles of Japanese forest tree species (Nakaji et al., 2004; Yamaguchi et al., 2007b; Yamaguchi et al., 2010). Nakaji et al. (2004) reported that exposure to O 3 did not significantly affect the activities of nitrate reductase and nitrite 104 reductase, the concentrations of inorganic N compounds (NO 3- , NO 2- and NH 4+), or free amino acid in the needles of Japanese red pine. On the other hand, Yamaguchi et al. (2007b) and Yamaguchi et al. (2010) reported the O 3 -induced inhibition of N resorption from the leaves in autumn, reductions in the activity of nitrate reductase and the ratio of total soluble protein concentration to N concentration and increase in the concentration of acidic amino acid in the leaves of Japanese beech seedlings. 

(3) Combined effects of O 3 and other environmental stresses on Japanese tree species 

At the present time, limited information is available on the combined effects of O 3 and other environmental stresses on Japanese forest tree species. The combined effect of O 3 and N load on growth is quite different among the Japanese forest tree species (Yamaguchi et al., 2011; Watanabe et al., 2012). In the experimental studies of Watanabe et al. (2006, 2007 and 2008) and Yamaguchi et al. (2007a, 2007b and 2010), seedlings of Quercus serrata , Japanese beech, Castanopsis sieboldii ,Japanese red pine, Japanese larch and Japanese cedar were grown in potted andosol (black soil) supplied with N as NH 4 NO 3 solution at 0, 20 and 50 kg ha -1 year -1 and simultaneously exposed to charcoal-filtered air or O 3 at 1.0, 1.5 and 2.0 times the ambient concentration for two growing seasons (24-h seasonal mean concentration of O 3 from April to September during the experimental period: 12, 43, 63 and 84 ppb, respectively). Watanabe et al. (2006, 2007 and 2008) reported the additive effects of O 3 and N load on the whole-plant dry mass of Quercus serrata , Castanopsis sieboldii , Japanese red pine and Japanese cedar seedlings. On the other hand, significant interactive effects of O 3 and N load on the whole-plant dry mass were detected in Japanese larch and Japanese beech (Watanabe et al., 2006; Yamaguchi et al., 2007a). Nakaji and Izuta (2001), Nakaji et al. (2004) and Watanabe et al. (2006) reported that the N load to soil did not change the degree of O 3 -induced reduction in the net photosynthetic rate in Japanese red pine needles and Japanese larch seedlings. In contrast, the degrees of O3 -induced reduction in net photosynthetic rate of Quercus serrata , Japanese beech and 

Castanopsis sieboldi seedlings became high with increasing the amount of N load to andosol (Watanabe et al., 2006, 2008; Yamaguchi et al., 2007a). Yamaguchi et al. (2010) concluded that exposure to O 3 reduced the N allocation to soluble protein in the leaves of Japanese beech seedlings grown under relatively high N load, but did not affect allocation in the leaves of the seedlings grown under relatively low N load. There are very few studies on the combined effects of O 3 and elevated CO 2 or soil water stress on Japanese forest tree species (Yonekura et al., 2001a; Yonekura et al., 2001b; Matsumura et al., 2005; Watanabe et al., 2005; Shimizu and Feng, 2007; Watanabe et al., 2010b). Matsumura et al. (2005) reported that the effect of elevated CO 2 on O 3 -induced reduction in the whole-plant dry mass was counteractive in Japanese white birch seedlings, while not in the Japanese mountain birch, Japanese beech, Japanese red pine and Japanese cedar seedlings. This result indicates that the combined effect of O 3 and elevated CO 2 is different among Japanese forest tree species. On the other hand, Watanabe et al. (2010b) reported that simultaneous exposure to O 3 and elevated CO 2 induced marked growth stimulation of Japanese beech seedlings as compared with those exposed to elevated CO 2 . Yonekura et al. (2001a and 2001b) reported the additive effects of O 3 and soil water stress on the growth of Japanese beech seedlings. On the other hand, Watanabe et al. (2005) reported that chronic soil water stress counteracted the negative effects of O 3 on net photosynthesis of the leaves of Japanese beech seedlings. 105 

(4) Critical levels of O 3 for Japanese forest tree species 

The critical levels for vegetation are defined as the concentration, cumulative exposure or cumulative stomatal flux of atmospheric pollutants above which direct adverse effects on sensitive vegetation may occur according to present knowledge (Mills et al., 2010). To define the concentration-based critical levels for O 3 , AOT40 has been adopted for use within the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) Convention of Long-Range Trans-boundary Air Pollution (CLRTAP) and the European Union (Ashmore et al., 2004; Mills et al., 2010). Critical level of O 3 for protecting European forest tree species has been defined as 5 μmol mol -1 h (ppm h) of daylight AOT40 accumulated over a six-month growing season (from April to September) associated with a 5%-growth reduction per one growing season for sensitive deciduous tree species such as European beech ( Fagus sylvatica ) and European birch ( Betula pendula ) (Karlsson et al., 2004; Mills et al., 2010). Because the vegetation and climatic conditions in Japan are quite different from those in Europe, the critical level of O 3 for European forest tree species are not directly applicable to Japanese forest tree species (Kohno et al., 2005). Kohno et al. (2005) proposed that provisional critical level of O 3 for Japanese forest tree species classified into the high O 3 sensitivity group such as Japanese larch and Japanese beech is 8-15 ppm h of daylight AOT40 accumulated over one growing season (from April to September) associated with a 10%-reduction in the increment of the whole-plant dry mass per one growing season. However, N deposition from the atmosphere should be taken into account to evaluate the critical level of O 3 for protecting Japanese forest tree species, because the sensitivities of Japanese larch and Japanese beech to O 3 are influenced by the amount of N load to soil (Watanabe et al., 2006; Yamaguchi et al., 2007a; Watanabe et al., 2012). Furthermore, as indicated by Matsumura et al. (2005) and Watanabe et al. (2010b), it is necessary to take into account environmental factors such as atmospheric CO 2concentration to evaluate the critical level of O 3 for forest tree species. To establish the critical level of O3 for protecting Japanese forest tree species, therefore, further research is required concerning the combined effects of O 3 and other abiotic environmental factors on growth and physiological functions such as photosynthesis of Japanese forest tree species. Ozone enters the leaf through the stomata and then injures cellular components such as the plasma membrane (Nouchi, 2002). Since the real impacts of O 3 mainly depend on the amount of O 3 reaching the sites of damage within the leaf, cumulative flux or uptake of O 3 through the stomata and associated response functions are suitable for mapping and quantifying impacts of O 3 at the local and regional scale (Mills et al ., 2010). Therefore, atmospheric concentration-based critical level of O 3 expressed as AOT40 can be used only for estimating the damage risk. The approach based on the O 3 flux into leaves or needles requires the development of mathematical models to estimate stomatal O 3 uptake primarily from the knowledge of stomatal responses to environmental factors (e.g. Emberson et al., 2000a; Emberson et al., 2000b). At the present time, however, there is limited information on stomatal O3 flux into the leaves or needles of Japanese forest tree species (Hoshika et al., 2009; Hoshika et al., 2012). Therefore, for the final purpose of mapping and quantifying the impacts of O 3 on Japanese forest tree species, it is necessary to promote research toward the modeling of stomatal O 3 flux. 

3.3.3.3 Effects of O 3 on forest tree species growing in other Asian countries 

At the present time, very little information is available on the effects of O 3 on Asian forests and forest tree species native to Asian countries. However, there are several experimental studies on the effects of 106 O3 on Chinese tree species. He et al. (2007) conducted an open-top chamber experiment to examine the effects of O 3 at 80 ppb on 4-year-old ginkgo seedlings ( Ginkgo biloba ). Leaf mass and size, leaf area index, net photosynthetic rate, apparent quantum yield, transpiration rate and stomatal conductance were reduced by the exposure to O 3 . Visible foliar injury such as light-brown flecks were observed after exposure to O 3 for 90 days. The O 3 -induced reduction in net photosynthetic rate was the result of both stomatal and non-stomatal limitations. In the early season, the inhibition of net photosynthesis was mainly caused by stomatal limitation, and the earliest response was the photoprotective down-regulation of photosynthesis but not photodamage. At the end of the season, non-stomatal limiting factors such as the reductions in the chlorophyll content, apparent quantum yield and antioxidative enzyme activity became more important. Feng et al. (2008) conduced an open-top chamber experiment to clarify the effects of O 3 at 50, 100 and 200 ppb for 25 days on 2-year-old seedlings of dawn redwood (Metasequoia glyptostroboides ). Leaf length, crown width, chlorophyll content, net photosynthetic rate, stomatal conductance and transpiration rate of dawn redwood seedlings were significantly reduced by exposure to O 3 at 100 and 200 ppb. Exposure of dawn redwood seedlings to O 3 at 50 ppb induced a remarkable reduction in stomatal conductance. He et al. (2009) reported the effect of O 3 on the accumulation of main secondary metabolites in leaves of 4-year-old ginkgo seedlings. The seedlings were exposed in open-top chambers with ambient air, and air with twice ambient O 3concentration in Shenyang in 2006. Elevated O 3 increased the concentrations of terpenes, but decreased the concentrations of phenolics in the leaves of ginkgo seedlings. The results showed that secondary compounds from the ginkgo leaves responded to the elevated O 3 exposure in a different way when compared to previous studies, which showed elevated O 3 increased the concentrations of phenolics, but had no effect on the terpenes in leaves of other deciduous trees. Furthermore, reduced synthesis of phenolics may decrease the resistance of ginkgo to O 3 and the other environmental factors. On the other hand, the O 3 -induced synthesis of terpenes may enhance the antioxidant capabilities of the leaves at the end of O 3 fumigation. Wang et al. (2009) reported the effects of O 3 on net photosynthetic rate and chlorophyll fluorescence in Mongolian oak leaves ( Quercus mongolica ) grown in urban areas of China. Photosynthetic parameters were reduced by exposure to 80 ppb O 3 during the whole season for 105 days. In particular, light-saturated net photosynthetic rate was reduced by exposure to O 3 over the whole growing season with a maximum reduction to about 72% of the control value after the exposure to O 3 for 45 days. The O 3 -induced reduction was related to both stomatal and non-stomatal factors, including a 9% decrease in the maximum quantum yield of PSII photochemistry detected after the exposure to O 3 for 90 days. Yan et al. (2010) reported the responses of photosynthesis, lipid peroxidation and antioxidant system in leaves of Mongolian oak seedlings to O 3at 80 ppb. During the exposure to O 3, net photosynthetic rate and stomatal conductance reduced signi fi cantly, but the O 3 -induced reduction in net photosynthetic rate hardly resulted from the stomatal limitation. Signi fi cant decrease was noted in carboxylation ef fi ciency, indicating that the CO 2 fi xation process of Mongolian oak seedlings was affected by O 3 . This was considered to be the main factor leading to O 3-induced reductions in net photosynthetic rate, particularly in the initial 45 days of O 3fumigation. During this initial 45 day period of O 3 fumigation, ascorbate content and activities of superoxide dismutase and ascorbate peroxidase were enhanced, but enhanced antioxidant capability did not balance reactive oxygen species production, resulting in a signi fi cant increase in 107 malondialdehyde content by day 45. In the following O 3 fumigation period, signi fi cant decreases in the activities of antioxidant enzymes and ascorbate content were recorded in the leaves. Along with the decline of antioxidant capability, chlorophyll loss, increase in the electrolyte leakage and decrease in the maximum photochemical ef fi ciency of photosystem II were also noted. According to the biochemical and photosynthetic changes, they suppose that leaf senescence was accelerated by elevated O 3 in the prolonged fumigation period. Zhang et al. (2012) reported the effect of O 3 on growth, photosynthetic parameters, lipid peroxidation and antioxidant system of eight broadleaved tree species (Liriodendron chinense , Liquidambar formosana , Ilex integra , Photinia × fraseri ,

Cinnamomum camphora , Cyclobalanopsis glauca , Neolitsea sericea and Schima superba ). The exposure to O 3 significantly reduced total dry mass of Liriodendron chinense , Liquidambar formosana 

and Cinnamomum camphora seedlings, but did not significantly reduce that of the other five tree species. There was a significant negative relationship between the degree of reduction in total dry mass and leaf mass per area (specific leaf mass), suggesting that the difference in the sensitivity to O 3among the 8 tree species is attributed to leaf thickness. There are several experimental studies on the combined effects of elevated CO 2 and O 3 on Chinese tree species. Huang et al. (2008) reported the in fl uence of elevated CO 2 and O 3 on foliar nonvolatile terpenoids in ginkgo leaves. Elevated CO 2 , alone and in combination with elevated O 3 , increased the concentrations of terpenoids, while elevated O 3 alone only increased the concentration of bilobalide. These results demonstrate that the metabolism of terpenoids in ginkgo leaves is more sensitive to elevated CO 2 than elevated O 3 . Li et al. (2009) reported the impact of elevated CO 2 and O 3 on the emission of biogenic volatile organic compounds from ginkgo trees. The exposure to elevated CO 2induced an increase in the emission of isoprene in July and September, while the total monoterpenes emission increased in July and decreased in September by elevated CO 2 . The exposure to elevated O 3increased emissions of isoprene and monoterpenes in July and September. The combination of elevated CO 2 and O 3 did not have any effect on biogenic volatile organic compounds emissions, except increases of isoprene and ᇞ3-carene in September. Zhao et al. (2009) conducted an open-top chamber experiment to clarify the effects of elevated CO 2 and O3 on Hill activity and Ca 2+ /Mg 2+ -ATPase activity in the needles of Chinese red pine ( Pinus tabulaeformis ). The exposure to elevated CO 2 increased net photosynthetic rate, Hill activity, Ca 2+ /Mg 2+ -ATPase activity, and contents of soluble sugar and starch. While net photosynthetic rate, Hill activity, Ca 2+ /Mg 2+ -ATPase activity and the contents of soluble sugar and starch were reduced by the exposure to O 3. Under elevated CO 2and O 3 concentrations, net photosynthetic rate, Hill activity and contents of soluble sugar and starch increased, but Ca 2+ -ATPase activity increased during the earlier growing season, and decreased in the later growing season, while Mg 2+ -ATPase activity responded contrarily. Li et al . (2011) reported the effects of elevated CO 2 and/or O3 on endogenous plant hormones in the leaves of ginkgo. Four-year-old gingko seedlings were exposed to ambient and elevated concentrations of CO 2 and O 3,and their combination for 1 year, using open-top chambers in Shenyang, China in 2006. Elevated CO 2increased leaf area and leaf dry mass, but had no effect on the shoot length of gingko seedlings. Exposure to elevated CO 2 increased the contents of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), gibberellins A 3 (GA 3 ), zeatin riboside (ZR), dihydrozeatin (DHZR) and isopentenyl-adenosine (iPA), but reduced the content of abscisic acid (ABA). Elevated O 3 signi fi cantly decreased leaf area, leaf dry mass and shoot length of gingko seedlings. Exposure to O 3 reduced the contents of IAA, GA 3 and ZR, but increased ABA 108 content and had little effect on iPA and DHZR contents. The combined exposure to elevated CO 2 and O3 reduced the contents of IAA, iPA and DHZR, while increased the contents of ABA and GA 3 in the early stage of the exposure and then reduced in the late stage. The results of this study indicate that elevated CO 2 ameliorates the effects of elevated O 3 on tree growth, and elevated CO 2 may have a largely positive impact on forest tree growth while elevated O 3 will likely have a negative impact. 

3.4. Summary 

We conclude that regional-scale distributions and seasonal cycles, along with the controlling factors of tropospheric ozone in Asia (in particular, East Asia) are well understood by enhanced observational evidence and model analysis. There is general consensus that long-term trends in East Asia are increasing, but their causes are poorly understood. In particular, trends were not quantitatively reproduced by state-of-science models incorporating the latest emissions inventories. In addition, interannual variations were not sufficiently explored. We found that the amount of surface (boundary layer) data is increasing, but free tropospheric data (middle and upper troposphere) is still very limited and needs to be expanded - not only in terms of sites but also in terms of the number of species. In addition, the monitoring of ozone precursors and tracers of pollution sources needs to be enhanced, and tropospheric ozone satellite data and its precursors need to be better harnessed to further understand and constrain emissions of ozone precursors and the transport of ozone. With regards to the modeling perspective, the impacts of climate change on the S-R relationship need to be explored more. Evaluation of ozone effects on crops by experimental and field studies is needed in Asia. The species or cultivar difference in sensitivity to ozone should be considered when evaluating present and future effects of ozone on crops and the critical levels of ozone for protecting agricultural production in Asia. It is necessary to take measures to minimize the O 3 -induced reduction in agricultural production in Asia. Therefore, to evaluate the effects of ozone on forest tree species in Asia, experimental studies and field surveys should be promoted, and monitoring the systems of atmospheric ozone concentration in forested areas is required. The species difference in sensitivity to ozone should be considered to evaluate present and future effects of ozone on forest tree species, and the critical levels for protecting forest ecosystems in Asia. It is necessary to clarify the combined effects of ozone and other environmental stresses on Asian forest tree species. 109 

> Appendix

Table A1 List of all field sites reviewed in Chapter 3 110 

Figure A1 A regional map of all field sites reviewed in Chapter 3 References 

ADORC (Acid Deposition and Oxidant Research Center) 2006. Tropospheric ozone: A growing threat. ADORC (Acid Deposition and Oxidant Research Center), Niigata, Japan, pp. 1-16. Ahsan, N., Nanjo, Y., Sawada, H., Kohno, Y. and Komatsu, S. 2010. Ozone stress-induced proteomic changes in leaf total soluble and chloroplast proteins of soybean reveal that carbon allocation is involved in adaptation in the early developmental stage. Proteomics 10: 2605-2619. Aihara, K., Aso, T., Takeda, M. and Koshiji, T. 2004. Actual condition of forest decline and approach (II) The phenomena of forest decline at Tanzawa Mountain in Kanagawa prefecture. Journal of Japan Society for Atmospheric Environment 39: A29-A39. (In Japanese) Akhtar, N., Yamaguchi, M., Inada, H., Hoshino, D., Kondo, T. and Izuta, T. 2010b. Effects of ozone on growth, yield and leaf gas exchange rates of two Bangladeshi cultivars of wheat ( Triticum aestivum L.). Environmental Pollution 158: 1763-1767. Akhtar, N., Yamaguchi, M., Inada, H., Hoshino, D., Kondo, T., Fukami, M., Funada, R. and Izuta, T. 2010a. Effects of ozone on growth, yield and leaf gas exchange rates of four Bangladeshi cultivars of rice ( Oryza sativa L.). Environmental Pollution 158: 2970-2976. Akimoto, H. (2003), Global air quality and pollution, Science, 302, 1716–1719. Akimoto, H., H. Nakane, and Y. Matsumoto, The chemistry of oxidant generation: Tropospheric ozone 111 increase in Japan, in Chemistry of the Atmosphere: The Impact on Global Change, edited by J. G. Calvert, pp. 261-273, Blackwell Sci., Malden, Mass., 1994. Ambasht, N. K. and Agrawal, M. 2003. Effects of enhanced UV-B radiation and tropospheric ozone on physiological and biochemical characteristics of field grown wheat. Biologia Plantarum 47: 625-628. Anderson, H., Atkinson, R., Peacock, J., Marston, L., & Konstantinou, K. 2004. Meta-analysis of Time-Series Studies and Panel Studies of Particulate Matter (PM) and Ozone (O3). Report of a WHO Task Group. Copenhagen. Anenberg, S. C., Horowitz, L. W., Tong, D. Q., & West, J. J. 2010. An estimate of the global burden of anthropogenic ozone and fine particulate matter on premature human mortality using atmospheric modeling. Environmental health perspectives , 118 (9), 1189–95. doi:10.1289/ehp.0901220 Ariyaphanphitak, W., Chidthaisong, A., Sarobol, E., Bashkin, V. N. and Towprayoon, S. 2005. Effects of elevated ozone concentrations on Thai Jasmine rice cultivars ( Oryza sativa L.). Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 167: 179-200. Ashmore, M., Emberson, L., Karlsson, P.E., Pleijel, H. 2004. New directions: A new generation of ozone critical levels for the protection of vegetation in Europe. Atmospheric Environment 38: 2213-2214. Aunan, K., T. K. Berntsen and H. M. Seip (2000). Surface ozone in China and its possible impact on agricultural crop yields. Ambio, 29(6), 294-301. Auvray, M., and Bey, I.: Long-range transport to Europe: Seasonal variations and implications for the European ozone budget, J. Geophys. Res., 110, D11303, doi:10.1029/2004JD005503, 2005. Avnery, S., D. L. Mauzerall, J. Liu, and L. W. Horowitz (2011a). Global crop yield reductions due to surface ozone exposure:1. Year 2000 crop production losses and economic damage. Atmospheric Environment, 45, 2284–2296. Avnery, S., D. L. Mauzerall, J. Liu, and L. W. Horowitz (2011b). Global crop yield reductions due to surface ozone exposure: 2. Year 2030 potential crop production losses and economic damage under two scenarios of O 3 pollution. Atmospheric Environment, 45, 2297–2309. Beig, G., and V. Singh, Trends in tropical tropospheric column ozone from satellite data and MOZART model, Geophys. Res. Lett., 34, L17801, doi:10.1029/2007GL030460, 2007. Beirle, S., K. F. Boersma, U. Platt, M. G. Lawrence, and T. Wagner, Megacity Emissions and Lifetimes of Nitrogen Oxides Probed from Space, 2011, Science, 333, 1737, DOI:10.1126/science.1207824. Bell, M. L., Dominici, F., & Samet, J. M. 2005. A Meta-Analysis of Time-Series Studies of Ozone and Mortality With Comparison to the National Morbidity , Mortality , and Air Pollution Study. 

Epidemiology , 16 (4), 436–445. doi:10.1097/01.ede.0000165817.40152.85 112 Biswas, D. K. and Jiang, G. M. 2011. Differential drought-induced modulation of ozone tolerance in winter wheat species. Journal of Experimental Botany 62: 4153-4162. Biswas, D. K., Xu, H., Li, Y. G., Liu, M. Z., Chen, Y. H., Sun, J. Z. and Jiang, G. M. 2008b. Assessing the genetic relatedness of higher ozone sensitivity of modern wheat to its wild and cultivated progenitors/relatives. Journal of Experimental Botany 59: 951-963. Biswas, D. K., Xu, H., Li, Y. G., Ma, B. L. and Jiang, G. M. 2013. Modification of photosynthesis and growth responses to elevated CO 2 by ozone in two cultivars of winter wheat with different years of release. Journal of Experimental Botany 64: 1485-1496. Biswas, D. K., Xu, H., Li, Y. G., Sun, J. Z., Wang, X. Z., Han, X. G. and Jiang, G. M. 2008a. Genotypic differences in leaf biochemical, physiological and growth responses to ozone in 20 winter wheat cultivars released over the past 60 years. Global Change Biology 14: 46-59. Biswas, D. K., Xu, H., Yang, J. C., Li, Y. G., Chen, S. B., Jiang, C. D., Li, W. D., Ma, K. P., Adhikary, S. K., Wang, X. Z. and Jiang, G. M. 2009. Impacts of methods and sites of plant breeding on ozone sensitivity in winter wheat cultivars. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 134: 168-177. Bovensmann, H., Burrows, J. P., Buchwitz, M., Frerick, J., Noel, S., Rozanov, V. V., Chance, K. V., and Goede, A. H. P.: SCIAMACHY – Mission objectives and measurement modes, J. Atmos. Sci., 56(2), 127–150, 1999. Byun, D.W., and J.K.S. Ching, Science algorithms of the EPA Models-3 community multi-scale air quality (CMAQ) modeling system, NERL, Research Triangle Park, NC, 1999. Callies, J., Corpaccioli, E., Eisinger, M., Hahne, A., and Lefebvre, A.: GOME-2-Metop’s second-generation sensor for operational ozone monitoring, ESA Bull., 102, 28–36, 2000. Chan, C. Y., L. Y., Chan, and J. M. Harris, Urban and background ozone trend in 1984-1999 at subtropical Hong Kong, south China, J. Ozone Sci. Eng., 25, 513-522, 2004. Chen, Z., Wang, X., Feng, Z., Zheng, F., Duan, X. and Yang, W. 2008. Effects of elevated ozone on growth and yield of field-grown rice in Yangtze River Delta, China. Journal of Environmental Sciences 20: 320-325. Cuesta, J., Eremenko, M., Liu, X., Dufour, G., Cai, Z., Höpfner, M., von Clarmann, T., Sellitto, P., Foret, G., Gaubert, B., Beekmann, M., Orphal, J., Chance, K., Spurr, R., and Flaud, J.-M.: Satellite observation of lowermost tropospheric ozone by multispectral synergism of IASI thermal infrared and GOME-2 ultraviolet measurements, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 13, 2955-2995, doi:10.5194/acpd-13-2955-2013, 2013. De Smedt, I., J. -F. Müller, T. Stavrakou, R. van der A, H. Eskes, and M. Van Roozendael, Twelve years of global observations of formaldehyde in the troposphere using GOME and SCIAMACHY sensors, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 8, 4947–4963, 2008. Ding, A. J., Wang, T., Thouret, V., Cammas, J.-P., and Nédélec, P.: Tropospheric ozone climatology 113 over Beijing: analysis of aircraft data from the MOZAIC program, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 8, 1-13, doi:10.5194/acp-8-1-2008, 2008. Ding, A., and Wang, T., 2006, Influence of stratosphere-to-troposphere ex- change on the seasonal cycle of surface ozone at Mount Waliguan in western China, Geophys. Res. Lett. , 33, L03803, doi:10.1029/2005GL024760. Dufour, G., Eremenko, M., Orphal, J., and Flaud, J.-M., 2010, IASI observations of seasonal and day-to-day variations of tropospheric ozone over three highly populated areas of China: Beijing, Shanghai, and Hong Kong, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 3787–3801, doi:10.5194/acp-10-3787-2010. Emberson, L. D., Ashmore, M. R., Cambridge, H. M., Simpson, D., Tuovinen, J. -P. 2000b. Modelling stomatal ozone flux across Europe. Environmental Pollution 109: 403-413. Emberson, L. D., Wieser, G., Ashmore, M. R. 2000a. Modelling of stomatal conductance and ozone flux of Norway spruce: comparison with field data. Environmental Pollution 109: 393-402. EU-EEA (1998), Tropospheric ozone in EU -The consolidated report, Topic report No.8/1998. Fang, Y., Naik, V., Horowitz, L.W., and Mauzerall, D.L. 2013. Air Pollution and associated human mortality: the role of air pollutant emissions, climate change and methane concentration increases from the preindustrial period to present. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 13: 1377-1394. Feng, Z. -W., Jin, M. -H., Zhang, F. -Z. and Huang, Y. -Z. 2003. Effects of ground-level ozone (O 3)pollution on the yields of rice and winter wheat in the Yangtze River Delta. Journal of Environmental Sciences 15: 360-362. Feng, Z. -Z., Yao, F. -F., Chen, Z., Wang, X. -K., Zheng, Q. -W. and Feng, Z. -W. 2007. Response of gas exchange and yield components of field-grown Triticum aestivum L. to elevated ozone in China. Photosynthetica 45: 441-446. Feng, Z. -Z., Zeng, H. -Q., Wang, X. -K., Zheng, Q. -W. and Feng, Z. -W. 2008. Sensitivity of 

Metasequoia glyptostroboides to ozone stress. Photosynthetica 46: 463-465. Feng, Z., Pang, J., Kobayashi, K., Zhu, J. and Ort, D. R. 2011. Differential responses in two varieties of winter wheat to elevated ozone concentration under fully open-air field conditions. Global Change Biology 17: 580-591. Feng, Z., Tang, H., Uddling, J., Pleijel, H., Kobayashi, K., Zhu, J., Oue, H. and Guo, W. 2012. A stomatal ozone flux-response relationship to assess ozone-induced yield loss of winter wheat in subtropical China. Environmental Pollution 164: 16-23. Fiore, A. M., Dentener, F. J., Wild, O., Cuvelier, C., Schultz, M. G., Hess, P., Textor, C., Schulz, M., Doherty, R. M., Horowitz, L. W., MacKenzie, I. A., Sanderson, M. G., Shindell, D. T., Stevenson, D. S., Szopa, S., van Dingenen, R., Zeng, G., Atherton, C., Bergmann, D., Bey, I., Carmichael, G., Collins, W. J., Duncan, B. N., Faluvegi, G., Folberth, G., Gauss, M., Gong, S., 114 Hauglustaine, D., Holloway, T., Isaksen, I. S. A., Jacob, D. J., Jonson, J. E., Kaminski, J. W., Keating, T. J., Lupu, A., Marmer, E., Montanaro, V., Park, R. J., Pitari, G., Pringle, K. J., Pyle, J. A., Schroeder, S., Vivanco, M. G., Wind, P., Wojcik, G., Wu, S., and Zuber, A. : Multimodel estimates of intercontinental source-receptor relationships for ozone pollution, J. Geophys. Res., 114, D04301, doi:10.1029/2008JD010816, 2009. Fiore, A. M., Jacob, D. J., Bey, I., Yantosca, Y. M., Field, B. D., Fusco, A. C., and Wilkinson, J. G.: Background ozone over the United States in summer: Origin, trend, and contribution to pollution episodes, J. Geophys. Res., 107(D15), 4275, doi:10.1029/2001JD000982, 2002. Frei, M., Kohno, Y., Tietze, S., Jekle, M., Hussein, M.A., Becker, T. and Becker, K. 2012. The response of rice grain quality to ozone exposure during growth depends on ozone level and genotype. Environmental Pollution 163: 199-206. Frei, M., Kohno, Y., Wissuwa, M., Makkar, H. P. S. and Becker, K. 2011. Negative effects of tropospheric ozone on the feed value of rice straw are mitigated by an ozone tolerance QTL. Global Change Biology 17: 2319-2329. Frei, M., Tanaka, J. P. and Wissuwa, M. 2008. Genotypic variation in tolerance to elevated ozone in rice: dissection of distinct genetic factors linked to tolerance mechanisms. Journal of Experimental Botany 59, 3741-3752. Frei, M., Tanaka, J. P., Chen, C. P. and Wissuwa, M. 2010. Mechanisms of ozone tolerance in rice: characterization of two QTLs affecting leaf bronzing by gene expression profiling and biochemical analyses. Journal of Experimental Botany 61, 1405-1417. Fu, J. S., Hsu, N. C., Gao, Y., Huang, K., Li, C., Lin, N.-H., and Tsay, S.-C. 2006. Evaluating the influences of biomass burning during BASE-ASIA: a regional chemical transport modeling, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 12, 3837-3855, doi:10.5194/acp-12-3837-2012 Fu, J. S., X. Dong, Y. Gao, D. C. Wong, and Y. F. Lam. 2012. Sensitivity and linearity analysis of ozone in East Asia: The effects of domestic emission and intercontinental transport, J. Air Waste Manag. Assoc., 62:9, 1102-1114. Fuhrer, J., L. Skarby, and M. Ashmore. 1997. Critical levels of ozone effect in Europe, Environ. Pollut., 97, 91–106. Ghude S. D., S. L. Jain, B. C. Arya, G. Beig, Y. N. Ahammed, Arun Kumar, and B. Tyagi, Ozone in ambient air at a tropical megacity, Delhi: characteristics, trends and cumulative ozone exposure indices, J. Atmos. Chem. 60, 237-252. Guo, H., Tian, R., Zhu, J., Zhou, H., Pei, D. and Wang, X. 2012. Combined cadmium and elevated ozone affect concentrations of cadmium and antioxidant systems in wheat under fully open-air conditions. Journal of Hazardous Materials 209-210: 27-33. Han K. M., Lee, C. K., Lee, J., et al. (2011), A comparison study between model-predicted and OMI-retrieved tropospheric NO 2 columns over the Korean peninsula. Atmos Environ 45:2962–2971. doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2010.10.016. 115 Han, K. M., Song, C. H., Ahn, H. J., et al. (2009), Investigation of NOx emissions and NOx-related chemistry in East Asia using CMAQ predicted and GOME-derived NO 2 columns, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 9(17):1017–1036. He, X. -Y., Fu, S.-L., Chen, W., Zhao, T. -H., Xu, S. and Tuba, Z. 2007. Changes in effects of ozone exposure on growth, photosynthesis, and respiration of Ginkgo biloba in Shenyang urban area. Photosynthetica: 45, 555-561. He, X. -Y., Huang, W., Chen, W., Dong, T., Liu, C., Chen, Z., Xu, S. and Ruan, Y. (2009) Changes of main secondary metabolites in leaves of Ginkgo biloba in response to ozone fumigation. Journal of Environmental Sciences 21: 199-203. He, Y., Uno, I, Wang, Z., et al., 2007, Variations of the increasing trend of tropospheric NO 2 over central east China during the past decade. Atmos Environ 41(23): 4865–4876. doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2007.02.009. Hilboll, A., A. Richter, and J. P. Burrows, Long-term changes of tropospheric NO 2 over megacities derived from multiple satellite instruments, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 13, 4145–4169, 2013. Hollaway M. J., Arnold S.R., Challinor A. J., and Emberson L.D., 2012 Intercontinental trans-boundary contributions to ozone-induced crop yield losses in the northern hemisphere. Biogeosciences, 9, 272-292. Holloway, T., Sakurai, T., Han, Z., Ehlers, S., Spak, S. N., Horowitz, L. W., Carmichael, G. R., Streets, D. G., Hozumi,Y., Ueda, H., Park, S. U., Fung, C., Kajino, M., Thongboonchoo, N., Engardt, M., Bennet, C., Hayami, H., Sartelet, K., Wang, Z., Matsuda, K., and Amann, M. : MICS-Asia II: Impact of global emissions on regional air quality in Asia, Atmos. Environ., 42, 3543– 3561, doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2007.10.022, 2008. Hoshika, Y., Hajima, T., Shimizu, Y., Takigawa, M. and Omasa, K. 2009. Effect of growing season on ozone stomatal flux for deciduous forests in East Asia. Eco-Engineering 21: 3-8. Hoshika, Y., Watanabe, M., Inada, N. and Koike, T. (2012) Modeling of stomatal conductance for estimating ozone uptake of Fagus crenata under experimentally enhanced free-air ozone exposure. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 223: 3893-3901. Huang, W., He, X., Chen, W., Chen, Z., Ruan, Y. and Xu, S. 2008. In fl uence of elevated carbon dioxide and ozone on the foliar nonvolatile terpenoids in Ginkgo Biloba . Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 81: 432-435. Inada, H., Kondo, T., Akhtar, N., Hoshino, D., Yamaguchi, M. and Izuta, T. 2012. Relationship between cultivar difference in the sensitivity of net photosynthesis to ozone and reactive oxygen species scavenging system in Japanese winter wheat ( Triticum aestivum ). Physiologia Plantarum 146: 217-227. Inada, H., Yamaguchi, M., Satoh, R., Hoshino, D., Nagasawa, A., Negishi, Y., Nouchi, I., Kobayashi, K. and Izuta, T. 2008. Effects of ozone on photosynthetic cmponents and radical scavenging system in leaves of rice ( Oryza sativa L.). Journal of Agricultural Meteorology 64: 243-255. 116 IPCC Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2007 (AR4) (2007), IPCC Working Group I, Climate Change 2007, The Physical Science Basis, Cambridge University Press. Irie, H., Boersma, K. F., Kanaya, Y., Takashima, H., Pan, X., and Wang, Z. F.: Quantitative bias estimates for tropospheric NO 2 columns retrieved from SCIAMACHY, OMI, and GOME-2 using a common standard, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 5, 2403-2411, 2012. Ishii, S., Marshall, F. M. and Bell, J. N. B. 2004b. Physiological and morphological responses of locally grown Malaysian rice cultivars ( Oryza sativa L.) to different ozone concentrations. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 155: 205-221. Ishii, S., Marshall, F. M., Bell, J. N. B. and Abdullah, A. M. 2004a. Impact of ambient air pollution on locally grown rice cultivars ( Oryza sativa L.) in Malaysia. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 154: 187-201. Itahashi, S., Uno, I., Kim, S.: Seasonal source contributions of tropospheric ozone over East Asia based on CMAQ-HDDM, Atmos. Environ., 70, 204-217, 2013. Jacob, D. J., Logan, J. A., and Murti, P. P.: Effect of rising Asian emissions on surface ozone in the United States, Geophys. Res. Lett., 26(14), 2175–2178, 1999 JEA (Japan Environment Agency) (1973), Bulletin No. 25, May 8 1973. Jiang, F., Guo, H., Wang, T.J., Cheng, H. R., Wang, X. M., Simpson, I. J., Ding, A. J., Saunders, S. M., Lam, S. H. M., and D. R. Blake, 2010, An ozone episode in the Pearl River Delta: Field observation and model simulation, J. Geophys. Res. , 115, D22305, doi:10.1029/2009JD013583. Kajii, Y., H. Akimoto, Y. Komazaki, S. Tanaka, H. Mukai, K. Murano, J. Merrill, Long-range transport of ozone, carobn monoxide, and acidic trace gases at Oki Island, Japan during PEM-WEST(B)/PEACAMPOT (B) campaign, J. Geophys. Res., 102, 28637-28649 (1997). Kajii, Y., K. Someno, H. Tanimoto, J. Hirokawa, H. Akimoto, T. Katsuno, and J. Kawara, Evidence for the seasonal variation of photochemical activity of tropospheric ozone: Continuous observation of ozone and CO at Happo, Japan, Geophys. Res. Lett., 25(18), 3505-3508, 1998. Kanaya, Y., Akimoto, H., Wang, Z.-F., Pochanart, P., Kawamura, K., Liu, Y., Li, J., Komazaki, Y., Irie, H., Pan, X.-L., Taketani, F., Yamaji, K., Tanimoto, H., Inomata, S., Kato, S., Suthawaree, J., Okuzawa, K., Wang, G., Aggarwal, S. G., Fu, P. Q., Wang, T., Gao, J., Wang, Y., and Zhuang, G.: Overview of the Mount Tai Experiment (MTX2006) in Central East China in June 2006: studies of significant regional air pollution, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 13, 8265-8283, doi:10.5194/acp-13-8265-2013, 2013. Kanaya, Y., Pochanart, P., Liu Y., Li, J., Tanimoto, H., Kato, S., Suthawaree, J., Inomata, S., Taketani, F., Okuzawa, K., Kawamura, K., H. Akimoto, H., and Wang, Z. F.: Rates and regimes of photochemical ozone production over Central East China in June 2006: a box model analysis using comprehensive measurements of ozone precursors, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 9, 7711–7723, doi:10.5194/acp-9-7711-2009, 2009. 117 Karlsson, P.E., Uddling, J., Braun, S., Broadmeadow, M., Elvira, S., Gimeno, B.S., Thiec, D.L., Oksanen, E., Vandermeiren, K., Wilkinson, M., Emberson, L. 2004. New critical levels for ozone effects on young trees based on AOT40 and simulated cumulative leaf uptake of ozone. Atmospheric Environment 38: 2283-2294. Karmosky, D.F., J.M. Skelly, K.E. Percy, and A.H. Chappelka (2007), Perspectives regarding 50 years of research on effects of tropospheric ozone on US forests, Environ. Pollut., 147, 489–506. Kohno, Y., Matsumura, H., Ishii, T. and Izuta T. 2005. Establishing critical levels of air pollutants for protecting East Asian vegetation, A challenge. In: Omasa, K., Nouchi, I. and De Kok, L. J. (Eds), Plant Responses to Air Pollution and Global Change. Springer-Verlag, Tokyo, pp. 243-250. Kondo, Y., et al., 2004, Photochemistry of ozone over the western Pacific from winter to spring, J. Geophys. Res., 109, D23S02, doi:10.1029/2004JD004871. Kondo, Y., M. Ko, M. Koike, S. Kawakami, and T. Ogawa, Preface to special section on Biomass Burning and Lightning Experiment (BIBLE), J. Geophys. Res., 107, 8397, doi:10.1029/2002JD002401, 2002. [printed 108(D3), 2003] Kulkarni, P. S., S. D. Ghude, and D. Bortoli, Tropospheric ozone (TOR) trend over three major inland Indian cities: Delhi, Hyderabad and Bangalore, Ann. Geophys., 28, 1879–1885, 2010. Kumari, S., Agrawal, M. and Tiwari, S. 2013. Impact of elevated CO 2 and elevated O 3 on Beta vulgaris L.: Pigments, metabolites, antioxidants, growth and yield. Environmental Pollution 174: 279-288. Kume, A., Numata, S., Watanabe, K., Honoki, H., Nakajima, H. and Ishida M. 2009. Influence of air pollution on the mountain forests along the Tateyama-Kurobe Alpine route. Ecological Research 24: 821-830. Kurokawa, J., et al., Influence of meteorological variability on interannual variations of springtime boundary layer ozone over Japan during 1981-2005, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 9, 6287-6304, 2009. Lai, H.-K., Tsang, H., & Wong, C.-M. (2013). Meta-analysis of adverse health effects due to air pollution in Chinese populations. BMC Public Health, 13(1), 360. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-13-360 Lee, S., H. Akimoto, H. Nakane, S. Kurnosenko, and Y. Kinjo, Lower tropospheric ozone trend observed in 1989–1997 at Okinawa, Japan, Geophys. Res. Lett., 25, 1637-1640, 1998. Levelt, P. F., van den Oord, G. H. J., Dobber, M. R., Malkki, A., Visser, H., de Vries, J., Stammes, P., Lundell, J., and Saari, H.: The Ozone Monitoring Instrument, IEEE Trans. Geo. Rem. Sens., 44, 5, 1093–1101, doi:10.1109/TGRS.2006.872333, 2006. Levy, J. I., Carrothers, T. J., Tuomisto, J. T., Hammitt, J. K., & Evans, J. S. 2001. Assessing the public health benefits of reduced ozone concentrations. Environmental health perspectives , 109 (12), 1215–26. 118 Li, D., Chen, Y., Shi, Y., He, X. and Chen, X. 2009. Impact of elevated CO 2 and O 3 concentrations on biogenic volatile organic compounds emissions from Ginkgo biloba . Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 82: 473-477. Li, J., Wang, Z. Huang, H., Min, H., Meng F., et al. Sun, Y.L., Wang, X., Wang, Y., and Wang, Q., 2013, Assessing the effects of trans-boundary aerosol transport between various city clusters on regional haze episodes in spring over East China, Tellus B, 65, 20052, http://dx.doi.org/10.3402/tellusb.v65i0.20052. Li, J., Wang, Z., Akimoto, H., Gao, C., Pochanart, P., and Wang, X., 2007, Modeling study of ozone seasonal cycle in lower roposphere over East Asia, J. Geophys. Res., 112, D22S25, doi:10.1029/2006JD008209. Li, J., Wang, Z., Akimoto, H., Tang, J., and Uno, I., 2009, Modeling of the impacts of China’s anthropogenic pollutants on the surface ozone summer maximum on the northern Tibetan Plateau, Geophys. Res. Lett. , 36, L24802, doi:10.1029/2009GL041123. Li, J., Wang, Z., Akimoto, H., Yamaji, K., Takigawa, M., Pochanart, P., Liu, Y., Tanimoto, H., and Kanaya, Y.: Near-ground ozone source attributions and outflow in central eastern China during MTX2006, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 8, 7335–7351, 2008. Li, J., Wang, Z., Wang, X., Yamaji, K., Takigawa, M., Kanaya, Y., Pochanart, P., Liu, Y., Irie, H., Hu, B., Tanimoto, H., and Akimoto, H., 2011, Impacts of aerosols on summertime tropospheric photolysis frequencies and photochemistry over Central Eastern China, Atmos. Environ. , 45, 1817–1829. Li, J., Wang, Z., Zhuang, G., Luo, G., Sun, Y., and Wang, Q., 2012, Mixing of Asian mineral dust with anthropogenic pollutants over East Asia: a model case study of a super-duststorm in March 2010, Atmos. Chem. Phys. , 12, 7591-7607, doi:10.5194/acp-12-7591-2012. Li, X. M., Zhang, L. H., Li, Y. Y., Ma, L. J., Chen, Q., Wang, L. L. and He, X. Y. 2011. Effects of elevated carbon dioxide and/or ozone on endogenous plant hormones in the leaves of Ginkgo biloba . Acta Physiologiae Plantarum 33: 129-136. Li, Y., Lau, A. K.-H., Fung, J. C.-H. Zheng, J. Y., Zhong, L. J., and Louie, P. K. K. 2012.Ozone source apportionment (OSAT) to differentiate local regional and super-regional source contributions in the Pearl River Delta region, China, J. Geophys. Res., 117, D15305, doi:10.1029/2011JD017340, Lim, S. S., Vos, T., Flaxman, A. D., Danaei, G., Shibuya, K., Adair-Rohani, H., … Aryee, M. 2012. A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet , 380 (9859), 2224–60. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61766-8 Lim, Y.-H., Kim, H., Kim, J. H., Bae, S., Park, H. Y., & Hong, Y.-C. 2012. Air pollution and symptoms of depression in elderly adults. Environmental health perspectives , 120 (7), 1023–8. doi:10.1289/ehp.1104100 119 Lin, J.-T., McElroy, M. B., Boersma K. F. (2010), Constraint of anthropogenic NOx emissions in China from different sectors: a new methodology using multiple satellite retrievals. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10:63–78. doi: 10.5194/acp-10-63-2010. Lin, M., Holloway, T., Carmichael, G. R., and Fiore, A. M.: Quantifying pollution inflow and outflow over East Asia in spring with regional and global models, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 4221–4239, doi:10.5194/acp-10-4221-2010, 2010. Lin, W., Xu, X., Zhang, X., Tang, J.: Contributions of pollutants from North China Plain to surface ozone at the Shangdianzi GAW station, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 8, 5889–5898, 2008. Liu, H., D. J. Jacob, L. Y. Chan, S. J. Oltmans, I. Bey, R. M. Yantosca, J. M. Harris, B. N. Duncan, and R. V. Martin: Sources of tropospheric ozone along the Asian Pacific Rim: An analysis of ozonesonde observations, J. Geophys. Res., 107(D21), 4573, doi:10.1029/2001JD002005, 2002. Logan, J. A., I.A. Megretskaia, A.J. Miller, G.C. Tia, D. Choi, L. Zhang, R.S. Stolarski, G.J. Labow, S.M. Hollandsworth, G.E. Bodecker, H. Claude, D. DeMuer, J.B. Kerr, D.W. Tarasick, S.J. Oltmans, B. Johnson, F. Schmidlin, J. Staehelin, P. Viatte, and O. Uchino: Trends in the vertical distribution of ozone: A comparison of two analyses of ozonesonde data, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 26,373-26,399, 1999. Logan, J. A., Trends in the vertical distribution of ozone: An analysis of ozonesonde data, J. Geophys. Res., 99, D12, 25,553-25,585, 1994. Lou, S., Holland, F., Rohrer, F., Lu, K., Bohn, B., Brauers, T., Chang, C.C., Fuchs, H., Häseler, R., Kita, K., Kondo, Y., Li, X., Shao, M., Zeng, L., Wahner, A., Zhang, Y., Wang, W., and Hofzumahaus, A. 2010, Atmospheric OH reactivities in the Pearl River Delta-China in summer 2006: measurement and model results, Atmos. Chem. Phys. , 10, 11243-11260, doi:10.5194/acp-10-11243-2010. Luo, C., St. John, J. C., Xiuji, Z., Lam, K. S., Wang, T., and Chameides, W. L.: A nonurban ozone air pollution episode over eastern China: Observations and model simulations, J. Geophys. Res., 105(D2), 1889–1908, doi:10.1029/1999JD900970, 2000. Ma, J., Zheng, X., and Xu, X., 2005, Comment on ‘‘Why does surface ozone peak in summertime at Waliguan?’’ by Bin Zhu et al., Geophys.Res. Lett. , 32, L01805, doi:10.1029/2004GL021683. Matsumura, H. 2001. Impacts of ambient ozone and/or acid mist on the growth of 14 tree species: an open-top chamber study conducted in Japan. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 130: 959-964. Matsumura, H., Mikami, C., Sakai, Y., Murayama, K., Izuta, T., Yonekura, T., Miwa, M. and Kohno, Y. 2005. Impacts of elevated O 3 and/or CO 2 on growth of Betula platyphylla , Betula ermanii ,

Fagus crenata , Pinus densiflora and Cryptomeria japonica seedlings. Journal of Agricultural Meteorology 60: 1121-1124. Meng, Z. Y., Xu, X. B., Yan, P., Ding, G. A., Tang, J., Lin, W. L., Xu, X. D., and Wang, S. F. 2009. Characteristics of trace gaseous pollutants at a regional background station in Northern China, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 9, 927-936, doi:10.5194/acp-9-927-2009. 120 Meng, Z.Y., Ding, G.A., Xu, X.B., Xu, X.D., Yu, H.Q., and S. F. Wang. 2008. Vertical distributions of SO 2 and NO 2 in the lower atmosphere in Beijing urban areas, China. Science of the Total Environment, 390, 456–465, doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2007.10.012. Mills, G., A. Buse, B. Gimeno, V. Bermejo, M. Holland, L. Emberson, and H. Pleijel. 2007. A synthesis of AOT40-based response functions and critical levels of ozone for agricultural and horticultural crops. Atmospheric Environment, 41, 2630-2643. Mills, G., Pleijel, H., Büker, P., Braun, S., Emberson, L., Harmens, H., Hayes, F., Simpson, D., Grünhage, L., Karlsson, P. -E., Danielsson, H., Bermejo, V., Fernandez, I. G. 2010. Mapping critical levels for vegetation, Revision undertaken in summer, 2010, to include new flux-based critical levels and response functions for ozone. In: Spranger, T. (Eds.), Mapping Manual 2004, UNECE Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution. pp. III-4-57. Mishra, A. K., Rai, R. and Agrawal, S. B. 2013. Differential response of dwarf and tall tropical wheat cultivars to elevated ozone with and without carbon dioxide enrichment: Growth, yield and grain quality. Field Crops Research 145: 21-32. Nagashima, T., Ohara, T., Sudo, K., Akimoto, H. 2010 The relative importance of various source regions on East Asian surface ozone, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 11305–11322, doi:10.5194/ acp-10-11305-2010. Naja, M., and H. Akimoto. 2004. Contribution of regional pollution and long-range transport to the Asia–Pacific region: analysis of long-term ozonesonde data over Japan, J. Geophys. Res., 109, D21306, doi:10.1029/2004JD004687. Naja, M., and S. Lal, Changes in surface ozone amount and its diurnal and seasonal patterns, from 1954–55 to 1991–93, measured at Ahmedabad (23 degN), India, Geophys. Res. Lett., 23, 81-84, 1996. Nakaji, T. and Izuta T. 2001. Effects of ozone and/or excess soil nitrogen on growth, needle gas exchange rates and Rubisco contents of Pinus densiflora seedlings. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 130: 971-976. Nakaji, T., Kobayashi, T., Kuroha, M., Omori, K., Matsumoto, Y., Yonekura, T., Watanabe, K., Utriainen, J. and Izuta, T. 2004. Growth and nitrogen availability of red pine seedlings under high nitrogen load and elevated ozone. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution, Focus, 4: 277-287. Nara, H., H. Tanimoto, Y. Nojiri, H. Mukai, J. Zeng, Y. Tohjima, and T. Machida, CO emissions from biomass burning in Southeast Asia in the 2006 El Niño year: Shipboard and AIRS satellite observations, Environ. Chem., 8, 213-223, doi:10.1071/EN10113, 2011. Nawahda, A., K. Yamashita, T. Ohara, J. Kurokawa, and K. Yamaji. 2013. Evaluation of the Effect of surface ozone on main crops in east Asia: 2000, 2005, and 2020. Water, Air and Soil Pollution, 224:1537-1555. 121 Nawahda, A., Yamashita, K., Ohara, T., Kurokawa, J., & Yamaji, K. 2012. Evaluation of Premature Mortality Caused by Exposure to PM2.5 and Ozone in East Asia: 2000, 2005, 2020. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution , 223 (6), 3445–3459. doi:10.1007/s11270-012-1123-7 Ng, C. F. S., Ueda, K., Nitta, H., & Takeuchi, A. 2013. Seasonal variation in the acute effects of ozone on premature mortality among elderly Japanese. Environmental monitoring and assessment .doi:10.1007/s10661-013-3211-6 Nouchi, I. 2002. Responses of whole plants to air pollutants. In: Air pollution and plant biotechnology, Prospects for phytomonitoring and phytoremediation (Omasa, K., Saji, H., Youssefian, S., Kondo, N. Eds.), Springer-Verlag Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 3-39. Oh, I.-B., Kim, Y.-K., Hwang, M.-K., Kim, C.-H., Kim, S., and Song, S.-K.: Elevated Ozone Layers over the Seoul Metropolitan Region in Korea: Evidence for Long-Range Ozone Transport from Eastern China and Its Contribution to Surface Concentrations, J. Appl. Meteor. Clim., 49, 203-220, doi:10.1175/2009JAMC2213.1, 2010. Ohara, T., Akimoto, H., Kurokawa, J. , Horii, N. , Yamaji, K., and Hayasaka, T.: An Asian emission inventory of anthropogenic emission sources for the period 1980–2020, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 7, 4419–4444, 2007. Oltmans, S. J., A. S. Lefohn, H. E. Scheel, J. M. Harris, H. Levy II, I. E. Galbally, E.-G. B runke, C. P. Meyer, J. A. Lathrop, B. J. Johnson, D. S. Shadwick, E. Cuevas, F. J. Schmidlin, D. W. Tarasick, H. Claude, J. B. Kerr, O. Uchino, V. Mohnen, Trends of ozone in the troposphere, Geophys. Res. Lett., 25, 139-142, 1998. Oltmans, S., A.S. Lefohn, J.M. Harris, I. Galbally, H.E. Scheel, G. Bodeker, E. Brunke, H. Claude, D. Tarasick, B.J. Johnson, P. Simmonds, D. Shadwick, K. Anlauf, K. Hayden, F. Schmidlin, T. Fujimoto, K. Akagi, C. Meyer, S. Nichol, J. Davies, A. Redondas, E. Cuevas, Long-term changes in tropospheric ozone, Atmos. Environ., 40, 3156-3173, 2006. Oue, H., Kobayashi, K., Zhu, J., Guo, W. and Zhu, X. 2011. Improvements of the ozone dose response functions for predicting the yield loss of wheat due to elevated ozone. Journal of Agricultural Meteorology 67: 21-32. Ou-Yang, C.-F., H.-C. Hsieh, S.-H. Wang, N.-H. Lin, C.-T. Lee, G.-R. Sheu, J.-L. Wang, Influence of Asian continental outflow on the regional background ozone level in northern South China Sea, Atmos. Environ., 78, 144-153, 2013 Pang, J., Kobayashi, K. and Zhu, J. 2009. Yield and photosynthetic characteristics of flag leaves in Chinese rice ( Oryza sativa L.) varieties subjected to free-air release of ozone. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 132: 203-211. Parrish, D.D., K.S. Law, J. Staehelin, R. Derwent, O. Cooper, H. Tanimoto, A. Volz-Thomas, S. Gilge, H.-E. Scheel, M. Steinbacher, and E. Chan, Long-term changes in lower tropospheric baseline ozone concentrations at northern mid-latitudes, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 12, 11485-11504, 2012. Parrish, D.D., J.-F. Lamarque, V. Naik, L. Horowitz, D.T. Shindell, J. Staehelin, R. Derwent, O.R. 122 Cooper, H. Tanimoto, A. Volz-Thomas, S. Gilge, H.-E. Scheel, M. Steinbacher, M. Fröhlich, Long-term changes in lower tropospheric baseline ozone concentrations: Comparing chemistry-climate models and observations at northern midlatitudes, J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 119, doi:10.1002/2013JD021435, 2014. Pochanart, P., H. Akimoto, Y. Kinjo, and H. Tanimoto, Surface ozone at four remote island sites and the preliminary assessment of the exceedances of its critical level in Japan, Atmos. Environ., 36, 4235-4250, 2002. Pochanart, P., J. Kreasuwun, P. Sukasem, W. Geeratithadaniyom, M. S. Tabucanon, J. Hirokawa, Y. Kajii, and H. Akimoto, Tropical tropospheric ozone observed in Thailand, Atmos. Environ.,35, 2657–2668, 2001. Rai, R. and Agrawal M. 2008. Evaluation of physiological and biochemical responses of two rice (Oryza sativa L.) cultivars to ambient air pollution using open top chambers at a rural site in India. Science of the Total Environment 407: 679-691. Rai, R., Agrawal, M. and Agrawal, S. B. 2007. Assessment of yield losses in tropical wheat using open top chambers. Atmospheric Environment 41: 9543-9554. Rai, R., Agrawal, M. and Agrawal, S. B. 2010. Threat to food security under current levels of ground level ozone: A case study for Indian cultivars of rice. Atmospheric Environment 44: 4272-4282. Richter A, Burrows JP, Nüss H et al. (2005) Increase in tropospheric nitrogen dioxide over China observed from space. Nature 437(7005):129–32. doi: 10.1038/nature04092 Samet, J. M., & Bell, M. L. 2010. Air Pollution. In H. Frumkin (Ed.), Environmental Health: From Global to Local (2nd ed., pp. 387–416). San Francisco: Jossy-Bass Books. Saraf, N., and G. Beig, Long-term trends in tropospheric ozone over the Indian tropical region, Geophys. Res. Lett., 31, L05101, doi:10.1029/2003GL018516, 2004. Sarkar, A. and Agrawal, S. B. 2010. Elevated ozone and two modern wheat cultivars: An assessment of dose dependent sensitivity with respect to growth, reproductive and yield parameters. Environmental and Experimental Botany 69: 328-337. Sarkar, A. and Agrawal, S. B. 2012. Evaluating the response of two high yielding Indian rice cultivars against ambient and elevated levels of ozone by using open top chambers. Journal of Environmental Management 95: S19-S24. Sawada, H. and Kohno, Y. 2009. Differential ozone sensitivity of rice cultivars as indicated by visible injury and grain yield. Plant Biology 11 (suppl. 1): 70-75. Schwartz, J. 1997. HEALTH EFFECTS OF AIR POLLUTION FROM TRAFFIC: OZONE AND PARTICULATE MATTER. In T. Fletcher & A. J. McMicael (Eds.), Health at the crossroads :transport policy and urban health (pp. 61–82). New York: J. Wiley and sons. Shan, W., Yin, Y., Zhang, J., Ding, Y., 2008, Observational study of surface ozone at an urban site in East China, Atmos. Environ., 89(3),252-261. 123 Shen, J., Wang, X. S., Li, J. F., Li Y. P., and Zhang, Y. H., 2011, Evaluation and intercomparison of ozone simulations by Models-3/CMAQ and CAMx over the Pearl River Delta. Science China-Chemistry, 41(11): 1750-1762. Shi, C., Fernando H. J. S., Wang Z., et al. (2008), Tropospheric NO 2 columns over East Central China: Comparisons between SCIAMACHY measurements and nested CMAQ simulations. Atmos Environ 42(30):7165–7173. doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2008.05.046 Shi, G., Yang, L., Wanga, Y., Kobayashi, K., Zhu, J., Tang, H., Pan, S., Chen, T., Liu, G. and Wang, Y. 2009. Impact of elevated ozone concentration on yield of four Chinese rice cultivars under fully open-air field conditions. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 131: 178-184. Shimizu, H. and Feng, Y. W. 2007. Ozone and/or water stresses could have influenced the Betula ermanii Cham. Forest decline observed at Oku-Nikko, Japan. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment 128: 109-119. Singh, P., Agrawal, M. and Agrawal, S. B. 2009. Evaluation of physiological, growth and yield responses of a tropical oil crop ( Brassica campestris L. var. Kranti) under ambient ozone pollution at varying NPK levels. Environmental Pollution 157: 871-880. Singh, P., Singh, S., Agrawal, S. B. and Agrawal, M. 2012. Assessment of the interactive effects of ambient O 3 and NPK levels on two tropical mustard varieties ( Brassica campestris L.) using open-top chambers. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment 184: 5863-5874. Son, J., Lee, J., Kim, H., Yi, O., & Bell, M. 2012. Susceptibility to air pollution effects on mortality in Seoul, Korea: A case-crossover analysis of individual-level effect modifiers. Journal of Exposure Science and … , 22 (3), 227–234. doi:10.1038/jes.2012.6.Susceptibility Stavrakou, T., J.-F. Müller, K. F. Boersma, I. De Smedt, and R. J. van der A. 2008. Assessing the distribution and growth rates of NOx emission sources by inverting a 10-year record of NO 2satellite columns, Geophys. Res. Lett., 35, L10801, doi:10.1029/2008GL033521. Stieb, D. M., Judek, S., & Burnett, R. T. 2003. Meta-analysis of time-series studies of air pollution and mortality: update in relation to the use of generalized additive models. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association (1995) , 53 (3), 258–61. Streets, D. G., Fu, J. S., Jang, C. J., Hao, J., He, K., Tang, X., Zhang, Y., Wang, Z., Li, Z., Zhang, Q., Wang, L., Wang B., Yu, C., 2007, Air quality during the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games, Atmos. Environ. , 41, pp. 480-492. Sudo, K., and Akimoto, H.: Global source attribution of tropospheric ozone: Long-range transport from various source regions, J. Geophys. Res., 112, D12302, doi:10.1029/2006JD007992, 2007. Suto, H., Hattori, Y., Tanaka, N. and Kohno, Y. 2008. Effects of strong wind and ozone on localized tree decline in the Tanzawa Mountains of Japan. Asian Journal of Atmospheric Environment 2: 81-89. 124 Takeda, M. and Aihara, K. 2007. Effects of ambient ozone concentrations on beech ( Fagus crenanta )seedlings in the Tanzawa Mountains, Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan. Journal of Japan Society for Atmospheric Environment 42: 107-117. (In Japanese with English summary) Tanimoto, H., H. Furutani, S. Kato, J. Matsumoto, Y. Makide, and H. Akimoto.2002. Seasonal cycles of ozone and oxidized nitrogen species in northeast Asia, 1, Impact of regional climatology and photochemistry observed during RISOTTO 1999-2000, J. Geophys. Res., 107(D24), 4747, doi:10.1029/2001JD001496. Tanimoto, H. 2009. Increase in springtime tropospheric ozone at a mountainous site in Japan for the period 1998-2006, Atmos. Environ., 43, 1358-1363. Tanimoto, H., K. Matsumoto, and M. Uematsu, Ozone–CO correlations in Siberian wildfire plumes observed at Rishiri Island, SOLA, 4, 65-68, doi:10.2151/sola.2008-017, 2008. Tanimoto, H., O. Wild, S. Kato, H. Furutani, Y. Makide, Y. Komazaki, S. Hashimoto, S. Tanaka, and H. Akimoto. 2002. Seasonal cycles of ozone and oxidized nitrogen species in northeast Asia, 2, A model analysis of the roles of chemistry and transport, J. Geophys. Res., 107(D23), 4706, doi:10.1029/2001JD001497. Tanimoto, H., Sawa, Y., Matsueda, H., Uno, I., Ohara, T., Yamaji, K., Kurokawa, J., and Yonemura, S. 2005. Significant latitudinal gradient in the surface ozone spring maximum over East Asia, Geophys. Res. Lett., 32, L21805, doi:10.1029/2005GL023514. Tanimoto, H., T. Ohara, and I. Uno. 2009. Asian anthropogenic emissions and decadal trends in springtime tropospheric ozone over Japan: 1998–2007, Geophys. Res. Lett., 36, L23802, doi:10.1029/2009GL041382 Tanimoto, H., Y. Kajii, J. Hirokawa, H. Akimoto, and N.P. Minko. 2000. The atmospheric impact of boreal forest fires in far eastern Siberia on the seasonal variation of carbon monoxide: Observations at Rishiri, a northern remote island in Japan, Geophys. Res. Lett., 27(24), 4073-4076. Task Force on Hemispheric Transport of Air Pollution (HT HTAP). 2007. Hemispheric transport of air pollution 2007 interim report, edited by T. J. Keating and A. Zuber, Air Pollut. Stud. 16, U.N. Econ. Comm. for Europe, New York. Task Force on Hemispheric Transport of Air Pollution (HT HTAP). 2010, Hemispheric transport of air pollution 2010 Part A: Ozone and particulate matter, edited by F. Dentener, T. J. Keating and H. Akimoto, Air Pollut. Stud. 17, U.N. Econ. Comm. for Europe, New York. Thwe, A.A., Vercambre, G., Gautier, H., Pagès, L., Jourdan, C., Gay, F. and Kasemsap, P. 2013. Dynamic shoot and root growth at different developmental stages of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum Mill.) under acute ozone stress. Scientia Horticulturae 150: 317-325. Tie, X., Geng, F., Peng, L., Gao W., and C. Zhao, 2009, Measurement and modeling of O 3 variability in Shanghai, China: Application of the WRF-Chem model. Atmos. Environ., 43, 4289-4302. 125 Tiwari, S., Agrawal, M. and Marshall, F. M. 2006. Evaluation of ambient air pollution impact on carrot plants at a suburban site using open top chambers. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment 119: 15-30. Tripathi, R. and Agrawal S. B. 2012. Effects of ambient and elevated level of ozone on Brassica campestris L. with special reference to yield and oil quality parameters. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 85: 1-12. Tripathi, R. and Agrawal, S. B. 2013. Interactive effect of supplemental ultraviolet B and elevated ozone on seed yield and oil quality of two cultivars of linseed ( Linum usitatissimum L.) carried out in open top chambers. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 93: 1016-1025. Tsukahara, K., Sawada, H., Matsumura, H., Kohno, Y. and Tamaoki, M. 2012. Quantitative trait locus analyses of ozone-induced grain yield reduction in rice. Environmental and Experimental Botany 88, 100-106. Tsutsumi, Y., K. Mori, M. Ikegami, T. Tashiro, K. Tsuboi. 2006 Long-term trends of greenhouse gases in regional and background events observed during 1998–2004 at Yonagunijima located to the east of the Asian continent, Atmos. Environ., 40, 5868-5879. Tsutsumi, Y., Y. Zaizen, and Y. Makino. 1994 Tropospheric ozone measurement at the top of Mt. Fuji, Geophys. Res. Lett., 21(16), 1727-1730. Tsutsumi, Y., Y.Igarashi, Y Zaizen and Y. Makino. 1998. Case studies of tropospheric ozone events observed at the summit of Mt. Fuji, J. Geophys. Res., 103(D14), 16935-16951. Tuovinen, J., L. Emberson, and D. Simpson 2009. Modelling ozone fluxes to forests for risk assessment: status and prospects, Ann. For. Sci., 66, 401. Uno, I., He, Y., Ohara T., et al. (2007), Systematic analysis of interannual and seasonal variations of model-simulated tropospheric NO 2 in Asia and comparison with GOME-satellite data. Atmos Chem Phys 7(6): 1671–1681. doi: 10.5194/acp-7-1671-2007. USEPA (2006), Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (final). EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF. US Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC. USEPA (2008), Ozone air quality standards, http://www.epa.gov/air/ozonepollution/standards.html. Van der A., R. J., Eskes, H. J., Boersma, K. F., et al. 2008. Trends, seasonal variability and dominant NOx source derived from a ten year record of NO 2 measured from space. J. Geophys. Res. 113(D4). doi: 10.1029/2007JD009021. Van Dingenen, R., F. J. Dentener, F. Raes, F., M. C. Krol, L. Emberson, and J.Cofala. 2009. The global impact of ozone on agricultural yields under current and future air quality legislation. Atmospheric Environment, 43, 604–618. Van, D. T. H. and Oanh, N. T. K. 2009b. Open top chamber experiment study to assess effects of ground level ozone on local peanut cultivar in Vietnam. International Journal of Environmental Studies 66: 101-111. 126 Van, D. T. H., Ishii, S. and Oanh, N. T. K. 2009a. Assessment of ozone effects on local rice cultivar by portable ozone fumigation system in Hanoi, Vietnam. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment 155: 569-580. Wahid, A. 2006. Influence of atmospheric pollutants on agriculture in developing countries: A case study with three new wheat varieties in Pakistan. Science of the Total Environment 371: 304-313. Wang, J., Zeng, Q., Zhu, J., Liu, G. and Tang, H. 2013. Dissimilarity of ascorbate–glutathione (AsA–GSH) cycle mechanism in two rice ( Oryza sativa L.) cultivars under experimental free-air ozone exposure. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 165: 39-49. Wang, L., He, X. and Chen, W. 2009. Effects of elevated ozone on photosynthetic CO 2 exchange and chlorophyll a fluorescence in leaves of Quercus mongolica grown in urban area. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 82: 478-481. Wang, Q. G., Han, Z. W., Wang, T. J., and Zhang, R. J. 2008. Impacts of biogenic emissions of VOC and NOx on tropospheric ozone during summertime in eastern China. Science of the Total Environment, 395, 41-49, doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2008.01.059. Wang, T. and Xie, S., 2009, Assessment of traffic-related air pollution in the urban streets before and during the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games traffic control period. 43(35), 5682-5690. Wang, T., Cheung, T. F., Li, Y. S., Yu, X. M., and Blake, D. R. 2002. Emission characteristics of CO, NO x , SO 2 and indications of biomass burning observed at a rural site in eastern China, J. Geophys. Res., 107(D12), 4157, doi:10.1029/2001JD000724. Wang, T., Cheung, V. T. F., Anson, M., and Li, Y. S. 2001. Ozone and related gaseous pollutants in the boundary layer of eastern China: Overview of the recent measurements at a rural site, Geophys. Res. Lett., 28(12), 2373–2376, doi:10.1029/2000GL012378. Wang, T., Ding, A., Gao, J., and Wu, W. S. 2006. Strong ozone production in urban plumes from Beijing, China, Geophys. Res. Lett., 33, L21806, doi:10.1029/2006GL027689 Wang, T., Wong, C. H., Cheung, T. F., Blake, D. R., Arimoto, R., Baumann, K., Tang, J., Ding, G. A., Yu, X. M., Li, Y. S., Streets, D. G., Simpson, I. J. 2004. Relationships of trace gases and aerosols and the emission characteristics at Lin'an, a rural site in eastern China, during spring 2001, J. Geophys. Res., 109, D19S05, doi:10.1029/2003JD004119. Wang, T., X. L. Wei, A. J. Ding, C. N. Poon, K. S. Lam, Y. S. Li, L. Y. Chan, and M. Anson. 2009. Increasing surface ozone concentrations in the background atmosphere of Southern China, 1994–2007, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 9, 6217-6227. Wang, T.J., Lam, K.S., Xie, M., Wang, X. M., Carmichael, M., and Li, Y.S. 2006a. Integrated studies of a photochemical smog episode in Hong Kong and regional transport in the Pearl River Delta of China, Tellus, 2006,58B, 31-40. Wang, X. S. and Li J. L. 2003. A case study of ozone source apportionment in Beijing(in Chinese). 127 Acta Scientiarum Naturalium Universitatis Pekinensis, 39(2), 244-253. Wang, X., and D. L. Mauzerall. 2004. Characterizing distributions of surface ozone and its impact on grain production in China, Japan and South Korea: 1990 and 2020. Atmospheric Environment, 38, 4383-4402. Wang, X., Zhang, Q., Zheng, F., Zheng, Q., Yao, F., Chen, Z., Zhang, W., Hou, P., Feng, Z., Song, W., Feng, Z. and Lu, F. 2012a. Effects of elevated O 3 concentration on winter wheat and rice yields in the Yangtze River Delta, China. Environmental Pollution 171: 118-125. Wang, Y., Jacob, D. J., and Logan, J. A. 1998. Global simulation of tropospheric O3-NOx-hydrocarbon chemistry: 3. Origin of tropospheric ozone and effects of nonmethane hydrocarbons, J. Geophys. Res., 103(D9), 10757–10767. Wang, Y., McElroy, M. B., Munger, J. W., Hao, J., Ma, H., Nielsen, C. P., and Chen, Y.: Variations of O3 and CO in summertime at a rural site near Beijing, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 8, 6355–6363, 2008a. Wang, Y., Yang, L., Han, Y., Zhu, J., Kobayashi, K., Tang, H. and Wang, Y. 2012b. The impact of elevated tropospheric ozone on grain quality of hybrid rice: A free-air gas concentration enrichment (FACE) experiment. Field Crops Research 129: 81-89. Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Hao, J., and Luo, M.: Seasonal and spatial variability of surface ozone over China: contributions from background and domestic pollution, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 3511–3525, doi:10.5194/acp-11-3511-2011, 2011. Wang, Z, Li, J., Wang, X., Pochanart, P., and Akimoto, H., 2006b, Modeling of regional high ozone episode observed at two mountain sites (Mt. Tai and Huang) in East China, J. Atmos. Chem., 

55(3), 253–272, doi:10.1007/s10874-006-9038-6. Wang, Z. F. Li, J., Wang, X. Q, Pochanart, P., and Akimoto, H.: Modeling of Regional High Ozone Episode Observed at Two Mountain Sites (Mt. Tai and Huang) in East China, J. Atmos. Chem., 55, 253–272, 2006. Watanabe, M., Hoshika, Y., Inada, N., Wang, X., Mao, Q. and Koike, T. 2013. Photosynthetic traits of Siebold’s beech and oak saplings grown under free air ozone exposure in northern Japan. Environmental Pollution 174: 50-56. Watanabe, M., Matsuo, N., Yamaguchi, M., Matsumura, H., Kohno, Y. and Izuta, T. 2010a. Risk assessment of ozone impact on the carbon absorption of Japanese representative conifers. European Journal of Forest Research 129: 421-430. Watanabe, M., Umemoto-Yamaguchi, M., Koike, T. and Izuta, T. 2010b. Growth and photosynthetic response of Fagus crenata seedlings to ozone and/or elevated carbon dioxide. Landscape and Ecological Engineering 6: 181-190. Watanabe, M., Yamaguchi, M., Iwasaki, M., Matsuo, N., Naba, J., Tabe, C., Matsumura, H., Kohno, Y. and Izuta, T. 2006. Effects of ozone and/or nitrogen load on the growth of Larix kaempferi ,128 

Pinus densiflora and Cryptomeria japonica seedlings. Journal of Japan Society for Atmospheric Environment 41: 320-334. Watanabe, M., Yamaguchi, M., Matsumura, H., Kohno, Y. and Izuta, T. 2008. Effects of ozone on the growth and photosynthesis of Castanopsis sieboldii seedlings grown under different nitrogen loads. Journal of Agricultural Meteorology 64: 143-155. Watanabe, M., Yamaguchi, M., Matsumura, H., Kohno, Y. and Izuta, T. 2012. Risk assessment of ozone impact on Fagus crenata in Japan: Consideration of atmospheric nitrogen deposition. European Journal of Forest Research 131: 475-484. Watanabe, M., Yamaguchi, M., Matsumura, H., Kohno, Y., Koike, T. and Izuta, T. 2011. A case study of risk assessment of ozone impact on forest tree species in Japan. Asian Journal of Atmospheric Environment 5: 205-215. Watanabe, M., Yamaguchi, M., Tabe, C., Iwasaki, M., Yamashita, R., Funada, R., Fukami, M., Matsumura, H., Kohno, Y. and Izuta, T. 2007. Influences of nitrogen load on the growth and photosynthetic responses of Quercus serrata seedlings to O 3 . Trees 21: 421-432. Watanabe, M., Yonekura, T., Honda, Y., Yoshidome, M., Nakaji, T. and Izuta, T. 2005. Effects of ozone and soil water stress, singly and in combination, on leaf antioxidative systems of Fagus crenata 

seedlings. Journal of Agricultural Meteorology 60: 1105-1108. WHO. 2006. WHO Air quality guidelines for particulate matter, ozone, nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide, Global update 2005. Wild, O., and Akimoto, H.: Intercontinental transport of ozone and its precursors in athree-dimensional global CTM, J. Geophys. Res., 106(D21), 27729-27744, 2001. Wild, O., Pochanart, P., and Akimoto, H. 2004. Trans-Eurasian transport of ozone and its precursors, J. Geophys. Res., 109, D11302, doi:10.1029/2003JD004501. Wittrock, F., A. Richter, H. Oetjen, J. P. Burrows, M. Kanakidou, S. Myriokefalitakis, R. Volkamer, S. Beirle, U. Platt, and T. Wagner. 2006. Simultaneous global observations of glyoxal and formaldehyde from space, Geophys. Res. Lett., 33, L16804, doi:10.1029/2006GL026310. Worden, H. M., et al. 2007. Comparisons of Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer (TES) ozone profiles to ozonesondes: Methods and initial results, J. Geophys. Res., 112, D03309, doi:10.1029/2006JD007258. Xu, H., Biswas, D. K., Li, W. -D., Chen, S. -B., Zhang, L., Jiang, G. -M. and Li, Y. -G. 2007. Photosynthesis and yield responses of ozone-polluted winter wheat to drought. Photosynthetica 45: 582-588. Xu, X., Lin, W., Wang, T., Yan, P., Tang, J., Meng, Z., and Wang, Y. 2008. Long-term trend of surface ozone at a regional background station in eastern China 1991–2006: enhanced variability, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 8, 2595-2607, doi:10.5194/acp-8-2595-2008. Yamaguchi, M., Inada, H., Satoh, R., Hoshino, D., Nagasawa, A., Negishi, Y., Sasaki, H., Nouchi, I., 129 Kobayashi, K. and Izuta, T. 2008. Effects of ozone on the growth, yield and leaf gas exchange rates of two Japanese cultivars of rice ( Oryza sativa L.). Journal of Agricultural Meteorology 64: 131-141. Yamaguchi, M., Watanabe, M., Iwasaki, M., Tabe, C., Matsumura, H., Kohno, Y. and Izuta, T. 2007a. Growth and photosynthetic responses of Fagus crenata seedlings to O 3 under different nitrogen loads. Trees 21: 707-718. Yamaguchi, M., Watanabe, M., Matsumura, H., Kohno, Y. and Izuta, T. 2010. Effects of ozone on nitrogen metabolism in the leaves of Fagus crenata seedlings under different soil nitrogen loads. Trees 24: 175-184. Yamaguchi, M., Watanabe, M., Matsumura, H., Kohno, Y. and Izuta, T. 2011. Experimental studies on the effects of ozone on growth and photosynthetic activity of Japanese forest tree species. Asian Journal of Atmospheric Environment 5: 65-78. Yamaguchi, M., Watanabe, M., Matsuo, N., Naba, J., Funada, R., Fukami, M., Matsumura, H., Kohno, Y. and Izuta, T. 2007b. Effects of nitrogen supply on the sensitivity to O 3 of growth and photosynthesis of Japanese beech ( Fagus crenata ) seedlings. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution, Focus 7: 131-136. Yamaji, K., Li, J., Uno, I., Kanaya, Y., Irie, H., Takigawa, M., Komazaki, Y., Pochanart, P., Liu, Y., Tanimoto, H., Ohara, T., Yan, X., Wang, Z., and Akimoto, H. 2010. Impact of open crop residual burning on air quality over Central Eastern China during the Mount Tai Experiment 2006 (MTX2006), Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 7353–7368. Yan, K., Chen, W., He, X. Zhang, G., Xu, S. and Wang, L. 2010. Responses of photosynthesis, lipid peroxidation and antioxidant system in leaves of Quercus mongolica to elevated O3 .Environmental and Experimental Botany 69: 198-204. Yan, M., Liu, Z., Liu, X., Duan, H., & Li, T. 2013. Meta-analysis of the Chinese studies of the association between ambient ozone and mortality. Chemosphere. doi:10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.05.040 Yonekura, T., Dokiya, Y., Fukami, M. and Izuta, T. 2001a. Effects of ozone and/or soil water stress on growth and photosynthesis of Fagus crenata seedlings. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 130: 965-970. Yonekura, T., Honda, Y., Oksanen, E., Yoshidome, M., Watanabe, M., Funada, R., Koike, T. and Izuta, T. 2001b. The influences of ozone and soil water stress, singly and in combination, on leaf gas exchange rates, leaf ultrastructural characteristics and annual ring width of Fagus crenata 

seedlings. Journal of Japan Society for Atmospheric Environment 36: 333-351. Yonekura, T., Yoshidome, M., Watanabe, M., Honda, Y., Ogiwara, I. and Izuta T. 2004. Carry-over effects of ozone and water stress on leaf phenological characteristics and bud frost hardiness of 

Fagus crenata seedlings. Trees 18: 581-588. Yoshitomi, M., Wild, O., and H. Akimoto. 2011. Contributions of regional and intercontinental 130 transport to surface ozone in the Tokyo area, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 7583–7599, doi:10.5194/ acp-11-7583-2011. Zbinden, R.M., J.-P. Cammas, V. Thouret, P. Nedelec, F. Karcher, and P. Simon. 2006. Mid-latitude tropospheric ozone columns from the MOZAIC program: Climatology and interannual variability, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 1053-1073. Zhang, W., Feng, Z., Wang, X. and Niu, J. 2012. Responses of native broadleaved woody species to elevated ozone in subtropical China. Environmental Pollution 163: 149-157. Zhao, T. H., Guo, D., Wang, Y., Yu, M., Wang, D., Jin, Y., Wang, J. L. and He, X. Y. 2009. Effects of elevated atmospheric CO 2 and O 3 on Hill activity and Ca 2+ /Mg 2+ -ATPase activity of Pinus tabulaeformis Carr. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 83: 516-519. Zheng, J. Y., Zhong, L. J., Wang, T., Louie, P. K. K. and Li, Z. C. 2010. Ground-level ozone in the Pearl River Delta region: Analysis of data from a recently established regional air quality monitoring network. Atmos. Environ. , 44, 814–823, doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2009.11.032. Zheng, Y. H., Li, X., Li, Y. G., Miao, B. H., Xu, H., Simmons, M. and Yang, X. H. 2012. Contrasting responses of salinity-stressed salt-tolerant and intolerant winter wheat ( Triticum aestivum L.) cultivars to ozone pollution. Plant Physiology and Biochemistry 52: 169-178. Zheng, Y. H., Li, Y. G., Xia, W. R., Xu, H., Su, B. Y., Jiang, G. M. and Ning, T. Y. 2011. Responses of gas exchange, cellular membrane integrity, and antioxidant enzymes activities of salinity-stressed winter wheat to ozone pollution. Photosynthetica 49: 389-396. Zhu, B., Akimoto, H., Wang, Z., Sudo, K., Tang, J., and Uno I. 2004. Why does surface ozone peak in summertime at Waliguan?, Geophys. Res. Lett., 31, L17104, doi:10.1029/2004GL020609. Zhu, X., Feng, Z., Sun, T., Liu, X., Tang, H., Zhu, J., Guo, W. and Kobayashi, K. 2011. Effects of elevated ozone concentration on yield of four Chinese cultivars of winter wheat under fully open-air field conditions. Global Change Biology 17: 2697-2706. Ziemke, J. R., S. Chandra, B. N. Duncan, L. Froidevaux, P. K. Bhartia, P. F. Levelt, and J. W. Waters .2006. Tropospheric ozone determined from Aura OMI and MLS: Evaluation of measurements and comparison with the Global Modeling Initiative's Chemical Transport Model, J. Geophys. Res., 111, D19303, doi:10.1029/2006JD007089. 131 

# Chapter 4 Acidification and Eutrophication 4.1 Overview 

The pioneering works by John Evelyn in the 17 th century and by Robert Angus Smith in the 18 th century lead to discovery of acid rain and its adverse effect. A dramatic increase of fossil fuel consumption after World War II worsened the acid deposition problem in Europe and eastern North America. Eventually, the convention on long-transboundary air pollution was launched in 1979 to investigate acid deposition and implement a mitigation measure. 

Although the acid rain problem in East Asia is noted as early as the 1970’s (Galloway et al , 1978), the acid rain study in East Asia began to appear in literature only after late 1980’s because of the lack of visible adverse effects. The characteristics of rain water composition and wet deposition were intensively investigated mainly in North Eastern Asia; China (Larssen et al., 2006), Japan (Hara et al., 1995; Noguchi, 1995; Seto and Hara, 2006) and Republic of Korea (Chung et al., 1996; Lee et al., 2000) which reported high calcium concentrations with pH ranging from 4 to 6. Acid deposition modeling was also performed to analyze acid deposition phenomena and source-receptor relations, the early works of which include modeling studies in Asia (Kotamarthi and Carmichael, 1990; Arndt and Carmichael, 1995; Arndt et al., 1998), North East Asia(Park and Cho, 1998; Kim et al., 2003; Park et al. 2005) and China(Huang et al., 1995). The above mentioned field measurement and modeling in the 1990’s and 2000’s and the recent studies in the 2010’s (Lu et al., 2010; Kuribayashi et al, 2012, Morino et al, 2011) all noted that the sulfur and nitrogen depositions has increased in China and Japan from 1980s to 2000s most likely due to increased SO 2 and NO x emissions in China. Recently, some researchers suggested that sulfur deposition might start to decrease as early as after 2006.(Kim and Cho, 2003; Lin et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2013). Anthropogenic inputs of sulfur and reactive nitrogen into terrestrial ecosystems are now comparable to natural input, and can have profound and manifold impacts on soil and fresh water. Sulfur retention in soil, long-term changes in nitrogen cycle in forested ecosystems, and other factors have been investigated and some hypotheses were developed. Asian data is available only for Japan and China, where the biogeochemical cycle is shown to be different from that in Europe and North America due to warm and humid weather and different soil and vegetation types. Yang et al.(2012b), and Nakahara et al.(2010) reported a significant decrease of soil pH over the last twenty years or so in China and Japan, which were probably caused by acid rain. Despite these studies, soil acidification manifesting in East Asian field observations are still too limited to draw a reliable scientific conclusion from. In addition, the Al/(Ca+Mg) or Al/( Ca+Mg+K) ratios reported in China (Dawei et al., 2001) and Japan (Sato and Wakamatsu, 2001) are small mainly due to high calcium concentration such that the risk of forest decline by soil acidification is not serious. Inland water acidification probably due to high acid loads occurred during the last several decades in China, Japan and Russia, and both SO 42− and NO 3− contributed to acidification in the region. Acid Neutralizing Capacity (ANC) of the bedrock geology is one of the most important factors in the manifestation of inland water acidification. Based on input–output measurements conducted in Japan and China, the majority of ecosystems have high retention ability for nitrogen, whereas nitrogen saturation occurred in some particular forested ecosystems. Spatial distribution of nitrate concentrations in Japanese stream water demonstrated that 132 

there were some areas with high concentration in the vicinity of large cities and intensive agricultural areas, and the area with highest concentration were located on the air mass advection path from central Tokyo. There were a number of good studies on acid deposition for the North East Asia, addressing characteristics of precipitation chemistry, trends of major anions and cations, emissions of acid precursors, and source-receptor relations. However, there are significant differences among the reported source-receptor analysis results, the resolution of which requires multi-model simulation through international collaboration. On the other hand, there are only limited studies in literature for South East Asia. Therefore, further field work is recommended, as well as model simulations to enable trend analyses and source-receptor studies. Despite significant advances in acid deposition studies over the past twenty years or so in East Asia, the parameterizations of individual processes still heavily rely on studies from the United States and Europe. Therefore, combined theoretical and field studies should be carried out to test the validity of these imported parameterization schemes and to develop the new parameterization method more suitable to East Asia if necessary. High priority areas in this regard include the parameterization of dry deposition velocities, the contribution of in-cloud sulfate production to sulfate aerosols. In addition, as a future project, collecting data on biogeochemical cycles, especially in South East Asia, and analyzing the interaction between nitrogen and carbon cycle are recommended. Long-term data on inland water chemistry is limited in the Asian region. The re-measurement of previously surveyed points or the assessment of public data on water quality may be informative when evaluating the current situation on inland water acidification and nitrogen leaching. Moreover, the areas with low ANC geology that suffered high acid deposition should be monitored particularly as potentially high-risk areas on inland water acidification. Regional scales evaluation of acidification and nitrogen leaching is necessary. It should be useful to analyze the causal relationship between regional deposition and impacts through the collaboration of research regarding atmospheric modeling and impact. 

4.2 Sulfur and nitrogen deposition monitoring and modeling 4.2.1 Spatial distribution and seasonal variation 

Scientific papers of observational studies on spatial distributions of sulfur and nitrogen deposition all over the East and Southeast Asia are very limited, and thus, we firstly refer to a report of EANET (2012) in this subsection. Deposition rates of nss-SO 42-, NO 3- , and NH 4+ were high at urban and rural sites, including Chongqing (China), Petaling Jaya (Malaysia), Metro Manila (Philippines), Jakarta (Indonesia), and Ijira (Japan) as shown in Figure 4.2.1. High deposition in these areas can be explained by high emission rates of their precursors around these areas (Kurokawa et al., 2013). In northeast China, Pan et al. (2013) and Pan et al. (2012) evaluated spatial variations in the deposition of sulfur and nitrogen, respectively. Pan et al. (2013) investigated atmospheric sulfur deposition via precipitation, particles, and gases from continuous measurement at ten sites in Northern China between December 2007 and November 2010. Higher sulfur deposition was observed at industrial and urban sites (50–101 kg S hr-1 yr-1) than at agricultural and rural sites (35–70 kg S hr-1 yr-1), reflecting higher contribution of dry deposition (mostly of gaseous SO 2 ) than the wet process. Dry deposition accounted for 70% (57%-82%) of total sulfur deposition, and 68-78% of sulfur dry deposition occurred in a form of gaseous SO 2 .The seasonal variation in the total sulfur deposition was 133 

not obvious across the entire year because of opposite seasonal trends in wet and dry deposition (Dry deposition was the highest in winter while wet deposition was the highest in summer and lowest in winter). Spatial pattern of total sulfur deposition resembled that of the emission inventory, indicating the dramatic anthropogenic imprints on the regional sulfur budget. Pan et al. (2012) investigated the wet and dry atmospheric deposition of different nitrogen species at ten selected sites in Northern China during 2007-2010. It should be noted that gaseous HNO 3concentration was not measured, and thus, dry deposition of HNO 3 was not included in their estimate. The total nitrogen deposition in Northern China (28-100 kg N hr-1 yr-1) was significantly larger than the values reported by national scale monitoring networks in Europe, North America and East Asia because of high rates of wet deposition and gaseous NH 3 dry deposition. The greatest contribution to the total nitrogen deposition was from dry deposition of gaseous species, followed by wet deposition and dry deposition of particulate species. More than 91% (84–97%) of gaseous dry deposition of nitrogen species in Northern China was attributed to NH 3 , thereby indicating that NH 3 played a more significant role than NO x in the gaseous dry deposition for agricultural, rural, suburban and even urban sites. The gaseous dry deposition flux of NH 3 at the agricultural sites was 2 to 3 times higher than that at the urban and industrial sites. Spatial differences in the nitrogen wet deposition were not significant between the ten sites or in the different years. NH 4+ remains the major contributor to nitrogen wet deposition in the target areas, but the contribution of NO 3− to nitrogen wet deposition was enhanced in certain urban areas due to emissions from vehicles. Observational spatial variations of sulfur and nitrogen deposition in Japan were discussed in Aikawa et al. (2010) and Endo et al. (2011). Aikawa et al. (2010) measured SO 2 and SO 42- concentrations at multiple sites throughout Japan from April 2003 to March 2006. There was no evident relationship between SO 2 concentrations and longitude (Figure 4.2.2). This independence of SO 2 concentrations and longitude is consistent with the observation that local SO 2 emissions and meteorology are more important in the determination of SO 2 concentrations. In contrast, they observed a distinct relationship between SO 42- concentrations and longitude, including the SO 42- concentrations measured at the 3 EANET sites in Republic of Korea. SO 42- concentrations were generally higher at sites toward the west, in areas closer to the Asian continent. We observed a similar pattern between SO 42- concentrations and latitude although it was not as clear as that for longitude. Endo et al. (2011) evaluated the regional characteristics of dry and wet deposition at 10 EANET sites in Japan from April 2003 to March 2008. The components examined for dry deposition were sulfur compounds (SO 2 and particulate SO 42- ) and nitrogen compounds (HNO 3 , NH 3 , particulate NO 3- , and NH 4+ ). Dry deposition was calculated by the product of the deposition velocity estimated by the inferential method for forest and grass surfaces and the air concentration of each compound. The 5-year mean annual dry deposition amounts for sulfur and nitrogen compounds were in the range of 5-37 and 7-50 mmol m -2 year -1 , respectively. The regional characteristics of dry deposition amounts were similar between sulfur and nitrogen compounds, which showed higher deposition in the Sea of Japan side and in Western Japan. The 5-year mean annual total deposition amounts for sulfur and nitrogen compounds were in the range of 28-77 and 22-130 mmol m -2 year -1 , respectively. The total deposition amounts among sulfur and nitrogen compounds showed different regional characteristics. The higher total deposition amounts for sulfur compounds at remote sites were caused by long-range transboundary air pollution. Total deposition amounts in Japan were larger than those in North America and Europe because of high wet deposition, which implied that the increasing emissions of 134 

air pollutants in East Asia caused high atmospheric depositions Modeling approach also has been applied to evaluate spatial variations in the deposition field over East Asia. Wang et al. (2008) presented the ensemble-mean depositions of various species over East Asia based on eight regional chemical models used in Model Inter-Comparison Study for Asia (MICS-Asia) II. Monthly-mean dry deposition of SO 2 , HNO 3 , NH 3, sulfate, nitrate and ammonium and wet deposition of SO 42- , NO 3- and NH 4+ of chemical species simulated by these models have been provided for four periods (March, July, December 2001 and March 2002). Models can reproduce well acid depositions of China, Japan, Republic of Korea and Southeast Asia, but cannot correctly describe them in inland areas, such as Mongolia and Russia, which needs to be improved. Ensemble-mean simulation indicated that high deposition of sulfate, nitrate and ammonium often occurs in eastern China, Japan, Republic of Korea, Thailand, Viet Nam, Philippines and other parts of Southeast Asia. Lin et al. (2008a) conducted a comprehensive model evaluation to help identify major uncertainties of regional air quality model (CMAQ) in predicting long-range transport and deposition of acidifying substances in East Asia. The model successfully reproduces the magnitudes and diurnal variations of SO 2 mixing ratios at most sites of EANET. Figure 4.2.3 shows the distributions of annual wet deposition of sulfate, nitrate, and ammonium in 2001. The strong continental outflow of Asian pollutants is clearly depicted. These maps provide an Asia-wide perspective on acidic deposition, which is due predominately to sulfur species at present, but with a growing contribution from nitrate. On annual average, the spatial variations and magnitudes of sulfate and ammonium deposition have been well reproduced by the model, while there is a moderate underestimation of nitrate wet deposition at all EANET sites. Dentener et al. (2006) used 23 atmospheric chemistry transport models to calculate current and future (2030) deposition of reactive nitrogen and sulfate to land and ocean surfaces. Figure 4.2.4 illustrates the mean modeled deposition of nitrate, sulfur, and ammonium in 2000. The regions of high nitrate deposition are North America, western and eastern Europe, and East Asia. The largest total deposition of ammonium is found over Europe, India and East Asia. Sulfur deposition dominates over North America, Europe and East Asia. These results indicate that East Asia is one of the major global high deposition areas. 135 

Figure 4.2.1 (a-c) Annual deposition levels of nss- SO 42- , NO 3- , and NH 4+ observed at EANET sites in 2010 (EANET, 2012). (d-f) Spatial distributions of annual emissions (Mg yr −1 grid −1 ) of SO 2 , NO x, and NH 3 in 2008 (Kurokawa et al., 2013). 

(a) (d) (b) (e) (f) (c) 136 

Figure 4.2.2 Relationship between annual mean concentrations of SO 2 (a) and SO 42- (b) and longitude, and between annual mean concentration of SO 42- and latitude (c) during fiscal year 2003-2005 at 32 monitoring sites in Japan. Error bars indicate the ranges of annual mean values (Aikawa et al., 2010). 137 

Figure 4.2.3 Annual wet deposition load of sulfate, nitrate, and ammonium in 2001. The filled circles show measurements as observed by the EANET network. (a) nss SO 42- , (b) NO 3- , (c) NH 4+ and (d) scatter plot (Lin et al., 2008a). 138 

Figure 4.2.4 (a) Simulated total annual deposition of reactive nitrogen (mg(N) m -2 y -1 ) (b) total deposition (mg(S) m -2 yr -1 ) of sulfur, and (c) total deposition (mg(N) m -2 yr -1 ) of ammonium for year 2000 (Dentener et al., 2006). 4.2.2 Long term trend and inter-annual variation 

Inter-annual trend of sulfate deposition in the East Asia had been reported in several studies. Lu et al. (2010) estimated the annual SO 2 emission in China from 2000 to 2008 using a technology-based 

> (a) (b) (c) 139

methodology. Total SO 2 emission in China increased by 53%, from 21.7 Tg to 33.2 Tg, at an annual growth rate of 7.3% from 2000 to 2006. The emission growth rate slowed around 2005, and emissions began to decrease after 2006 mainly due to the wide application of flue-gas desulfurization devices in power plants in response to a new policy of China’s government. It was shown that the trend of estimated SO 2 emission in China is consistent with the trends of SO 2 concentration and acid rain pH and frequency in China. Figure 4.2.5 shows the acid rain frequencies and precipitation pH in cities under the National Acid Rain Monitoring Program of China during 2000–2008. The proportion of cities experiencing acid rain with a frequency of >50% and >75% increased between 2000 and 2005; meanwhile, the proportion of cities experiencing moderate and heavy acid rain (average pH of precipitation less than 5.0 and 4.5, respectively) also increased, indicating the acid rain problem was getting more severe year by year. After 2005, the acid rain problem in Chinese cities was alleviated in both frequency and average precipitation pH value. Kuribayashi et al. (2012) used a chemical transport model to investigate the long-term trends of sulfur deposition in East Asia during 1981-2005. The model reproduced the observed spatial distributions of the rate of wet deposition of nss- SO 42- in East Asia, as well as seasonal variations and long-term trends of wet deposition of nss- SO 42- in Japan from 1988 to 2005. The increasing rate of wet deposition of nss- SO 42- in Japan during 1991-2005 was demonstrated with 99.9% significance for both observed and modeled data. The annual rate of total (wet + dry) sulfur deposition in Japan increased from 15.6 Gmol S y -1 in 1981-1985 to 23.9 Gmol S y -1 in 2001-2005 and this increase can be explained by increased contributions from China (an increase of 7.0 Gmol S y -1 ) and Miyakejima volcano (2.4 Gmol S y -1 ) (Figure 4.2.6a). Sulfur deposition from other sources decreased marginally (1.0 Gmol S y -1 ). The interannual trend of SO 2 emissions in China explains well the trend of China’s contribution to sulfur deposition in Japan ( r = 0.96). Over the same period, the rate of deposition of sulfur in East Asia increased gradually from 14.2 mmol S m 2 y -1 to 24.0 mmol S m 2 y -1 , and the contribution of emissions from China to total sulfur deposition in East Asia increased from 65% to 77%. The increase in the sulfur deposition rate was remarkably high on the North China Plain, near Guangzhou, and south of Chongqing (Figures 4.2.6b and 4.2.6c). Trend analysis of nitrogen deposition in East Asia is of great concern, and several scientific papers have been published on this subject since 2010. Liu et al. (2013) used nationwide data sets on bulk nitrogen deposition, as well as plant foliar nitrogen and crop nitrogen uptake to evaluate nitrogen deposition dynamics and their effect on ecosystems across China between 1980 and 2010. They find that, in spite of site-to-site variability in the data, the average annual bulk deposition of N increased by approximately 8 kgN ha -1 (P<0.001) between the 1980s (13.2 kgN ha -1 ) and the 2000s (21.1 kgN ha -1 )(Figure 4.2.7). The increase in bulk N deposition was driven mainly by increased volume-weighted N concentrations in rain water because annual precipitation in the study area has not changed significantly in the past 30 years. NH 4+ was the dominant form in bulk deposition, but the ratio of NH 4+ to NO 3- in bulk precipitation decreased significantly with time. The increase in overall bulk N deposition and the change in the ratio of NH 4+ to NO 3- in precipitation and deposition (Figure 4.2.7) are similar to the increasing trends of anthropogenic gaseous reactive nitrogen (NH 3 and NO x )emissions and changes in their ratio since 1980. They also analyzed the dynamics of bulk N deposition regionally by dividing deposition data into six areas: northern, southeast, southwest, northeast and northwest China and the Tibetan plateau. In general, bulk nitrogen deposition showed increasing trends and ratios of NH 4+ to NO 3- showed decreasing trends for all six regions between the 1980s and 140 

the 2000s. By comparison with the national average, they found both higher overall rates of deposition and higher annual rates of increase in deposition in the industrialized and agriculturally intensified northern, southeast and southwest China (annual bulk deposition rates were 22.6, 24.2 and 22.2 kgN ha -1 , respectively). The levels are much higher than those observed in any region in the United States, and are comparable to the maximum values observed in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands when N deposition was at its peak in the 1980s. Kim et al. (2011 reported nitrogen deposition in the Northwestern Pacific Ocean: The relative abundance of nitrate over phosphorus has increased in the period since 1980 in the marginal seas bordering the northwestern Pacific Ocean, located downstream of the populated and industrialized Asian continent. The increase in nitrate availability within the study area was mainly driven by increasing nitrate concentrations and was most likely due to the deposition of pollutant nitrogen from atmospheric sources. Atmospheric nitrogen deposition had a high temporal correlation with nitrate availability in the study area (r = 0.74 to 0.88), except in selected areas wherein riverine nitrogen load may be of equal importance. The increase in nitrate availability caused by atmospheric deposition and riverine input has switched extensive parts of the study area from being nitrate-limited to phosphorus-limited. Morino et al. (2011) analyzed results of a chemical transport model (CMAQ) and observational data to evaluate the interannual trend of nitrogen wet deposition across Japan from 1989 to 2008. The model successfully reproduced the general patterns of spatial and temporal variations of observed NO 3- wet deposition rates. Wet deposition rates of NO 3− across Japan increased from 1989 to 2008 (Figure 4.2.8), with rates of increase of 2-5% yr -1 . Sensitivity simulations indicated that the increase of NO 3- wet deposition rates was mostly (61%-94%) explained by the increased emissions of atmospheric pollutants in China. Contributions of China’s emissions increased from 29%-35% during 1989-1993 to 43%-61% during 2004-2008, suggesting that transboundary pollution had a large impact on NO 3- wet deposition in Japan. The contribution of observed NO 3- to total nitrogen wet deposition (i.e., NO 3- +NH 4+ ) increased in southwestern Japan, and currently, NO 3- and NH 4+ make similar contributions to nitrogen wet deposition across Japan. Morino et al. (2011) further evaluated inter-annual variation of NO 3− wet deposition in spring (March-May) using a meteorological index, area-weighted surface pressure anomaly (ASPA) in the western Pacific. When ASPA was negative, air masses from the Asian continent were more directly transported to Japan, and NO 3- concentrations across Japan became high. Thus, anomalies of NO 3- concentrations were negatively correlated with ASPA, as shown in Figure 4.2.9. Anomalies of NO 3- wet deposition rates, however, showed a weak positive correlation with ASPA, reflecting a positive correlation between anomalies in precipitation rates and ASPA. This result strongly suggests that precipitation patterns have a large impact on the inter-annual variation of NO 3-wet deposition across Japan. Recently, Fang et al. (2013) conducted trend analyses of SO 42− and NO 3- in Guangzhou, China based on monitoring data. Chemical composition of precipitation had been observed at four sites in Guangzhou City since 1992 and automatic precipitation samplers were used during 2001–2010. In China, SO 2 emissions increased by 28%, from 2001 (19.9 Tg) to 2005 (25.5 Tg), and then decreased by 10% from 2005 to 2010 (22.9 Tg). By contrast, in Guangzhou city, SO 2 emissions decreased with a rate of 7% per year since 2001; annual emissions in 2010 were reduced by 60% from 2001 and by 40% from 2005. Statistical analysis indicated that SO 42− deposition decreased during 2001-2010, and this decrease reflected decrease of SO 2 emissions in Guangzhou city. Temporal patterns of NO 3- and 141      

> NH 4+were not clear during the same period. They also noted that the current SO 42−(43 kg S hr-1 yr-1 as sulfate) and nitrogen depositions (35 kg N hr-1 yr-1 as NH 4+plus NO 3-in 2010) were still among the highest in China.

Figure 4.2.5 Proportion of cities with acid rain frequencies above 50% and 75%, and with average pH values of precipitation below 5.0 and 4.5 in China. (a) All cities under the National Acid Rain Monitoring Program. (b) Cities in the acid rain control area (Lu et al., 2010). 

Figure 4.2.6 (a) Interannual variations from 1981 to 2005 of sulfur deposition rates in Japan differentiated by source. Percentages for contributions from China, wet deposition are also shown. Spatial distributions averaged for 1981-2005 of (b) annual sulfur deposition (purple contours indicate the percentage of China’s contribution), and (c) percentage of increase rate in annual amount of sulfur deposition (Kuribayashi et al., 2012). 

> (a) (c) (b) 142

Figure 4.2.7 Trends in nitrate deposition and its components in China between 1980 and 2010. a, Bulk nitrate deposition; b, bulk nitrate concentration. c, ratios of NH 4+ to NO 3- in bulk precipitation (Liu et al., 2013). 143 

Figure 4.2.8 Temporal variations in annual averaged observed wet deposition rates of NO 3- and NH 4+ and precipitation rates in northeastern Japan (NEJ), central Japan (CJ), and southwestern Japan (SWJ). Model results averaged over the whole target area (red solid circles) and those averaged over the monitoring sites continuously operated during 1994–2008 (red open circles) are shown (Morino et al., 2011). 144 

Figure 4.2.9 Anomalies of O 3 , NO 3- wet deposition rates, precipitation rates, and particulate NO 3- concentrations in southwestern Japan (SWJ) and central Japan (CJ) in spring (March, April, and May) during 1989–2008. Area -weighted surface pressure anomaly (ASPA) is shown on the right axis. Anomalies of observed results (NO 3- wet deposition and precipitation rates) were multiplied by a factor of 0.5. 4.2.3 Source-receptor relationships 

The source-receptor relationship of sulfur and nitrogen deposition had been evaluated using simulation models in East Asia. Lin et al. (2008b) evaluated the source-receptor relationship in East Asia for sulfur and reactive nitrogen deposition in East Asia, using CMAQ model with emission and meteorology data for 2001. Figure 4.2.10 depicts the region-to-region source-receptor relationships for total depositions of sulfur and reactive nitrogen over 18 receptor regions in East Asia. Total deposition includes both the locally driven dry deposition and the more long-range transport effects of wet deposition. The contribution from China, including all the seven source regions shown as red bars in Figure 4.2.10, is significant to the deposition load throughout the study area. Long-range transport from the industrialized areas of China (red series) contributes a significant percentage (>20%) of anthropogenic sulfur and reactive nitrogen depositions throughout East Asia. At the same time, northwest China receives approximately 35% of its sulfur load and 45% of its nitrogen load from foreign emissions mainly from the Indian subcontinent either in domain or through boundary inflows. For the receptor areas in Southeast Asia, except Thailand and parts of India, the dominating sources (>50%) are foreign emissions from Thailand, South China and Southeast China. Source-receptor relationships for reactive nitrogen deposition (Figure 4.2.10b) show a somewhat different pattern as contrasted to source-receptor relationships for sulfur deposition. In considering the internal relationships among source regions of China, for instance, the relative contribution from Southeast China is more significant for the reactive nitrogen load in other regions than for the sulfur load. Local emissions are the dominant source of sulfur deposition in Southwest and South China, whereas for reactive nitrogen loading over these two areas, Southeast China sources contribute up to 20-30%. Boundary conditions of chemical species derived from a global model (MOZART) were used to conduct source attribution for regions outside 145 

the CMAQ domain, such as other parts of the Indian subcontinent and European outflow across Eurasia to Asia. Their results show that the contribution of global inflows (gray bars in Figure 4.2.10) is significant (>30%) for the deposition loads of sulfur and reactive nitrogen over the northern and western receptor areas of the study domain, i.e., parts of Russia, Mongolia, Northwest China, parts of India and Myanmar. Boundary contribution to sulfur deposition is also evident (>10%) even for the receptors located in the central parts of study domain, i.e., Central China, and Republic of Korea. Kuribayashi et al. (2012) evaluated the contributions of emission sources in China to sulfur deposition in surrounding areas (particularly, Japan) during 1980-2005. They showed increasing trend in contributions of China emissions to Japan. It should be noted that their estimate contribution (39% in 2001) was higher than the estimate of Lin et al. (2008b) (21%). Kuribayashi et al (2012) estimated that 1.04% of SO 2 emissions from China were deposited on the land area of Japan, while Lin et al. (2008b) estimated 0.42% (Figure 4.2.11). Kuribayashi et al. suggested several possible explanations for this discrepancy, including differences in the defined region of Japan, the CTM used, the interannual variation of meteorology, and emission data. However, the reason of the discrepancy is not specified. Morino et al. (2011) also estimated increasing trend in Chinese contributions to nitrate wet deposition in Japan, as described in the previous subsection. Their estimate (31-49% in 1999-2003) was higher than the estimate of Lin et al. (2008b) (21% in 2001). Morino et al. (2011) analyzed only wet deposition rates while Lin et al. (2008b) evaluated total (dry plus wet) deposition rates. Morino et al. (2011) suggested that much of the discrepancy between these two studies likely reflects the differences in total and wet deposition rates. Considering these differences among models, the multi-model assessment in East Asia would be necessary in future. On the hemispherical scale, model intercomparison study of the intercontinental transport of both gaseous and aerosol species was organized by the Task Force on Hemispheric Transport of Air Pollution (TF HTAP) (2007), and Sanderson et al. (2008) quantified the export of reactive nitrogen to and from four regions (Europe, North America, South Asia, and East Asia) using fifteen chemistry-transport models and estimated the uncertainty in the results. The annual mean sensitivities for reactive nitrogen deposition in each region to a 20% reduction in anthropogenic NO xemissions in each of the source regions are summarized in Table 4.2.1. Emissions in North America, Europe and South Asia impacted reactive nitrogen deposition in East Asia by 0.9%, 2.4% and 6.4%, respectively. The scatter in the model results is most likely to be due to differences in the boundary layer and convection schemes used to mix and transport the reactive nitrogen species, and the associated wet removal processes. When compared to North America, Europe, and South Asia, East Asia exports the least reactive nitrogen to other areas, with little seasonality (between 0.10 and 0.15). Engardt et al. (2005) investigated the atmospheric export and import of anthropogenic sulfur between nine countries in Southeast Asia as well as the import to these countries from the boundaries of our model domain, from southern China, and from international shipping in the surrounding waters. When compared to the conditions at the mid-latitudes (Europe, North America and East Asia), the influence of long-range transport is smaller in this part of the world. Countries in Southeast Asia with large area and high emissions mainly receive sulfur from their own respective country (i.e., Thailand 88%; Indonesia 83%; Malaysia 66%) (Table 4.2.2). The same, large domestic contribution also applies to the very small—highly developed—countries of Singapore (83%) and Brunei (81%). All these countries are in the fortunate position to have control over the sources of acidifying and corroding sulfur falling on their respective territories. If reductions are deemed necessary, national legislation combined with 146 

actions taken domestically will have a significant effect on the amount of sulfur falling on the respective country. For Lao PDR, the situation is completely opposite: 90% of all sulfur deposited on this country emanates from external sources. To reduce the sulfur deposition in Lao PDR, emissions must be reduced in other countries (mainly Thailand and China). Myanmar, Viet Nam and Cambodia lie somewhere in between with 30–40% of the sulfur deposition originating from domestic sources, the rest from sources outside the respective country. The reason for the comparatively little long-range transport is a combination of low near-surface wind speeds during most parts of the year, efficient wet scavenging of pollutants due to the abundance of rain events in the tropical environment and efficient vertical mixing in convective clouds. 

Figure 4.2.10 Region-to-region source–receptor relationships for total sulfur (a) and total reactive nitrogen (b) deposition in East Asia. Vertical bars show the origin of substances deposited in each receptor region. Values given show percentage of total deposition in a receptor region contributed from different ‘‘source’’ regions. Red series is used for seven source regions in China, whereas blue series shows source regions in Southeast Asia (Lin et al., 2008b). 147 

Figure 4.2.11 Relationship from 1981 to 2005 between deposition in Japan of sulfur originating from China and SO 2 emissions in China (Kuribayashi et al., 2012). 

Table 4.2.1 Source-Receptor Relationships for Each HTAP Region, When the Anthropogenic NO x Emissions are Reduced by 20% in the Source Region a .(Sanderson et al., 2008). 148 

Table 4.2.2 National budgets of the emission and deposition (in Gg S yr -1 ) of anthropogenic sulfur in Southeast Asia during 2000 (Engardt et al., 2005). 

4.2.4 Biogeochemical cycle 

4.2.4.1 Global estimation of atmospheric deposition of sulfur and nitrogen 

Sulfur is derived from atmospheric deposition and from the weathering of sulfur-bearing minerals in rocks. According to Andrews et al. (2003), atmospheric sulfur deposition to land was 32 Tg S y -1 ,which originated from volcanic emission (10 Tg S y -1 ), volatilization from continent (22 Tg S y -1 ) and aeolian dust (10 Tg S y -1 ), prior to any major alteration by human industrial and urban activity. Ninety three Tg of sulfur have been added to the atmosphere by human activities mainly due to fossil fuel combustion and metal smelting. As the result, the deposition flux of sulfur on land surfaces had increased by approximately 163% to 84 Tg S y -1 by the mid-1980s. As input from weathering of sulfur–bearing minerals is estimated to be 72 Tg S y -1 , the input from atmospheric deposition now accounts for more than half of the total input. This input can have a profound impact on poorly buffered soils and fresh waters (Andrews et al. 2003). On the other hand, Galloway et al. (2004) evaluated the global nitrogen cycle in the 1860s, 1993. According to their estimation, nitrogen input to land was 140.7 Tg Ny-1 in the 1860s, and among that 85% came from biological nitrogen fixation within natural ecosystems. The input has increased to 268 Tg N y -1 caused mainly by the addition from fossil fuel combustion (24.5 Tg N y -1 ) and Haber-Bosch process for chemical fertilizer (100 Tg N y -1 )in 1993. With these changes in nitrogen input, atmospheric NO x and NH 3 emission excluding NH 3emission from the sea has both increased by 250% from 1860 to 1993, caused by the increasing emission due to fossil fuel combustion (from 0.6 Tg N y -1 to 24.5 Tg N y -1 ) and the increasing utilization of chemical nitrogen fertilizer for intensive agriculture. Atmospheric NO x and NH 3deposition to the land in 1993 have also become 275% and 260%, respectively, in 1993 (Table 4.2.3). 149 

Table 4.2.3 Global atmospheric emission and deposition of NO x and NH 3 for land (Tg Ny -1 ) 1) 

1860 1993 NOx NH 3 NOx NH 3Food production 2.0 6.6 9.0 44.3 Energy production 0.6 0.7 27.2 2.9 Natural 10.5 7.7 9.7 5.4 Emission total 13.1 14.9 45.9 52.6 Deposition total 6.6 10.8 24.8 38.7 1) Extracted and summarized data from Table 2 and Figure 1 of Galloway et al. (2004) 

4.2.4.2 Biogeochemical cycle of sulfur 

The effects of atmospheric deposition of acidic substances to the forest ecosystems are not straightforward. Sulfur and nitrogen are both biogenic elements, and are regulated by various biogeochemical processes depending on the soil properties, plant species, meteorological conditions, topography and other factors in each location. The U.S., European and also the Asian science communities have conducted a lot of research to investigate the biogeochemical cycle in various terrestrial ecosystems, to clarify mechanisms for mitigating the effects of acidic substances, and to find indicators of effects and so forth. In the research regarding the sulfur biogeochemical cycle in the context of effect of atmospheric deposition, sulfur retention in soil has been focused on as a process eliminating acid or delaying acidification. Sulfate adsorption is a major acid neutralization process because the negative charge of sulfate adsorbed on an Al or Fe hydroxide surface is balanced by displacement of OH – , though the exact nature of sulfate adsorption in soils is chemically complex (Mitchell et al., 1992). Several factors are known to enhance sulfate adsorption: increasing quantity of Al and Fe oxides, decreasing soil pH and decreasing organic matter. In acidic circumstances H + is incorporated on to the surface of Al and Fe oxides that becomes positively charted and can retain anions. When soil is acidified by naturally formed organic acids or anthropogenic acidic deposition, this process proceeds, leading to sulfate adsorption increases with decreasing soil pH. As organic matter works as competing ligand, sulfate adsorption decreases with increasing organic matter. Some organic acids such as citrate and oxalate may solubilize Fe and Al and further reduce sulfate adsorption (Mitchell et al., 1992). Sulfate absorption is now switched to desorption in some ecosystems where atmospheric sulfur deposition has been largely decreasing. According to long-term monitoring of sulfur fluxes and budget study in a catchment in the Hubbard Brook (Likens et al., 2002), experimental field, NH, USA, for example, atmospheric bulk deposition of sulfur decrease from 1964-1969 to 1993-1998 by 34% (from 406 to 266 mol S ha -1 y -1 ), stream output decreased by 10% (from 495 to 445 mol S ha -1 y -1 ) and net soil release increased by 184% (from 44 to 128 mol S ha -1 y -1 ) and this increase was most likely 150 

attributed to sulfate desorption and the mineralization of organic sulfur. . Beside Al and Fe oxides, amorphous and quasicrystal clay minerals such as allophane and imogolite have larger adsorption capacity. These minerals are important in the areas covered by volcanic ash soil like Japan. Tanikawa et al. (1999, 2003) investigated accumulation of sulfate in soil profiles of Japanese Andisoil and Inceptisoils and found Andisols contained large amount of phosphate-extractable sulfur (16 –880 mgSkg -1 ), which is mainly constituted of adsorbed and soluble sulfate. This amount is significantly larger than that for Inceptisols (10-296 mgSkg -1 ) and also for various soils reported in Europe and North America (up to 100 mgSkg -1 ). Sulfate concentration increased with depth and showed a significant relationship with the concentration of inorganic amorphous aluminum and ion oxides, crystalline iron oxide and allophane. Concentrations of the water-soluble sulfate of Andisols in subsoil were significantly lower than Inceptisoil, which was considered to be kept low by the high sulfate adsorption capacity of the subsoil of Andisols. Sulfate adsorption was shown to regulate the stream leaching of sulfur derived by atmospheric deposition as well as by forest decline caused by pine wilt disease. The sulfate concentrations in stream water in Japan’s Kiryu experiment basin affected by pine wilt disease stared to increase after NO 3–concentrations peaked. The delay of sulfate leaching to NO 3– was considered to be due to sulfate adsorption on variable charges under low pH conditions resulting from nitrification (Kim et al., 2003). The sulfate adsorption process was rarely taken into account in the conventional model for ecosystem acidification developed in Europe and North America where volcanic ash soil is not widely distributed. Incorporation of the process has been made to the existing models aiming at application for Asia and Europe as well (Fumoto and Sverdrup, 2001; Martinson et al., 2003). Tanikawa et al. (2009) showed that Japanese Andisols highly contain organic sulfur too and total sulfur concentrations ranged from 540 to 2240 mg S kg -1 depending on the location and depths in the soil profile. The amount of sulfur accumulated in the soil profile up to a depth of 1 m (ranging from 3370 to 8520 kg S ha -1 ) was shown to be much higher than the values of other soils in Europe and North America. Spatial distribution of accumulated sulfur and other soil parameters were measured in a small catchment in Japan and relationship between them were investigated (Tanikawa et al. 2013). They described that the high sulfur concentrations are related to the richness of pedogenic volcanic minerals, which create suitable conditions for sulfate adsorption, precipitation of Al-hydroxy sulfates, occlusion of sulfates, and a pool of free Al to form Al-humus complexes containing organic S and concluded that the insights into S dynamics in forest ecosystems allow more precise and reliable estimation of the sensitivity of ecosystems to atmospheric sulfur deposition. 

4.2.4.3 Biogeochemical cycle of nitrogen 

(1) Nitrogen saturation hypothesis 

Forest ecosystems are usually nitrogen limited and increase in nitrogen input is considered to effect the vitality and biomass of plants and microbes, changes in the internal cycle of nitrogen and changes in nitrogen outflows to the environment. Large scale experimental studies such as Nitrogen saturation experiments (NITREX) and Experimental Manipulation of Forest Ecosystems in Europe (EXMAN) (Wright and Rasmussen, 1998), monitoring in various scales such as International Co-operative Programme on Assessment and Monitoring of Air Pollution Effects on Forests(ICP Forests) (Erisman et al., 2003) and measurements in individual experimental fields have been conducted to investigate the Biogeochemical cycle of nitrogen in forested ecosystems in Europe and North America over the 151 

previous several decades. Based on the data and findings obtained by this research, a nitrogen saturation hypothesis, which is a hypothetical series of changes in ecosystem condition due to chronic elevated nitrogen deposition, was proposed and modified (Aber et al., 1989; Aber et al., 1998). Although there are various kinds of definition proposed, the typical definition is that nitrogen saturation is a situation in which the supply of nitrogenous compounds from the atmosphere exceed the demand by plants and microbes in the watershed (Aber et al., 1989, Stoddard, 1994). Several stages for the response of forested ecosystem to changing level of nitrogen availability were proposed as follows: 

Stage 0 : Inputs of Ν from deposition are at background levels. Nitrogen transformations are dominated by plant and microbial assimilation with little or no NO 3– leakage from the watershed during the growing season. 

Stage 1 : Fertilization effect of nitrogen results in increased ecosystem production and tree vigor. Retention of nitrogen is very efficient and little or no Ν is lost to surface waters during dormant season as in Stage 0. 

Stage 2 : Nitrogen saturation is reached and nitrification. Uptake of nitrogen by forest plants and microbes is much reduced, resulting in loss of NO 3– to streams and to groundwater during the growing season. Additionally, at least one of the following take place: permanently elevated nitrogen concentration in foliage; lowered phosphorus and lignin content in foliage; and increased water stress caused by relatively lower availability of carbon, phosphorus, or water within the plant as nitrogen limitations are removed. 

Stage 3 : Effects on the forests become visible and result in major environmental impacts. No sinks for nitrogen exist in the watershed, and all inputs, as well as mineralized nitrogen, are lost from the system either through denitrification or in runoff water. Although this hypothesis has not been fully supported by actual data, it has been used as a yardstick to evaluate the extent of damage to forested watershed by nitrogen deposition and to predict future changes. There is much literature investigating the status of nitrogen saturation in Europe and North America. Nitrogen leaching from forested catchment was also measured in many catchments in Asia, mainly in Japan and China, and high rate of leaching were observed in some catchments. For them, the stage of saturation and relationship with atmospheric deposition, and other forest conditions were investigated (Chen et al., 2004; Fang et al., 2008; Fang et al., 2009; Fang et al., 2011c; Michell, 2011, Nakahara et al., 2010; Ohte et al., 2001; Tabayashi and Koba, 2011; Chen and Mulder, 2007; Yoh et al., 2001). The details of some of this research will be discussed in 2.3.2. Some indicators were also proposed for evaluating the progress of nitrogen saturation. 

Seasonal changes in nitrogen leaching loss to surface water 

Considering the definition of nitrogen saturation, seasonality of nitrogen leaching loss should be a good indicator in the forest watershed, and data collected in Europe and America actually support this. This indicator was also considered available for the Lake Ijira catchment in central Japan. Nitrogen concentration in stream water had shown a seasonal change: high in dormant season and low in growing seasons before 1996/1997 and this seasonality was lost since then (Nakahara et al, 2010). They concluded that the catchment became nitrogen-saturated (changing from stage 1 to 2) in 152 

1996/1997. In other catchments in Japan, however, changes in seasonal variation does not work as a saturation indicator. According to the results of several research programs, many of the monitored watersheds in Japan did not show any seasonal pattern in NO 3– concentration or even had the greatest NO 3– losses to the surface water during the growing season even if the watersheds received low nitrogen deposition and were not nitrogen saturated (Mitchell et al., 1997; Mitchell, 2011; Ohte et al., 2001). The lack of a seasonal pattern of NO 3– concentration in surface water of Japanese catchments was explained from the climatic regime of Japan, where there was the greatest precipitation and drainage water flux late in the growing season. Enhanced nitrogen mineralization in warm humid conditions was also indicated as the reason (Michell et al., 1997; Ohte et al, 2001). Regarding Chinese subtropical forest, 40 to 45 year-old Masson pine-dominated stands in Tieshanping (TSP, near Chongqing City) and Caijiatang (CJT in Shaoshan, Hunan province), the seasonality of stream water N concentration was also climatic and hydrologically controlled, with highest values commonly occurring in the wet growing season and lowest in the dry dormant season (Chen and Mulder, 2007). In three subtropical forests in Dinghushan Biosphere Reserve (DHSBR) in central Guangdong province, South China, the majority of DIN deposition as well as of DIN leaching from soil layer occurred in the rainy growing season (March to August) and monthly DIN concentrations and fl uxes in leaching were positively related to those in throughfall. This implies that part of the N leaching was hydrologically driven (Fang et al., 2008). Although atmospheric nitrogen deposition rates were rather high (25 ~ 38 kg N ha -1 y -1 in TSP and in CJT, 32~34 kg DIN ha -1 y -1 in DHSBR) and some of these stands display high nitrogen leaching, nitrogen leaching was considered to be controlled by hydrological factors like Japanese catchments, as opposed to the mechanism in Europe and in North America relating to changes in nitrogen availability. 

C/N ratio of forest floor and soil 

C/N ratio of the forest floor (organic soil layer) is most commonly used a saturation indicator for boreal and temperate forests in Europe and North America. It was shown that forest fl oor C/N ratios less than 25 are associated with increased NO 3– leaching (Gundersen et al., 1998; Lovett et al., 2002). Recent studies based on the large databases or meta-analysis revealed the C/N is one of the control factors of NO 3– leaching (Aber et al., 2003, Dise et al., 2009, Nave et al., 2009). The case of Asian watersheds may not be appropriate for tropical and subtropical forests because forest fl oors are generally thin or not present at all, due to relatively fast organic matter decomposition in warm, humid conditions (Chen et al., 2004; Fang et al., 2011c). Alternatively, Yoh (2001) showed that NO 3– production by incubating mineral soils, which were sampled in the Tama River watersheds, at 25 degree were strongly correlated with their C/N ratio. The net nitrogen mineralization rate of each soil profile of samples from TSP and CJT forest stands in China also significantly correlated with the C/N ratio (Chen and Mulder, 2007). However, the relationship between NO 3– leaching from soil layer or to the surface water has not been well documented in Asian watersheds and other indicators such as the soil fl ux density of mineral nitrogen, de fi ned as (N deposition + net N mineralization) has been investigated as a candidate of better indicator for NO 3– leaching (Chen et al., 2004). 

Isotope ratio of plant tissue and soil 

Stable nitrogen isotope ratios are a potentially valuable measure of regional assessments of N saturation, which is an integrated measure of the N cycling history of a site with a single sampling 153 

(Pardo et al., 2007). During biological processes, isotopic fractionation is generally lighter (lower ratio of 15 N to 14 N) than the remaining substrate. Nitrogen saturated ecosystems with high nitrification and NO 3– loss was therefore considered to have remaining substrate in soil and vegetation enriched in 15 N(Pardo et al., 2007). They showed that foliar 15 N in Northeastern US was strongly correlated with N deposition, and was also positively correlated with net nitri fi cation potential and negatively correlated with soil C:N ratio. Fang et al. (2011a) also showed foliar nitrogen concentration and 15 N were higher in the mature broadleaf forest that is highly nitrogen saturated than in the successional pine or mixed forests in DHSBR in China, supporting the above hypothesis. They conducted nitrogen addition experiments for 3 years in these four forest stands, and found nitrogen addition signi fi cantly increased foliar 15 N value in three of these cases. Higher nitrogen addition caused further increase in foliar 15 N. 

However, change in foliar 15 N during the nitrogen saturation process is still controversial. Fang et al. (2011c) surveyed nitrogen concentration and 15 N in leaves and soils at 14 forest stands along a 150 km transect from a urban to rural area in southern China. Foliar 15 N was negatively correlated with soil NO 3– concentration and NO 3– leaching to stream across the entire transect, implying that an increased N supply does not necessarily increase foliar 15 N. They proposed several potential mechanism that could contribute to the 15 N pattern, including (i) increased plant uptake of 15 N-depleted soil NO 3– , (ii) foliage uptake of 15 N-depleted ammonium ions, (iii) increased utilization of soil inorganic N relative to dissolved organic N, and (iv) increased fractionation during plant N uptake under higher soil N availability. Based on the large-scale studies on the effects of atmospheric deposition of acidic substances conducted mainly in Europe and North America, the biogeochemical cycle in forested ecosystems and the mechanisms of acidification or fate of substances have been getting clearer in the past several decades. As Chen et al. (2004) pointed, however, great di ff erences exist between Europe and China with respect to climate, ecosystem types, history of land use and atmospheric deposition. This makes the utility of a direct application of knowledge from European studies questionable. Studies in Asian forests revealed the various different biogeochemical cycles such as different capacity of sulfur retention in soil, nitrogen leaching pattern regulated by the different climate, and so on. These might require the modification of the existing hypothesis. Asian studies referred to in this section are only for Japan and China. Data is lacking for Southeastern Asia and other Asian areas and studies in these regions would be worthy for further improvements of our understanding and hypothesis on biogeochemical cycles. 

(2) Interaction of carbon and nitrogen cycle 

Changes in the biogeochemical cycle of nitrogen are considered to affect the cycle of carbon and other elements and vice versa (Gruber and Galloway, 2008). It has been strongly concerned whether the increasing nitrogen deposition would enhance the carbon storage in plant and in soil. Many studies have been conducted including nitrogen addition experiments, 15 N tracer experiments (Nadelhoffer et al., 1999), NEP measurements of ecosystems with different nitrogen deposition (Magnani et al., 2007) etc. Meta-analysis of nitrogen addition experiments showed that the most ecosystems are nitrogen limited and average response rate of aboveground growth was 1.29 (29% increase by nitrogen addition) based on 126 experiments (LeBauer and Treseder, 2008). Some experiments and meta-analyses also showed the synergistic effects of nitrogen addition and enhanced CO 2concentration to plant biomass growth (Reich et al. 2006) and to soil carbon increase (van Groenigen 154 

et al. 2006). Similar experiments were made in Chinese forests (Liu et al., 2011), and net increase in photosynthetic rate and biomass production by nitrogen addition of 50 to 100 kg N ha -1 y -1 was observed (Mo et al. 2008a). Through experiments with higher nitrogen addition in a nitrogen saturated tropical forest, however, it was found that plant growth was negatively affected by nitrogen addition (Lu et al. 2006, 2007). About 30 Tg CH 4 is estimated to be consumed per year by soils, and forest soil is the major sink of atmospheric CH 4 because of its aerobic condition. Soil CH 4 consumption is known to be inhibited by ammonium (Shnell and King, 1994) and research on the effects of nitrogen deposition on it have been conducted in Asian forests (Morishita et al., 2004, Zhang et al, 2008). Zhang et al. (2008) conducted N addition experiments in several forests in tropical China and showed CH 4 uptake reduction in accordance with the N addition rates in a manure forest but no significant effects in rehabilitated and disturbed forests. They concluded that the responses of soil CH 4 uptake to N deposition may vary depending on the soil N status. Morishita et al. (2004) evaluated the effects by carrying out long-term monitoring of nitrogen deposition and CH 4 consumption in 10 forested sites in Northern Japan. They derived a multiple regression equation that indicated the negative correlated of CH 4 consumption with rain, ammonium and nitrate deposition rate and soil total carbon and concluded that nitrogen input to forest soils is one of the main factors that control cumulative CH 4 uptake. 

4.3 Impacts on ecosystem 4.3.1 Effects on forests 4.3.1.1 Soil acidification in forests of East Asia (1) Soil buffer system 

Soil has buffer systems, which react to acids added. In the case of a calcareous soil, an acid (HA) initially added to the system may react with CaCO 3 , as shown in the equation (1): CaCO 3 + H + + A − → Ca 2+ + HCO 3− + A − (1) As long as CaCO 3 is present, added H + is consumed by the reaction, and the pH of the soil solution remains constant (can be called “carbonate buffer range (8.6 > pH > 6.2, the actual pH depends on CO 2 partial pressure)”: Ulrich 1991). When the CaCO 3 is depleted by addition of the acid, the solution pH starts to decrease until the next buffer range as shown in Figure 4.3.1. Weathering of primary silicate may contribute to the buffering process (mainly pH > 5 in carbonate free soils). During cation exchange buffer range (5 > pH > 4.2), proportion of exchangeable acid cations, such as Mn 2+ and Al 3+ ,may increase, resulting in the reduction of base saturation (BS, percentage of base cations such as Ca, Mg, K and Na in exchangeable sites on clay minerals). In this process, the ratio of base cations to aluminum, such as Ca/Al and Mg/Al, may decrease. In aluminum buffer range (pH < 4.2), the pH is not easily changed by dissolution of hydroxyl-Al compounds. Then, further addition of the acid leads the soil to the next plateau, ion buffer range (pH < 3.2) by dissolution of iron oxides/hydroxides (Ulrich 1991). Due to the presence of the above buffer systems, the addition of a strong acid does not directly result in a change in pH. The amount of strong acid required to reduce the pH of a system to a reference pH value is termed “acid neutralizing capacity (ANC)” (Van Breemen et al. 1983). Therefore, soil acidification should be defined as a decrease in the ANC of the soil. 155 

Figure 4.3.1 Change in pH in the course of soil acidification (after Ulrich 1991) 

The ANC of soil was expressed as the equation (2) (Van Breemen et al. 1983): ANC (s) = 6(Al 2 O3 ) + 2(CaO) + 2(MgO) + 2(K 2 O) + 2(Na 2 O) + 4(MnO 2 ) + 2(MnO) + 6(Fe 2 O3 ) + 2(FeO) − 2(SO 3 ) − 2(P 2 O5 ) − (HCl) (2) However, the components that contribute to ANC may depend on the soil pH in actual fields. The dissolution of Fe 2 O3 , Al 2O3 and MnO 2 is negligible above pH 5, while Al 2 O3 is dissolved at pH 3. Accordingly, the equation (2) can be modified depending on the pH (Van Breemen et al. 1983). Consequently, different types of soil with different pH and chemical compositions should have different ANC. 

(2) Observation of soil acidification 

The depletion of ANC from a soil cannot be equated with formation of soil acidity as exchangeable H +and A 3+ (Van Breemen et al. 1983). Even if acidification with decrease of ANC proceeds in a soil by strong acids derived from external sources, indices for soil acidification such as pH, and exchangeable H+ and Al 3+ may not change easily. Therefore, it may take a long time to detect soil acidification phenomena by field observation. In southwest Sweden, Hallbäcken and Tamm (1986) reinvestigated 90 soil profiles from 1982 to 1984, which were studied by Tamm’s father in 1927, and they found that pH decreased 0.3-0.9 units in all soil horizons (A0, A2, B and C, at 70 cm depth). They concluded that biological effects, such as forest growth or tree species, were not able to completely explain the phenomena above and acid deposition combined with the biological effects might cause the soil acidification. Moreover, the rate of acidification there was higher than in that in the northern part with a lower deposition load: wet deposition of H + in southwest part, 45-55 mmol m −2 year −1, and that in northern part, 20-25 mmol m −2year −1 (Tamm and Hallbäcken 1988). In central Europe, soils were acidified during the 20 or 30 years from the 1960s to 1980s, and it was observed that Ca/Al and Mg/Al ratios in soil solutions of a beech 156 

forest significantly decreased from approximately 1.0 to 0.2 and 0.5 to 0.2 respectively in the period from the late 1960s to the mid-1980s in Solling Mountains in northern Germany (Schulze 1989). The resampling of forest soils in 1980s after 20-50 years showed widespread soil acidification in Central Europe and Scandinavia, and the declined values of pH decreased with decrease of the initial soil pH as shown in Figure 4.3.2 (Nilssen 1986; Ulrich 1991). This may be because different buffering systems functioned in different soil pH as can be expected in Figure 4.3.1 (Ulrich 1991), although the humus layer was composed of organic matter that might have other buffering functions. In the United States also, resampling of forest soils after 36 years in northwestern Pennsylvania showed decrease in soil pH, 0.78 and 0.23 in the O- and A-horizons, respectively (Drohan and Sharpe 1997). In the case of Europe and North America, acid deposition has been significantly reduced since the 1980s, and recovery of soil acidification has also been reported recently. Kirk et al. (2010) found that soil pH widely increased from 1978 to 2003 in England and Wales, which linked to decreased S deposition. 

Figure 4.3.2 Soil acidification in various forest soils with different initial pH in Central Europe, Scandinavia and the United States (drawn after Nilssen 1986; Ulrich 1991; Drohan and Sharpe 1997). Closed circle, humus layers; open circle, A-horizons; open triangle, B-horizons; closed triangle, silt; open square, C-horizons; closed square, sand. 

As described above, resampling of previous plots after 20-60 years manifested soil acidification in 1980s in Europe and the United States. In East Asia, this kind of approach has unfortunately not been 157 

made enough. Only in China and Japan was long-term acidification reported by field observation. Soil acidification manifested by field observation in China and Japan is summarized in Table 4.3.1. In southern China, Dai et al. (1998) reported that pH (H 2 O) decreased by approx. 1.0 units at Zhurongfeng (ZH) in Mt. Heng in Hunan Province and Wuming (near Nanning) in Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region during the 34/35 years from 1959/1960 to 1994, and the pH (KCl) also decreased by 0.71 and 0.58 units respectively. The acidified points at ZH in Mt. Heng and Wuming were covered by subalpine meadow soil and lateritic red soil (Nitosol/Nitisol), respectively. The soil pH (H 2 O) at another point (Shangfeng Temple, ST) in Mt. Heng, which was covered by Acrisols, has decreased by approx. 1.0 units, while the pH (KCl) only decreased by 0.2 units. They reinvestigated 7 points, however soil acidification was not evident in the other 4 points covered by yellow soils (Acrisols), yellow brown soil (Alisols) or red soils (Ferralsols). Cation exchange capacity (CEC) and BS have decreased to 76.2 and 53.2% of 1960 values in the topsoils at ZH in Mt. Heng, and to 59.2 and 28.9% of 1959 values at Wuming respectively. They also noted that acidification was higher in the topsoil than in the subsoil. They reported that the decrease of soil pH was not related to changes of organic matter content in these soils, and suggested that soil acidification in southern China may be related to high acid deposition in the area. In subtropical China, Liu et al. (2010) also reported that the soil pH declined from 4.60-4.75 to 3.84-4.02 for the two decades from 1980s to 2005 in the Dinghushan Biosphere Reserve, which was located 90 km west to the metropolitan Guangzhou. They investigated three different succession stages of forests in the region, namely pine forest (early stage), mixed forest and evergreen broadleaf forest (late stage) and the first two forests are relatively young after the clear cut in 1930s and the last one was over 400 years old. All three forests showed significant linear decline in soil pH over these two decades. Because the difference of the soil pH between the younger forests and the old forest was small (0.14 and 0.12 units) compared to the declined pH unit (0.72 in the old forest), the effect of forest succession seemed to be minor in the soil acidification observed here. On the other hand, the area has been experiencing high N (21 - 50 kg N ha −1 year −1 ) and S (20 - 67 kg S ha −1 year −1 )depositions for the period. They concluded that the high acid depositions might be the major driving force for the rapid decline of soil pH. They also pointed out that the forest soil with originally higher pH values was acidified more rapidly than that with originally lower pH values. In northern China’s grassland, Yang et al. (2012b) found that soil pH significantly decreased from 7.84 to 7.21 during the period from the 1980s to the 2000s based on data from national and regional soil surveys. They suggested significant effects of atmospheric depositions including nitrogen and sulfur and concluded that the magnitude of soil pH decrease depends on soil buffering capacity by soil carbonate: the larger pH decreases occurred in those regions with low carbonate content. In croplands in China, Guo et al. (2010) reported that topsoil pH significantly decreased by 0.13 to 0.80 units from 1980s to 2000s (the data is not shown in Table 1). However, they concluded that the main cause was overuse of N fertilizer and that acid deposition made a small contribution to the acidification. Hydrogen ions (H + ) released from a nitrogen cycle were significantly more than that from acid deposition. In central Japan, Nakahara et al. (2010) reported that the mean pH of surface mineral soils decreased from 4.5 in 1990 to 3.9 in 2004 in the Lake Ijira catchment, where atmospheric depositions of hydrogen, sulfur and nitrogen were among the highest in Japan, 0.83, 0.57 and 1.37 kmol ha −1 year −1 ,respectively. The area was covered by brown forest soil (Cambisols) derived from chert. They pointed 158 

out that the rate of pH decrease, 0.07 units year −1 , was noticeably higher than the previously reported values. As shown in Figure 4.3.2, the reduced values of pH in Europe and the United States decreased with decrease of the initial soil pH. Similarly, when the initial soil pH was lower than 7.0, the reduced pH values in China and Japan seemed to also decrease with the decrease of the initial soil pH, although the number of the data was limited (Figure 4.3.3). As suggested by Ulrich (1991), this may be because different buffering systems functioned in different soil pH. This is also consistent with the observation by Liu et al. (2010). In the soils with high pH (> 7) in northern China, soil carbonates functioned as the main buffering systems (Yang et al. 2012b) and therefore the declined pH values may be relatively small. As described above, soil acidification was not clear in the points covered by red and yellow soils in southern China (Dai et al. 1998). Red and yellow soils such as Acrisols, Alisols and Ferralsols were high-weathered acidic soils and rich in aluminum, which may be in aluminum buffer range. Therefore, soil pH in these soils might not easily decline even under high acid deposition. 159 

Table 4.3.1 Soil acidification by field observations in China and Japan 

Country Area/site Initial pH (horizon/layer) Re-measured pH Years References China Zhurongfeng in Mt. Heng, Hunan Province (Subalpine meadow soil) 5.5 (2-24 cm) 5.6 (24-55) 4.39 (1-24) 4.47 (24-45) 4.81 (45-57) 34 years (1960 to 1994) Dai et al. 1998 China Wuming in Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region (Lateritic red soil: Nitosols) 5.5 (0-10 cm) 4.0 (30-50) 4.5 (0-10) 4.54 (30-60) 35 years (1959 to 1994) Ibid. China Shangfeng Temple in Mt. Heng, Hunan Province (Yellow soil: Acrisols) 5.0 (5-35 cm) 3.93 (0-10) 4.13 (10-20) 4.29 (20-30) 34 years (1960 to 1994) Ibid.  

> China

Three forests (pine, mixed and evergreen broadleaf forests) in Dinghushan Biosphere Reserve, 90 km west to the metropolitan Guangzhou  

> 4.60 - 4.75 (0-20 cm) 3.84 - 4.02 (0-20) 20 years (1980s to 2005) Liu et al. 2010

China Grassland in northern part of China 7.80 Alpine steppe 7.29 Alpine meadow 8.35 Desert steppe 8.17 Typical steppe 7.90 Meadow steppe 7.32 6.68 7.80 7.50 7.10 Approx. 20 years (1980s to 2000s) Yang et al. 2012b Japan Lake Ijira catchment, Gifu Prefecture, central Japan 4.5 4.8 4.6 4.6 4.4 4.1 3.7 4.2 3.9 3.7 16/14 years (1988/1990 to 2004) Nakahara et al. 2010; EANET 2011 Note. The data for pH (H 2O) was only shown here. 160 

Figure 4.3.3 Soil acidification in surface soils with different initial pH in China and Japan (drawn after Dai et al. 1998; Nakahara et al. 2010; Yang et al. 2012; Liu et al. 2010). The same pH range used by Ulrich (1991) was also adopted here. 

(3) Potential risk of soil acidification 

Although soil acidification manifested by field observations was limited in East Asia, potential risk of soil acidification has been discussed on the regional scale as well as the catchment scale. For example, Hicks et al. (2008) calculated the time for effects for soils sensitive to acid deposition in Asia under potential future emission scenarios of S, N and Ca, and showed that sensitive soil types in parts of southern China, Myanmar, Hainan, Lao PDR, Thailand, Viet Nam and Western Ghats of India may acidify to a significant degree (base saturation, 20%) on a 0-50 year timescale. However, to make a clearer assessment of the risk, site-specific data is required for soil chemistry and deposition (Hicks et al. 2008). In Europe, the critical load approach based on the simple mass balance model (SMB) (Sverdrup and De Vries 1994) has been used to discuss potential risks of acid deposition. In East Asia, although applicability of the critical load approach was discussed in China (e.g. Zhao et al., 2007; Liu et al., 2011), Japan (e.g. Shindo et al., 1995) and Republic of Korea (e.g. Park and Bashkin 2001), the regional discussion has not been made in EANET. As described above, the ratios of base cations (BC) to aluminum in soil solution, such as Ca/Al, Mg/Al and (Ca+Mg)/Al, may decrease in the soil acidification process. Since BC is important as nutrients and Al ion is toxic for plants, the above ratios have been used as an index for the risk assessment of soil acidification. For European tree species, the BC/Al molar ratio, 1.0, is considered as a threshold value for tree growth. Therefore, BC/Al molar ratio (or Al/BC ratio) in soil solution was used for calculation of critical loads (e.g. Sverdrup et al. 1992). Here, discussion on the potential risk of soil acidification using the BC/Al molar ratio by field observation is introduced. 161 

In Chongqing in China, Dawei et al. (2001) reported that inorganic Al concentrations were very high, 2.0-8.9 mg L −1 , in soil solution in a small catchment. However, since Ca concentration was also high in soil solution, the Al/(Ca+Mg) molar ratio in most samples was still lower than 1.0. The deposition of S as well as Ca at the site was high: annual wet fluxes of S and Ca were 4.7-5.7 g m −2 year −1 and 2.6-3.6 g m −2 year −1 , respectively. They concluded that high Ca concentration in soil solution was primarily caused by high Ca deposition and severe toxic effects of Al on the forest had not been expected. In Guangzhou City, Xu et al. (2001) made a similar conclusion. They also reported that Al/(Ca+Mg) molar ratios in soil solutions were all less than the threshold value. They suggested that negative effects of soil acidification on forests in this area were dampened partly by substantial deposition of base cations such as Ca, Mg, and K. It seemed that soil acidification in southern China had not been considered a severe risk for forest decline because of high base cation depositions. However, Larsssen and Carmichael (2000) suggested that effects of acid deposition on soils and vegetation would be manifested if the anthropogenic emission of Ca would be reduced considerably faster than the sulfur emission. In Japan, Sato and Wakamatsu (2001) studied soil solution chemistry in in the three forest areas (Abukuma, northeastern Japan, Tateyama, central Japan, and Hiroshima, western Japan) with granite bedrock, which had relatively low ANC. In their surveys, the (Ca+Mg+K)/Al ratio for only one sample in Hiroshima was below 1.0 and that for most samples was higher than 10. They reported that the (Ca+Mg+K)/Al molar ratio became higher in deeper soil horizons and concluded that roots of trees were not exposed to sever Al stress in Japan. However, in Kyoto in western Japan, soil acidification and (Ca+Mg+K)/Al molar ratio in soil solution was discussed as a possible cause of decline in Japanese cedar ( Cryptomeria japonica ) and Japanese cypress ( Chamaecyparis obtusa ) trees (Ito et al. 2011). They reported that the soil solutions with a ratio of 10 or less accounted for more than 70% of samples from 20 cm depth, where high density of fine roots was observed. According to an experiment conducted by Izuta et al. (1997) using Japanese cedar seedlings, tree growth declined when the (Ca+Mg+K)/Al molar ratio was 10 or below. Ito et al. (2011) concluded that soil acidification was one of the most likely causes of the decline of temple and shrine forests in Kyoto. There was an uncertainty in the index. In the cases in China, the threshold of BC/Al ratio (in their case, Al/BC ratio), 1.0, for European species was directly used for Chinese ecosystems. Then, they concluded that the ratio was lower than harmful level for tree species. In fact, severe ecosystem impacts associated with soil acidification have not been widely observed, although damage has been reported in some areas (Larssen and Carmichael 2000). In the case of Japan, they adopted a threshold value of the BC/Al ratio, 10, specific to Japanese tree species, which was ten times larger than that of European tree species. Then, they discussed effects of soil acidification on tree stands. It seemed that Japanese tree species are relatively sensitive to a reduction in BC/Al molar ratio in soil solution compared with European forest tree species such as Norway spruce. According to Izuta et al. (2001), when the (Ca+Mg+K)/Al molar ratio in soil solution of brown forest soil becomes 1.0, the relative whole-plant dry mass of Japanese beech ( Fagus crenata ), C. japonica and Japanese red pine ( Pinus densiflora ) will be reduced by 35 to 40% compared with the control values. It is possible that sensitivity to the BC/Al molar ratio in soil solution is different in East Asian plant species from that in European species. Such basic data has not been accumulated in East Asia. Moreover, Izuta et al. (2004) suggested that the molar ratio of (Ca+Mg+K)/(Al+Mn) in the soil solution was a suitable soil index to evaluate critical loads of acid deposition for protecting F. crenata forests in Japan. Therefore, 162 

it may be necessary to reinvestigate the index itself in East Asia. Further studies are necessary for precise risk assessment of soil acidification in the region. Impacts of soil acidification on ecosystems have been discussed mainly in the context of plant nutrition. However, soil acidification may induce other various adverse impacts on the environment. As discussed earlier, in China’s grassland, soil acidification seemed to be buffered by soil carbonate (Yang et al. 2012b). Consequently, Yang et al. (2012a) suggested that soil inorganic carbon stock could be released to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide, and that this phenomenon may diminish the strength of terrestrial C sequestration and amplify the positive C-climate feedback. 

4.3.1.2 Effects on forest vegetation (1) Forest decline 

In East Asia, concern about acid rain was perhaps first raised in Japan where Yoshida (1998 as cited by Kohno et al., 1998) and Fujii (1971 as cited by Kohno et al., 1998) reported on the petal discoloration of morning glory and azaleas in downtown Kanto and Kinki districts after very a small amount of rain events. The first report on decline of forest trees due to acid rain was made by Sekiguchi et al. (1986) on Japanese cedar ( Cryptomeria japonica) in the Kanto district of Japan. This generated a lot of interest about the effects of rain acidification on trees and forests as reported in Katoh et al. (1990). However, Shan et al. (2000) reported that mass mortality of pine trees had been noted throughout Japan with 80% observed in Nagasaki, Kumamoto, Miyazaki and Tokyo with acid deposition causing accelerated phonological progress and reduced frost hardiness. Interest on acid deposition and forest decline expanded to other tree species like old beech ( Fagus crenata ), fir ( Abies firma ), Abies veitchii, A. mariesii, Picea hondoensis and P. jezoensis in (Kohno 1996). Fujii (2000) presented certain characteristics of stands and temporal changes in forests decline rates in different prefectures from Hokkaido to Shikoku and Chugoku from 1992 to 2000. He determined that defoliation in lowland regions was common with leaf loss rates ranging from 20% to 40%, and that distributional characteristics indicated soils acidification as the main cause. Furthermore his observations revealed no decline on sites with limestone strata, that trees were healthier at sites with acid-soluble bedrock, and that trees were able to recover from damage on sites where alkaline substances were fertilized or deposited. Meanwhile, the study led by Sakugawa (2000), established the relationship between red pine damage and distribution pattern of specific pollutants like nitrogen compounds in the Seto Inland coastal forests while in the Tanzawa/Oyama forests, a strong relationship between silver fir tree damage and acid fog occurrence was observed. Lastly, long range transported pollutants from the Asian continent were also observed in the Yakushima forests. In a paper by Feng et al. (2001), it was mentioned that south China has become the third largest acid deposition region after Europe and North America with the impact area extending from 1.75 million km 2in 1985 to 2.8 million km 2 in 1993. In the country, 90% of the Masson pine forest had died in the 1970s in the Nanshan mountains of Chongqing (Shan et al., 2001) due to low rainfall pH, high SO 2concentration, and high Al/Ca ratio in the soil. Forest decline has been observed during the 1980’s in the stands of firs in the Emei Mountain in Sichuan province, in the Masson pines ( Pinus massoniana )forests in the South Mountain of Chongqing City, in the suburb of Liuzhou City in the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, and the Wanxian District of Chongqing, as well as among the plum stands in Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province (Liu, 1988; Chao et al., 1989; Yu, 1985; Du and Liu, 1988, all cited in Hao, et al., 1998). Detailed research, coupled with inquiries, led to the conclusion that acid deposition 163 

was the cause of the forest decline. Specifically on the South Mountain in Chongqing, half of the Masson pine stands have withered since 1982. Studies done by the Chinese Research Academy on Environmental Sciences revealed a 100% frequency of acid rain with rainwater pH ranging from 3.6 to 4.8. Physiologists observed that the roots of the Masson pine trees in the affected stands showed obvious damage from high concentrations of Al 3+ . In the 1990s, the decline in forests was monitored in seven provinces of Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Anhui, Fujian, Jiangxi, Hunan, and Hubei and was found to have affected 4.18% of the entire forests in the area, and 6.52% of the commercial forests (Hao et al., 1998). Forest plantations in Liuzhou City in the industrial center of Guangxi were reported by Liy et al. (2001) and that the damage was manifested in etiolation, early defoliation of both coniferous and broadleaved tree species, as well as tree growth degeneration. A very recent review on nitrogen deposition in China also included results of recent investigations on the effects of the same process on the forests of the country (Liu et al., 2011). Quoted elsewhere in this report is the literature covered by the review on the effects on the growth of forest vegetation, biodiversity, and litter decomposition. Much of the research reviewed was conducted in the Dinghushan Long-term Nitrogen Research Project which was established in 2002 (Mo et al., 2006). The experiments conducted were primarily aimed at determining the biochemical and physical responses of forests to elevated N deposition. Three tropical/subtropical forest types were covered in the long term research, but since then there had been a number of investigations undertaken in other forest types in the country. In 1999, a forest decline survey done in the Republic of Korea as reported by Kim et al., (2001) revealed that slight damage to forests had been observed in the southern part of the coastal and industrial areas and large cities. That time, large areas of forest decline have not yet been reported in the country. Recently, t ree decline and its possible causes around Mt. Bogdkhan in Mongolia had been investigated by Sase et al. (2005) In Thailand, the death of trees on the slopes of Doi Pha Tup and Doi Pha Chi located east of the Mae Moh Power Complex Units has also been observed (Kozlov andSirintornthep, 1998). In a study by the KBN (1994), it has been predicted that while the operations of the Mae Moh Power Plant will not exacerbate SO 2 concentrations in the Mae Moh Valley, there would be areas in the mountains between the Mae Moh Valley and Mae Wang where ground level concentrations of the gaseous pollutant will exceed National Environmental Board limits. 

(2) Sensitivities of forest species to acid deposition 

Quite a volume of research had been undertaken to determine sensitivities of forest species to acid deposition. Hayes and Zarsky (1995) advanced the notion that this approach “simplifies greatly the complex interdependence of species in actual ecosystems, and the existence of numerous limiting conditions and thresholds which may not be represented prudently in the acidity level defined as acceptable to the indicator species.” Therefore, it is crucial that detailed ecological studies be conducted in a range of sensitive and significant ecosystems to identify indicator species which capture the complexity and set conservative limits with respect to the whole ecosystem, not just the dominant or indicator species in the ecosystem. (http://nautilus.org/staff-publications/acid-rain-in-a-regional-context/#axzz2a0CnQU4K) 

The use of simulated acid rain (SAR) was undertaken extensively in the past to look into the sensitivities of plants to rain acidification. Huobao and Chuanrong (1999) conducted a study where seeds and seedlings of five broad-leaved species were separately exposed to simulated acid rain at pH values of 2.0, 164 

3.5, 5.0, and 6.0, or to distilled water (the control). The results showed that seed germination was remarkably inhibited by pH2.0 treatment for the three species. Significant foliar damage, decline in chlorophyll contents, and retardation of the seedlings growth of all the species, were observed at pH 2.0 treatment. The pH2.0 treatment seemed to be a threshold level for inhibition of seed germination and seedling growth for all the treated species, while the seedling was stimulated at pH value between 3.5 and 5.0. There were also quite a number of studies done on various tree species in Japan as affected by direct contact with acidified rain (Kohno et al., 1995; Kohno et al., 1998). In a study by Nashimoto (1993), 

Cryptomeria japonica and Chamaecyparis japonica were cultivated in nutrient culture solution for 15 weeks. Acidity of 1/5 Hoagland’s nutrient solution was adjusted to pH values ranging from 3.5 to 6.0 by HCl and NaOH. Growth performance of both Cryptomeria and Chamaecyparis was best at lowest pH of 3.5-4.0. Contents of K + , Ca + , and Mg in the leaves and roots of both species were also highest in the same pH range. On the one hand, with Populus maximowiczii grown in the nutrient solution at pH range 2.5-3.0 or 3.5-4.0 for 15 weeks showed about 35% reduction from that at pH range 4.5-5.0 for three weeks. Matsumura (2001) determined the impacts of ambient ozone and/or acid mist on the growth of 14 tree species (nine conifers and seven deciduous broad leaves) in Japan using the open top chamber approach. He found that increasing acidity of mist caused growth increases in all tree species except Picea, A. veitchii, A. homolepis and Quercus. The results of this study suggested that acid mist or fog in Japan could not induce adverse effects on the growth of trees but with O 3 at pH3, growth decline was observed on A. veitchii, Populus, Fagus, and Zelkova. Thus, there is the potential that the presence of O 3 can exacerbate adverse effects with nitrate, by the deposition of acid precipitation on the shoot. Silwal et al., (2001) applied acid fog consisting of nitric acid, sodium chloride, and ammonium sulfate in the ratio of 1:1:2:1 at pH2, 3, 4 and 5.6 (distilled water) to seedlings of Japanese cedar, red pine and beech. The latter exhibited significantly visible foliar injury in all three acid fog treatments. Injury was only visible for red pine and Japanese cedar at pH2. There were no damages observed on tree bud, stem and root cross sections caused by the acid fog treatments. Nor was there any effect on dry matter growth. There was however evidence of reduced cold tolerance in the seedlings of the four species treated with acidic fog. In another experiment using Nikko fir, Japanese cedar, and white birch seedlings grown in three soils, Matsumura et al., (2001) concluded that the response of the species to acid rain vary considerably, not only with the species but also with soil type. The responses of the species differed in terms of chlorophyll content, K + leaching concentration, free amino acid, and ascorbic acid contents. Still on species sensitivity to acid deposition, Kojima (2001) categorized vascular plants into three broad categories as those which are extreme acidophile, strong acidophile, and moderate acidophile in an attempt to provide useful information in predicting possible changes in vegetation with changes in soil acidity due to deposition of external substances into the soil. In China, the effects of simulated C 2 H4alone and in synergy with SO 2 and NO 2 were investigated in Pinus tabulaeformis, Platycladus orientalis, Populus tomentosa, Salix capitata, Sophora japonica, Robinia pseudoacacia, Amorpha fruticosa, Fraxinus sogdiana, and Ailanthus altissima using the open top chamber (He et al., 2001). There have been numerous studies conducted that showed acidified soil will release a large amount of soluble Al, toxic to plant root growth, at low pH zone. Many of the nutrient solution cultures carried out with plants demonstrated that high Al concentration will inhibit the uptake of Ca and Mg and physiological activity in the root system (Andersson 1988; Foy et al.,1978; Hutchinson et al., 1986; 165 

Keltjens and Loenen 1989; Kochian 1995; McCormick and Steiner 1978; Rengel 1992; Rengel and Elliott 1992; Taylor, 1989 ). Kohno et al.(1995) carried out studies of young Japanese conifer seedlings which were grown in nutrient cultures solution containing 0.5 to 20mM of Al as AlCl 3 at the pH range of 3.5 to 4.0 for maintaining designated Al concentration in the solution. They found out that Al supplied at or below 1 mM did not cause mortality to the species. However, beyond 2mM, there was significant increase in mortality indicating that the critical Al concentration is around 2mM. This concentration is much higher than those reported in field crops, vegetables and/or herbs (Andersson, 1988; Krizek et al., 1997). This further implies that in the occurrence of soil acidification due to acid deposition, herbaceous plants will be influenced earlier than coniferous trees. Looking at the vegetation dynamics, this further suggests that there will be significant changes in ground vegetation first before forest decline occurs in a coniferous stand affected by acid deposition. A study was also done to establish the sensitivity of three species found in the Makiling Forest Reserve, in the Province of Laguna, Philippines, to simulated acid rain by Carandang et al. (2011). The species included ( Madhuca betis (Blanco) MacBride), Artocarpus blancoi (Elmer) Merr.), and ( Toona calantas 

Merr. & Rolfe). Simulated acid rain with the following pH levels were used in watering the seeds and seedlings: 2.5, 3.5, 4.5, 5.5, and distilled water serving as the control with a pH of 7.0. The sensitivities were established by examining the response of the said species to the aforementioned pH levels of simulated rain in terms of seed germination and early growth of their seedlings. Germination value and root length were not significantly affected by acidity treatment. However, height and diameter growth, shoot and root biomass and shoot root ratio were found significantly affected by rainfall acidity. These parameters were then considered as most useful indicators of sensitivity to acid treatment in the study area. Root length and sturdiness quotient were both affected by rainfall pH and soil type and were regarded as less useful parameters in the study of the sensitivity of plants to acid treatment. Of the three species studied, T. calantas was observed to be the most sensitive to changes in the acidity treatment levels. With M. betis , the differences in the seedling responses to the various pH levels of simulated acid rain were found to be insignificant. A. blancoi was intermediate between T. calantas and 

M. betis .Research on the impacts of rainfall acidification on the forests of the country is very nil. To date, there were only three studies reported, both dealing with the sensitivities of certain tree species to various pH levels of the soil under nursery conditions. The first study (Costales, 2004) determined the effects of varying levels of concentrations of sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid on the growth and development of selected reforestation species in the Cordillera Region of the Philippines. Concentrations for both acids were at 10, 20 and 30 ppm with a control. Species tested were Pinus kesiya, Eucalyptus camaldulensis, Swietenia macrophylla, Pterocarpus indicus, Acacia auriculiformis , and Gmelina arborea . Survival, height and diameter growth of seedlings in the nursery were measured every three months. The morphological appearances of the experimental plants were also characterized throughout the experiment. There were no significant effects observed on all the species when performances as affected by the two types of acids were compared. P. indicus exhibited poor growth and survival at lower pH. Reduced height and diameter increments were also observed at lower pH for G. arborea 

while it was only height that was affected in S. macrophylla. A. auriculiformis, E. camaldulensis and P. kesiya were not significantly affected by the acid treatments in terms of survival and growth. Interveinal 166 

chlorosis from the mid-portion of the leaves progressing towards the margin, and slight curling of young leaves were noted in P. indicus . Leaf blight and skeletonizing were also noted. In another study, Picundo (2005) tested the effects of different pH levels on seed germination, seedling survival, growth and biomass of Swietenia macrophylla, Samanea saman, Cassia fistula, Gliricidia sepium and Wikstroemia lanceolata . Zero survival occurred in the seedlings of all the species studied at ph 3.0. However, survival of all species did not significantly differ at pH levels of 4.0, 5.0 and 7.0. There were also no significant differences on height and diameter growth of seedlings of all the species at the same remaining pH levels mentioned. G. sepium showed the least survival at pH 4.0, while the highest were observed with W. lanceolata and S. macrophylla .

(3) Morphological, physiological and biochemical responses of trees 

The effects of high pollutant concentrations have been observed in Chongquin, the largest industrial city in southwest China (Emberson et al., 2001). In 1995, the annual daily mean concentrations of 340 μg m -3 for SO 2 , 320 μg m -3 SPM and 67 μg m -3 NOx caused the development of red and brown necrotic lesions and thick layers of black dust on the surface of the leaves after several days without precipitation (Jiang and Zhang, 1996 as cited by Emberson et al., 2001). Other symptoms included delayed sprouting and accelerated senescence. Other tree species such as peach, cherry and citrus also showed signs of air pollution-induced injury in terms of inhibited or shortened flowering period, early leaf abscission and premature dropping of fruit. Kohno et al., (2001) found out that Japanese larch ( Larix kaempferi )defoliated at pH 2.0 and developed leaf tip discoloration at pH 2.5. In the Hunan Province air pollutants from a coal burning power station reduced fruit yield by as much as 100%. Average leaf CO 2assimilation rates and fruit number per tree of citrus trees growing in the vicinity of the power station were reduced by 55% and 50%, respectively (Boa and Zhu, 1997 as cited by Emberson et al., 2001).Increased concentrations of aluminum and manganese in the soil is often associated with the occurrence of forest declines. In East Asia, there were several studies carried out that determined the effects of such on the different physiological processes occurring in trees. Dry matter production, net photosynthetic rate, nutrient status, and anatomical characteristics of Fagus crenata seedlings were grown in brown forest soil acidified by adding H 2 SO 4 solution were investigated by Izuta et al. (2000). Seedlings grown in soils treated with H + at 120 mgL -1 were observed to have lower dry mass per plant and lower carboxylation efficiency and maximum net photosynthetic rate at saturated CO 2 concentration compared with the control. Furthermore, the treatment induced a reduction in the concentration of Ca in the leaf and an increase in Al concentration with increasing amount of H + added to the soil. It was further concluded that Fagus crenata is relatively sensitive to a reduction in the (Ca+Mg+K)/Al molar ration of soil solution compared with European forest tree species. Kohno et al. (1998) determined responses of tree species to either ozone or sulfur dioxide based on total dry weight per plant. Pinus thunberghii, Picea abies, Chamaecyparis obtuse, Quercus serrata and 

Quercus mongolia did not show significant growth reduction in a high concentration ozone. However, the total dry weight of Acer buergerianum and Fraxinus japonica were significantly reduced even at ambient level of ozone making the two species very good candidates as early indicator species of increased ozone concentration in the atmosphere. Pinus strobus and Liriodendron tulipifera showed significant growth reduction to exposure at 10ppb of sulfur dioxide hence were considered most sensitive to the said pollutant. Other having significant reduction in growth to exposure at 40 ppb of sulfur dioxide included Pinus densiflora, Larix kaempferi, Betula platyphylla , and Acer buergerianum. 

Species were considered sensitive when visible injury developed or when total dry weight is 167 

significantly reduced at and over ambient level of ozone or at and over 10 ppb of sulfur dioxide. Intermediate species are those where there is visible injury or when total dry weight is significantly reduced at and over 1.5 times higher than ambient ozone level or at and over 20 ppb sulfur dioxide. Finally, species are considered tolerant when no visible injury develops or when no significant reduction in growth occurred in total dry weight at any treatment. The germination of Chinese pine ( Pinus tabulaeformis Carr.) seeds sown in soils treated with H 2 SO 4decreased compared to that of the untreated soil (Tang et al., 2000) due to the large amounts of Al ions leached out at low pH values ( ≤3.5). It was further concluded that the acid decreased the size of soil aggregates, and increased the number of micro-aggregates (under 250 μm in diameter), which lead to increased viscosity. This in turn tied the pine needles to the soil after the seeds have germinated and prevented the seedlings from fully developing. Tomioka and Takenaka (2001) showed that with Al treatment, the rhizosphere pH neutralization decreased for both Chamaecyparis obtuse (hinoki) and 

Quercus serrata Thumb (konara) seedlings with the latter showing higher acid neutralization capacity in the rhizosphere. A large amount of Ca was leached from the roots and the Ca content in the tip of the roots decreased for both species suggesting that Al may attack the Ca-channel of the root cell membrane and replace the Ca. The effects of manganese toxicity on the photosynthesis of Betula platyphylla var. japonica , Betula ermanii , Alnus hirsuta, Ulmus davidiana var. japonica , and Acer mono were investigated by Kitao et al. (2001). They found that the early successional species B. platyphylla, B. ermanii , and A. hirsuta had greater tolerant capacity to excessive Mn accumulation in leaves based on photosynthetic response than the mid- and the late successional species U. davidiana and A. mono ., respectively. Such differences in photosynthetic responses as a result of increasing Mn accumulation in leaves can be detected by chlorophyll fluorescence methods as well as gas exchange measurements. This was also the method used by Shan and Dang (2001) when they assessed the phenological progress of jack pine as affected by nitrogen using the Fv/Fm ratio. Still on the effects of acid deposition on photosynthesis of tree species, Yoshida et al., (2001) investigated the effect of simulated acid fog and drought stress on Abies firma Sieb seedlings in Japan. They discovered that the photosynthetic rate of seedlings in the drought and drought + acid fog treatment significantly decreased compared with the control and that the drought + acid fog treated seedlings showed a higher transpiration and photosynthetic rates than those of the drought treatment. With their findings, the researchers suggested that acid fog has negative influences on stomata closure. Meanwhile, a study was undertaken to determine the effects of OH-generating solutions on the physiological traits of Japanese red pine ( Pinus densiflora ) in Mt. Gokurakuji, Western Japan (Kobayashi et al., 2001). The needles were exposed to 100μM HOOH-at 50 and 100 μM; pH 5.17-5.39) as a mist. The needles exposed to 100μM HOOH showed lower net photosynthetic rate (P n ) and stomatal conductance (g s ) and higher non-photochemical quenching (NPQ) than did the control needles. Conversely, the needles exposed to 100μM HOOH and NO 2- showed higher g than the control needles, though P n and NPQ were similar, suggesting that the HOOH solution induced a defective stomatal opening, while the NO 2- solution might have caused an excess opening of the stomata. They further concluded that area-based chlorophyll contents were lower and ethylene emission rates were higher in needles subjected to HOOH solution suggesting an early occurrence of leaf senescence. In China, studies have shown that excess N will result in nutrient imbalance in trees, disturbed N metabolism, reduced net photosynthesis, and an overall restriction in plant growth due to the foregoing 168 

adverse physiological effects (Li et al., 2005, Lu et al., 2006 and 2007; Mo et al., 2008) as cited in Liu et l., (2011). In the latter study, Mo et al. (2008) found that the net photosynthetic rate and biomass production of seedlings of Schima superba and Cryptocarya concinna were increased by lower N addition (50-100 kg N ha -1 yr -1 ). However, both species were adversely affected by higher N addition. Lu et al. (2006 and 2007) found that N addition significantly increased foliar N in three understory plants in an N saturated tropical forest conditions. Below ground biomass was also negatively affected by the addition of higher N levels, with the fine root biomass significantly decreasing with increasing levels of N addition. In a three year study, Duan et al., (2009) as cited by Liu et al., (2011) observed that elevated CO 2 concentration and N deposition increased biomass accumulation but the responses varied among tree species. The same study concluded that nitrogen deposition stimulated above ground biomass production with decreasing root:shoot ratio and elevated CO 2 concentration significantly increased biomass accumulation or belowground or aboveground biomass of different tree species. The effects of N deposition on litter decomposition in China were also surveyed by Liu et al., (2011). These studies indicated both positive and negative responses on the decomposition rate and release of nutrient elements depending on the ecosystem N status, litter quality, species, and time of N deposition (Mo et al., 2006, 2007, 2008c; Song et al., 2007; Deng et al., 2007; Fan et al., 2008). For agronomic crops, a review of the database on the effect of elevated O 3 on wheat showed 29% and 18% reduction in yield and aboveground biomass, respectively (Feng et al., 2008). Reduction in grain protein content, photosynthetic rates, Rubisco activity, stomatal conductance as well as chlorophyll content due to elevated O 3 were gleaned from the literatures published between 1980 and 2007. 

(4)Forest biodiversity 

Soil acidification due to acid deposition is likely to affect the composition and function of forests in acid-sensitive areas over the long term (Lovett, et al., 2009). The addition of significant amounts of N to the soil can affect biodiversity in an area (Clark and Tilman, 2008). Furthermore, literature published from 1953 to 2007 showed that pollutants causing soil acidification imposed a stronger detrimental effect on plant diversity than industries whose emissions increased soil pH and that the adverse effect increased with increase in pollution load (Zvereva et al, 2007). In the Dinghushan Long-term Nitrogen Research (DHSLTNR) in China, Lu et al. (2008) have shown in studies that excessive N deposition can reduce species diversity. In an old growth forest in southern China, high N addition levels (e.g.>100 kg N ha -1 yr -1 ) significantly reduced understory species diversity and the mechanism responsible for change appeared to be N deposition-mediated soil acidification rather than fertilization (Lu et al., as cited by Liu et al., 2011). It was also found by Xu et al., (2006) in the same forest that N addition significantly decreased soil fauna diversity. On the other hand, however, there were also some studies that have shown an increase in species richness by low N addition levels (Xu et al., 2005) specifically in pine forests. Xue et al. (2007) found that short term addition of N significantly increased soil bacterial population but decreased soil fungal counts. 

4.3.2 Effects on inland water 4.3.2.1 Inland water acidification (1) Acid neutralizing capacity of inland water 

Similar to soil acidification, inland water acidification may depend on its ANC. In aqueous systems, ANC (aq) is determined by strong acid titration to a reference pH around 4-5 and is defined as the base equivalence minus the strong acid equivalence (van Breemen 1983: 1984) as shown in the following 169 

equation: ANC (aq) = [HCO 3−] + 2[CO 32−] + [A −] + [OH −] − [H + ] (1) where [A −] is the molar concentration of a potential proton accepting anions such as organic anions. In most natural environments, ANC (aq) is largely attributed to HCO 3− concentration (van Breemen 1983). In fact, alkalinity with the end-point pH 4.8 monitored in EANET is designed to measure HCO 3−

(EANET 2010). If a soil completely neutralizes H + inputs, base cations such as Ca 2+ , Mg 2+ , K + and Na +are released and exported from the soil by vegetation uptake or by outflow of drainage water, resulting in soil acidification, while aqueous alkalinization (an increase in ANC(aq)) occurs as counter-process to soil acidification (van Breemen 1984). On the other hand, if H + inputs to a soil is significantly large, and concentrations of bound base cations in the soil are low or their dissolution kinetics are slow, or the retention time of water within the mineral soil is short, the neutralization of H + inputs may be incomplete and result in the export of free H + in drainage water from the soil (van Breemen 1984). Inland waters such as stream/river waters and lake waters are flowed from their catchment areas. Therefore, ANC of inland waters depends on characteristics of their catchments, in particular on geology. If limestone (rich in CaCO 3 ) or dolostone (rich in CaMg(CO 3 ) 2 ) are mainly distributed as surface geology in a region, the stream waters draining from the regions must have high ANC. 

(2) Inland water acidification by field observations 

Inland water acidification was strongly associated with acidic geologies. Acidification of inland waters in Europe (e.g., Wright et al. 1976) and North America (e.g., Watt et al. 1983) has been observed mainly in granite-rich areas. On the other hand, Kilham (1982) reported that alkalinization of lake water was observed in Weber Lake in Michigan, where carbonate-rich bedrocks are widespread. It seemed that inland water was acidified by acid deposition in acid-sensitive areas and alkalized in non-sensitive areas (Kilham 1982). Inland water acidification in such acid-sensitive areas was reported by field observation in Europe and North America mainly in the 1970s or 1980s. As anthropogenic sulfur emission has been reduced since the mid-1980s, recovery from acidification (upward trends of alkalinity) has been reported at the regional scale, in particular in Europe, while no regional recovery was observed in three areas in North America, namely south/central Ontario, the Adirondack/Catskill Mountains and Midwestern North America in the 1990s (Stoddard et al. 1999). Although SO 42−

concentrations showed significant declining trends, alkalinity showed unclear change or declining trends in the above areas in North America. They suggested that this could be attributed to excessive declines of base cation concentrations (compared to SO 42− declines), which were due to the reduction of base cation depositions (Hedin et al. 1994) and cation depletion of watershed soils (Likens et al., 1996). The regional trends from 1990 to 2001 were reinvestigated by Skjelkvåle et al. (2005) and showed upward trends of ANC in the Adirondack/Appalachian (including Catskill) mountains. However, they noted that significant downward trends in alkalinity have been observed during this period in Maine/Atlantic Canada where declines of concentrations in base cations (Ca 2+ + Mg 2+ )exceeded declines in acid anions (SO 42− + NO 3−). They also noted upward trends of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in most areas, suggesting the effects of climate change as well as reduction of acid deposition. In southwestern China, Xue and Schnoor (1994) surveyed precipitation chemistry and lake water chemistry in 40 stations and 16 lakes, respectively, and concluded that lake water acidification has not occurred in the area despite severe acid deposition. Although the low ANC (< 200 μmol c L−1 ) was 170 

observed in two lakes, the ANC in most of the lakes was greater than 300 μmol c L−1 (Xue and Schnoor 1994). They suggested that water chemistry was buffered by base cations derived from calcareous dust particles and chemical weathering in soil. In the same part of China, in a small catchment in Guiyang, Guizhou Province, Larssen et al. (1998) also noted that Ca was the major cation in stream water and that the acidity of stream water was relatively well neutralized in deep soil layers and bedrock compared with soil water. They suggested that high concentrations of base cations might dampen harmful effects of Al on organisms despite relatively high concentrations of Al in surface water. However, they also reported that the median pH values in the two first order streams were very acidic, 4.9 and 5.0, while the value in the dam at the lowest point of the catchment was 6.3. According to a statistical analysis of national hydrological monitoring data in the Yangtze River watershed by Duan et al. (2011), river water acidification trend was clarified in many of the tributaries of Upper Yangtze River in the last two decades, 1988-1997 and 1998-2007 (Table 4.3.2). They reported that concentrations of SO 42− and NO 3− showed significant increasing trends at 9 and 7 of the 13 stations respectively in 1988-1997, while the stations with increasing trends were reduced in 1998-2007, particularly for SO 42−. With the increasing concentration of the acid anions in 1988-1997, the declining trend of pH was observed at 8 of 13 stations above, while no declining trend was observed in 1998-2007. They also noted that the increasing trend of Ca 2+ was observed in most stations from 1988-1997, which was however lower than that of SO 42−: the mean in the period, 32.6 and 49.2 μmol c L−1 year −1, respectively. They suggested that river water acidification in 1988-1997 was primarily caused by the rapid increase of SO 2 emission, and that the slowdown in SO 2 emission after 1998 had limited further acidification of the surface waters. In small sized water in this region also, including streams, ponds and headwaters, inland acidification in the last 20 years was observed by comparison of two surveys in 1988 and 2009, which supported the regional trends (Duan et al. 2011). 171 

Table 4.3.2 Trend analysis of water chemistry in the tributaries of Upper Yangtze River in China (after Duan et al. 2011) River Station pH SO 42− NO 3−     

> 1988/1997 1998/2007 1988/1997 1998/2007 1988/1997 1998/2007

Minjiang GC −0.014 0.020 42.4 46.9 6.71 2.78 PS −0.014 41.0 −72.6 SHM −0.040 68.9 5.30 7.44 LJW −0.019 0.033 51.4 74.0 8.61 −18.50 FLZ −0.51 Jianlingjiang XDZ −0.030 69.1 TZK 0.025 36.4 WS −0.015 39.6 4.29 PW 1.21 FJQ −0.055 0.026 33.3 1.43 3.06 SH −0.068 54.8 4.64 LDX 0.017 117.7 3.00 2.25 Wujiang WL 42.0 174.0 Note: Values showed annual changes in pH (units year −1) and concentrations ( μmol c L−1 year −1). Trend significant at p < 0.01 by seasonal Kendall test. Blank cell indicates no significant trend. In southern China, leaching derived from large nitrogen deposition may be also an important factor for stream water acidification. Fang et al. (2011) reported that the pH values of stream waters were negatively correlated with NO 3− concentrations in broadleaved forests and pine forests. They noted that the pH value in stream water decreased significantly, and NO 3− concentration increased as N deposition increased. In Japan, acid deposition was not considered to be likely to lead to marked increases in acidity of surface waters because most catchments have ANC (Ohte et al., 2001b). Several studies have revealed the high ANC of Japanese forest soils compared to those in Europe and the U.S. (Shibata et al., 2001). However, inland water acidification has been reported recently by field observations and historical data, in particular in geologically acid-sensitive areas in central Japan (Yamada et al. 2007; Matsubara et al. 2009; Nakahara et al. 2010). Yamada et al. (2007) investigated the effects of acid deposition in five representative lakes from Hokkaido (northernmost) to Kyushu (southernmost) in Japan based on the monitoring data by the Ministry of the Environment of Japan and they found that the pH of Lake Ijira in central Japan had declined slightly since the mid-1990s. Such significant acidification trends were only observed in Lake 172 

Ijira, where the geology of the catchment is dominated by chert. In fact, alkalinity of the lake and stream waters was relatively low, approx. 150 μmol c L−1 . Since the lake is located about 40 km north of the Chukyo industrial area near Nagoya, one of the biggest industrial areas in Japan, it was suggested that air pollution from this industrial area was transported to mountainous areas including the Lake Ijira catchment. In fact, among monitoring stations in Japan, the wet depositions of H + and nss-SO 42– were the highest at Lake Ijira. Nakahara et al. (2010) suggested that climate anomalies had triggered the reduction of nitrogen retention by vegetation since the mid-1990s in the Lake Ijira catchment. They concluded that NO 3– leaching to the stream since the mid-1990s caused declines in stream water pH and alkalinity. Long-term acidification of river water was also reported in three neighboring prefectures in central Japan, namely Gifu for 1988-2003, Nagano for 1973-2004, and Niigata for 1986-2003 (Matsubara et al., 2009), and the acidification trends were found in the rivers from the areas, which were dominated by low-ANC geology, such as granite, rhyolite and chert. In fact, the river waters had low pH, EC and alkalinity, reflecting the geology. Moreover, atmospheric deposition may be large in central Japan. As described above, Gifu Prefecture may be affected by emissions from the Chukyo Industrial Area. Niigata Prefecture may be affected by long-range transport from the Asian Continent, especially by seasonal winter winds (Kamisako et al., 2008; Matsubara et al., 2009). As one of the possible causes of river water acidification in Niigata Prefecture, Kobayashi et al. (2012) suggested mobilization of internal sulfur accumulated in forest ecosystems might have contributed to the observed long-term acidification, because the sulfur output exceeded the input in the catchment. Leaching of sulfur accumulated in ecosystems in the past was also reported in Europe and North America (e.g. Mitchell and Likens 2011), and therefore the effects of sulfur may continue even after its deposition was reduced. River water in the areas dominated by low-ANC geology may become acidified if acid loading from the atmosphere is quite large. Ebise and Nagafuchi (2005) investigated stream water chemistry on a tall cone-shaped mountainous island, Yakushima Island in Japan, to clarify the effects of long-range transport of air pollutant on streams located in different directions. They found that concentrations of SO 42− in streams in west/northwest were higher than those in other directions, and such western streams had low pH, high EC, low alkalinity and dissolved SiO 2 , suggesting high acid deposition load in western part of the island. In Siberian part of Russia, Sorokovikova et al. (2004) found that relative chemical compositions of waters in the southern tributaries of Baikal Lake in 2001 have changed compared with those in 1955: SO 42− content has increased, while the content of HCO 3− and Ca 2+ has decreased. They also pointed out that river waters were more acidified in tributaries located in acid rock geology than those in carbonate rock geology, even though the largest industry is located in the latter area. They concluded that acidic snow water derived from industries along Baikal Lake was not effectively neutralized in the acid rock geology, resulting in the decline of pH in these tributaries: the lowest pH, 5.7, was observed in Khara-Murin River in snowmelt season. Moreover, based on the data of publications and field observations, Sorokovikova et al. (2009) estimated that fluxes of SO 42− and NO 3− to Baikal Lake from its nine tributaries increased by a factor of 1.21-2.29 and 1.10-1.80, respectively, in the recent decade (1997 −2006) compared with those in 1950s. They suggested that one of the factors responsible for the increase in the concentrations of SO 42− and NO 3− in natural waters and their fluxes to the lake was the increase of the air pollution level in the region, since the inputs by precipitation to Lake Baikal 173 

increased by a factor of 3.3 and more than 2, respectively. 

(3) Episodic acidification in snowmelt season or heavy rain events 

Although long-term observation was limited, episodic acidification of streams/rivers has been reported in snowmelt season or heavy rain events. This may suggest potential risks on inland water by acid deposition. In Japan, many Japanese watersheds show little evidence of acidification accompanying high NO 3−

concentrations during episodic events (Ohte et al. 2001a). However, several cases showing episodic acidification with NO 3− leaching have been reported. In Toyama Prefecture, Japan, Kawakami et al. (2001) suggested stream water acidification due to nitrogen saturation in Kureha Hill, where low pH (mean, 5.2) and negative ANC (mean, -8 μmol c L−1 ) were observed with significant high NO 3−

concentrations (mean, 125 μmol c L−1 ). They pointed out that pH and ANC decreased to 4.55 and -24 

μmol c L−1 , respectively, with increase of NO 3− concentration (up to 370 μmol c L−1 ) during a heavy rain event. Similar episodic acidification of stream water because of NO 3− leaching has been observed in other small catchments such as those in the Tama Hills, Tokyo (Baba and Okazaki 1998) and at the Kajikawa site in Niigata Prefecture (Kamisako et al. 2008). 

(4) History of inland water acidification suggested by diatoms 

In Kyoto, Japan, Yoshikawa et al. (2000) reported a historical trend of inland water acidification based on diatom analysis in sediment cores in Sawanoike Pond. In Europe and North America, fossil diatom assemblages preserved in lake sediments have been used as reliable ecological indicators of lake-water pH since the 1970’s (Yoshikawa et al. 2000). They noted that diatom-inferred pH began to decrease in the 1940s, and reached the minimum level in the mid-1980s, while the pH had gradually increased until the 1930s/1940s. Finally, the pH declined by 0.4–0.5 units in the northern core and 0.2–0.3 units in the central core since ca. 1910, when vegetation around the shore changed to a community similar to that of recent years. They concluded that the pH decline could be attributed to acid deposition caused by fossil fuel combustion, since concentrations of labile Pb, Zn and spheroidal carbonaceous particles in the sediment cores began to increase from the 1920’s with the industrial development of Japan and reached the maximum levels in 1960s. 

4.3.2.2 Nitrogen leaching and nitrogen saturation 

Another effect of atmospheric deposition of acidic substances to inland water is nitrogen leaching from watersheds. Chronic input of nitrogen may lead the ecosystem from oligotrophic to eutrophic in the long term, which may cause leaching of excess nitrogen over the demands by plant and microbes, from the soil layer below the rooting zone or to streams as being posited by the nitrogen saturation hypothesis described in 4.2.4. Nitrogen input and retention in ecosystems, and output through leaching have become a major concern in Asian watersheds where emission of reactive nitrogen, nitrogen oxides and ammoniacal nitrogen has been increasing recently and is expected to increase more in coming decades (Ohara et al., 2007). 

(1) Input–Output budget analysis 

According to the nitrogen input-output analysis conducted in European and North American watersheds, nitrogen output (to stream water) is related to the input (via throughfall) but these relationships show substantial scatter reflecting the different retention capacity of nitrogen of each watersheds (Aber et al., 2003). It was found, however, nitrogen output remained low (below 5 kg N 174 

ha –1 y –1 ) in the watersheds where nitrogen input was less than a certain threshold value around 10 kg N ha –1 y –1 (Wright et al., 1995; MacDonald et al., 2002; Aber et al., 2003). At input above 25~30 kg N ha –1 y –1 , outputs are substantial and at intermediate inputs between these two thresholds, the outputs are highly variable with some sites showing almost complete retention and others leaching large amount nitrogen. Nitrogen input and output in Asian watersheds are summarized in Table 4.3.3 based on existing literature and depicted in Figure 4.3.4. The Sino-Norwegian IMPACTS project (Integrated Monitoring Program on Acidification of Chinese Terrestrial Systems) conducted budgets studies in 4 forested watershed in China: Chongqing (Tiesanping (TSP) in Chongqing city, Caijiatang (CJT) in Hunan, Leigongshan (LGS) in Guizhou and Liuxihe (LXH) in Guangdong provinces (Chen et al., 2004; Chen and Mulder, 2007; Larssen et al., 2011). These sites are located within the so-called Acid Rain Control Zone, the target area for acid rain mitigation in China. For TSP and CJT sites, nitrogen deposition is high compared with values from Europe and North America. About 70% of the deposited nitrogen comes as NH 4+ mainly caused by agriculture. The annual average NO 3− fl uxes from soil rooting zone was large at all sites and exceeding throughfall input fl ux at some of them. This means there is no retention, or no small retention, of nitrogen in vegetation and soil rooting zone. On the other hand, stream water fluxes are significantly smaller than at the 50cm depth soil solution. Retentions of nitrogen (sulfur and calcium also) were large in dipper soil or riparian zones and this was considered due to reduction processes, which are likely to be most pronounced in systems with hot and wet summers, characteristic of much of South China. 175 

Ta ble 4.3.3 Nitrogen input–output budget in Asian watersheds 

Watershed, Forest stand Input ------------- Output ------------Literature Rooting zone ------ Stream ----------------- kg N ha -1 yr -1 ------------ mg N L -1 

[CHINA] Chongqing (TSP) T 35 42 7 Chen et al. (2004), Chen and Mulder Hunan (CJT) T 35 33.6 5.6 

Guizhou (LGS) T 5.6 9.8 2.8 (2007), Larssen et al.,(2011) Guangdong (LXH) T 14.8 8.4 1.4 

DHSBR, Southern China NO 3– DON NO 3– DON Fang et al. (2008, 2009b) Pine forest T 27 18 16 8Mixed forest T 23 15 10 7Old-growth forest T 32 20 42 17 Shaoshan forest, Hunan T Bulk: 26.2, Dry: 5.2 2.2 Du et al. (2008) 

14 forests along a 150 km urban to rural transect in southern China Fang et al. (2011b) 

Urban P 22-30 1.5-2.0 

Urban T 25-45 Suburban P 34-38 0.8-4.3 

Suburban T 40-65 Rural P 16-18 0.3-0.8 

Rural T 10-25 69 forest ecosystems at 50 sites throughout China P 2.6-48.2 22% of throughfall input Fang et al. (2011a) 

T (B): 140% 1) (C) 134% 1) [JAPAN] Tanakami, Shiga 3.5 0.8-2.5 

Mitchell et al. (1997), Ohte et al. (2001a) 

Kiryu, Shiga 5.4-8.0 16.-3.8 Ryuoh, Shiga 3.6-4.7 0.7-1.7 

Kamigamo, Kyoto 3.5 0.6 

Mt. Hiei, Shiga 4.4 NA 

Yanagatani, Shiga 5.2 1.3-1.4 0.063 Nodabata, Kyoto, 9.8 NA 

Hirusen, Tottori NA NA 

Asahino-mori, Shiga 8.7 0.8-1.2 

Hakyuchi, Tokyo 7.6 28 

Tsukuba, Ibaraki 10.5 12.7-13.1 1.764 Ohyasan, Gunma 10.5 8.5-16.1 1.428 Tomakomai, Hokkaido (D) 2) 4.7 1.2 Tomakomai, Hokkaido (C) 4.1 6

Kutsuki experimental forest (near Lake Biwa), Kyoto Hartmann et al. (2008) 1993-1999: 15.4 1.7 176          

> 2000-2004: 19.4 1.3 Kajikawa, Niitaga, P17.7 90.7 Kamisako et al. (2008) T+S 17.9 1) Ratio to precipitation input, (B): broad leaved stand, (C); conifer stand, 2) (D) deciduous stand, (C):Conifer stand

In DHSBR in central Guangdong province, input-output monitoring was carried out over two years (Fang et al., 2008, 2009a). Data in three subtropical forests (a young pine forest, a young mixed pine/broadleaf forest and an old-growth forest) in a region of South China under high air pollution were investigated. They evaluated the input fluxes via throughfall and output flux from soil rooting zone for DIN (NO 3– ) as well as dissolved organic Nitrogen (DON). In the younger forests, 41-63% of precipitation DIN leached below the 20-cm soil depth. Monthly fluxes showed a good correlation between throughfall inputs and soil water outputs in each site. In the old-growth forest, no nitrogen retention in vegetation or in the rooting zone was observed; rather, a net loss of nitrogen from the soil occurred. They regarded the old-growth forest as completely nitrogen saturated. DON is recognized as an important component of terrestrial nitrogen cycle under N-limited conditions. In these 3 forests in nitrogen rich condition, it was shown that DON significantly contributed to both input and output fluxes. Measurements in Shaoshan forest (subtropical evergreen mixed forest) in Hunan Province in China for 4 years also showed the high throughfall input of DIN (Du et al., 2008). Annual fluxes of NH 4+ and NO 3– in bulk precipitation ranged from 14.4 to 19.5 kg N ha –1 y –1 and from 8.4 to 10.3 kg N ha –1 y –1 ,respectively, and considerable amount of dry deposition was observed. In spite of this high input, output to stream water was low and net retention was accounted to be 29.2 kg N ha –1 y –1 . It was concluded that the forest is far from nitrogen saturation. In 14 forests in 7 sites along a 150 km transect from urban to rural in southern China, precipitation and throughfall input flux (using ion-exchange resin column) for 18 months and nitrogen concentration in leaf, soil and stream water were measured (Fang et al., 2011b). Seven sites were classified into urban (around Guangzhou city), suburban (DHSBR and a neighboring site) and rural (in the Heishiding Natural Reserve in Zhaoqing). Precipitation and throughfall DIN deposition ranged from 16.2 to 38.2 kg N ha –1 y –1 and of 11.7 to 65.1 kg N ha –1 yr –1 , respectively, and the suburban sites took the maximum nitrogen input. Across these forests, throughfall N input correlated positively with soil nitri fi cation rates and NO 3– leaching to stream, and negatively with pH in soil and stream water. Although the output fluxes were not measured, the survey results showed that nitrogen deposition enhanced soil N availability and N turnover in urban and suburban forests, compared with those in rural forests. Fang et al. (2011a) summarized nitrogen input and output budget in 69 forests at 50 sites throughout China based on the existing literature including the international journal papers on the IMPACTS projects, researches in DHSBR and other forests and also Chinese papers. DIN deposition due to precipitation ranged from 2.6 to 48.2 kg N ha –1 y –1 , with an average of 16.6 kg N ha –1 y –1 . NH 4+ is dominating DIN species (64%) in precipitation input. Throughfall inputs were 40% and 34% larger than the precipitation input in broad-leaved and coniferous forests, respectively. For output flux, they used the data from 34 forests where data of leaching loss from rooting zone or via streams were available, and analyzed this data without distinction between them. High nitrogen leaching was found in warm and humid areas, for example Hainan, Guangdong, and Yunan provinces. Overall leaching rate was 22% of the throughfall DIN input, which was lower than the rate in European forests that was 177 

50 to 59% according to Dise et al. (2009), Gundersen et al, (1998) etc. Nitrogen budgets in Japanese forested watersheds were also summarized for 24 forests grouped into 12 (Table 4.3.3) on the nitrogen input via precipitation and stream water output and were compared with nitrogen budget in North America and Europe (Mitchell et al., 1997; Mitchell, 2011). Each forest has the respective management history such as fertilization with urea or sewage water, improvement cutting etc. Bulk deposition of DIN ranged from 3.5 to 10.5 kg N ha –1 y –1 and drainage losses ranged from 0.6 to 28 kg N ha –1 y –1 . NO 3– and NH 4+ concentration in stream water ranged from 0.01 to 2.3 mg N L –1 and from ND to 0.3 mg N L –1 . High nitrogen concentration and losses exceeding the inputs were found in the watersheds in Kanto region near Tokyo (Group IX, X and XI in Tokyo, Ibaraki and Gunma, respectively). Profound nitrogen output to streams was observed in Hakyuchi (IX), located west of Tokyo. Net nitrogen loss from watershed was attributed to high rates of N mineralization in conjunction with high atmospheric nitrogen inputs, whereas most of the watersheds showed large nitrogen retention. Among the 4 sites investigated by Ohte et al. (2001a), two sites in Kanto region (TB and OS), where stream water output were large, showed nitrogen concentration in stream water as high as urban watersheds in South China (Fang et al., 2011b) shown in Table 4.3.3 despite the much smaller input flux. In Kutsuki experimental forest in Kyoto, Japan, stream water output rate to input flux was small in spite of the increase in input flux by 26% over 10 years, noticeably impact to the stream water fluxes was not observed (Hartmann et al., 2008). On the other hand, in Kajikawa catchment in Niigata with the same level of input with Kutsuki forest, nitrogen output from rooting zone was relatively large and stream water output also may be high because of the relatively high nitrogen concentration in stream water (Kamisako et al., 2008). In summarizing these results, a considerable portion on input nitrogen leaches out from soil rooting zones in many stands both in China and Japan (Figure 4.3.4a). Chinese watersheds, however, generally have large retention capacity of nitrogen, especially in lower soil layers and riparian zone. Output fluxes of nitrogen to stream water are relatively small even in the watersheds with very large input fluxes exceeding the upper threshold (25~30 kg N ha –1 y –1 ) of substantial nitrogen output found in watersheds in Europe and North America (Figure 4.3.4b). This could be because of the shorter history of N pollution in China than in these regions (Fang et al, 2011a), and could be due to large denitrification ability of the watersheds. The possibility of large denitrification is supported by large efflux of nitrous oxide from forest floor observed in the three forest types in DHSBR (Tang et al., 2006). On the other hand, relatively high nitrogen leaching above 5 kg N ha –1 y –1 was observed in some watersheds receiving lower throughfall inputs than the threshold (~10 kg N ha –1 y –1 ). This was attributed to different hydrological conditions in monsoon climate area – having warm and wet summers (Fang et al., 2011a). In Japanese watersheds, there is wide variation in nitrogen inputs and outputs. Most of the watersheds studied so far show large nitrogen retention whereas some watershed especially located in Kanto region are nitrogen saturated with the stream water output exceeding the input flux (Figure 4.3.4b). A lot of discussions were made on the different seasonal variation of nitrogen concentration in stream water in Japan (and China) with those in Europe and North America (Ohte et al., 2001; Michell, 2011 etc.) as described in 4.2.4. On the other hand, the thresholds of nitrogen output described before seem to be available for Japanese watersheds to some extent: Mitchell et al. (1997) showed the plots 178 

indicating the relationship between of nitrogen inputs and outputs in Japanese watersheds were almost overlapping with that for European and North American watersheds with some exceptions. 

Figure 4.3.4 Relationship between nitrogen input and output (a) from soil rooting zone and (b) to stream (drawn after Chen et al. 2004, Chen and Mulder 2007, Du et al. 2008, Fang et al. 2008, 2009b, Hartmann et al. 2008, Kamisako et al. 2008, Larssen et al. 2011, Mitchell et al. 1997, Ohte et al. 2001a. 

(2) Nitrate concentration in stream water in regional scale 

Wide area and spatial characteristics evaluation of input-output budgets is difficult because the continuous monitoring of input and output are demanded at a considerable number of the sites. Instead, measurements of nitrogen (nitrate) concentration were carried out in many streams that receive no direct inflows from sewage, industrial and agricultural effluent, and so on in order to evaluate the regional scale effect of atmospheric deposition to inland water chemistry. Inorganic N (NO 3– and NH 4+ ) concentrations were measured in streams in 18 experimental forests belonging to universities located throughout Japan from June 2000 to May 2001 (Shibata et al., 2001). Nitrogen mineralization potential in soil was also measured using batch incubation experiments. Higher NO 3– concentrations exceeding 1.0 mg N L –1 were observed in central Japan (Ohyasan in Gunma Prefecture), an area that receives high rates of atmospheric N deposition. At some streams in northern Japan, snowmelt resulted in increased nitrate concentrations in stream water. High potential N mineralization in the surface soil partly contributed to the increase in NO 3– concentration in stream water during a storm event. Yoh et al. (2001) conducted a survey for NO 3– concentration at 15 tributaries in the Tama river basin. The concentration ranged between 0.03 and 2.1 mg N L –1 and showed a distinct regional pattern from the upper to lower tributaries. A clear inverse relationship was found between NO 3– concentration and average altitude of the respective catchment and concentrations are maximum ranging from 1.1 to 2.1 mg N L –1 at the lowest tributaries, which Hakyuchi indicated in Table 4.3.3 was located in and the closest to the central Tokyo among the measured tributaries. They also made surveys at forested catchments surrounding Kanto Plain. According to the measurements at more than 60 streams, several streams with high NO 3– concentration over 70 mol L –1 (0.98 mg N L –1 ) were identified at western periphery of Kanto plain (including the Tama river basin) and at the northwestern region on the route        

> 010 20 30 40 50 60 020 40 60 Nitogen output from rooting zone (kg N ha  -1 y -1  )Nitogen input (kg N ha -1 y-1 )

(a) China Japan 010 20 30 0 10 20 30 40 Nitogen output to stream (kg N ha  -1 y -1 )Nitogen input (kg N ha -1 y -1 )(b) China Japan 179 

of polluted air advection from central Tokyo. Similar surveys were conducted in wider areas in Japan. Ito et al. (2004) measured NO 3– concentration at 270 streams in the area covering Kanto, Chubu and part of Tohoku region in Japan. NO 3–concentrations ranged from 0.0 to 1.9 mg N L –1 , and the median was 0.24 mg N L –1 . Most of the watersheds with high NO 3– concentrations were on the periphery of the Kanto plain. Konohira et al. (2006) measured concentration of various elements in stream water at 1278 sites throughout Japan in the summer of 2003. Prefectural averages of NO 3– concentration showed large variability ranging from 0.11 (in Hokkaido) to 1.6 mg N L –1 (Saitama) and high concentration were observed in the suburbs of large cities. Tabayashi and Koba (2011) measured NO 3– concentration in stream water at 24 sites in Chichibu region in Saitama Prefecture where high concentration was observed by Konohira et al. (2006) to investigate the relationship between concentration and the air mass advection path from central Tokyo. Spatial distribution of NO 3– concentration could be explained sufficiently by the air mass advection path. They selected some of the measurement sites from those used by Konohira et al. (2006) to compare the measurements in different year. The average concentrations were 1.36 and 1.58 mg N L –1 in Tabayashi and Koba (2011) and in Konohira et al. (2006), respectively, and spatial pattern agreed fairly well. Long-term changes in NO 3– concentration in stream water in Japan were investigated based on the measurements obtained by Konohira et al. (2006) and the measurements in 255 rivers across Japan measured by Kobayashi (1961) in 1930s to 1950s (Tabayashi and Yamamuro, 2009). Both data sets were summarized into the average for each of 8 regions (from Hokkaido to Kyushu), and for each prefecture in Kanto region, and compared each other, although these measurements were not in stream in mountainous forests but rather lower reaches. They found a large contrast between northern and southern regions: NO 3– concentrations in the Hokkaido and Tohoku regions decreased over time, whereas Southern regions showed an increase (Figure 4.3.5). The increase in average NO 3–concentrations over the last 50 years in the Chubu, Kinki, Chugoku, Shikoku and Kyushu regions ranged from 0.08 to 0.26 mg N L –1 and that in Kanto region was extremely large (0.62 mg N L –1 ). Within the Kanto region, the increase was large especially in the western regions such as Gunma, Saitama, Tokyo and Kanagawa Prefectures, ranging from 0.72 to 1.38 mg N L –1 . This region is identified as the area with most high NO 3– concentration in the research on stream water chemistry described above. 180 

Figure 4.3.5. Increase in average nitrate concentration in stream water for eight Japanese regions in the last 50 years from measurement in 1950s by Kobayashi to those in 2003 by Konohira et al. (Tabayashi and Yamamuro 2009). 

This research demonstrated the NO 3– concentration in stream water had a large spatial variability, and areas with high concentration were studded mostly around large cities in Japan. The most profound area was the western Kanto region beside the central Tokyo. The concentrations were shown to be increasing during the last 50 years in central to southern Japan, and particularly in the western Kanto with high concentration. These indicate that stream water has been strongly affected by atmospheric nitrogen deposition in long terms due to enlarged human activities. 

(3) Effect of atmospheric nitrogen deposition to downward rivers 

Atmospheric nitrogen deposition could have a certain effects on the water quality in downward rivers directly or indirectly. Contribution of nitrogen from atmospheric deposition to the total input nitrogen to watersheds comprised various land use types were evaluated. Atmospheric deposition was accounted as the second most important source of nitrogen (9.56 kg N ha –1 y –1 ) after fertilizer (18.7 kg N ha –1 y –1 ) based on the analysis for 22 water sheds on the west coast of the US (Schaefer et al., 2009), and it was evaluated to be 24% of the total input to the coastal water in North Carolina (Whitall and Paerl, 2001), for example. For the Changjian river basin, input of nitrogen and exports of DIN to the estuary were estimated for the period from 1970 to2003 by using the global NEWS DIN model (Yan et al., 2010). In 2003, nitrogen input from atmospheric deposition was calculated as 24 kg N ha –1 y –1 (21% of the total input) which was the third largest source after fertilizer (34 kg N ha –1 y –1 ) and animal manure (32 kg N ha –1 y –1 ). Contribution of atmospheric deposition has been gradually growing from 8 kg N ha –1 y –1 (15%) in 1970 to the present value. Chiwa et al. (2012) evaluated the effect of exported nitrogen from nitrogen saturated forests to water degradation in downward rivers. They conducted synoptic stream water measurements at 23 sites across a wide range of land-use categories in the Tatara river basin in Northern Kyushu, Japan. They also analyzed long-term changes in down-stream water quality in relation with the long-term trend of related factors such as urban/agricultural activity, sewage wastewater treatment, atmospheric N deposition, and forest condition. The results showed the NO 3– concentration in downstream water had 181 

an increasing trend despite the reduction in pollutant exports derived from urban/agricultural activities in the past 30 years. Considering the increase in atmospheric N deposition and the maturation of coniferous plantation forests observed in the same period, they concluded that atmospherically deposited nitrogen to N-saturated forests can be a large enough non-point source of nitrogen leaving the watershed to impact downstream water quality. 

4.3.3 Other impacts 

Atmospheric corrosion of materials has been known as one of the direct effects of acid deposition (Kucera and Fitz 1995). The deterioration of materials including historical buildings and monuments was considered as an important area to be investigated. Moreover, it may be possible that heavy metals are released from material surfaces and transported into the biosphere. Kucera and Fitz (1995) suggested that the leaching of metal ions form metal constructions due to acid deposition was an important source of zinc and copper accumulated in sludge in sewage plants. In Europe, based on the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (CLRTAP) within the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), the International Cooperative Programme on Effects on Materials including Historic and Cultural Monuments (ICP Materials) has been accumulating the information on dose-response functions for several material groups. The damage costs by atmospheric corrosion are also of great interest for cost-benefit analysis (Kucera and Fitz 1995). Cowell and Apsimon (1996) estimated the cost savings in terms of building damage, which were expected after the implementation of the second Sulfur Protocol based on the CLRTAP. According to their estimate, total cost savings was approximately 9,500 million US dollars over all Europe. Particularly in Eastern Europe, the cost savings were very large: approximately 5,800 million US dollars. In EANET countries, many field/laboratory studies on material damage have been conducted. Field studies have been conducted in China (Maeda et al. 2001; Tsujino et al. 2001; Tidblad et al. 2007; 2010), Japan (Maeda et al. 2001; Tsujino et al. 2001), Malaysia (Tidblad et al. 2007; 2010), Republic of Korea (Maeda et al. 2001; Tsujino et al. 2001), Thailand (Tidblad et al. 2007; 2010) and Viet Nam (Binh et al. 2003; Lan et al. 2005; 2006; Tidblad et al. 2007; 2010) to discuss dose-reaction functions in actual conditions in the East Asian cities. Maeda et al. (2001) conducted atmospheric and laboratory corrosion tests for several materials, such as bronze, copper, steel and marble in China, Japan and the Republic of Korea. Test pieces of the materials were exposed to ambient air for 1-7 years from 1993. The corrosion degree assessed by the thickness loss decreased in the following order: steel > marble > bronze > copper. They pointed out that the bronze used in cultural/historical structures was more sensitive to acid deposition than the copper. They concluded that SO 2 was the most destructive to bronze and marbles especially in China and Republic of Korea. In the case of Japan, the bronze seemed to also be damaged by sea salt. Tsujino et al. (2001) exposed urushi lacquer (Japan) plates to (indoor) air in instrument screens from 1995 to 1997 in 7 cities in East Asia, and observation of the plate surface was conducted every three months. They reported that numerous fine spots (0.2-0.3 mm in diameter) were observed on urushi surfaces by microscopy at Chongqing (China), Taejon (Republic of Korea), and Nara (Japan), while 182 

the spots were obscure in Nara. The relative humidity was more than 80% and temperature was above 0 °C for 1,000 hours, or more in 90 days, in Chongqing and Taejon, and high concentration of SO 42−

was included in fog in these cities. The spots were characterized by presence of carbonyl group, which was formed by oxidation of urushiol (the main component of urushi). It was suggested that the oxidation of urushiol was accelerated by high concentration of SO 42− in acid fog at Chongqing and Taejon and the spots of carbonyl group appeared on urushi surface. In Viet Nam, atmospheric corrosion of carbon steel was studied in the northern region (Binh et al. 2003) and southern region (Lan et al. 2006). Binh et al. (2003) pointed out that atmospheric corrosion of carbon steel in the northern part of Viet Nam (Hanoi and Bai Chay) was more severe in winter than in summer: the corrosion weight losses for 3 months in Hanoi were from 67.3 to 77.9 g m −2 and from 98.7 to 121.1 g m −2 in summer and winter, respectively. They suggested that an integral duration of rain by drizzling long rain in winter was two or three times longer than that by heavy showers in summer and that such a wet condition in winter increased life time of liquid moisture films containing corrosive electrolytes on the steel surface. Lan et al. (2006) investigated atmospheric corrosion in sheltered and unsheltered conditions in four cities in the southern region of Viet Nam (Ho Chi Minh, Bien Hoa, My Tho and Vung Tau). They pointed out that the magnitude of the mass loss in the sheltered condition was in the order of HoChiMinh > Bien Hoa > Vung Tau = My Tho, which could be explained mainly by SO 2 concentration and partly by chloride concentration. On the other hand, the mass loss in the unsheltered condition was in the order of My Tho > Bien Hoa > Vung Tau > Ho Chi Minh. It was suggested that additional factors, including washout of corrosion products by rain, wetness time of the material, and a wet and dry cycle, should be taken into consideration to explain the corrosion in the unsheltered condition. In general, the mass loss under the unsheltered condition was larger than that under the sheltered condition except for the case in Ho Chi Minh. They discussed that protective ability of the corrosion products, such as lepidocrocite ( γ-FeOOH) and goethite ( α-FeOOH), might have an important role to explain the corrosion behavior. Lan et al. (2005) investigated also atmospheric corrosion of marble (calcite, CaCO 3 ) in the four cities in the southern part of Viet Nam. The thickness loss under the sheltered condition increased in the order of My Tho < Vung Tau < Bien Hoa < HoChiMinh, and this order corresponded to the average SO 2 concentration. The thickness loss under the unsheltered condition showed the similar order, My Tho < Vung Tau < Bien Hoa ≈ HoChiMinh. However, the thickness loss was much higher in the unsheltered condition than in the sheltered condition. They found that gypsum (CaSO 4 ·2H 2 O) was found as the only corrosion product after the field exposure test in all the sheltered test pieces, while gypsum was found only a few in unsheltered test pieces. Since gypsum is highly soluble, the gypsum formed on unsheltered test pieces could be easily eroded by rain. They concluded that rain strongly affected the corrosion of marble and led to the significant difference in the thickness loss of marble under the sheltered and unsheltered conditions. The exposure program on atmospheric corrosion was conducted based on the Programme on Regional Air Pollution in Developing Countries (RAPIDC) from 2002 to 2004 in 12 test sites in Asia (India, Viet Nam, Thailand, Malaysia and China) and four test sites in Africa (South Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe) (Tidblad et al. 2007; 2010). Plates of five kinds of materials (carbon steel, zinc, copper, limestone and paint coated steel) were exposed to ambient air in the sites for one, two and four years. The results of corrosion after 2-year exposure in EANET countries are shown in Table 4.3.4 (after Tidblad et al. 2010). They reported that high values of corrosion were generally observed in the sites 183 

where SO 2 concentrations were high (e.g. 100 and 87 μg m −3 at Chongqing and Kitwe, respectively) and corrosion values of all the tested materials were significantly correlated to SO 2 concentrations (positively) and rainwater pH (negatively). Moreover, the corrosion values of zinc and limestone also showed significant positive correlation to HNO 3 concentration. They pointed out that both dry deposition and wet deposition are important parameters for corrosion of the tested materials. 

Table 4.3.4 Corrosion of materials by 2-year exposure in Asia and Africa (after Tidblad et al. 2010)                                                                                                           

> Name Country Painted steel Steel Zinc Copper Limestone mm g m −2g m −2g m −2μmBhubaneswar-u India 2.1 252 8.6 15.2 24.3 Bhubaneswar-r India 1.2 270 7.9 19.4 17.3 Bangkok Thailand 0.6 161 7.6 26.3 25.4 Phrapradaeng Thailand 1.7 417 11.3 28.6 47.9 Hanoi Viet Nam 1.4 279 11.6 11.4 27.6 Ho Chi Minh Viet Nam 0.8 214 11.3 15.1 20 Mytho Viet Nam 2.3 298 8.5 20.1 9.9 Chongqing China 8.2 1201 19.9 46 75.6 Tie Shan Ping China 6.7 769 24.8 36.5 55.6 Hong Kong China 0.7 201 11.4 12.4 25.3 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia 0.9 181 15.8 19.3 35.9 Tanah Rata Malaysia 0.8 90 11 20 15.8 Johannesburg South Africa 0.6 168 4.3 9-Kitwe Zambia 4561 47.5 19.3 61.2 Magoye Zambia 0.6 70 3.3 10.2 9.7 Harare Zimbabwe 1.5 267 6.3 7.6 14.5

Note: Corrosion degree was assessed by spread from cut, mass loss and recession for painted steel, other metals and limestone, respectively. Katayama et al. (2005) simulated atmospheric corrosion of carbon steels in a laboratory chamber. They exposed carbon steels to simulated sea salt in the chamber by controlling air temperature and relative humidity based on meteorological data. They pointed out the environmental factors near the sample surface and dew condensation greatly influenced the initial atmospheric corrosion of carbon steel. By controlling the temperature of carbon steel in addition to air temperature and relative humidity, the corrosion behavior in outdoor environments could be reproduced (Katayama et al. 2005). 

4.4 Summary 

Atmospheric processes leading to wet and dry deposition of acids are relatively well investigated through field monitoring and mathematical modeling in China, Japan, and Korea. It is likely that the species containing sulfur have been decreasing in the last five years or so in China and its neighboring 184 

countries, but nitrate has not yet exhibited a clear trend. Although the impact of acid deposition is less clearly understood, the adverse impact on forests, inland waters, and materials have been reported in one or more countries in the East Asia regions. Therefore, continuous efforts toward impact assessment of acid deposition are necessary for the decades to come. 

References 

Aber, J., McDowell, W., Nadelhoffer, K., Magill, A., Berntson, G., Kamakea, M., McNulty, S., Currie, W., Rustad, L., Fernandez, I. 1998. Nitrogen Saturation in Temperate Forest Ecosystems Hypotheses revisited. BioScience 48: 921-934. Aber, J.D., Goodale, C.L., Ollinger, S.V., Smith, M.L., Magill, A.H., Martin, M.E., Hallett, R.A., Stoddard, J..L. 2003 Is Nitrogen Deposition Altering the Nitrogen Status of Northeastern Forests? BioScience 53: 375-389. Aber, J.D., Nadelhoffer, K.J., Steudler, P, Melillo, J.M. 1989. Nitrogen saturation in northern forest ecosystems. Excess nitrogen from fossil fuel combustion may stress the biosphere. BioScience 39: 378-386. Aikawa, M., T. Hiraki, M. Yamagami, M. Kitase, Y. Nishikawa, and I. Uno. 2008. Regionality and particularity of a survey site from the viewpoint of the SO 2 and SO 42- concentrations in ambient air in a 250-km x 250-km region of Japan, Atmos Environ , 42 (7): 1389-1398. Andersson,, M. 1988. Toxicity and tolerance of aluminum in vascular plants: A literature review. Water, Air, Soil Pollut. 39:439-462. Andrews, J.E., Brimblecombe, P., Jickells, T.D., Liss, P.S., Reid, B. 2003. An Introduction to Environmental Chemistry. Second edition, Blackwell Science Ltd. Arndt, R. L., and G. R. Carmichael. 1995. Long-range Transport and Deposition of Sulfur in Asia. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 85.4: 2283-288. . Arndt, Richard L., Gregory R. Carmichael, and Joylnne M. Roorda. 1998. Seasonal Source-receptor Relationships in Asia. Atmospheric Environment 32.8: 1397-406. . Arndt, Richard L., Gregory R. Charmichael, David G. Streets, and Neeloo Bhatti. 1997. Sulfur Dioxide Emissions and Sectorial Contributions to Sulfur Deposition in Asia. Atmospheric Environment 31.10 (1997): 1553-572. Augustin, S. 2009. Linking critical thresholds for acidity to forest condition by using element contents in tree rings: consequences for the development of an integrated ecosystem assessment. iForest 2: 51-53. Augustin, S., H. Stephanowitz , B. Wolff , J. Schröder and E. Hoffmann. 2005. Manganese in tree rings of Norway spruce as an indicator for soil chemical changes in the past. European Journal of Forest Research 124: 313-318. AYERS, G. P., Leong Chow Peng, R. W. Gillet, and Lim Sze Fook. 2002 Rainwater Composition and Acidity at Five Sites in Malaysia in 1996. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 133: 15-30. 185 

Baba, M. and Okazaki, M. 1998. Acidification in nitrogen-saturated forested catchment. Soil Science and Plant Nutrition 44: 513–525. Bhatti, Neeloo, David G. Streets, and Wesley K. Foell. 1992. Acid Rain in Asia." Environmental Management 16.4: 541-62. Binh, D.T., Strekalov, P.V. & Khuong, N.V. (2003). Effects of Seasonal Conditions and the Slope of a Specimen on the Atmospheric Corrosion of Steel in the Tropics of Viet-Nam. Protection of Metals , 39, 278–287. Cape, J.N. 1993. Direct damage to vegetation caused by acid rain and polluted cloud: definition of critical levels for forest trees. Environmental Pollution 82(2):167-80. Carandang, V.Q., E.L. Tolentino, Jr., R.V.O. Cruz, A.SA. Castillo, R.G. Visco, and W.M. CARANDANG. 2011. Effect of simiulated acid rain on the germination and early seedling growth of Betis ( Madhuca betis (Blanco) MacBride, Antipolo ( Artocarpus blancoi (Elmer) Merr.} and Kalantas ( Toona calantas Merr. & Rolfe) in two soil types in Laguna, Philippines. Asia Life Sciences 20(1):239-258. Carmichael, Gregory R., David G. Streets, Giuseppe Calori, Markus Amann, Mark Z. Jacobson, James Hansen, and Hiromasa Ueda. 2002. Changing Trends in Sulfur Emissions in Asia: Implications for Acid Deposition, Air Pollution, and Climate. Environmental Science & Technology 36.22: 4707-713. Chao Hongfa, Gao Yingxin, and Shu Jianmin. 1989. Study on relationship between fir decline and acidic precipitation on the Emei Mountain. In: Chinese Environmental Science Lyceum’s Collection on Acid Rain, pp. 381-391. (In Chinese) Chen, X.Y., Mulder, J. 2007. Indicators for nitrogen status and leaching in subtropical forest ecosystems, South China. Biogeochemistry, 82: 165-180. Chen, X.Y., Mulder, J., Wang, Y.H., Zhao, D.W. and Xiang, R.J. 2004. Atmospheric deposition, mineralization and leaching of nitrogen in subtropical forested catchments, South China. Environmental Geochemistry and Health 26: 179–186. Chiwa M., Onikura, N., Ide, J., Kume, A. 2012. Impact of N-Saturated Upland Forests on Downstream N Pollution in the Tatara River Basin, Japan. Ecosystems 15: 230–241. Chung, Yongseung, Taekoon Kim, and Kihyun Kim. 1996. Temporal Variation and Cause of Acidic Precipitation from a Monitoring Network in Korea. Atmospheric Environment 30.13: 2429-435. Print. Cowell, D. & Apsimon, H. (1996). Estimating the cost of damage to buildings by acidifying atmospheric pollution in Europe. Atmospheric Environment 30, 2959-2968. Dagang, T. and O. Eilertsen. 1999. Acid deposition and its effects in China: an overview. Environmental Science & Policy 2 (1999) 9-24. Dai, Z., Liu, Y., Wang, X. and Zhao, D. 1998. Changes in pH, CEC and exchangeable acidity of some forest soils in Southern China during the last 32-35 years. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 108: 186 

377–390. Dawei, Z., Larssen, T., Zhang, D., Gao, S., Vogt, R.D., Seip, H.M. and Lund, O.J. 2001. Acid deposition and acidification of soil and water in the Tie Shan Ping area, Chongqing, China. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 130, 1733-1738. Deng, X.W., Y. Zhang, S.J. Han, X.F. Li, K.X. Li, 2007. Effects of nitrogen addition on the early stage decomposition of Korean pine litter in the Changbaishan Mountains, Northeastern China. Joournal of Beijing Forestry University, 29(6), p. 162-222. Dise, N.B. , Rothwell, J.J., Gauci, V., van der Salm, C., de Vries, W. 2009. Predicting dissolved inorganic nitrogen leaching in European forests using two independent databases. Science of the Total Environment 407, 1798-1808. Drohan, J.R. and Sharpe, W.E., 1997. Long-term changes in forest soil acidity in Pennsylvania, USA. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 95: 299–311. Du, C. Y., Zeng, G.M., Zhang, G., Tang, L., Li, X. D., Huang, D.L., Huang, L., Jiang, Y. M. 2008. Input – Output Budgets for Inorganic Nitrogen Under Acid Rain in a Subtropical Evergreen Mixed Forest in Central-South China. Water Air Soil Pollut. 190:171–181. Du, X. and H. Liu. 1988. Characteristic of mist water and its effects on masson pines in Chongqing. Journal of Environmental Sciences (China), 8(4), pp. 467-473. Duan, H.I. J.X. Liu, Q. Deng, X.M. Chen, and D.Q. Zhang, 2009. Effects of elevated CO2 and N deposition on plant biomass accumulation and allocation in subtropical forest ecosystems: a mesocosm study. Chinese Journal of Plant Ecology 33, 570-579. Duan, L., Ma, X., Larssen, T., Mulder, J. and Hao, J. 2011. Response of surface water acidification in Upper Yangtze River to SO2 emissions abatement in China. Environmental Science & Technology 45: 3275-3281. EANET 2010. Alkalinity. In: Technical Manual for Inland Aquatic Environment Monitoring in East Asia -2010. Network Center for EANET, Asia Center for Air Pollution Research, Niigata, Japan, pp. 33-38. EANET 2011. II-4 Japan, In: Second Periodic Report on the State of Acid Deposition in East Asia, Part II National Assessments. Network Center for Acid Deposition Monitoring Network in East Asia (EANET), Asia Center for Air Pollution Research (ACAP), Niigata, Japan, pp. 43-100. EANET.2011. The Second Periodic Report on the State of Acid Deposition in East Asia, Part I: Regional Assessment. Ebise, S. and Nagafuchi, O. 2005. Influence distributions of acid deposition in mountain streams on a tall cone-shaped island, Yakushima. Journal of Water and Environment Technology 3: 169-174. Emerson, L.D., M.R. Ashmore, F. Murray, J.C.I. Kuylenstierna, K.E. Percy, T. Izuta, Y. Zheng, H. Shimizu, B.H. Sheu, C.P. Liu, M. Agrawal, A. Wahid, N.M. Abdel-Latif, M. van Tienhoven, 187 

L.I. de Bauer and M. Domigos. 2001. Impacts of air pollutants on vegetation in developing countries. Water, Air and Soil Pollution 130: 107-118. Endo, T., H. Yagoh, K. Sato, K. Matsuda, K. Hayashi, I. Noguchi, and K. Sawada. 2011, Regional characteristics of dry deposition of sulfur and nitrogen compounds at EANET sites in Japan from 2003 to 2008, Atmos Environ, 45(6): 1259-1267. Engardt, M., U. Siniarovina, N. I. Khairul, and C. P. Leong. 2005. Country to country transport of anthropogenic sulfur in Southeast Asia, Atmos Environ , 39 (28): 5137-5148. Erisman, J.W., Möls, H., Fonteijn, P., Geusebroek, M., Draaijers, G., Bleeker, A., van der Veen, D. 2003. Field intercomparison of precipitation measurements performed within the framework of the Pan European Intensive Monitoring Program of EU/ICP Forest. Environmental Pollution 125: 139-155. F. Dentener, J. Drevet, J. F. Lamarque, I. Bey, B. Eickhout, A. M. Fiore, D. Hauglustaine, L. W. Horowitz, M. Krol, U. C. Kulshrestha, M. Lawrence, C. Galy-Lacaux, S. Rast, D. Shindell, D. Stevenson, T. Van Noije, C. Atherton, N. Bell, D. Bergman, T. Butler, J. Cofala, B. Collins, R. Doherty, K. Ellingsen, J. Galloway, M. Gauss, V. Montanaro, J. F. Müller, G. Pitari, J. Rodriguez, M. Sanderson, F. Solmon, S. Strahan, M. Schultz, K. Sudo, S. Szopa and O. Wildt al. 2006, Nitrogen and sulfur deposition on regional and global scales: A multimodel evaluation, Global Biogeochem Cy , 20 (4), GB4003 .Fan, H.B., W.F. Liu, L. Xu, Y.Y. Li, Y.C. Liao, Q.Q. Wang, and Z.W. Zhang. 2008. Carbon and nitrogen dynamics of decomposing foliar litter in a Chines fir ( Cunninghamia lanceolata )plantation exposed to simulated nitrogen deposition. Acta Ecologia Sinica 28, 2546-2553. Fang Y. T., Gundersen, P., Mo, J. M., Zhu, W. X. 2009a. Nitrogen leaching in response to increased nitrogen inputs in subtropical monsoon forests in southern China. Forest Ecology and Management, 257: 332–342. Fang, Y. T., X. M. Wang, F. F. Zhu, Z. Y. Wu, J. Li, L. J. Zhong, D. H. Chen, and M. Yoh. 2013. Three-decade changes in chemical composition of precipitation in Guangzhou city, southern China: has precipitation recovered from acidification following sulfur dioxide emission control?. Tellus B 65 20213. Fang, H., Yu, G., Cheng, S., Zhu, T., Zheng, J., Mo, J., Yan, J., Luo, Y. 2011a. Nitrogen-15 signals of leaf-litter-soil continuum as a possible indicator of ecosystem nitrogen saturation by forest succession and N loads. Fang, Y. T. , Gundersen, P., Mo, J. M., Zhu, W. Z. 2008. Input and output of dissolved organic and inorganic nitrogen in subtropical forests of South China under high air pollution. Biogeosciences, 5: 339–352. Fang, Y., Gundersen, P., Vogt, R.D., Koba, K., Chen, F., Chen, X. Y., Yoh, M. 2011. Atmospheric deposition and leaching of nitrogen in Chinese forest ecosystems. J For Res 16: 341–350. Fang, Y., Yoh, M., Koba, K., Zhu, W., Takebayashi, Y.U., Xiao, Y., Lei, C., Mo, J., Zhang, W. and Lu, X. 2011b. Nitrogen deposition and forest nitrogen cycling along an urban–rural transect in 188 

southern China. Global Change Biology 17: 872-885. Fang, Y., Zhu, W., Gundersen, P., Mo, J., Zhou, G., Yoh, M. 2009. Large loss of dissolved organic nitrogen from nitrogen-saturated forests in subtropical China. Ecosystems 12: 33–45. Feng , Z., K.Kobayashi and E. A. Ainsworth. 2008. Impact of elevated ozone concentration on growth, physiology, and yield of wheat ( Triticum aestivum L.): a meta-analysis. Global Change Biology 14: 2696 – 2708. Foell, W., C. Green, M. Amann, S. Bhattacharya, G. Carmichael, M. Chadwick, S. Cinderby, T. Haugland, J. -P. Hettelingh, L. Hordijk, J. Kuylenstierna, J. Shah, R. Shrestha, D. Streets, and D. Zhao. 1995 Energy Use, Emissions, and Air Pollution Reduction Strategies in Asia. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 85.4: 2277-282. Fujimaki, R., A. Kawasaki, Y. Fujii and N. Kaneko. 2008. The influence of topography on the stream N concentration in the Tanzawa Mountains, Southern Kanto District, Japan . Journal of Forest Research 13: 380-385. Fujimaki, R., A. Sakai and N. Kaneko. 2009. Ecological risks in anthropogenic disturbance of nitrogen cycles in natural terrestrial ecosystems. 24: 955-964. Fujita, Shin-ichi, Akira Takahashi, Jian-Hua Weng, Lian-Fen Huang, Hui-Kang Kim, Cheng-Kang Li, Frank T. Huang, and Fu-Tien Jeng. 2000. Precipitation Chemistry in East Asia. Atmospheric Environment 34: 525-537. Fukushima, K. and N. Tokuchi. 2008. Factors controlling the acid-neutralizing capacity of Japanese cedar forest watersheds in stands of various ages and topographic characteristics. Hydrological Process 23: 259 – 271. Fumoto, T., Sverdrup, H. 2001. Implementation of sulfate adsorption in the SAFE model. Journal of environmental quality 30(1): 45-57 Galloway, J. N. 1995. Acid Deposition: Perspectives in Time and Space. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 85.1: 15-24. . Galloway, J.N., Dentener, F.J., Capone, D.G., Boyer, E.W., Howarth, R.W., Seitzinger, S.P., Asner, G.P., Cleveland, C.C., Green, P.A., Holland, E..A., Karl, D.M., Michaels, A.F., Porter, J.H., Townsend, A.R., Vorosmarty, C.J. 2004. Nitrogen cycles: past, present, and future. Biogeochemistry 70: 153-236. Galloway, James N. A . 1978. National Program for Assessing the Problem of Atmospheric Deposition (acid Rain): A Report to the Council on Environmental Quality. [S.l.]: National Atmospheric Deposition Program. Granat, L. 1996. Regional Background Acidity and Chemical Composition of Precipitation in Thailand. Atmospheric Environment 30.10-11: 1589-596. . Gruber, N,, Galloway, J.N. 2008. An Earth-system perspective of the global nitrogen cycle. Nature 451: 293-296. 189 

Gundersen, P., Callesen, I., De Vries, W. 1998. Nitrate leaching in forest ecosystems is related to organic top layer C/N ratios. Environ Pollut 102:403–407. Guo, J.H., Liu, X.J., Zhang, Y., Shen, J. L., Han, W.X., Zhang, W.F., Christie, P., Goulding, K.W.T., Vitousek, P.M. and Zhang, F.S. 2010. Significant acidification in major Chinese croplands. Science 327: 1008-1010. 

Hallbäcken, L. and Tamm, C.O. 1986. Changes in soil acidity from 1927 to 1982 −1984 in a forest area of south-west Sweden. Scandinavian Journal of Forest Research 1: 219-232. Hao, Jiming, Shaodong Xie, Lei Duan, and Xumei Ye. 1998. Acid Deposition and Ecosystem Sensitivity in China. In: Bashkin, V. and Park Soon-ung eds. Acid Deposition and Ecosystem Sensitivity in East Asia. Nova Science Publishers, pp. 267-311. Hara, Hiroshi, Moritsugu Kitamura, Atsuko Mori, Izumi Noguchi, Tsuyoshi Ohizumi, Sinya Seto, Tadashi Takeuchi, and Teruyuki Deguchi. 1995. Precipitation Chemistry in Japan 1989~1993. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 85.4: 2307-312. . Hartmann, J., Kunimatsu, T., Levy, J. K. 2008. The impact of Eurasian dust storms and anthropogenic emissions on atmospheric nutrient deposition rates in forested Japanese catchments and adjacent regional seas. Global and Planetary Change 61, 117–134. He, S., L. Jingsen, L. Baizhong, Y. Gongying, and L. Zeng. 2001. In Acid Rain 2000, Abstract Book of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition, 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Hedin, L.O., Granat, L., Likens, G.E., Buishand, T.A., Galloway, J.N., Butler, T.J., and Rodhe, H. 1994. Steep declines in atmospheric base cations in regions of Europe and North America. Nature 367: 351-354.  

> http://nautilus.org/staff-publications/acid-rain-in-a-regional-context/#axzz2a0CnQU4K, downloaded 24 July 2013. Hicks, W.K., Kuylenstierna, J.C.I., Owen, A., Dentener, F., Seip, H.M. and Rodhe, H. 2008. Soil Sensitivity to Acidification in Asia: Status and Prospects. AMBIO: A Journal of the Human Environment 37, 295-303.

Huang, Meiyuan, Wang Zifa, He Dongyang, Xu Huaying, and Zhou Ling. 1995. Modeling Studies on Sulfur Deposition and Transport in East Asia. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 85.4: 1921-926. Print Huobao, F. and L. Chuanrong. 1999. Effects of simulated acid rain on seedling emergence and growth of five broad-leaved species. Journal of Forestry Research 10(2):83-86. Hutchinson, T.C., L. Bozic, and G. Muñoz-Vega. 1986. Responses of five species of conifer seedlings to aluminum stress. Water, Air, Soil Pollution. 31:283-294. Ichikawa, Yoichi, Hiroshi Hayami, and Shin-ichi Fujita. 1998. A Long-Range Transport Model for East Asia to Estimate Sulfur Deposition in Japan. Journal of Applied Meteorology 37.10 : 1364-374. . 190 

Itahashi, S., I. Uno, K. Yumimoto, H. Irie, K. Osada, K. Ogata, H. Fukushima, Z. Wang, and T. Ohara. 2011. Up/Down Trend in the MODIS Aerosol Optical Depth and Its Relationship to the Sulfur Dioxide Emission Changes in China during 2000 and 2010. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics Discussions 11.8: 21971-1993. . Ito, K., Uchiyama, Y., Kurokami, N., Sugano, K. and Nakanishi, Y. 2011. Soil acidification and decline of trees in forests within the precincts of shrines in Kyoto (Japan). Water, Air and Soil Pollution 214: 197-204. Itoh, Y., Miura S., Kato M. and Yoshinaga, S. 2004. Regional distribution of nitrate concentrations in the stream water of forested watershed in the Kanto and Chubu Districts. J. Jpn. For. Soc. 86: 275-278 ( In Japanses with English summary). Izuta, T., Ohtani, T., and Totsuka, T. 1997. Growth and nutrient status of Cryptomeria japonica 

seedlings grown in brown forest soil acidified with H 2 SO 4 solution. Environmental Science 5: 177 –189. Izuta, T., T. Yamaoka, T. Nakaji, T. Yonekura, M. Yokoyama, H. Matsumura, S. Ishida, K. Yazaki, R. Funada, and T. Koike. 2001. Growth, net photosynthetic rate, nutrient status and secondary xylem anatomical characteristics of Fagus crenata seedlings grown in brown forest soil acidified with H 2 SO 4 solution. In Acid Rain 2000: Proceedings of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition (Satake, K. ed.), 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 1007-1012. Kamisako, M., Sase, H., Matsui, T., Suzuki, H., Takahashi, A., Oida, T., Nakata, M., Totsuka, T., and Ueda, H. 2008. Seasonal and annual fluxes of inorganic constituents in a small catchment of a Japanese cedar forest near the Sea of Japan. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 195: 51-61. Katayama, H., Noda, K., Masuda, H., Nagasawa, M., Itagaki, M., & Watanabe, K. (2005). Corrosion simulation of carbon steels in atmospheric environment. Corrosion Science , 47, 2599-2606. Katoh, T., T. Kohno, I. Koyama, H. Tsuruta, and H. Makino. 1990. Acidic precipitation in Japan. P. 41-105. In Bresser, A.H.M. and W. Salomons (eds.), Acid Precipitation Vol. 5: International Overview and Assessment. Springer-Verlag, New York. Kawakami, T., Honoki, H. and Yasuda,H. 2001. Acidification of a Small Stream on Kureha Hill Caused by Nitrate Leached from a Forested Watershed. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 130: 1097-1102. Keltjens, W.G. and E.V. Loenen, 1989. Effects of aluminum and mineral nutrition on growth and chemical composition of hydroponically grown seedlings of five different forest tree species. Plant Soil 119:39-50. Kilham, P. 1982. Acid precipitation: Its role in the alkalization of a lake in Michigan. Limnology and Oceanography 27: 856-867. Kim, Jaehee, and SeogYeon Cho. 2003. A Numerical Simulation of Present and Future Acid Deposition in North East Asia Using a Comprehensive Acid Deposition Model. Atmospheric Environment 37.24 : 3375-383. . 191 

Kim, Jaehee, Boeun Han, and SeogYeon Cho. 2003. A Numerical Simulation of Annual Acid Deposition Amount in Korea. Atmospheric Environment 37.12: 1703-713. . Kim, Jungtae, and Seogyeon Cho. 1999. Application of the Nested Grid STEM to an Early Summer Rain in South Korea. Atmospheric Environment 33: 3167-181. . Kim, S.J., Ohte, M., Kawasaki, M., Katsuyama, M., Tokuchi, N., Hobara, S. 2003. Interactive Responses of dissolved sulfate and nitrate to disturbance associated with pine wilt disease in a temperate forest, Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, 49:4: 539-550 Kim, T. W., K. Lee, R. G. Najjar, H. D. Jeong, and H. J. Jeong. 2011. Increasing N Abundance in the Northwestern Pacific Ocean Due to Atmospheric Nitrogen Deposition, Science, 334(6055): 505-509. Kim, Young-kul, J. Yoo, and C. Lee. 2001. Effects of acid deposition on forest ecosystems in South Korea. In Acid Rain 2000, Abstract Book of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition, 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Kirk, G.J.D., Bellamy, P.H. and Lark, M. 2010. Changes in soil pH across England and Wales in response to decreased acid deposition. Global Change Biology 16: 3111–3119. Kitada, Toshihiro, Lee, Pinus C.S., Ueda, Hiromasa. 1993. Numerical modeling of long-range transport of acidic species in association with meso-β- convective-clouds across the Japan sea resulting in acid snow over coastal Japan—I. model description and qualitative verifications, Atmospheric Environment 27, 7: 3167-181. Kitao, M., T.T. Lei, and T. Koike. 2001. Effects of manganese toxicity on photosynthesis in five deciduous broad-leaved tree species native to Northern Japan. In Acid Rain 2000, Abstract Book of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition, 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Knute J. Nadelhoffer, K.J., Downs, M.R., Fry, B. 2011. Sinks for 15N-Enriched Additions to an Oak Forest and a Red Pine Plantation. Ecological Applicationts 9, 72-86. Kobayashi, R., Sumarriani, Y., Yamashita, N., Ohta, T., Matsubara, H., Yagoh, H., Nakata, M., Sase, H. 2012. Seasonal variation of water chemistry and sulfur budget in an acid-sensitive river along the Sea of Japan. Limnology 14: 195-209. Kobayashi, T. T. Hirakawa, N. Nakatani, T. Miyake, M. Chiwa, M. Suzuki, A. Kume, K. Nakane, and H. Sakugawa. 2001. Effects of OH-generating solutions on ecophysiological traits of Japanese red pine ( Pinus densiflora ): the simulation of dew at Mt. Gokuraku ji, Western Japan. In Acid Rain 2000, Abstract Book of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition, 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Kobayashi, T., H. Matsumura and Y. Kohno. 1994. Effects of simulated acid rain and acid mist on development of visible injury and growth in plants. CRIEPI Report: U94205. Kohno, Y. and T. Kobayashi. 1989a. Effect of simulated acid rain on the growth of soybean. Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 43:11-19. 192 

Kohno, Y. and T. Kobayashi. 1989b. Effect of simulated acid rain on the yield of soybean. Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 45:173-181. Kohno, Y. H. Matsumura, and T. Kobayashi. 1995. Effect of aluminum on the growth of Cryptomeria japonica and Chamaecyparis obtuse grown in nutrient solution culture, J. Jpn. Soc. Atmos. Environ. 30: 316-326. Kohno, Y., H. Matsumura and T. Kobayashi. 1998. Differential Sensitivity of Trees to Simulated Acid Rain or Ozone in Combination With Sulfur Dioxide. In Bashkin, V. And Park S. (eds). 1998. Acid Deposition and Ecosystem Sensitivity in East Asia. Proceedings of International Symposium on Acid Deposition and Ecosystem Sensitivity East Asia, INTECOL Congress, Florence Italy, 19-25 Jukly 1998. Kohno,Y. 1996. Summary of CRIEPI acid deposition assessment program: Acid deposition, forest decline and further research needs. P. 207-222. In Proc. CRIEPI International Seminar on Transport and Effects of Acidic Substances, November 28-29, 1996, CRIEPI, Tokyo, Japan). Kojima, S. 2001. Ecological characterization and categorization of some selected vascular plants of forest ecosystems in Hokkaido, Japan in relation to soil acidity. In Acid Rain 2000, Abstract Book of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition, 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Konohira E, Shindo J, Yoshioka T, Toda T. 2006. Stream water chemistry in Japan. J Jpn Assoc Hydrolog Sci 36:145–149 (in Japanese with English summary) Kotamarthi, V., and G. Carmichael. 1990. The Long Range Transport of Pollutants in the Pacific Rim Region.Atmospheric Environment. Part A. General Topics 24.6: 1521-534. . Kozlov, M and Sirintornthep. 1998. Sensitivity of Thailand’s Ecosystems to Acid Deposition. In: Bashkin, V. and Park Soon-ung eds. Acid Deposition and Ecosystem Sensitivity in East Asia. Nova Science Publishers, pp.335-378. Krupa SV. 2003. Effects of atmospheric ammonia (NH 3 ) on terrestrial vegetation: a review. Environmental Pollution. 124(2):179-221. Kucera, V., & Fitz, S. 1995. Direct and indirect air pollution effects on materials including cultural monuments. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution , 85 (1), 153-165. Kuribayashi, M., T. Ohara, Y. Morino, I. Uno, J. Kurokawa, and H. Hara. 2012. Long-term trends of sulfur deposition in East Asia during 1981-2005, Atmos Environ, 59: 461-475. Kurokawa, J., Ohara, T., Morikawa, T., Hanayama, S., Greet, J.-M., Fukui, T., Kawashima, K. and Akimoto, H. 2013. Emissions of air pollutants and greenhouse gases over Asian regions during 2000-2008: Regional Emission inventory in ASia (REAS) version 2, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 13: 10049-10123. Kwak, J., S. Lim, H. Park, S. Lee, K. Lee, H. Kim, S.X. Chang, S. Lee, H. Ro and W. Choi. 2008. Relating tree ring chemistry of Pinus densiflora to precipitation acidity in an industrial area of South Korea. Water , Air and Soil Pollution. 199: 95-106. 193 

Lan, T.T.N., Nishimura, R., Tsujino, Y., Satoh, Y., Thoa, N.T.P., Yokoi, M., & Maeda, Y. (2005). The effects of air pollution and climatic factors on atmospheric corrosion of marble under field exposure. Corrosion Science, 47, 1023–1038. Lan, T.T.N., Thoa, N.T.P., Nishimura, R., Tsujino, Y., Yokoi, M. & Maeda, Y. (2006). Atmospheric corrosion of carbon steel under field exposure in the southern part of Vietnam. Corrosion Science , 48, 179-192. Larssen, T. and Carmichael, G.R. 2000. Acid rain and acidification in China: the importance of base cation deposition. Environmental Pollution 110: 89-102. Larssen, T., Duan, L., Mulder, J. 2011. Deposition and Leaching of Sulfur, Nitrogen and Calcium in Four Forested Catchments in China: Implications for Acidification. Environ. Sci. Technol. 45: 1192–1198 Larssen, T., Jiling, X., Vogt, R. D., Seip, H. M., Bohan, L., and Dianwu, Z. 1998. Studies of soils, soil water and stream water at a small catchment near Guiyang, China. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 101: 137-162. Larssen, Thorjorn, Espen Lydersen, Dagang Tang, Yi He, Jixi Gao, Haiying Liu, Lei Duan, Hans M. Seip, Rolf D. Vogt, Jan Mulder, Min Shao, Yanhui Wang, He Shang, Xiaoshan Zhang, Svein Solberg, Wenche Aas, Tonje Okland, Odd Eilertsen, Valter Angell, Quanru Li, Dawei Zhao, Renjun Xiang, Jinshong Xiao, and Jiahai Luo. 2006. Acid Rain in China. Environmental Science & Technology 40.2: 418-25. . LeBauer, D.S.and Treseder, K.K. 2008. Nitrogen limitation of net primary productivity in terrestrial ecosystems is globally distributed. Ecology 89, 371–379. Lee, Bokyoung, Seunghee Hong, and Dongsoo Lee. 2000. Chemical Composition of Precipitation and Wet Deposition of Major Ions on the Korean Peninsula. Atmospheric Environment 34: 563-75. . Li, D.J., J.M. Mo, S.L. Peng, and Y.T. Fang. 2005. Effects of simulated nitrogen deposition on elemental concentrations of Schima superba and Cryptocarya concinna seedlings in subtropical China. Acta Ecologia Sinica 25, 2165-2172. Liao, B., Guo, Z., Zeng, Q. Probst, A., Probst, J-L. 2007. Effects of Acid Rain on Competitive Releases of Cd, Cu, and Zn from Two Natural Soils and Two Contaminated Soils in Hunan, China. Water, Air and Soil Pollution: Focus 7: 151-161. Likens, G.E., Driscoll, C.T., and Buso, D.C. 1996. Long-term effects of acid rain: response and recovery of a forest ecosystem. Science 272: 244-245. Likens, G.E., Driscoll, D C., Buso, T..C., Mitchell, M.J., Lovett, G.M., Bailey, S.W., Siccama, T.G., Reiners , W.A., Alewell, C. 2002. The biogeochemistry of sulfur at Hubbard Brook. Biogeochemistry, 60: 235-316. Lin, M., T. Oki, M. Bengtsson, S. Kanae, T. Holloway, and D. G. Streets. 2008b. Long-range transport of acidifying substances in east Asia - Part II - Source-receptor relationships, Atmos Environ, 42(24): 5956-5967. 194 

Lin, W., Xiaobin Xu, Zhiqiang Ma, Huarong Zhao, Xiwen Liu, Ying Wang. 2012. Characteristics and recent trends of sulfur dioxide at urban, rural, and background sites in North China: Effectiveness of control measures, Journal of Environmental Sciences, 24(1): 34-49 Liu Houtian. 1988. Relationship between masson pine decline and air pollution in Chongqing. Journal of Botany (China), 30, pp. 319-325. Liu, K. H., Fang, Y. T., Yu, F. M., Liu, Q., Li, F. R. and Peng, S. L. 2010. Soil acidification in response to acid deposition in three subtropical forests of subtropical China. Pedosphere 20: 399-408. Liu X.J., Zhang Y.,Han W., Tang A., Shen T., Cui Z., Vitousek P., Erisman J.W., Goulding K., Christie P., Fangmeier A., and Zhang. F 2013. Enhanced nitrogen deposition over China, Nature, 494(7438): 459-462. Liu, X., Duan, L., Mo, J., Du, E., Shen, J., Lu, X., ... & Zhang, Y., Zhou X., He, C. and Zhang, F. 2011. Nitrogen deposition and its ecological impact in China: an overview. Environmental pollution 159, 2251-2264. Liy, Y., M. Guangjing, Zhenboli, Xumansong, M. Zhucheng, and H. Huihua. 2001. Effects of acid deposition on the forest in Liuzhou and positive measures taken. In Acid Rain 2000, Abstract Book of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition, 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Lovett, G. M., Weathers, K.C., Arthur, M.A. 2002. Control of nitrogen loss from forested watersheds by soil carbon:nitrogen ratio and tree species composition, Ecosystems 5: 712-718. Lu, X.K. J.M. Mo, D.J. Li, W. Zang, and Y.T. Fang. 2007. Effects of simulated N deposition on the photosynthetic and physiologic characteristics of dominant understory plants in Dinghushan Mountain of subtropical China. Journal of Beijing Forestry University 29, 1-9. Lu, X.K., J.M. Mo, D.J. Li, and Q.F. Lin. 2006. Effects of simulated N deposition on free amino acids and soluble protein of three dominant understory species in a monsoon evergreen broadleaved forest of subtropical China. Acta Ecologia Sinica 26, 743-753. Lu, Z., D. G. Streets, Q. Zhang, S. Wang, G. R. Carmichael, Y. F. Cheng, C. Wei, M. Chin, T. Diehl, and Q. Tan. 2010. Sulfur dioxide emissions in China and sulfur trends in East Asia since 2000, Atmos Chem Phys, 10(13): 6311-6331. M. G. Sanderson, F. J. Dentener, A. M. Fiore, C. Cuvelier, T. J. Keating, A. Zuber, C. S. Atherton, D. J. Bergmann, T. Diehl, R. M. Doherty, B. N. Duncan, P. Hess, L. W. Horowitz, D. J. Jacob, J.-E. Jonson, J. W. Kaminski, A. Lupu, I. A. MacKenzie, E. Mancini, E. Marmer, R. Park, G. Pitari, M. J. Prather, K. J. Pringle, S. Schroeder, M. G. Schultz, D. T. Shindell, S. Szopa, O. Wild and P. Wind. 2008. A multi-model study of the hemispheric transport and deposition of oxidised nitrogen, Geophys Res Lett, 35(17), L17815. MacDonald, J. A., Dise, N. B., Matzner, E., Armbruster, M.,Gundersen, P., & Forsius, M. 2002. Nitrogen input together with ecosystem nitrogen enrichment predict nitrate leaching from European forests. Global Change Biology 8, 1028 – 1033 195 

Maeda, Y., Morioka, J., Tsujino, Y., Satoh, Y., Zhang, X., Mizoguchi, T., & Hatakeyama, S. (2001). Material damage caused by acidic air pollution in East Asia. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution ,

130 (1-4), 141-150. Magnani, F., Mencuccini, M., Borghetti, M., Berbigier, P., Berninger, P., Delzon, S., Grelle, A., Hari, P., Jarvis, P.G., Kolari, P., Kowalski, A.S., Lankreijer, H., Law, B.E., Lindroth, A., Loustau, D., Manca, G., Moncrieff, J.B.,Rayment, M., Tedeschi, V., Valentini, R., Grace, J. 2007. The human footprint in the carbon cycle of temperate and boreal forests. Nature 447, 848-850 Martinson, L., Alveteg, M., Warfvinge, P. 2003. Parameterization and evaluation of sulfate adsorption in a dynamic soil chemistry model. Environmental Pollution 124: 119–125. Masaaki C., H. Kondo, N. Ebihara and H. Sakugawa. 2008. Atmospheric concentrations of nitric acid, sulfur dioxide, particulate nitrate and particulate sulfate, and estimation of their dry deposition on the urban- and mountain-facing sides of Mt. Gokurakuji, Western Japan. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment: 140: 349-360. Matsubara, M., Morimoto, S., Sase, H., Ohizumi, T., Sumida, H., Nakata, M. Ueda, H. 2009. Long-term declining trends of river water pH in Central Japan. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 200: 253–265. Matsumura, H. 2001. Impacts of ambient ozone and/or acid mist on the growth of 14 tree species: an open top chamber study conducted in Japan. In Acid Rain 2000: Proceedings of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition (Satake, K. ed.), 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Pp. 959-964. Matsumura, H., T. Watanabe, T. Kobayashi, Y. Kohno, T. Izuta and T. Totsuka. 2001. Effect of simulated acid rain on the growth of nikko fir, Japanese cedar, and white birch seedlings grown in three soils. In Acid Rain 2000, Abstract Book of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition, 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers. McCormick, L.H. and K.C. Steiner. 1978. Variation in aluminum tolerance among six genera of trees. Forest Sci. 24(4):565-568. Mehlhorn, H, G.Seufert, A. Schmidt and K. J. Kunert. 1986. Effect of SO 2 and O 3 on production of antioxidants in conifers. Plant Physiology 82:336-338. Mitchell, M. J. 2011. Nitrate dynamics of forested watersheds: spatial and temporal patterns in North America, Europe and Japan. J For Res 16:333–340. Mitchell, M. J., Iwatsubo, G., Ohrui, K., Nakagawa, Y. 1997. Nitrogen saturation in Japanese forests: an evaluation, Forest Ecology and Management 97, 39-51. Mitchell, M.J., Likens, G.E. 2011. Watershed sulfur biogeochemistry: shift from atmospheric deposition dominance to climatic regulation. Environmental Science and Technology 45: 5267–5271. Mitchell, M.J.,David, M.B., Harrison, R.B. 1992. 9 Sulfur Dynamics of Forest Ecosystems. in R. W. Howarth, J. W. B. Stewart, M. V. Ivanov (Eds.) Sulfur Cycling on the Continents - Wetlands, 196 

Terrestrial Ecosystems, and Associated Water Bodies, SCOPE 48. Mo, J.M. H. Fang, W. Zhu, G. Zhou, X. Lu, and Y. Fang. 2008c. Decomposition of pine (Pinus massoniana) needles with two different nutrient status responses to N. deposition in a tropical pine plantation in southern China. China Annals of Forest Science 65, 405. Doi:10.1051/forest:2008017. Mo, J.M., Li, D.J. and P. Gundersen. 2008a. Seedling growth response of two tropical tree species to nitrogen deposition in southern China. European Journal of Forest Research 127, 275-283. Mo, J.M., S. Brown, J.H. Xue, Y.T. Fang, and Z.A. Li. 2006. Response of litter decomposition to simulated N deposition in disturbed, rehabilitated and mature forests of subtropical China. Plant and Soil 282, 135-151. Mo, J.M., W. Zhang, W. Zh, Y.Fang, D. Li, and P. Zhao. 2007. Response of soil respiration to simulated N deposition in a disturbed and a rehabilitated tropical forest in southern China. Plant and Soil, 296, 125-135. Mo, J.M., W. Zhang, W.X. Zhu, P. Gundersen, Y.T. Fang, D.J. Li, and H. Wang. 2008b. Nitrogen addition reduces soil respiration in a mature tropical forest in southern China. Global Change Biology 14, 403-412. Morino, Y., T. Ohara, J. Kurokawa, M. Kuribayashi, I. Uno, and H. Hara. 2011. Temporal variations of nitrogen wet deposition across Japan from 1989 to 2008, J Geophys Res-Atmos, 116, D06307. Morishita T., Hatano, R., Nagata, O., Sakai, K., Koide, T., Nakahara, O. 2004. Effect of nitrogen deposition on CH 4 uptake in forest soils in Hokkaido, Japan. Soil Sci. Plant Nutr. 50, 1187-1194. Nakahara, O., Takahashi, M., Sase, H., Yamada, T., Matsuda, K., Ohizumi, T., Fukuhara, H., Inoue, T., Takahashi, A., Kobayashi, H., Hatano, R. and Hakamata, T. 2010. Soil and stream water acidification in a forested catchment in central Japan. Biogeochemistry 97: 141-158. Nashimoto, M. 1993. Decline of Cryptomeria japonica D.Don and secondary air pollutants, CRIEPI Report U93017. Nave, L.E., Vance, E.D., Swanston, C.W., Curtis, P.S. 2009. Impacts of elevated N inputs on north temperate forest soil C storage, C/N, and net N-mineralization. Geoderma 153 (2009): 231– 240. Network Center for EANET (2012), Data Report 2010, Available at: http://www.eanet.asia/product/datarep/datarep10/datarep10.pdf. Nilssen, I. 1986. Critical deposition limits for forest soils. Nordisk Ministerråd, Miljø Rapp 1986, 11: 37-69. Noguchi, I., T. Kato, M. Akiyama, H. Otsuka, and Y. Matsumoto. 1995. The Effect of Alkaline Dust Decline on the Precipitation Chemistry in Northern Japan. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 85.4: 2357-362. . 197 

Ohara, T., Akimoto, H., Kurokawa, J., Horii, N., Yamaji, K., Yan, X., Hayasaka, T. 2007. An Asian emission inventory of anthropogenic emission sources for the period 1980–2020. Atmos Chem Phys 7, 4419–4444. Ohara, T.S., S. Wakamatsu, I. Uno, T. Ando, and S. Izumikawa. 1995. An analysis of annual trends of photochemical oxidants in the Kanto and Kansai areas., J. Jpn. Soc. Air Pollut. 30:137-148 (In Japanese with English abstract). Ohte, N., Mitchell, M. J., Shibata, H., Tokuchi, N., Toda, H., and Iwatsubo, G. 2001a. Comparative evaluation on nitrogen saturation of forest catchments in Japan and northeastern United States. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 130: 649–654. Ohte, N., Tokuchi, N., Shibata, H., Tsujimura, M., Tanaka, T. and Mitchell, M. J. 2001b. Hydrobiogeochemistry of forest ecosystems in Japan: major themes and research issues. Hydrological Processes 15: 1771-1789. Okochi, H. and M. Igawa. 2001. Elevational patterns of acid deposition into a forest and nitrogen saturation on Mt. Oyama, Japan. Water, Air and Soil Pollution 130:1091-1096. Pan, Y. P., Y. S. Wang, G. Q. Tang, and D. Wu. 2012. Wet and dry deposition of atmospheric nitrogen at ten sites in Northern China, Atmos Chem Phys, 12(14): 6515-6535. Pan, Y. P., Y. S. Wang, G. Q. Tang, and D. Wu. 2013. Spatial distribution and temporal variations of atmospheric sulfur deposition in Northern China: insights into the potential acidification risks, Atmos Chem Phys, 13(3): 1675-1688. Pardo, L.H., McNulty, S.G., Boggs, J.L., Duke, S. 2007. Regional patterns in foliar 15 N across a gradient of nitrogen deposition in the northeastern US. Environmental Pollution 149: 293-302 Park, Il-Soo, Won-Jun Choi, Tae-Young Lee, Suk-Jo Lee, Jin-Seok Han, and Cheol-Hee Kim. 2005. Simulation of Long-range Transport of Air Pollutants over Northeast Asia Using aComprehensive Acid Deposition Model. Atmospheric Environment 39.22: 4075-085. . Park, Jaekwan, and Seogyeon Cho. 1998. A Long Range Transport of So2 and Sulfate between Korea and East China. Atmospheric Environment 32.16: 2745-756. . Park, S. 2003. Long-range Transport Contribution to Dry Deposition of Acid Pollutants in South Korea." Atmospheric Environment 37.28: 3967-980. . Park S-U., Bashkin, V. 2001. Soil acidity loading in South Korean ecosystems. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 132, 19-41. Percy, K. 1986. The effects of simulated acid rain on germinative capacity, growth and morphology of forest tree seedlings. New Phytol. 104:473-484. Reich, P.B. , A. W. Schoettle, H. F. Stroo, J.Troiano and R.G. Amundson. 1987. Effects of ozone and acid rain on white pine ( Pinus strobus ) seedlings grown in five soils. I. Net photosynthesis and growth. Canadian Journal of Botany 65(5): 977–987. Reich, P.B., Hobbie, S.E., Lee, T., Ellsworth, D.S., West, J.B., Tilman, D., Knops, J.M.H., Naeem, S., 198 

Trost, J. 2006. Nitrogen limitation constrains sustainability of ecosystem response to CO2. Nature 440, 922-925. Rodhe, Henning, James Galloway, and Zhao Dianwu. 1992. Acidification in Southeast Asia-Prospects for the Coming Decades. JSTOR 21.2 (1992): 148-50. . Sase, H., Bulgan, T., Batchuhuluun, T., Shimizu, H., Totsuka, T. 2005. Tree decline and its possible causes around Mt. Bogdkhan in Mongolia. Phyton (Horn, Austria) 45: 583-590. Sato, K., & Wakamatsu, T. (2001). Soil solution chemistry in forests with granite bedrock in Japan. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 130: 1001-1006. Schaefer, S.C., Hollibaugh, J.T., Alber, M. 2009. Watershed nitrogen input and riverine export on the west coast of the US. Biogeochemistry 93:219–33. Schnell, S. and King, G.M. 1994. Mechanistic analysis of ammonium inhibition of atmospheric methane consumption in forest soils. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 60, 3514-3521. Schulze 1989. Air pollution and forest decline in a spruce ( Picea abies ) forest. Science 244: 776-783. Sekiguchi, K., Y. Hara, and A. Ujiiee. 1986. Dieback of Cryptomeria japonica and distribution of 

acid deposition and oxidant in Kanto District of Japan, Environ. Tech. Lett., 7:263-268. Seto, Sinya, and Hiroshi Hara. 2006. Precipitation Chemistry in Western Japan: Its Relationship to Meteorological Parameters.Atmospheric Environment 40.8: 1538-549. . Shah, Jitendra, Tanvi Nagpal, Todd Johnson, Markus Amann, Gregory Carmichael, Wesley Foell, Collin Green, Jean-Paul Hettelingh, Leen Hordijk, Jia Li, Chao Peng, Yifen Pu, Ramesh Ramankutty, and David Streets. 2000. INTEGRATED ANALYSIS FOR ACID RAIN IN ASIA: Policy Implications and Results of RAINS-ASIA Model1. Annual Review of Energy and the Environment 25.1: 339-75. . Shan, Y. and Q. Dang. 2001. Ecophysiological effects of ozone and simulated acid mist, alone and in combination, on red pine seedlings. In Acid Rain 2000, Abstract Book of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition, 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Shan, Y., T. Izuta, M. Aoki and T. Totsuka. 1997. Effects of O 3 , and soil acidification, alone and in combination, on growth, gas exchange rate and chlorophyll content of red pine seedlings. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 97: 355-366. Shibata, H., Kuraji, K., Toda, H., Sasa,K. 2001. Regional Comparison of Nitrogen Export to Japanese Forest Streams. The Scientific World 1(S2) 572-580. Shibata, H., Satoh, F., Sasa, K., Ozawa, M., Usui, N., Nagata, O., Hayakawa, Y. and Hatano, R. 2001. Importance of internal proton production for the proton budget in Japanese forested ecosystems. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 130: 685-690. Shindo, J., Bregt, A.K. and Hakamata, T. 1995. Evaluation of estimation methods and base data 199 

uncertainties for critical loads of acid deposition in Japan. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 85, 2571-2576. Silwal, S., K. Horie, and M. Aoki. 2001. Effects of simulated acid fog on growth and nutrient status of Japanese cedar, red pine and beech seedlings. In Acid Rain 2000, Abstract Book of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition, 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Skjelkvåle, B. L., Stoddard, J. L., Jeffries, D. S., Tørseth, K., Høgåsen, T., Bowman, J., Mannio, J., Monteith, D.T., Mosello, R., Rogora, M., Rzychon, D., Vesely, J., Wieting, J., Wilander, A. and Worsztynowicz, A. 2005. Regional scale evidence for improvements in surface water chemistry 1990-2001. Environmental Pollution 137: 165-176. Song, X.G., T.X. Hu,J.R. Sian, W. Li, W.G. Wu, and C.L. Xiao. 2007. Responses of litter decomposition and nutrient release to simulated nitrogen deposition in an evergreen broad leaved forest in southwestern Sichuan. Chinese Journal of Applied Ecology 18, 2167-2172. Sorokovikova, L.M., Netsvetayeva, O.G., Tomberg, I.V., Khodzher, T.V. and Pogodaeva, T.V. 2004. Effects of atmospheric precipitation on the chemical composition of river waters in the South Baikal. Atmospheric and Oceanic Optics 17: 373-377. Sorokovikova, L.M., Sinyukovich, V.N., Netsvetayeva, O.G., Tomberg, I.V., and Sezko N.P. 2009. The entry of sulfates and nitrogen into Lake Baikal with the waters of its influent rivers. Geography and Natural Resources 30: 35–39. Stern, D. 2006. "Reversal of the Trend in Global Anthropogenic Sulfur Emissions." Global Environmental Change 16.2: 207-20. . Stoddard, J. L. 1994. Long-term changes in watershed retention of nitrogen. In Baker, L.A. (eds.) Environmental Chemistry of Lakes and Reservoirs. Advances in Chemistry Series 237, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 223-284. Stoddard, J. L., Jeffries, D. S., Lükewille, A., Clair, T. A., Dillon, P. J., Driscoll, C. T., Forsius, M. Johannessen, M., Kahl, J.S., Kellogg, J.H., Kemp, A., Mannio, J., Monteith, D.T., Murdoch, P.S., Patrick, S., Rebsdorf, A., Skjelkvåle, B.L., Stainton, M.P., Traaen, T., van Dm, H., Webster, K.E., Wieting, J. and Wilander, A. 1999. Regional trends in aquatic recovery from acidification in North America and Europe. Nature 401: 575-578. Stursova, M., C. L. Crenshaw and R. L. Sinsabaugh. 2006. Microbial responses to long-term N deposition in a semi-arid grassland. Microbial Ecology 51:90-98. Sverdrup, H., and De Vries, W. (1994). Calculating critical loads for acidity with the simple mass balance method. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 72: 143-162. Sverdrup, H., Warfvinge, P., Frogner, T., Håøya, A. O., Johansson, M., & Andersen, B. 1992. Critical loads for forest soils in the Nordic countries. Ambio 21: 348-355. Tabayashi, Y., Koba, K. 2011. Heterogeneous Atmospheric Nitrogen Deposition Effects Upon the Nitrate Concentration of Stream Waters in a Forested Mountain Area. Water Air Soil Pollut 200 

216:105–115. Tabayashi, Y., Yamamuro, M. 2009. Changes in the impact of anthropogenic effects on river water quality during the last 50 years in Japan. Wetlands Ecology and Management 17, 409-415. Takamatsu, T. H. Sase, J. Takada, and R. Matsushita. 2001. Annual changes in some physiological properties of Cryptomeria japonica leaves from Kanto, Japan. In Acid Rain 2000: Proceedings of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition (Satake, K. ed.), 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers. pp. 941-946. Tamm, C.O. and Hallbäcken, L. 1988. Changes in soil acidity in two forest areas with different acid deposition: 1920s to 1980s. Ambio 17: 56-61. Tanaka, K., K. Ohta, P. Haddad, J. Fritz, K. Lee, K. Hasebe, A. Ieuji, and A. Miyanaga. 1999. Acid-rain Monitoring in East Asia with a Portable-type Ion-exclusion–cation-exchange Chromatographic Analyzer. Journal of Chromatography A 850.1-2: 311-17. . Tanaka, Motoki, and Keisuke Suzuki. 2010. Winter Precipitation Chemistry at a High Elevation Site of Japan Northern Alps. Bulletin of Glaciological Research 28: 17-26. . Tang, H., T. Izuta, M. Aoki, and T. Totsuka. 2001. Effects of red yellow soil acidification on seed germination of Chinese pine. In Acid Rain 2000 Abstract Book of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition, 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Tang, X. L., Liu, S. G., Zhou, G. Y., Zhang, D. Q., and Zhou, C. Y. 2006. Soil-atmospheric exchange of CO 2 , CH 4, and N 2 O in three subtropical forest ecosystems in southern China. Global Change Biol., 12, 546–560. Tanikawa, T., Ishizuka, K., Imaya, A., 1999. Extractable sulfate content in Japanese forest soils. J. For. Res. 4, 191-194. Tanikawa, T., Takahashi, M., Imaya, A., Inagakki, Y., Isizuka, K. 2003. Vertical Distributions and Accumulations of Sulfate in Andisols and Inceptisols-Adsorbed and Soluble Sulfate Fractions. Japanese Soil Science and Plant Nutrition 74: 149-155 (in Japanese with English abstract). Tanikawa, T., Takahashi,M., Imaya, A., Ishizuka, 2009 Highly accumulated sulfur constituents and their mineralogical relationships in Andisols from central Japan, Geoderma 151, 42–49. Tanikawa, T., Yamashita, N., Aizawa, S., Ohnuki, Y., Yoshinaga, S., Takahashi, M. 2013. Soil sulfur content and its spatial distribution in a small catchment covered by volcanic soil in the montane zone of central Japan, Geoderma 197-198, 1-8. Terada, Hiroaki, Hiromasa Ueda, and Zifa Wang. 2002. Trend of Acid Rain and Neutralization by Yellow Sand in East Asia-a Numerical Study. Atmospheric Environment 36: 503-09. . Thompson, A.M. 1992. The oxidizing capacity of the earth’s atmosphere: Probable past and future changes. Science 256:1157-1165. Tidblad, J., Kucera, V., Hicks, K., Kuylenstierna, J., Dawei, Z., Wing, K., Saha, D., Das, S.N., Zandi, 201 

M., Galang, R., Ramiz, A.M., Pradhan, B.B., Arachchi, W.R., Chantra, W. 2010. Atmospheric Corrosion Effects of Air Pollution on Materials and Cultural Property in Asia and Africa. In: 

17 th International Corrosion Congress 2008: Corrosion Control of in the Service of Society. NACE International. Curran Associates, Inc. Pp. 703-716. Tidblad, J., Kucera, V., Samie, F., Das, S. N., Bhamornsut, C., Peng, L. C., So, K.L., Dawei, Z., Lien, L.T.H., Schollengerger, H., Lungu, C.V. & Simbi, D. 2007. Exposure Programme on Atmospheric Corrosion Effects of Acidifying Pollutants in Tropical and Subtropical Climates. 

Water, Air, & Soil Pollution: Focus , 7(1-3), 241-247. Tomioka, R. and C. Takenaka. 2001. Response of Chamaecyparis obtusa (hinoki) and Quercus serrata Thumb (konara) roots to aluminium stress. In Acid Rain 2000: Proceedings of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition, 10-16 December 2000 (Satake, K. ed.), Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 1013-1018. Tsujino, Y., Satoh, Y., Kuramoto, N., & Maeda, Y. (2001). Effects of Acid Deposition on Urushi Lacquer in East Asia. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution , 130, 1487-1492. Turunen M. and S. Huttunen. 1990. A review of the response of epicuticular wax of conifer needles to air pollution. Journal of Environmental Quality 19:35-45. Ulrich, B. 1991. An Ecosystem Approach to Soil Acidification. In : Ulrich, B. and Sumner, M.E. (Eds.) Soil Acidity. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York, pp. 28-79. Van Breemen, Driscol, T. N. and Mulder, J. 1984. Acidic deposition and internal proton sources in acidification of soils and waters. Nature 307: 599-604. Van Breemen, N. Mulder, J. and Driscol, T. 1983. Acidification and alkalinization of soils. Plant and Soil 75: 283-308. van Groenigen, K.J., Six, J., Hungate, B.A., de Graaff, M.A., van Breemen, N., van Kessel, C. 2006. Element interactions limit soil carbon storage. PNAS 103, 6571-6574. Voigt, Garth K. 1979. A National Program for Assessing the Problem of Atmospheric Deposition (Acid Rain). A Report to the Council on Environmental Quality. Journal of Environment Quality 8.4: 608. . Wang, T. 2000. A Modeling Study on Acid Rain and Recommended Emission Control Strategies in China. Atmospheric Environment 34.26: 4467-477. . Wang, Wenxing, and Tao Wang. 1995. On the Origin and the Trend of Acid Precipitation in China. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 85.4: 2295-300. . Wang, Z. F., et al. 2008, MICS-Asia II: Model inter-comparison and evaluation of acid deposition, Atmos Environ, 42(15): 3528-3542. Wang, Z. F.. 2002. Neutralization of Soil Aerosol and Its Impact on the Distribution of Acid Rain over East Asia: Observations and Model Results. Journal of Geophysical Research 107.D19 Watt, W.D., Scott, C.D., White, W.J. 1983. Evidence of acidification of some Nova Scotia Rivers and its impact on Atlantic Salmon. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 40: 462– 202 

473. Whitall, D.R., Paerl, H.W., 2001. Spatiotemporal variability of wet atmospheric nitrogen deposition to the Neuse River Estuary, North Carolina. J Environ Qual 30:1508–15. Wittig, V. E . , E. A. Ainsworth, S. l. Naidu, D. F . Karnosky and S. P. Long. 2008. Quantifying the impact of current and future tropospheric ozone on tree biomass, growth, physiology and biochemistry: a quantitative meta-analysis. Global Change Biology 15: 396 – 424. Wright, R. F., Roelofs, J. G. M., Bredemeier, M., Blanck, K.,Boxman, A. W., Emmett, B. A., et al. 1995. NITREX: responses of coniferous forest ecosystems to experimentally changed deposition of nitrogen. Forest Ecology and Management, 71, 163 – 169. Wright, R.F., Dale, T., Gjessing, E.R., Hendrey, G., Henriksen, A., Johannessen, M., Muniz, I.P. 1976. Impact of acid precipitation on freshwater ecosystems in Norway. Water, Air and Soil Pollution 6: 483–499. Wright, R.F., Rasmussen, L. 1998, Introduction to the NITREX and EXMAN projects, Forest Ecology and Management 101: 1-7. Xiao, Hui, Gregory R. Carmichael, James Durchenwald, Donald Thornton, and Alan Bandy. 1997. "Long-range Transport of SO and Dust in East Asia during the PEM B Experiment." Journal of Geophysical Research 102.D23: 28589-8612. . Xu, G.L., J.M. Mo, G.ai. Zhou, and S.L. Fu. 2006. Preliminary response of soil fauna to simulated N deposition in three typical subtropical forests. Pedosphere 16, 596-601. Xu, G.L., J.M. Mo, G.Y. Zhou, and J.H. Xue. 2005. Litter decomposition under N deposition in Dinghushan forests and its relationship with soil fauna. Ecology and Environment 14, 901-907. Xu, Y. G., Zhou, G. Y., Wu, Z. M., Luo, T. S., & He, Z. C. 2001. Chemical Composition of Precipitation, Throughfall and Soil Solutions at Two Forested Sites in Guangzhou, South China. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 130: 1079-1084. Xue, H.B. and Schnoor, J.L. 1994. Acid deposition and lake chemistry in southwest China. Water, Air and Soil Pollution 75: 61-78. Xue, J.H., J.M. Mo, J. Li, D.J. Li. 2007. The short term response of soil microorganism number to simulated nitrogen deposition. Guihaia 27, 174-179. Yagasaki, Y., T. Chisima, M. Okazaki, D. Jeon, J.H. Yoo and Y.K. Kim. 2001.Acidification of red pine forest soil due to acidic deposition in Chunchon, Korea. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 130:1085-1090. Yamada, T., Inoue, T., Fukuhara, H., Nakahara, O., Izuta, T., Suda, R., Takahashi, M., Sase, H., Takahashi, A., Kobayashi, H., Ohizumi, T. and Hakamata, T. 2007. Long-term trends in surface water quality of five lakes in Japan. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution: Focus 7: 259-266. Yamaguchi, K., T. Tatano, F. Tanaka, M. Nakao, M. Gomyoda, and H. Hara. 1991. An Analysis of 203 

Precipitation Chemistry Measurements in Shimane, Japan. Atmospheric Environment. Part A. General Topics 25.2: 285-91. Yan, W., Mayorga, E., Li, X., Seitzinger, S. P. and Bouwman, A. F. 2010. Increasing anthropogenic nitrogen inputs and riverine DIN exports from the Changjiang River basin under changing human pressures. Global Biogeochemical CYycles 24: GB0A06, 1-14. Yang, Y., Fang, J., Ji, C., Ma, W., Mohammat, A., Wang, S., Wang, S., Datta, A., Robinson, D. and Smith, P. 2012a. Widespread decreases in topsoil inorganic carbon stocks across China's grasslands during 1980s–2000s. Global Change Biology18: 3672–3680. Yang, Y., Ji, C., Ma, W., Wang, S. Wang, S., Han, W., Mohammat, A. Robinson, D. and Smith, P. 2012b. Significant soil acidification across northern China’s grassland during 1980s −2000s. Global Change Biology 18: 2292-2300. Yoh, M., Konohira, E., Yagi, K. 2001. Regional Distribution of Natural Stream Nitrate in Central Japan. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 130: 655-660. Yoshida, K., C. Takami, C. Takenaka, and T. Tezuka. 2001. Effect of simulated acid fog and drought stress on the physiology of Abies firma Sieb seedlings. In Acid Rain 2000, Abstract Book of the 6 th International Conference on Acidic Deposition, 10-16 December 2000, Tsukuba, Japan. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Yoshikawa, S., Yamaguchi, S., and Hata, A. 2000. Paleolimnological investigation of recent acidity changes in Sawanoike Pond, Kyoto, Japan. Journal of Paleolimnology 23: 285–304. Yu Shuwen, Bian Yongmei, and Ma Guangjing. 1990. Discussion on relationship between masson pine decline and air pollution in Chongqing. Journal of Environmental Sciences (China), 10(3), pp. 378-383. Zhang, W., Mo, J.M., Zhou, G.Y., Gundersen, P., Fang, Y., Lu, X., Zhang, T., Dong, S. 2008. Methane uptake responses to nitrogen deposition in three tropical fo0rests in southern China. Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 113, D11116. doi:10.1029/2007JD009195. Zhao, B., S. X. Wang, J. Y. Xu, K. Fu, Z. Klimont, J. M. Hao, K. B. He, J. Cofala, and M. Amann. 2013NO x emissions in China: historical trends and future perspectives, Atmos. Chem. Phys. 13, 16047-16112 Zhao, Y., Duan, L., Larssen, T., Hu, L., and Hao, J. 2007. Simultaneous assessment of deposition effects of base cations, sulfur, and nitrogen using an extended critical load function for acidification. Environmental science & technology 41, 1815-1820. Zvereva E.L., E. Toivonen and M.V. Kozlov. 2007. Changes in species richness of vascular plants under the impact of air pollution: a global perspective. Global Ecology and Biogeography 17: 305 – 319. 204 205 

# Chapter 5 Air Toxics 5.1 Overview 

There are chemical substances which are persistent in the environment, have accumulative property to the living organisms and give much impacts to the environment by transporting via long-range atmospheric transportation. The chemical substances which have such properties are called “Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs)”. POPs have been produced widely in the world and their huge production of usage has resulted in serious pollution not only locally, but also globally through atmospheric long-range transportation. And several kinds of POPs are unintentionally produced as a by-products of industrial chemicals or uncontrolled waste incineration, such as polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins/dibenzofurans (PCDDs/PCDFs), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), hexachlorobenzene (HCB) and so on. POPs chemicals are detected in remote areas where the POPs chemicals have never been used because of their long-range transportation properties via atmospheric environments. For example, PCBs are detected in the blood samples of the Inuit in Alaska, nevertheless PCBs have never been used in this region. And some POPs chemicals, like DDTs, are still produced and utilized because of their low cost and because there are no practical alternatives. The measures to prevent the transboundary contamination of POPs are significant to improve the global environment and ecosystem. In the 1990s, the discussion on the effective reduction of POPs in the environmental media and accumulation in living organisms was initiated under the framework of the United Nations Environment Plan, and “the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (SC)” for the reduction and elimination of POPs chemicals which was adopted at a Conference of Plenipotentiaries on 22 May 2001 in Stockholm, Sweden. Source and emission inventories and the investigation of long-range transportation should be evaluated and preparation of practical reduction measures should be required. Detailed information on POPs concentrations in the environment is not the only significant area of focus for the design of effective measures for the reduction of POPs, but is also used as a basis for the effectiveness evaluation of the SC. The global scale monitoring activities for POPs in the environment also considered under the SC and the “Global Monitoring Plan (GMP)” was prepared and revised based on the discussion in the “Conference of Parties (COP)”. Furthermore, the monitoring data can be used as fundamental information for selecting new candidate POPs chemicals that have similar properties to the existing and registered POPs. Major activities of the parties for the reduction and elimination of POPs chemicals are defined as follows: (1) The 18 POPs chemicals *1 shall be prohibited to produce, use, export and import in principle; (2) DDT, perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) and its salts and perfluorooctanesulfonyl fluoride (PFOSF) are limited to be produced and used for the specific objectives and usage for the prevention of malaria fever, and manufacturing industrial products such as PFOS; (3) Unintentional POPs chemicals, such as PCDDs/PCDFs, PCBs, hexachlorobenzene, or pentachlorobenzene, shall be reduced by aiming elimination to the maximum extent; (4) Proper management and eliminating treatment of stockpile and wastes containing POPs chemicals; (5) Preparation of National Implementation Plan on the measures against POPs chemicals as described above; and, 206 (6) Taking the measures against the organic pollutants, which have similar properties to POPs chemicals, for preventing the production and usage, implementation of the investigation, surveillance, monitoring, provision of information, public awareness and technical transfer and funding to the developing countries. *1: PCBs, aldrin, endorin, dieldrin, chlordanes, heptachlors, chlordecone, toxaphenes, mirex, HCB, pentachlorobenzene, b-HCH, a-HCH, lindane, tetrabromodiphenyl ether and pentachlorodiphenyl ether, hexachlorodiphenyl ether and heptachlorodiphenyl ether, and hexabromobenzene 

These subjects should be carefully considered in order to design long-term monitoring with foresight based on preventive approaches. The 23 listed POPs will be considered further in this monitoring. Among various environmental media, soils and sediment are quite heterogeneous and there are difficulties in obtaining “representative” samples showing the pollution status for each year. These samples are also liable to be affected by artificial or natural disturbances, which might mask long-term and nation-wide trends in pollution status. The sampling procedures for soils and sediments should be re-evaluated and improved after the start of POPs monitoring to overcome the above problems. This monitoring is not directly aimed at specifying individual sources, searching for illegal dumping, or inspecting the health of wildlife. Obtaining accurate information on source inventories, however, is extremely important in order to plan efficient reduction measures and to make models for the analyses of monitoring data. Furthermore, monitoring should be designed not only to clarify information on environmental levels but also to help assessment of health risks, for the ultimate goal of the POPs treaty includes protection of human health and of ecosystems (wildlife). Thus, the design goal of POPs monitoring should include production of a data set useful for construction of environmental fate models, for risk assessment and risk management. Items required for the selection of sampling locations, period, frequency, etc. need to be based upon information or estimation of the amount of past usage/emission in each area, information on the environmental movement of each chemical, information on the air/water flow at various scales in and around the home country, and on an estimation of global background levels around the home country. In particular, selection of living organisms for biomonitoring should be based on their levels on the food chain in their environmental niches, and on the feasibility of obtaining the same or related species in a wide area both inside and outside of home country in order to ensure that the analytical data are comparable. The monitoring should be designed to maximize efficiency and effectiveness by the establishment and careful adjustment of relationships with other previous related and on-going monitoring. Sampling and analytical methods for this monitoring should be designed carefully to assure the quality (accuracy and precision) of the data as well having high enough sensitivity to cope with probable further decreases in environmental levels of POPs during long-term monitoring. Top priority will be given to conducting high level monitoring by providing highly precise data to adequately low concentrations, not simply providing lists of “not detected (n.d.)”, and also to respond to other requirements as stated above. Design and conduct of monitoring with a hierarchical structure will be required in order to fulfill two, apparently incompatible, objectives, i.e., the application of leading-edge analytical technology and the provision of data that can be compared with cases in developing countries. In other words, accurate, highly precise, high frequency analyses (applications of advanced analytical technology) of POPs in air and water, which are at quite low concentrations and 207 highly variable in time and space but are easily comparable with models, are combined with biomonitoring or other methods using passive/active samplers, which somehow provide a qualitative but concentrated and averaged view of chemicals in the environment, in order to assure data can be compared with those of other countries. Furthermore, efforts to reduce ambiguities by accumulating basic information concerning environmental transport and biological accumulation, metabolism, etc. to allow comparative analysis between the two levels (air, water and organisms) are needed. In addition, the scale and the sampling points of this national POPs monitoring should be determined after careful survey and comparison with other monitoring at Local Government levels, at a regional level (such as the “East Asian region” which includes several countries), and at a global scale in order to set up a more efficient monitoring system in combination with these other monitoring activities. In East Asian sub-region, the PCDDs/DFs contamination issues was raised in the early 1980s in Japan and strong research activities and enormous measures have been taken for more than 20 years. On the other hands, because of the difficulties of measurement of PCDDs/DFs, the environmental surveillance for these compounds in the developing countries has been started in last 10 years, especially in China. The research activities for the atmospheric contamination levels of PCDDs/DFs (7), polybrominated flame retardants (1), PCBs and polychlorinated naphthalenes (2), POPs pesticides (1), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) (1) in this sub-region were reported. And because of the limited monitoring data or emission inventory information, the research papers for the modeling study on organochlorine pesticides (1), PCBs (1) and PAHs (4) were presented. Adverse impacts for POPs chemicals which are registered in the annexes of the Stockholm Convention were evaluated throughout the discussion of the POPs Review Committee and Conference of the Parties of the Stockholm Convention. The reviewed adverse impact of POPs were also summarized in this chapter. Further consideration will be necessary as to whether the survey of new POPs candidates (future POPs) will be included in this monitoring or not. 

5.2 Atmospheric contamination levels and monitoring 5.2.1 Background air monitoring results under the Global Monitoring Plan of the Stockholm Convention 

The background air monitoring for persistent organic pollutants registered by SC has been implemented under GMP to evaluate the effectiveness of article 16 of the SC, and the First Regional Monitoring Report – Asia-Pacific Region was published in December 2009. In this report, the active samplings were carried out in Cambodia, China (including Hong Kong), Indonesia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Lao PDR, Mongolia, Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam, and the passive samplings were implemented in Fiji, India and Oman. In these monitoring activities, initially registered POPs chemicals were monitored. Especially in these activities, Japan was continuously monitoring all of the POPs chemicals at 34 sites throughout the nation. Figure 5.2.1 showed the time trend of polychlorinated biphenyls in ambient air of Japan. As shown in this figure, the PCBs concentration in air has had a decreasing trend after PCB being banned. 208 

Figure 5.2.1 Time trend of PCBs in ambient air of Japan 

On the other hand, since the measurement of POPs chemicals by active sampling required expensive, highly sensitive analytical instruments with stable infrastructure, the passive air sampling has also been recommended to monitor the POPs in the regional scale. The passive air monitoring of PCBs and polychlorinated naphthalene (PCNs) was conducted by J. N. Hogarh, et al. (2012), and the source characterization was comprehensively evaluated using congener patterns of these compounds. The spatial distribution of aerial PCBs indicated existence of a rural-urban gradient of these pollutants in both Japan and Republic of Korea, and a south-north gradient along the eastern stretch of China. For aerial PCNs, the spatial trends in Japan and Republic of Korea apparently followed similar trends as the PCBs. However in China, the PCNs were somewhat equally distributed across the country. Contemporary source factors of air PCBs across East Asia seemed related mostly to combustion and re-emissions/volatilization (probably from contaminated environmental compartments such as soils). Although PCB formulations were derived among the possible source factors, their real contribution or relevance to contemporary PCBs emissions appeared mostly associated with reemissions/volatilization tendencies. Regarding the air PCNs, combustion emerged as the major culprit, with less linkage to Halowax or equivalent formulations. Residual factors were substantially inherent in the PCA outcome of PCNs; to this extent, there were probably factors of PCNs emission presently not fully understood. 

5.2.2 Nationwide monitoring of atmospheric PCDD/Fs and dioxin-like PCBs in Republic of Korea Original Research Article 

PCDD/Fs and dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls (DL-PCBs) were measured in ambient air samples collected from different parts of Republic of Korea in 2008, and the measured levels were used for assessing the spatial and temporal distribution of atmospheric PCDD/Fs and DL-PCBs in Republic of Korea (Sun, K.S., et al., 2011). The average concentrations of atmospheric PCDD/Fs and DL-PCBs among the 37 sites were 28 fg I-TEQ m −3 (ND – 617) and 1 fg WHO-TEQ m −3 (ND – 0.016). Elevated atmospheric levels of PCDD/Fs and DL-PCBs observed at residential/industrial sites and in the north-west of Republic of Korea, indicated a potential contribution and impacts of anthropogenic sources of PCDD/Fs and DL-PCBs. These levels were similar or lower than those previously reported in other ambient air surveys. Average concentrations of PCDD/Fs showed small seasonal variations (ANOVA analysis, p = 0.144). The highest concentrations of PCDD/Fs were observed during winter, followed by spring, autumn and summer. Atmospheric PCDD/Fs and 209 DL-PCBs in Republic of Korea rapidly decreased during the last 10 years (1998–2008), demonstrating the efficiency of stricter regulations and the application of best available technologies/best environmental practices at emission sources. Comparison of the congener profiles and principal component analysis showed that current atmospheric PCDD/Fs are mostly influenced by industrial sources and PCBs from old commercial PCB uses. Nationwide POPs monitoring will continue and allows an effective evaluation of the implementation of the Stockholm Convention on POPs. The background air monitoring for persistent organic pollutants registered by the SC has been implemented under theGMP to evaluate the effectiveness of article 16 of the SC, and the First Regional Monitoring Report – Asia-Pacific Region was published in December 2009. In this report, the active samplings were carried out in Cambodia, China (including Hong Kong), Indonesia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Lao PDR, Mongolia, Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam, and the passive samplings were implemented in Fiji, India and Oman. In these monitoring activities, initially registered POPs chemicals were monitored. 

5.2.3 Atmospheric bulk deposition of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs) in the vicinity of an iron and steel making plant Original Research Article 

An IRA-743 resin bulk sampler was validated to monitor long-term bulk deposition of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs). Six consecutive sampling campaigns (2008–2009) were conducted at four sites around steel complexes in Pohang, Republic of Korea, to investigate spatial and seasonal variations of PCDD/F bulk deposition (Fang, M., et al., 2011). The bulk deposition within the steel complex showed the highest ∑4–8 PCDD/F (Tetra-Octa) fluxes, ranging from 204 to 608 (mean: 352) pg m −2 d−1 , indicating steel complexes were major sources of PCDD/Fs. The homologue profiles were dominated with lower chlorinated PCDFs. Furthermore, the prevailing winds were confirmed to influence the spatial distribution of PCDD/F deposition. There were apparent seasonal variations of the bulk deposition at each site, and seasonal homologue patterns of PCDD/Fs were clearly observed. According to the passive air sampling, however, no significant seasonal change of ambient air concentrations of PCDD/Fs was observed. Therefore, it was concluded that the seasonal variations of deposition fluxes of PCDD/Fs probably resulted from temperature-dependent gas/particle partitioning. 

5.2.4 Levels of polybrominated diphenyl ethers and hexabromocyclododecane in the atmosphere and tree bark from Beijing, China 

Air samples in four seasons at one site and tree bark samples from four districts were determined to investigate seasonal variation and regional distribution of polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) and hexabromocyclododecane (HBCD) in Beijing, China (Hu, J., et al., 2011). The total concentrations of PBDEs ( ∑PBDE) and HBCD (and HB were in the range of 57–470 and 20–1800 pg m−3 in the atmosphere, respectively. The 00 pg mree bark samples from four districts were determinedd by the total suspended particulate matter in atmosphere. The total concentrations of PBDEs and HBCD in tree bark samples were in the range of 99-3700 and 26-3400 ng g −1 lipid weight. It was found that regional distribution of PBDEs and HBCD was related to the function of each district. In addition, the study found that weeping willow bark was an ideal atmospheric PBDEs and HBCD passive sampler. Finally, atmospheric levels of BDE-209 and HBCD at tree bark sampling districts were estimated via applying an established bark/air partitioning model, which had been verified by the measured concentrations in tree bark and atmosphere in Beijing. 210 

5.2.5 Atmospheric distribution of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans and dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls around a steel plant area, Northeast China 

Air monitoring of PCDDs, PCDFs, and DL-PCBs was carried out in June 2008 and January 2009 to investigate the concentrations, profiles and estimating potential inhalation risks to the local residents around a steel plant area in Northeast China (Li, Y., et al., 2011). The air concentrations and WHO-TEQs of PCDD/Fs ranged 94–4944 fg m −3 (average 1,352 fg m −3 ) and 3–247 fg m −3 (average 81 fg m −3 ), respectively. The WHO-TEQ concentrations of dioxin-like PCBs ranged 1–18 fg m −3(average 5 fg m −3 ), contributing to 3.6–26% of the total TEQ. Higher PCDD/F concentrations were observed in the winter, whereas higher dioxin-like PCB concentrations were found in the summer. The seasonal trend can be related to the significant correlation between the concentrations of dioxins and the reciprocal of temperature (positive for PCDD/Fs, P < 0.01; negative for dioxin-like PCBs, P = 0.05). A significant positive correlation (P < 0.0001) was found between the concentration of total suspended particulate (TSP) and PCDD/F concentrations, but not for PCB congeners. Although the steel plant sites showed higher dioxin levels than the residential and background areas, the PCDD/F levels in the atmosphere of the steel plant area was at a relatively low level. The results from this study provides further aid in evaluating the impact of steel plants as PCDD/Fs emission sources to the ambient air in China. 

5.2.6 Passive air monitoring of PCBs and PCNs across East Asia: A comprehensive congener evaluation for source characterization 

A comprehensive congener specific evaluation of PCBs and PCNs in the atmosphere was conducted across East Asia in spring 2008, applying polyurethane foam (PUF) disk passive air sampler (PAS) as a monitoring device (Hogarh, J., et al., 2012). Mean concentrations derived for Japan, China and Republic of Korea were 184 ± 24, 1100 ± 118, and 156 ± 20 pg m −3 for ∑202 PCBs, and 9.5 ± 1.5, 61 ± 6, and 16 ± 2.4 pg m −3 for ∑63 PCNs, respectively. Relative to reported data from 2004, the present results suggest that air PCBs concentrations have not changed much in Japan and Republic of Korea, while it has increased by one order of magnitude in China. From principal component analysis, combustion emerged highly culpable in contemporary emissions of both PCBs and PCNs across the East Asian sub-region. Another factor derived as important to air PCBs was re-emissions/volatilization. Signals from PCBs formulations were also picked, but their general importance was virtually consigned to the re-emissions/volatilization tendencies. On the contrary, counterpart PCNs formulations did not appear to contribute much to air PCNs. 211 

5.2.7 Atmospheric concentrations of DDTs and chlordanes measured from Shanghai, China, to the Arctic Ocean during the Third China Arctic Research Expedition in 2008 

In July to September 2008, air samples were collected aboard a research expedition icebreaker, Xuelong (Snow Dragon), under the support of the 2008 Chinese Arctic Research Expedition Program. DDTs and chlordanes were quantified in all samples (Wu, X., et al., 2011). ∑DDTs concentrations over the whole cruise varied substantially, ranging from 2.0 to 110 pg m −3 with the average concentration of 36 ± 31 pg m −3 . The fresh inputs of p,p'-DDT and o,p'-DDT indicated by DDT/DDE ratios and the relatively higher levels of p,p'-DDT and o,p'-DDT observed in East Asia and North Pacific Ocean may reflect direct transport of these compounds from the adjacent continent where continuing usage of DDT-related compounds is potentially occurring. In the Arctic, increase in sea ice melting in the summer of 2008 might result in the remobilization of DDT and enhance its atmospheric levels in this region. Air-borne pollutants arising from the fire occurring in East Europe during the summer of 2008 might make a large contribution to higher levels of DDTs observed in the atmosphere of the North Pacific Ocean and adjacent Arctic Ocean during our expedition. The ratios of o,p'-DDT/p,p'-DDT were higher than that in technical DDT but much lower than those observed in air samples from China, indicating the atmosphere during the present study was likely influenced by a mixture of DDT-containing products. The concentrations of ∑chlordanes varied between 1.8 and 11 pg m −3 , with an average of 5.4 ± 2.6 pg m −3 . Trans-chlordane (TC) and cis-chlordane (CC) were the most abundant among the chlordanes isomers, accounting for 40% and 39% of total chlordane for all samples. The TC/CC ratios measured in all samples were lower than in the technical mixture, reflecting the main influence by weathered chlordane. The sampling sites with low levels of TC and CC often have relatively low TC/CC ratios, and may be influenced by older air masses. 

5.2.8 Temporal trends of polychlorinated biphenyls in precipitation in Beijing, China 

Temporal trend of PCBs was determined in precipitation and monthly depositional fluxes were calculated in Beijing for the first time from February 2009 to March 2011 (Yang, G., et al., 2012). Total PCBs concentrations ranged from 7.00 to 993 ng L −1 in dissolved phase and from 1.00 to 133 ng L−1 in particulate phase, with a two orders of magnitude variation. Concentrations of PCBs were dominated by dissolved phase, which accounted for 82.5% of the total PCBs in precipitation, implying PCBs enrichment in rainwater due to efficient scavenging of highly contaminated gas phase and non-filterable submicron particles which easily adsorbed organic contaminants in urban atmosphere. Highest concentrations of PCBs were measured in snow, which were about two times higher than those in rainwater, demonstrating more efficient scavenging of PCBs by snow. The sum of bi-, tri- and tetrachlorinated congeners accounted for 70.5% of total PCBs in precipitation, suggesting that PCBs mainly come from the historical usage of domestic PCB product, e.g., trichlorobiphenyl. PCBs concentrations in both dissolved and particulate phases showed slow rate of decline, with a half-life of 16.9 years in precipitation, suggesting that the atmospheric concentrations of PCBs were decreasing slowly in Beijing. The wet deposition flux of oncentrations in both dissolved μg m −2 month −1 (mean: 1.41 μg m −2 month −1 ), indicating a relatively high level of PCBs contamination in Beijing atmosphere. 212 

5.2.9 Levels and spatial distribution of gaseous polychlorinated biphenyls and polychlorinated naphthalenes in the air over the northern South China Sea 

Monitoring marine POPs is important because oceans play a significant role in the cycling of POPs (Li, Q., et al., 2012). The South China Sea (SCS) is surrounded by developing countries in Southeast Asia which are centers of e-waste recycling and the ship dismantling industry. In this study, shipboard air samples collected over the SCS between September 6 and 22, 2005, were analyzed for PCBs and polychlorinated naphthalenes (PCNs). The levels of ∑12PCBs ranged from 32.3 to 167 pg m −3 , with a mean value of 98.4 ± 36.0 pg m −3 . Tetra-CBs were the predominant congeners. The concentrations of 

∑18 PCNs ranged from N.D. to 26.0 pg m −3 , with a mean value of 10.5 ± 7.16 pg m −3 , and tri-CNs were predominant. The gaseous concentrations of PCBs and PCNs over the SCS were consistent with those over other seas and oceans. Compared with previous studies, it was found that the concentrations of PCBs exhibited an obviously declining trend. The measured PCB and PCN concentrations in the atmosphere over the SCS were influenced by their proximity to source regions and air mass origins. The highest gaseous PCB and PCN concentrations were found at sampling sites adjacent to the continental South China. E-waste recycling, ship dismantling and combustion in South China and some Southeast Asian countries might contribute PCBs and PCNs to the atmosphere of the SCS. 

5.2.10 Atmospheric PCDD/F measurement in Southeast Asia during Dongsha Experiment 

The international campaign of the Dongsha Experiment was conducted in the northern Southeast Asian region during March–May 2010 (Thuan, N., 2013). To address the effects of long-range transport on the persistent organic pollutants and further understand the PCDD/F contamination in Vietnam, atmospheric PCDD/Fs were evaluated at a coastal station (Pingtung County, Site A) in southern of the island of Taiwan, remote island station in South China Sea (Dongsha Island, Site B) and coastal station (Da Nang City, Site C) in central Vietnam during different sampling periods in this study. The measurements indicated that the atmospheric PCDD/F concentrations were 1.01–27.4 fg I-TEQ/m 3 (n = 22), 1.52–10.8 fg I-TEQ/m 3 (n = 17) and 23.4–146 fg I-TEQ/m 3 (n = 16) at Sites A, B and C, respectively, during different periods in 2010. In March 2010, an Asian dust storm (ADS) that originated in the Gobi Desert eventually reached populated areas of East Asia, including Taiwan and the island in the northern South China Sea. During the ADS episode, measurements made in southern Taiwan and South China Sea on 16 and 21 March 2010 indicate that the atmospheric PCDD/F concentration increased 6.5 and 6.9 times at Sites A and B, respectively. Furthermore, the significantly higher PCDD/F concentrations and contents in suspended particles (134–546 pg I-TEQ/g-TSP) were measured at Site C in central Vietnam. In addition, the distribution of PCDD/F congeners measured in Central Vietnam was quite different from those measured at other stations with high PCDD distribution (>80%) especially in OCDD (>70%). During the Vietnam conflict, United States (US) forces had sprayed a greater volume of defoliant with higher PCDD/F contents than originally estimated. We consider that the high fraction of PCDDs observed in Vietnam probably originated as anthropogenic emission from a specific source in Vietnam. 213 

5.2.11 Pollution characteristics of volatile organic compounds, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and phthalate esters emitted from plastic wastes recycling granulation plants in Xingtan Town, South China 

With the aim to investigate the main pollution characteristics of exhaust gases emitted from plastic waste recycling granulation plants, mainly volatile organic compounds (VOCs), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and phthalate esters (PAEs) were analyzed in Xingtan Town, the largest distribution center of plastic waste recycling in China (Huang, D., et al., 2013). Both inside and outside the plants, the total concentrations of volatile monocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (MAHs), PAHs and PAEs ranged from 2,000 to 3,000 μg m −3 , 450 to 1,200 ng m −3 , and 200 to 1,200 ng m −3 ,respectively. Their concentration levels inside the plants were higher than those outside the plants, and PAHs and PAEs were mainly distributed in the gas-phase. Notably, highly toxic benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) could be detected inside the plants, and harmful PAEs could be detected not only inside but also outside the plants, although PAEs are non-volatile. The exhaust gas composition and concentration were related to the plastic feedstock and granulation temperature. 

5.2.12 Distribution of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans in ambient air of different regions in China 

Levels of PCDD/Fs were determined in 14 ambient air samples collected in 12 cities of five provinces and one large municipality in China. The PCDD/F concentrations varied from 2.6 to 120 pg m −3 (or from 0.04 to 1.93 pg I-TEQ m −3 ) (Chen, T., et al., 2011). Generally, TCDF was the dominant homologue group and as a rule the homologue concentration of PCDF decreased with rising chlorine substitution number of PCDF. In all cases 2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF was the most important contributor to the I-TEQ value, accounting for 35-57% of the total I-TEQ value. Higher PCDD/F levels in ambient air were found during winter. The highest PCDD/F levels were found in Chengdu, Sichuan Province. In general, the PCDD/F levels in this study were in the same range as in other studies in China. 

5.3 Modeling of persistent organic pollutants in the atmospheric environment 5.3.1 Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) 

Using a dynamic numerical atmospheric transport model for organochlorine pesticides (OCPs), the relationship between the East Asian summer monsoon and the fate of -hexachlorocyclohexane (-HCH), a banned OCP, in the atmosphere over Northeast Asia was investigated and assessed (C. Tian, et al., 2009). The modeled temporal and spatial patterns and variability of -HCH air concentrations during the summer months of 2005 revealed a strong link between this chemical in the atmosphere over Northeast Asia and the East Asian summer monsoon. At lower atmospheric levels, easterly and southeasterly winds blowing from a relatively cold ocean surface convey -HCH air concentration from Southeast China to Northeast China (Figure 5.3.1). 214 

Figure 5.3.1 Modeled mean air concentrations (pg m –3 ) of -HCH averaged over May-July 2005 at the first model level (1.5 m), overlaid by monthly mean winds at the same level. 

A monsoon front extending from Southeast China to Japan, characterized by a strong wind convergence, carried the air concentration to a high elevation of the atmosphere where it was delivered by southerly monsoon flow to northern China and North Pacific Ocean. This summer monsoon associated northward atmospheric transport caused a reversal of the soil/air exchange from outgassing to net deposition during the spring–summer period. The modeled wet deposition fluxes of -HCH agreed well with the changes in the typical summer monsoon rain bands, designated as Meiyu in China, Changma in Republic of Korea, and Baiu in Japan. The major wet deposition flux paralleled with the monsoon front as well as the monsoon rain bands. The temporal change in the fluxes exhibits abrupt northward advances, which is associated with a stepwise northward and northeastward advance of the East Asian summer monsoon. The modeled -HCH outflow in the atmosphere from China occurs mostly in the summer months and through Northeast China, featured strongly by the evolution of the summer months. This study suggests that the East Asian summer monsoon provides a major atmospheric pathway and summer outflows to -HCH over East Asia. 

5.3.1.1 A numerical study on the seasonal variability of polychlorinated biphenyls from the atmosphere in the East China Sea 

A three-dimensional/high-resolution transport model for POPs has been developed for the East China Sea (ECS) (Ono, J., et al., 2012). The POPs model has four compartments (gaseous, dissolved, phytoplankton-bound, and detritus-bound phases) and includes processes for diffusive air–water exchange, phytoplankton uptake/depuration to POPs, decomposition of dissolved phase, vertical sinking of phytoplankton, detritus production by phytoplankton mortality, and vertical sinking and decomposition of detritus. The POPs model is coupled with an ocean circulation model that can reproduce the seasonal variation in physical variables to represent the advection and diffusion of POPs. We applied the POPs model to the polychlorinated biphenyl congener 153 (PCB 153) from the atmosphere and examined the behavior of PCB 153 in the ocean. The model showed a remarkable seasonal variability of PCB 153. Concentrations in the dissolved and particulate phases are high in winter (January–March) and low in summer (July–September). In coastal regions, where chlorophyll a concentration is high, horizontal and vertical distributions in the dissolved and particulate PCB 153 concentrations are strongly affected by phytoplankton uptake. The sensitivity experiments on the dynamics of PCB 153 suggested that a change of Henry’s law constant associated with water 215 temperature is the major factor controlling the seasonal variability of PCB 153. The model-based yearly mass balance of PCB 153 in the ECS indicated that most of the atmospheric input (35.5 kg year −1 ) is removed by the horizontal advection outside the ECS (19.0 kg year −1 ) and accumulates to the sea bottom by vertical sinking (15.7 kg year −1 ). For comparison with PCB 153, we also conducted simulations for PCB 52, 101, and 180. The seasonal variations are similar to that of PCB 153. The mass balance of PCB 52 that has short half-life time and less hydrophobic property shows the different results compared with PCB 101, 153, and 180. 

Figure 5.3.2 (a) Model domain and bathymetry. Monthly averaged surface current in August is superimposed by vectors. The 20, 50, and 100 m isobaths are also superimposed by solid lines. A dashed line denotes the section along which vertical structures of PCB 153 are presented in Figure 5.3.6 and Figure 5.3.7. SP and KP denote the Shandong and Korean Peninsulas. (b) Schematics of physical–biochemical processes for POPs. The POPs model includes four compartments: gaseous POPs (CA), dissolved POPs (CW), phytoplankton-bound POPs (CWP), and detritus-bound POPs (CWD). See text for detailed explanations on the physical–biochemical processes. 216 

Figure 5.3.3 Time series of monthly averaged (a) dissolved (solid line) and particulate (dashed line) PCB 153 concentrations, and (b) the surface flux of PCB 153 from the atmosphere to the ocean (solid line) and the sinking flux of PCB 153 from the water column to the sea bottom (dashed line), averaged over the whole area of the East China Sea. Figure 5.3.4 Horizontal distributions of simulated results in February and August. (a and b) Surface flux of PCB 153 from the atmosphere to the ocean, (c and d) dissolved PCB 153 concentrations at the surface, and (e and f) particulate PCB 153 concentrations at the surface. 217 

Figure 5.3.5 Horizontal distributions of simulated results in February and August. (a and b) Dissolved PCB 153 concentration at the bottom, (c and d) particulate PCB 153 concentrations at the bottom, and (e and f) sinking flux of PCB 153 to the bottom. Figure 5.3.6 Distributions of (a) wind speed (black) and surface chlorophyll aconcentration (purple), (b) surface flux of PCB 153 from the atmosphere to the ocean (red) and sinking flux of PCB 153 (blue), (c) water temperature, and (d) dissolved and (e) particulate PCB 153 concentrations along the section shown in Fig. 1a, in February. Contour intervals are 2.0 °C for water temperature, 40 pg m −3 for dissolved PCB 153, and 12 pg m −3 for particulate PCB 153. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 218 

Figure 5.3.7 Similar to Figure 5.3.6, but for August. Contour intervals are 2.5 °C for water temperature, 30 pg m −3 for dissolved PCB 153, and 3 pg m −3 for particulate PCB 153. 5.3.1.2 Modeling the atmospheric transport and outflow of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons emitted from China 

An Euler atmospheric transport model Canadian Model for Environmental Transport of Organochlorine Pesticides (CanMETOP) was applied to the atmospheric transport and outflow of PAHs in China in 2003 based on a square kilometer resolution emission inventory (Zhang, Y., et al., 2011). The reaction with OH radical, gas/particle partition by considering the adsorption onto total aerosol surface area, and dynamic soil/ocean–air exchange of PAHs were also considered. The results show that the spatial distribution of PAH concentration levels in the atmosphere is greatly controlled by emission and meteorological conditions. Elevated concentration levels are predicted in Shanxi, Guizhou, North China Plain, Sichuan Basin and Chongqing metropolitan areas due to the high emission densities at those locations. High concentrations are also modeled in environments offshore of China and in the western Pacific Ocean. The model also predicts a slightly decreasing vertical profile in the planetary boundary layer (lower than –1 km), but concentration decreases –2 orders of magnitude in the free atmosphere. The Westerlies as well as the East Asian Monsoon and local 219 topographical forcings are identified as key factors influencing the transport pattern of PAHs in China. In 2003, –3,800 tons of the 16 parent PAHs listed on USEPA priority control list were transported out of China with about 80% transported through the eastern boundary. The outflow concentrates near 30°N, signifying a slight discrepancy from the position of emission density peaks. The center of the outflow plume is located at a height of –1 km at 120°E, and climbs to 3.5 km and 5 km at 130°E and 140°E, respectively. A seasonal variation of 5–6 fold is also found for the outflow flux with greatly elevated transport flux in spring and winter. 

Figure 5.3.8 Near surface atmospheric concentrations of three representative PAHs (from left to right: PHE, CHR and BaP, respectively). 

Figure 5.3.9 Vertical profile for the annual mean mixing ratios of three representative PAHs (PHE, CHR and BaP) for both the gaseous and particulate phases. 220 

Figure 5.3.10 Average horizontal (a–c) and vertical (d–f) transport fluxes for BaP in summer (June, July and August, b and e) and winter (December, January and February, c and f), and the total year (a, d). For the vertical transport flux, positive (negative) values mean upward (downward) transports. Figure 5.3.11 The annual meridional-mean meridional (a) and zonal-mean zonal (b) transport flux for BaP at different altitudes. Red colors denote east- and southward transport, blue colors denote west- and northward transport, and white color denotes nearly zero transport flux. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 221 

Figure 5.3.12 The variation of outflow flux for BaP; a) the outflow flux at different latitudes compared with that of emission density; b, c, and d) the zonal transport flux cross sections at 120°E, 130°E and 140°E, respectively. The concentration information in the lower portion of c (south of -25°N) and upper and lower portions (gray shaded area, north of 47°N and south of 35°N, respectively) in d are outside of the model domain, however the center of the outflow plume was captured. 

Figure 5.3.13 Transport and outflow pathways of the sum of the gaseous and particulate phase BaP from different regions of China, (a) the tagged emission regions, (b–f) transport pathways of BaP emitted from R2–6, respectively. 222 

Figure 5.3.14 The seasonal variation of the total BaP outflow from selected source regions in China in 2003. 

5.3.2 Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) 

PAHs are a group of organic compounds consisting of two or more aromatic rings and are emitted into the atmosphere by incomplete combustion or pyrolysis of organic matter, industrial processes, and cooking processing. Because of their widespread occurrence and toxic effects (carcinogenic activities) on ecosystem and human health, PAHs are regulated internationally as POPs by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe’s (UNECE’s) Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (CLRTAP). Furthermore, 16 PAHs (Naphthalene (Naph), acenaphthylene (Acy), acenaphthene (Ace), fluorene (Flo), phenanthrene (Phe), anthracene (Ant), fluoranthene (Flu), pyrene (Pyr), benz[ a]anthracene (BaA), chrysene (Chr), benzo[ b]fluoranthene (BbF), benzo[ k]fluoranthene (BkF), benzo[ a]pyrene (BaP), dibenz[ a,h ]anthracene (DahA), indeno[1,2,3-cd ]pyrene (IcdP), benzo[ ghi ]perylene (BghiP)) are listed as the priority pollutants in the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). 

5.3.2.1 Overview of existing models focused on East Asia 

Although a number of PAH observations have been reported, modeling studies of transboundary transport of PAHs have only a few. Currently, there are only two chemical transport models (Regional Air Quality Model version 2 for POPs version 1.1 (RAQM2-POP), Inomata et al., 2012, 2013, Kajino et al., 2012; CanMETOP, Zhang et al., 2008, 2011a, 2011b) in East Asia. In RAQM2-POP, Relational Emission inventory in Asia for POP version (REAS-POP) was used as the PAH emission inventory (Inomata et al., 2012). REAS-POP is a spatial resolution of 0.5 ×0.5  with monthly time resolution during 2000-2005. In CanMETOP, global or China’s emission inventory (1 ×1 ) developed by Zhang and Tao (2009) and Zhang et al. (2008) were used. Furthermore, there is one trajectory model, Potential Receptor Influence Function (PRIF), developed by Lang et al. (2008). For the PRIF model, PAH emission inventory was targeted for China with 1 × 1 km 2 resolution. The comparison of simulated and measured PAH concentrations revealed that simulated PAH 223 concentrations in several monitoring sites in East Asia generally agreed well with the measured ones to quantitatively assess the transboundary transport of PAHs. 

5.3.2.2 Source profiles of atmospheric particulate PAHs transported from the Asian continent 

Figure 5.3.15 shows the temporal variation of simulated BaP concentrations at the Noto monitoring site, coastal site of the Sea of Japan, with these dominant sources. The dominant source of BaP at Noto was domestic biofuel (11-18%), domestic coal (20-59%), and other transformation of coal (4-18%) from winter to spring. The contribution from domestic biofuel and coal combustion decreased toward summer, while the contribution from other sources was relatively increased. In particular, the contribution from the on-road mobile source was relatively higher in summer (10-17%). 

Figure 5.3.15 Temporal variation of simulated BaP concentrations at the Noto monitoring site with these source profiles. (Inomata et al., 2012) 

5.3.2.3 Transboundary transport of PAHs in East Asia 

China is one of the largest PAHs emitted countries in the world. Based on the forward trajectory model, Lang et al. (2008) estimated that 92.7% of annual emission (114Gg for 16PAHs) remained within the boundary of mainland in China in the early 2000s. In the PAHs outflow from China, approximately 8,092 tons (7.1%) reached the offshore of Mainland China and the South China Sea. About 227 (0.2), 71 (0.06), 746 (0.7), and 131 (0.1) tons (%) of PAHs reached North Korea, Republic of Korea, Russia-Mongolia region, and Japan with 2-4 days after emission. Only 1.4 tons (0.001%) of PAHs reached North America after emissions of more than 9 days. Transboundary transport of PAHs in Northeast Asia was also investigated by RAQM2-POP. Figure 5.3.16 shows the horizontal distributions of the simulated seasonal averaged particulate BaP concentrations and wind vectors near the surface. In winter (Figure 5.3.16a), high BaP concentrations were observed over a wide region in China, and transboundary transport of BaP from the Asian continent toward the Japanese islands occurred associated with northwesterly or westerly winds. In contrast, as shown in Figure 5.3.16b, southerly and southwesterly winds prevailed over the Pacific Ocean under the Pacific High pressure system, which blocks transboundary transport of BaP from the Asian continent. These results suggest that the seasonal variation of BaP emission and the prevailing meteorological conditions strongly controlled transboundary transport in Northeast Asia.            

> 2005 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec BaP concentrations (pg m -3 )020 40 60 80 Domestic biofuel Domestic coal Domestic others Industry Open biomass burning Othertransformation coal Power plant Traffic

224 

Figure 5.3.16 Spatial distributions of seasonal averaged BaP concentrations (a) Winter (December, January, and February), (b) Summer (June, July, and August). The color scale is in units of pg m -3 . (Inomata et al., 2013) 

Transboundary transport of PAHs in Northeast Asia was also evaluated by source-receptor relationships (SRR) analysis for the year 2005 by using RAQM2-POP (Inomata et al., 2013). 

Figure 5.3.17 shows the seasonal variation of BaP concentrations by SRR analysis at the Noto monitoring site in Japan. Transboundary transport from northern China (NCHN, >40 N) and central China (CCHN, 30-40 N) largely influences BaP concentrations from winter to spring. The relative contributions from NCHN and CCHN gradually decline toward the summer as the contribution from Japan (JPN) relatively increases. Figure 5.3.18 shows the horizontal distributions of seasonal average relative contributions of BaP from each source region. Transboundary transport from NCHN and CCHN, which are the dominant PAH-emitting regions in northeastern Asia, significantly influences concentrations in leeward regions such as Sea of Japan (SOJ), Japan, and Northwestern Pacific Ocean (NWP, Figure 5.3.18a). The contribution of transboundary transport from CCHN is high in yellow and East China Sea (YEC) and south of Japan in the NWP (Figure 5.3.18b). 

Figure 5.3.17 Seasonal variation of particulate BaP concentrations and its contribution from 6 source region in Noto. (a) Observed (circles) and simulated (stacked bar) concentrations. (b) Relative contributions (%) from the 6 source-receptor regions. (Inomata et al., 2013) 

> BaP (pg/m 3 )020 40 60 80

(a) 020 40 60 80 

> 2005 JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC
> BaP(%) 020 40 60 80 100 NCHN CCHN SCHN RUS KOR JPN

(b) 225 

Figure 5.3.18 The spatial distribution of the relative contribution from each source region to BaP concentrations (a) winter average for NCHN, (b) winter average for CCHN, (c) summer average for RUS, (d) summer average for JPN. The unit of the color scale is %. (Inomata et al., 2013) 

In the summer, the relative contribution from the 3 Chinese regions decreases, and contributions from Japan and Russia are additional sources of BaP over the Northwestern Pacific Ocean in summer (Figure 5.3.18c, d). The contribution rates for the PAH concentrations from each domain are different among PAH species (Pyr, BaP, IcdP) depending on their particulate phase oxidation rates. Reaction with O 3 on particulate surfaces may be an important component of the PAH oxidation processes. 

5.3.2.4 Interannual variation of BaP transport from East Asia over the Pacific Ocean 

Transboundary transport of BaP in the northern hemisphere was evaluated by a global model, 

CanMETOP by Zhang et al. (2011). The model has predicted significant outflow flux of BaP from the Asian continent over the region between 25 N and 45 N and extending to the western Pacific Ocean. Despite high emission in South Asia and the Indochina Peninsula, these contributions over the Pacific Ocean are much smaller compared with that from East Asia associated with the atmospheric circulation. It was estimated that East Asian emissions contributed about 97% to BaP concentrations in North America (30 50 N, 120 130 W). The contributions from other regions by transboundary transport at North America were estimated as follows: South Asia at 1.3%, West Asia at 1.1%, North Asia at 0.68%, the Indochina Peninsula at 0.33%, Southeast Asia at 0.0052%. Owing to the significant contribution of transpacific transport of BaP, the interannual variability of transpacific transport of BaP was assessed during the period of 1948 2007 (Figure 5.3.19). Average BaP concentration in North America (70 80 E and 100 120 E) has increased rapidly since the 1950s and slightly decreased during the last decade due to the declining trend in East Asian emissions. The transpacific transport flux of BaP was 1.6 times higher in the winter than in the summer. 226 

Figure 5.3.19 Interannual variability of BaP emission over East Asia and mean BaP column concentration over the region of North America within the boundaries of 30  70 N, 75  125 W, and 0 7 km altitudes. (Zhang et al., 2011a) 5.4 Adverse impact 5.4.1 Initial POPs 5.4.1.1 Aldrin 

This compound is listed under Annex A of SC. A pesticide applied to soils to kill termites, grasshoppers, corn rootworm, and other insect pests, aldrin can also kill birds, fish, and humans. In one incident, aldrin-treated rice is believed to have killed hundreds of shorebirds, waterfowl, and passerines along the Texas Gulf Coast when these birds either ate animals that had eaten the rice or ate the rice themselves. In humans, the fatal dose for an adult male is estimated to be about five grams. Humans are mostly exposed to aldrin through dairy products and animal meats. Studies in India indicate that the average daily intake of aldrin and its byproduct dieldrin is about 19 micrograms per person. 

5.4.1.2 Chlordane 

This compound is listed under Annex A of SC. Used extensively to control termites and as a broad-spectrum insecticide on a range of agricultural crops, chlordane remains in the soil for a long time and has a reported half-life of one year. The lethal effects of chlordane on fish and birds vary according to the species, but tests have shown that it can kill mallard ducks, bobwhite quail, and pink shrimp. Chlordane may affect the human immune system and is classified as a possible human carcinogen. It is believed that human exposure occurs mainly through the air, and chlordane has been detected in the indoor air of residences in the US and Japan. 

5.4.1.3 DDT 

This compound is listed under Annex B with acceptable purpose for disease vector control of SC. DDT was widely used during World War II to protect soldiers and civilians from malaria, typhus, and other diseases spread by insects. After the war, DDT continued to be used to control disease, and it was sprayed on a variety of agricultural crops, especially cotton. DDT continues to be applied against mosquitoes in several countries to control malaria. Its stability, its persistence (as much as 50% can remain in the soil 10-15 years after application), and its widespread use have meant that DDT residues can be found everywhere; residual DDT has even been detected in the Arctic. 227 Perhaps the best known toxic effect of DDT is egg-shell thinning among birds, especially birds of prey. Its impact on bird populations led to bans in many countries during the 1970s. Although its use had been banned in many countries, it has been detected in food from all over the world. Although residues in domestic animals have declined steadily over the last two decades, food-borne DDT remains the greatest source of exposure for the general population. The short-term acute effects of DDT on humans are limited, but long-term exposures have been associated with chronic health effects. DDT has been detected in breast milk, raising serious concerns about infant health. 

5.4.1.4 Dieldrin 

This compound is listed under Annex A of SC. Used principally to control termites and textile pests, dieldrin has also been used to control insect-borne diseases and insects living in agricultural soils. Its half-life in soil is approximately five years. The pesticide aldrin rapidly converts to dieldrin, so concentrations of dieldrin in the environment are higher than dieldrin use alone would indicate. Dieldrin is highly toxic to fish and other aquatic animals, particularly frogs, whose embryos can develop spinal deformities after exposure to low levels. Dieldrin residues have been found in air, water, soil, fish, birds, and mammals, including humans. Food represents the primary source of exposure to the general population. For example, dieldrin was the second most common pesticide detected in a US survey of pasteurized milk. 

5.4.1.5 Endrin 

This compound is listed under Annex A of SC. This insecticide is sprayed on the leaves of crops such as cotton and grains. It is also used to control rodents such as mice and voles. Animals can metabolize endrin, so it does not accumulate in their fatty tissue to the extent that structurally similar chemicals do. It has a long half-life, however, persisting in the soil for up to 12 years. In addition, endrin is highly toxic to fish. When exposed to high levels of endrin in the water, sheepshead minnows hatched early and died by the ninth day of their exposure. The primary route of exposure for the general human population is through food, although current dietary intake estimates are below the limits deemed safe by world health authorities. 

5.4.1.6 Heptachlor 

This compound is listed under Annex A of SC. Primarily used to kill soil insects and termites, heptachlor has also been used more widely to kill cotton insects, grasshoppers, other crop pests, and malaria-carrying mosquitoes. It is believed to be responsible for the decline of several wild bird populations, including Canadian Geese and American Kestrels in the Columbia River Basin in the US. The geese died after eating seeds treated with levels of heptachlor lower than the usage levels recommended by the manufacturer, indicating that even responsible use of heptachlor may kill wildlife. Laboratory tests have also shown high doses of heptachlor to be fatal to mink, rats, and rabbits, with lower doses causing adverse behavioral changes and reduced reproductive success. Heptachlor is classified as a possible human carcinogen. Food is the major source of exposure for humans, and residues have been detected in the blood of cattle from the US and from Australia. 

5.4.1.7 Hexachlorobenzene (HCB) 228 This compound is listed under Annex A and Annex C of SC. First introduced in 1945 to treat seeds, HCB kills fungi that affect food crops. It was widely used to control wheat bunt. It is also a byproduct of the manufacture of certain industrial chemicals and exists as an impurity in several pesticide formulations. When people in eastern Turkey ate HCB-treated seed grain between 1954 and 1959, they developed a variety of symptoms, including photosensitive skin lesions, colic, and debilitation; several thousand developed a metabolic disorder called porphyria turcica, and 14% died. Mothers also passed HCB to their infants through the placenta and through breast milk. In high doses, HCB is lethal to some animals and, at lower levels, adversely affects their reproductive success. HCB has been found in food of all types. A study of Spanish meat found HCB present in all samples. In India, the estimated average daily intake of HCB is 0.13 micrograms per kilogram of body weight. 

5.4.1.8 Mirex 

This compound is listed under Annex A of SC. This insecticide is used mainly to combat fire ants, and it has been used against other types of ants and termites. It has also been used as a fire retardant in plastics, rubber, and electrical goods. Direct exposure to mirex does not appear to cause injury to humans, but studies on laboratory animals have caused it to be classified as a possible human carcinogen. In studies mirex proved toxic to several plant species and to fish and crustaceans. It is considered to be one of the most stable and persistent pesticides, with a half-life of up to 10 years. The main route of human exposure to mirex is through food, particularly meat, fish, and wild game. 

5.4.1.9 Toxaphenes 

This group of compounds are listed under Annex A of SC. This insecticide is used on cotton, cereal grains, fruits, nuts, and vegetables. It has also been used to control ticks and mites in livestock. Toxaphene was the most widely used pesticide in the US in 1975. Up to 50% of a toxaphene release can persist in the soil for up to 12 years. For humans, the most likely source of toxaphene exposure is food. While the toxicity to humans of direct exposure is not high, toxaphene has been listed as a possible human carcinogen due to its effects on laboratory animals. It is highly toxic to fish; brook trout exposed to toxaphene for 90 days experienced a 46% reduction in weight and reduced egg viability, and long-term exposure to levels of 0.5 micrograms per liter of water reduced egg viability to zero. 

5.4.1.10 Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) 

This group of compounds is listed under Annex A with specific exemptions and under Annex C of SC. These compounds are used in industry as heat exchange fluids, in electric transformers and capacitors, and as additives in paint, carbonless copy paper, and plastics. Of the 209 different types of PCBs, 13 exhibit a dioxin-like toxicity. Their persistence in the environment corresponds to the degree of chlorination, and half-lives can vary from 10 days to one-and-a-half years. PCBs are toxic to fish, killing them at higher doses and causing spawning failures at lower doses. Research also links PCBs to reproductive failure and suppression of the immune system in various wild animals, such as seals and mink. Large numbers of people have been exposed to PCBs through food contamination. Consumption of 229 PCB-contaminated rice oil in Japan in 1968 and in Taiwan in 1979 caused pigmentation of nails and mucous membranes and swelling of the eyelids, along with fatigue, nausea, and vomiting. Due to the persistence of PCBs in their mothers’ bodies, children born up to seven years after the Taiwan incident showed developmental delays and behavioral problems. Similarly, children of mothers who ate large amounts of contaminated fish from Lake Michigan showed poorer short-term memory function. PCBs also suppress the human immune system and are listed as probable human carcinogens. 

5.4.1.11 Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD) 

This group of compounds is listed under Annex C of SC. These chemicals are produced unintentionally due to incomplete combustion, as well during the manufacture of pesticides and other chlorinated substances. They are emitted mostly from the burning of hospital waste, municipal waste, and hazardous waste, and also from automobile emissions, peat, coal, and wood. There are 75 different dioxins, of which seven are considered to be of concern. One type of dioxin was found to be present in the soil 10 - 12 years after the first exposure. Dioxins have been associated with a number of adverse effects in humans, including immune and enzyme disorders and chloracne, and they are classified as possible human carcinogens. Laboratory animals given dioxins suffered a variety of effects, including an increase in birth defects and stillbirths. Fish exposed to these substances died shortly after the exposure ended. Food (particularly from animals) is the major source of exposure for humans. 

5.4.1.12 Polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDF) 

This group of compounds is listed under Annex C of SC. These compounds are produced unintentionally from many of the same processes that produce dioxins, and also during the production of PCBs. They have been detected in emissions from waste incinerators and automobiles. Furans are structurally similar to dioxins and share many of their toxic effects. There are 135 different types, and their toxicity varies. Furans persist in the environment for long periods, and are classified as possible human carcinogens. Food, particularly animal products, is the major source of exposure for humans. Furans have also been detected in breast-fed infants. 

5.4.2 New POPs 5.4.2.1 Alpha-Hexachlorocyclohexane 

This compound is listed under Annex A of SC. As chlordecone can travel in the atmosphere far from its sources, neither a single country nor group of countries alone can abate the pollution caused by this substance. Regional action has already been considered necessary and chlordecone is totally banned under the UNECE Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution Protocol on Persistent Organic Pollutants. Although the production and use of chlordecone seems to be ceased in most countries, its reintroduction remains possible. This could lead to increased releases and levels in the environment. Based on the available evidence, chlordecone is likely as a result of its long-range environmental transport to lead to significant adverse human health and environmental effects such that global action is warranted. 

5.4.2.2 Beta-Hexachlorocyclohexane 230 This compound is listed under Annex A of SC. Beta-HCH is persistent and present in all environmental compartments; especially levels in the terrestrial as well as in the aquatic food chain give rise to concern to adversely affect human health. High exposure is expected in polluted areas, which are still present around the globe. High exposure is also possibly expected as a result of long-range environmental transport. Based on the inherent properties, together with estimated daily intakes of beta-HCH of Arctic indigenous people that exceeds safe intake reference values, and given the widespread occurrence of beta-HCH in biota, including in remote areas far from likely sources, it is concluded that the substance is likely, as a result of its long-range environmental transport, to lead to significant adverse human health and environmental effects, such that global action is warranted. 

5.4.2.3 Chlordecone 

This compound is listed under Annex A of SC. Chlordecone is very toxic to aquatic organisms. The most sensitive group is the invertebrates, which is not surprising for a substance with insecticidal properties. Even if the lowest effect concentration (0.000026 mg/L) was considered to be an outlier, the lowest effect concentrations would be well below 1 mg/L with the results of short term tests (mortality) in the range of 0.01 to 0.69 mg/L and those of long term tests (reproduction and growth) at 0.0025 and 0.0028 mg/L. 

5.4.2.4 Hexabromobiphenyls 

This compound is listed under Annex A of SC. Hexabromobiphenyls are very persistent in the environment. It has a great potential for bioaccumulation and in addition there is clear evidence of its biomagnification. Due to its physical and chemical properties and based on findings in environmental samples, it is verified that hexabromobiphenyl can be transported long distances in air, far from its sources. Hexabromobiphenyl is a possible human carcinogen and can also be regarded as a substance capable of disrupting the endocrine system. As hexabromobiphenyl can travel in the atmosphere far from its sources, neither a single country nor group of countries alone can abate the pollution caused by this substance. Regional action has already been considered necessary and hexabromobiphenyl is totally banned under the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution Protocol on Persistent Organic Pollutants. Although the production and use of hexabromobiphenyl seems to be ceased in most countries, its reintroduction remains possible. This could lead to increased releases and levels in the environment. 

5.4.2.5 Hexabromodiphenyl ether and Heptabromodiphenyl ether (Commercial octabromodiphenyl ether) 

This group of compounds is listed under Annex A of SC. The highest difficulty appears for the estimation of the potential hazard of the commercial mixture and its components. There are traditional ecotoxicological and toxicological studies where no effects have been observed even at unrealistically high concentrations. However, an in-depth assessment of these studies considering in particular the properties and toxicokinetic nature of PBDE indicates that the test design, exposure conditions and measured endpoints are not appropriate for a sound assessment of these types of chemicals. Thus, the lack of effects reported in those tests should be considered with 231 care. In addition, specific studies have reported particular hazards such as delayed neurotoxicity and immunotoxicity which may be particularly relevant in the assessment of both human health and ecosystem risks. Based on the existing evidence, it is concluded that the Hexa and HeptaBDE components of the commercial octabromodiphenyl ether are likely, as a result of LRET, to lead to significant adverse human health and/or environmental effects, such that global action is warranted. 

5.4.2.6 Lindane (gamma-hexachlorocyclohexane) 

This compound is listed under Annex A of SC. Lindane has been the subject of numerous risk assessment reports by different agencies, diverse country regulations and international initiatives, indicating the general concern raised by this organochlorine compound and indicating global action has already been undertaken. The information provided in the present document, as well as the information contained in the numerous risk assessment reports published on lindane, indicate that lindane is persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic, and is found in environmental samples all over the world as well as in human blood, human breast milk and human adipose tissue in different studied populations, especially impacting Arctic communities that depend on subsistence foods. These findings indicate that lindane is likely as a result of its long-range environmental transport to lead to significant adverse human health and environmental effects such that global action is warranted. 

5.4.2.7 Pentachlorobenzene 

This compound is listed under Annex A and C of SC. Pentachlorobenzene is persistent in the environment and is bioaccumulative. The small spatial variability in the ranges of air concentrations across the Northern Hemisphere indicates that PeCB has a very long atmospheric residence time, which allows it to become widely distributed in the global hemisphere. There are monitoring data from remote areas, backed up by modelling results that suggest that pentachlorobenzene can be transported over great distances. Pentachlorobenzene is moderately toxic to humans, but is very toxic to aquatic organisms. As a result of the long range transport of PeCB, neither a single country nor a group of countries alone can abate the pollution caused by this substance. Unintentional release of PeCB, as a byproduct of incomplete combustion, appears to be the largest current source. Measures to reduce these releases can only be taken at a global scale. Although the production and use of pentachlorobenzene seems to have ceased in most countries, its reintroduction remains possible. This could lead to increased releases and levels in the environment. Based on the available evidence, PeCB is likely, as a result of its long range environmental transport, to lead to significant adverse human health and/or environmental effects, such that global action is warranted. 

5.4.2.8 Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid, its salts and perfluorooctanesulfonyl fluoride 

This group of compounds is listed under Annex B of SC. PFOS is a synthetic substance of anthropogenic origin with no known natural occurrence. It can be concluded therefore that the presence of PFOS and its precursors in the environment are the result of anthropogenic activities and that PFOS found in remote areas far from possible sources has been brought there through long-range environmental transport. While PFOS related substances may be degraded to PFOS, PFOS itself is extremely persistent in all media and can bioaccumulate and 232 biomagnify in mammals and piscivorous birds. The voluntary phase out of PFOS production by the major producer in the USA has led to a reduction in the current use of PFOS-related substances. However, it can be assumed that it is still produced in some countries and it continues to be used in many countries. Given the inherent properties of PFOS, together with demonstrated or potential environmental concentrations that may exceed the effect levels for certain higher trophic level biota such as piscivorous birds and mammals; and given the widespread occurrence of PFOS in biota, including in remote areas; and given that PFOS precursors may contribute to the overall presence of PFOS in the environment, it is concluded that PFOS is likely, as a result of its long-range environmental transport, to lead to significant adverse human health and environmental effects, such that global action is warranted. 

5.4.2.9 Technical endosulfan and its related isomers 

This group of compounds is listed under Annex A of SC. The rapid field dissipation of the endosulfan isomers is related to volatility and it is then subject to atmospheric long-range transport. Persistence, in particular in colder regions, and bioaccumulation potential are confirmed through the combination of experimental data, models and monitoring results. Endosulfan is highly toxic to the environment and there is evidence suggesting the relevance of some effects on humans. However, the information on its genotoxicity and potential for endocrine disruption is not fully conclusive. Based on the inherent properties, and given the widespread occurrence in environmental compartments and biota in remote areas, together with the uncertainty associated with the insufficiently understood role of the metabolites which maintain the endosulfan chemical structure, it is concluded that endosulfan is likely, as a result of its long-range environmental transport, to lead to significant adverse human health and environmental effects, such that global action is warranted. 

5.4.2.10 Tetrabromodiphenyl ether and Pentabromodiphenyl ether (Commercial Pentabromodiphenyl ether) 

Based on the information in this risk profile, C-PentaBDE, due to the characteristics of its components, is likely, as a result of long-range environmental transport and demonstrated toxicity in a range of non-human species, to cause significant adverse effects on human health and the environment, such that global action is warranted. 

5.4.2.11 Hexabromocyclododecane 

This compound is listed under Annex A of SC. HBCD is a synthetic substance with no known natural occurrence that continues to be used in many countries including in imported articles and products. Releases of HBCD to the environment are increasing in all regions investigated, i.e., Europe and in Asia (Japan). HBCD is persistent in the environment and bioaccumulates and biomagnifies in fish, birds and mammals. A number of measured levels in biota, including higher trophic levels such as birds and mammals, in source and remote regions are of significant concern for human health and the environment. Therefore it is concluded that HBCD is likely, as a result of its long-range environmental transport, to lead to significant adverse human health and environmental effects, such that global action is warranted. 

5.4.3 POPs under consideration 5.4.3.1 Short-chained chlorinated paraffin 233 The available empirical and modelled data indicate that SCCPs are persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic, particularly to aquatic organisms, and undergo long-range environmental transport. SCCPs have been measured in sediments in Arctic lakes. SCCPs are particularly toxic to aquatic invertebrates. Given the key role that invertebrates play in aquatic ecosystems, there is concern relating to potential for effects of SCCPs on sediment-dwelling and other invertebrates. SCCPs accumulate in freshwater and marine fish and marine mammals, having been measured in biota in local, regional and remote regions, the latter including measurements from predators such as seals and belugas in the Arctic. Laboratory studies have shown adverse effects on fish at low concentrations. In mammals, SCCPs may affect the liver, the thyroid hormone system, and the kidneys. Although concentrations in remote areas are low, SCCPs have been measured in Arctic biota, presumably because of their high bioaccumulative potential. Notably, SCCPs are present in Arctic marine mammals, which are in turn food for northern indigenous people. SCCPs are measured in human breast milk both in temperate and Arctic populations. SCCPs have been measured in Arctic biota at concentrations similar to other known POPs. Simultaneous exposure to POPs may be of concern. 

5.4.3.2 Polychlorinated naphthalenes 

CNs are atmospherically transported to Arctic and subarctic regions far from local sources. Several CNs homologues are persistent in the environment and investigations on food webs and food chains confirm CNs selectively accumulate in invertebrates, fish, seabirds and marine mammals. CNs show dioxin-like mechanisms of toxicity thus contributing to the overall toxicity of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds such as coplanar PCBs. Some of the potent penta-, hexa- and hepta-CN congeners are among the most frequently detected homologues in addition to the confirmed bioaccumulation in biota thus exposing predators to high levels of these toxic compounds. Especially endocrine disrupting effects at low exposure concentrations and possible long term effects on wildlife and future generations are of concern. Despite the lack of experimental data for endpoints of concern such as carcinogenicity and immunotoxicity, these effects cannot be excluded based on toxicological and structural similarities to the known toxicity of polychlorinated biphenyls. Possible long-term effects of CNs are of most concern, and exposure to CNs should be minimized as much as possible. 

5.4.3.3 Hexabromobutadienes 

HCBD is very toxic to aquatic organisms. Very limited toxicological information on the effects of HCBD in humans is available, therefore animal data have to be used for hazard considerations. It is highly toxic after repeated and chronic exposure to laboratory animals (vertebrates). Its high toxicity to the kidneys, genotoxicity and carcinogenicity is of special concern especially for lifelong dietary low level exposure conditions. Based on the inherent properties, and given the measured occurrence in environmental compartments and biota in remote areas, together with the high toxicity and the suspected carcinogenicity, it is concluded that HCBD is likely, as a result of its long-range transport, to lead to significant adverse human health and environmental effects such that global action is warranted. 

5.4.3.4 Pentachlorophenol 

There is a wealth of reported information on adverse effects of pentachlorophenol in mammals. The 234 data show developmental, immunotoxic and neurotoxic effects and that human survivors of toxic exposures may suffer permanent visual and central nervous system damage. The data on pentachloroanisole indicate some toxicity to reproduction and possible mutagenic and carcinogenic effects, but current knowledge is insufficient to make a conclusive statement on those two endpoints. When considering the toxicity of pentachloroanisole, there is a need to take into account the fact that the main metabolite of pentachloroanisole in biota is pentachlorophenol, which is shown to be highly toxic. There is a wealth of information on the ecotoxicity of pentachlorophenol. Pentachlorophenol is highly toxic to aquatic organisms. Reported acute LC50 values for fish vary between 20 μg/L and 600 μg/L. The lowest chronic no observed effect concentrations (NOECs) observed in the freshwater fish test varied between 2 μg/L and below 15 μg/L. Pentachloroanisole is highly toxic to aquatic organisms. A reported LC50 value for fish is 27 μg/L. When considering eco-toxicity of pentachloroanisole, there is a need to take into account the fact that the main metabolite of pentachloroanisole in biota is pentachlorophenol, which is shown to be highly toxic. There is sufficient evidence that pentachlorophenol and pentachloroanisole meet the criterion on adverse effects. 

References 

De-Yin Huang, Shun-Gui Zhou, Wei Hong, Wei-Feng Feng, Liang Tao, Atmospheric Environment, 71, 327-334 (2013) Guosheng Yang, Lingling Ma, Diandou Xu, Liyan Liu, Hongliang Jia, Yang Chen, Yongbao Zhang, Zhifang Chai, Atmospheric Environment, 56, 222-227 (2012) Inomata, Y., Kajino, M., Sato, K., Ohara, T., Kurokawa, J.-I., Ueda, H., Tang, N., Hayakawa, K., Ohizumi, T., Akimoto, H., 2012. Emission and transport of particulate PAHs in Northeast Asia. Environmental Science & Technology 46: 4941 4949. Inomata, Y., Kajino, M., Sato, K., Ohara, T., Kurokawa, J.-I., Ueda, H., Tang, N., Hayakawa, K., Ohizumi, T., Akimoto, H., 2013. Source contribution analysis of surface particulate polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon concentrations in northeastern Asia by source–receptor relationships. Environmental Pollution. Accepted. Jicheng Hu, Jun Jin, Ying Wang, Zhaohui Ma, Wanjing Zheng, Chemosphere, 84 (3), 355-360 (2011) Yingming Li, Pu Wang, Lei Ding, Xiaomin Li, Thanh Wang, Qinghua Zhang, Hongbiao Yang, Guibin Jiang, Fusheng Wei, Chemosphere, 79 (3), 253-258 (2011) Jonathan Nartey Hogarh, Nobuyasu Seike, Yuso Kobara, Ahsan Habib, Jae-Jak Nam, Jong-Sik Lee, Qilu Li, Xiang Liu, Jun Li, Gan Zhang, Shigeki Masunaga, Chemosphere, 86 (7), 718-726 (2012) Jun Ono, Daisuke Takahashi, Xinyu Guo, Shin Takahashi, Hidetaka Takeoka, 2012 Chemosphere, 89 (4), 389-397 Kai Hsien Chi, Chuan-Yao Lin, Sheng-Hsiang Wang, Neng-Huei Lin, Guey-Rong Sheu, Chung-Te Lee, Atmospheric Environment, 78, 203-210 (2013) Kajino, M., Inomata, Y., Sato, K., Ueda, H., Han, Z., An, J., Katada, G., Deushi, M., Maki, T., Oshima, 235 N., Kurokawa, J-I., Ohara, T., Takami, A., Hatakeyama, S., 2012. Development of an aerosol chemical transport model RAQM2 and predictions of Northeast Asian aerosol mass, size, chemistry, and mixing type. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 12: 1 24. Lang, C., Tao, S., Liu, W., Zhang, Y., S. Simonich, 2008. Atmospheric transport and outflow of polyaromatic hydrocarbons from China. Environmental Science & Technology 42: 5196 5201. Lin-Chi Wang, Wen-Jhy Lee, Wei-Shan Lee, Guo-Ping Chang-Chien, Chemosphere, 84 (7), 936-942 (2011) Mingliang Fang, Sung-Deuk Choi, Song-Yee Baek, Hyokeun Park, Yoon-Seok Chang, Chemosphere, 84 (7), 894-899 (2011) Ngo Thi Thuan, Kai Hsien Chi, Sheng-Hsiang Wang, Moo Been Chang, Neng-Huei Lin, Guey-Rong Sheu, Chi-Ming Peng, Atmospheric Environment, 78, 195-202 (2013) Qilu Li, Yue Xu, Jun Li, Xiaohui Pan, Xiang Liu, Gan Zhang, Atmospheric Environment, 56, 228-235 (2012) Sun Kyoung Shin, Guang Zhu Jin, Woo Il Kim, Byung Hoon Kim, Seung Man Hwang, Jin Pyo Hong, Jin Soo Park, Chemosphere, 83 (10), 1339-1344 (2011) Tong Chen, Xiaodong Li, Jianhua Yan, Shengyong Lu, Kefa Cen, Atmospheric Environment, 45 (36), 6567-6575 (2011) Xiaoguo Wu, James C.W. Lam, Chonghuan Xia, Hui Kang, Zhouqing Xie, Paul K.S. Lam, Atmospheric Environment, 45 (22), 3750-3757 (2011) Yanxu Zhang, Huizhong Shen, Shu Tao, Jianmin Ma, 2011, Atmospheric Environment, 45 (17), 2820-2827 Zhang, Y., Shen, H., Tao, S., Ma, J., 2011b. Modeling the atmospheric transport and outflow of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons emitted from China. Atmospheric Environment 45: 2820 2827. Zhang, Y., Tao, S., 2008. Seasonal variation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) emissions in China. Environmental Pollution 156: 657 663. Zhang, Y., Tao, S., 2009. Global atmospheric emission inventory of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) for 2004. Atmospheric Environment 43:812 819. Zhang, Y., Tao, S., Ma, J., Simonich, S., 2011a. Transpacific transport of benzo[a]pyrene emitted from Asia. Atmospheric Chemistry Physics 11: 11993-12006. 236 237 

# Chapter 6 Emission Inventories 6.1 Overview 

Global, regional, national, and local emission estimates exist for many of the pollutants that are important for assessing the air quality, e.g., SO 2 , NO x , Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds 

(NMVOC ), NH 3 , CH 4 , (Organic Carbon )OC, (Black Carbon )BC, (Particulate Matter )PM, and 

(Carbon Monoxide )CO. Most of them are gridded and are publicly available, especially those covering the global and regional scales. For specific aspects of emissions or atmospheric processes investigated at national and local levels, there are several inventories developed and used by individual research groups or government agencies. The basic method to compile an emission inventory consists in combining emission factors, in units of mass of emissions per unit of activity, with activity data or proxies thereof and then distributed. Most emission inventories are developed using this method. The quality of emission inventories varies widely, and it is often difficult to assess it objectively. For developed countries, the quality of inventories for some pollutants from some sectors is qualified as “high,” as they have been crosschecked by field studies and laboratory tests and through forward or inverse air quality modeling. Examples of high-quality inventories would be the SO 2 emissions from power generation in North America and Europe. For other pollutants and sectors, the quality of inventories may be considerably lower. However, for developing and newly industrializing countries, most of which are located in Asia, the quality of emission inventories is still generally poor, due to a lack of actual emissions measurements and intensive ambient observations, incompleteness of the activity data, and absence of test-based emission factors. In this regard, it should be noted the great advance of China in developing the national and regional gridded emission inventories to support air quality modeling studies. A shorter history of inventory development in Asian developing and newly industrializing countries also signifies a lack of expertise and institutional capacity to perform such tasks of emission inventory. It should be noted that this lack has been providing challenges to the compilation of a complete and reliable inventory of all species during the last decades, especially in documenting atmospheric processes involved in the long range transport of air pollutants in the Northern Hemisphere. On the other hand, an issue of concern when developing an emission inventory is the estimation of associated uncertainties (e.g., Zhao et al., 2011). Major uncertainties are due to inadequate knowledge of certain sources which are major or significant in Asia, in particular open biomass burning (forest and grassland fires, agriculture waste burning), biofuel use (for heating and cooking in the domestic sector, etc.), artisanal industry, residential combustion of coal, and agricultural production systems. These inadequacies propagate into higher uncertainties in emissions for the pollutants that are mainly resulted from these activities Although statistics on activity data have been established in most developing Asian countries, in many remote regions it is however difficult to develop complete statistical data for all types of human activity. As a consequence, some sources may be missing or undercounted, reflected in a tendency to underestimate emissions. Also, there is a need in distinguishing between sources that are relevant for the regional transport of air pollution and those important for local air quality management. For regional air quality studies, sources such as marine and aviation emissions, natural emissions (including various methane sources, soil and lightning NO x ,238 

volcanoes SO 2 and dust, and windblown mineral dust), agricultural emissions, and biomass burning in remote areas, need to be more quantified for better understanding air pollutant emissions in Asia. During the past decade, initiatives and new tools have been developed to better handle the issue of uncertainties in emission inventories. In particular, the inverse modeling of air quality observations (from ground-based monitors, aircraft, or satellites) has recognized a large effort especially in North America and Europe (e.g., Streets et al., 2013). These new techniques may not only improve the accuracy of emission inventories, but they also offer the possibility of providing the basis for more rapid updates of emissions than can presently be obtained using statistics-based methods. However, the use of these new tools is still limited in Asia, due to a lack of local expertise and more specifically important resource required for such developments and associated data collection. This chapter reviews emission sources recognized to play important roles in the atmospheric processes and regional air quality in East Asia, especially in terms of PM, haze, ozone, acid deposition and air toxics. For all sources, Asian emissions are evaluated and compared with the global emissions. Natural sources will include vegetation land cover leading to biogenic emissions of (Volatile Organic Compounds )VOCs, windblown natural dust, and volcanoes. Biomass open burning will be covered with a special focus on Southeast Asia, where the activity is the most enhanced with forest and peat land fires, and agricultural burnings. Anthropogenic sources will include emission sources of SO 2 ,NO x , NMVOC, primary PM 10 and PM 2.5 , BC, OC, CO, NH 3 , CH 4 , Hg and PAHs. For each source type, emissions trends are also described in order to evaluate the effectiveness of control measures implemented for anthropogenic emission abatements and to assess the activity and frequency of natural and biomass burning emissions. 

6.2 Emissions from natural sources and biomass burning 6.2.1 Natural biogenic sources 

Through a number of scientific researches (e.g., Atkinson and Arey, 2003, Friedrich, 2009, Monks et al., 2009, and references therein), it has been accepted that natural emissions are an essential component to evaluate the composition of the atmosphere and support the establishment of appropriate regulatory control strategies for regional, national or local air pollution problems. Natural emission sources include vegetation, soil microbes, geogenic, lightning, and biomass burning. In the natural source emissions, biogenic VOCs (BVOC) from vegetation are considered as the dominant emissions. Among BVOC compounds, terpenoids (e.g., isoprene and monoterpene) were the most comprehensively studied species at global and regional scales due to their significant impacts on global and regional total VOC emission budget, ozone and aerosol formation mechanisms. In this section, we summarize the status of the current biogenic emission estimations focusing on isoprene and monoterpene in Asia. All of targeted countries or domains in the reviewed literatures are located in the depicted domain in Figure 6.2.1 in this paper. 239 

Figure 6.2.1 Geographical boundary for this review. 6.2.1.1 Methods for biogenic emission estimation in Asia 

Biogenic emission estimations that have been conducted from regional to provincial scales in Asia are listed in Tables 6.2.1 and 6.2.2. Two regional-, six national- and seven provincial-scale studies have estimated BVOC emissions using different platforms with different assumptions on input data and model algorithm parameters. Some studies modified a part of important parameter algorithms such as solar radiation and temperature (e.g., Chang et al., 2009 and Cho et al., 2006). Other studies created region-specific input data sets such as vegetation distribution and emission factors (e.g., Cho et al., 2006, Kim et al., 2013, Klinger et al., 2002, and Tsui et al., 2009). By far the most widely used models for estimating regional and global scale biogenic emissions are the empirical algorithms developed by Guenther and his collaborators (e.g., Guenther et al. 1991, 1993, 1995 and 2006). These empirical algorithms take into account the effects of temperature and light intensity on the basal emissions of natural isoprenoid (e.g., isoprene and monoterpene). Likewise, all the studies reviewed here have applied these empirical models to estimate BVOC emissions. The common feature of the platforms (or models) applied in the Asian BVOC studies is the use of the same general framework constructed with emission factor database, emission algorithms and source distribution database. This type of framework was originally suggested by the BEIS (Biogenic Emission Inventory System) established in the late 1980s (Lamb et al., 1987; Pierce and Waldruff, 1991) and then evolved into the recent modeling frameworks, equipped with more sophisticated algorithms and resourceful and well-studied emission factors and vegetation distribution databases, such as GloBEIS (the Global Biosphere Emissions and Interactions System model, Yarwood et al., 1999) and MEGAN (the Model of Emissions of Gases and Aerosols from Nature, Guenther et al., 2006 and 2012) . From the reviewed BVOC emission estimations in Asian studies, the use of different model platforms (e.g., BEIS and MEGAN) at national scales can induce the relative differences for annual emissions up to 120% and 150% for isoprene and monoterpene, respectively. It should be noted that these gaps are for a few number of estimation cases from three countries (e.g., China, and the Republic of Korea ). The estimation gaps can be much greater (or smaller) when more BVOC emission estimation cases 

> China India Mongolia Pakistan Myanmar Thailand Indonesia Laos Japan Vietnam Nepal Malaysia Cambodia North Korea Bangladesh Philippines South Korea Sri Lanka Bhutan Brunei Darussalam Singapore Taiwan
> 150° E 140° E 130° E 120° E 110° E 100° E 90° E 85° E 80° E 75° E 70° E 65° E 50° N 45° N 40° N 35° N 30° N 25° N 20° N 15° N 10° N 5° N 0° 5° S 10° S 240

from Asian countries are considered. 

6.2.1.2 Regional and national emission inventories 

In an East Asia domain (eastern China and northern Indochina), Steiner et al. (2002) estimated biogenic emissions applying the method described in Guenther et al. (1995). This study was focused on the impact of land use and land cover change of BVOC emissions in Asia. With two land cover scenarios ((1) near present-day and (2) pre-disturbed land-covers), they estimated that about 30% conversions of forests to cropland induced by human activities in East Asia caused a decrease of 30% in isoprene and 40% in monoterpenes annual emissions. Considering another East Asia domain, National Institute of Environmental Research (2011) estimated biogenic emissions for the year 2009 using the model MEGANv2.04 with Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS )

vegetation data sets (i.e., land cover and LAI (Leaf Area Index)). Although this study was preliminary and had some limitation (e.g., no use of representative vegetatin input, emission factor, etc.), it was extensive BVOC estimations for the Asia continental region (the same domain of Figure 6.2.1) with one of the most improved model platforms (i.e., MEGAN). For the entire China region, Klinger et al. (2002) estimated annual BVOC emissions for the year 2001 applying measured Emission Factors (EFs) to a regional VOC emissions model (Guenther et al., 1993 and 1995). This was an exhaustive, measurement based, BVOC emission estimation work. In this study ecological factors and BVOC emissions were measured for 386 plant species at 52 sites in China. Tie et al. (2006) also derived annual BVOC emissions from seasonal emissions (January, April, July, and October in 2004) that were calculated by the biogenic emissions formulations in Guenther (1997) and Guenther et al. (1993) applying meteorological data from the weather forecast model (WRF) developed by U.S. National Center for Atmospheric Research . For the Republic of Korea, Cho et al. (2006) estimated annual BVOC emissions for the year 2000 using the BEIS2 model algorithm. Although the BEIS2 approach used in this study had some limitations, it was an interesting study where they firstly tried to use a Korean specific vegetation distribution database and EFs from local measurement studies. In line with Cho et al. (2006), Kim et al. (2013) estimated biogenic emissions in the Republic of Korea for the period of May-June 2008 using the model MEGANv2.04 with more comprehensive and representative vegetation distribution database in the Republic of Korea. 241 

Table 6.2.1 List of natural BVOC emission estimations at regional/national scales in Asia.                                             

> Country (or Region) Target year BVOC algorithm Used Framework Grid System (or Domain extent) Reference East Asia Not specified Guenther et al. (1995) Not Specified 60km × 60km (LCC Prj.: 48.42°N, 84.42°E; 48.66°N, 154.4°E; 14.09°N, 99.43°E; and 14.21°N, 140.1°E) Steiner et al. (2002) East Asia 2009 Guenther et al. (2006) MEGANv2.04 60km × 60km (LCC Prj.*: -18.47°N -53.71°N and 53.12°E -166.58°E) NIER (2011) China 2001 Guenther et al. (1999) and Guenther et al. (1995) Not Specified 0.5° × 0.5° (All China) Klinger et al. (2002) China 2004 (January, April, July and October) Guenther (1997) and Guenther et al. (1993) Not Specified 10km × 10km (All China) Tie et al. (2006) Republic of Korea 2000 Guenther et al. (1993) and Geron (1994) BEIS2 1km × 1km (All Korea) Cho et al. (2006) Republic of Korea 2008 Guenther et al. (2006) MEGANv2.04 9km × 9km (All Korea) Kim et al. (2013)

* LCC prj.: lambert conformal conic projection 

6.2.1.3 Provincial and local emission inventories 

For Beijing, Wang et al. (2003) estimated annual BVOC emissions for the year 1998 using the GloBEIS model with combined datasets of the biomass inventory and hourly emission rates for vegetation covered species. The biomass inventory was surveyed in Beijing. Emission rates were measured for 39 vegetation types in Beijing quoted from a previous study or assigned with the taxonomic method for other vegetation types. Some uncertainties are also discussed in this study. For Hong Kong, Tsui et al. (2009) assessed annual BVOC emissions for the period between August 2004 and July 2005 using GloBEIS, with emission data obtained from measurements and the literature, tree distribution estimation data, land use information, and meteorological data. Following Tsui et al. (2009), Leung et al. (2010) estimated annual BVOC emissions for the year 2006 using MEGANv2.04 with more recruited emission data obtained from measurements and the literature, tree distribution estimation data, land use information, and meteorological data. For the Pearl River Delta region (PRD), Zheng et al. (2011) estimated BVOC emissions for the year 2006 using the GloBEIS model and quantified uncertainties of biogenic emission estimates in the PRD using the Monte Carlo method. They assessed EFs and model empirical coefficients where the key uncertainty sources for isoprene emissions and EFs, and foliar density represented the key uncertainty sources for monoterpenes and other volatile organic compounds (OVOCs). They recommended more 242 

research on shrub, coniferous forests and irrigated cropland/pasture to improve BVOC emission inventories in the PRD region. Wang et al. (2011) estimated BVOC emissions for the year 2006 using the latest version of MEGAN model (version 2.1) with local specific vegetation data (from satellite observation and local survey) and observed EFs (mainly adopted from Hong Kong study by Tsui et al. (2009)). Through the sensitivity analyses for EFs, vegetation distributions and meteorological factors, they presented the importance of using representative sources of input datasets for BVOC emission estimates and further ozone air quality studies in the PRD region. For a subtropical urban–rural complex, the Greater Hangzhou Area (GHA), Chang et al. (2012) estimated annual BVOC emissions for the year 2009 applying the BVOC algorithms in Guenther et al. (1993 and 1997) with emission data obtained from measurements and literature, vegetation composition and foliar biomass datasets for tree species from field surveys. They suggested that planting low-emitting species can reduce the total BVOC emissions in built-up areas while restoring native broad-leaved forest vegetation in rural areas. For the Kinki region, Bao et al. (2008) estimated BVOC emissions for August 2003 and February 2004 applying the BVOC algorithms in Guenther et al. (1991, 1993 and 1995) with the standard BVOC emission measurements for 10 Japanese plant species. They showed that BVOC emission of the 10 Japanese plant species strongly depended on temperature and light intensity. Annual emission estimates were not specified in the manuscript. 243 

Table 6.2.2 List of studies for natural BVOC emission estimation at provincial scale in Asia. 

Target Province Target year BVOC algorithm Used Framework Grid System (or Domain extent) Reference Beijing, China 1998 Guenther et al. (1999) and Geron et al. (1994) GloBEIS 1km × 1km (183×195 grid cells) Wang et al. (2003) Hong Kong, China 2004 (August) to 2005 (July) Guenther et al. (1999) and Geron et al. (1994) GloBEIS 3.32km × 3.32km Tsui et al. (2009) Hong Kong, China 2006 Guenther et al. (2006) MEGANv2.04 100m × 100 m (626 × 453) Leung et al. (2010) PRD region, China 2006 Guenther et al. (1999) and Geron et al. (1994) GloBEIS 3km × 3km (91 × 119 grid cells) (Lambert projected coordinate: 21.46°N - 23.94°N and 112.00°E - 115.41°E) Zheng et al. (2010) PRD region, China 2006 Guenther et al. (2006) MEGANv2.1 4km × 4km Wang et al. (2011) The Greater Hangzhou Area (GHA), China 2009 Guenther et al. (1993) and Guenther (1997) Not Specified Total area: 16,900 km 2(29.18°N - 30.57°N and 118.33°E -120.62°E) Chang et al. (2012) The Kinki region, Japan 2003 (August) and 2004 (February) Guenther et al., (1995), Guenther et al. (1993) and Guenther et al. (1991) Not Specified Total area: 340 km×220 km (32.92°N -36.00°N and 134.00°E - 136.37°E) Bao et al. (2008) 

6.2.1.4 Global emission inventories 

Biogenic emission inventories that have been developed from several global scale research activities are listed in Table 6.2.3. Although some inventories do not include terpenoid species, they were also tabulated and described in this section as the references of global BVOC inventory works. 

1) GEIA (Global Emission InitiAtive) v1 Soil-biogenic NO x emissions 

This 1° x 1° gridded inventory includes monthly mean NO x biogenic emissions from soils, averaged over a 10 year period (1985-1995) (Yienger and Levy II, 1995) and derived from a global, temperature and precipitation dependent, empirical model of soil-biogenic NO x emissions using a six-hour general circulation model forcing. This inventory dataset is available at http://www.pole-ether.fr/eccad. 

2) POET Global emissions inventory for natural sources 244 

This 1° x 1° gridded inventory dataset was derived from a vegetation canopy model (Wallens, S., Muller, J.F. and Guenther A.). Biogenic soils NO x emissions were derived from GEIAv1 NO x soils emissions (Yienger and Levy II, 1995). The inventory data sets for acetone (C 3 H6 O), CO, ethane (C 2 H6 ), ethene (C 2 H4 ), isoprene (C 5 H8 ), methanol (CH 3 OH), monoterpenes ([C 5 H8 ]2 ), NO x (Nitrogen Oxides), propane (C 3 H8 ), and propene (C 3 H6 ) are available at http://www.pole-ether.fr/eccad. 

3) MEGANv2 - Biogenic Global emissions 

This 0.5° x 0.5° gridded inventory was derived from the MEGAN (Model of Emissions of Gases and Aerosols from Nature) v2.0 modeling system. The inventory datasets for acetaldehyde, acetone (C 3 H6 O), CH 4 (Methane), CO, ethane (C 2 H6 ), ethene (C 2 H4 ), isoprene (C 5 H8 ), monoterpenes ([C 5 H8 ]2 ), other ketones, propane (C 3H8 ), propene (C 3 H6 ), sesquiterpenes (C 15 H24 ) and toluene are available at http://www.pole-ether.fr/eccad. 

4) MEGAN MACC VOCs biogenic emissions 

This 0.5° x 0.5° gridded inventory was calculated using MEGANv2.1, an updated version of MEGANv2.0 (Guenther et. al, 2006). The monthly averaged inventory datasets for acetaldehyde, acetic acid (C 2 H4 O2 ), acetone (C 3 H6 O), butanes and higher alkanes, butenes and higher alkenes, Methane(CH 4 ), CO, ethane (C 2 H6 ), ethanol (C 2 H5 OH), ethene (C 2 H4 ), formaldehyde (CH 2 O), formic acid (CH 2 O2 ), hydrogen cyanide (CHN) isoprene (C 5 H8 ), methanol (CH 3 OH), other aldehydes, other ketones, propane (C 3 H8 ), propene (C 3 H6 ), sesquiterpenes (C 15 H24 ) and toluene are available at http://www.pole-ether.fr/eccad. 

5) MEGAN-ECMWF 

This 0.5° x 0.5° gridded inventory for isoprene was constructed based on the MEGANv2.1 model coupling with a detailed canopy environment model, MOHYCAN (MOdel for Hydrocarbon emissions by the CANopy). This inventory used meteorological analyses from the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF). The monthly averaged isoprene emissions are available at http://tropo.aeronomie.be/models/mohycan.htm. 

6) MEGANv2.1 - CH 3 OH Global emissions 

This 0.5° x 0.5° gridded inventory for methanol was constructed based on the MEGANv2.1 coupling with the MOHYCAN canopy environment model, ERA-Interim fields between 2003 and 2009 and eight-day MODIS LAI datasets. This inventory dataset is available at both http://tropo.aeronomie.be/models/methanol.htm and http://www.pole-ether.fr/eccad. 

7) GUESS-ES Monthly biogenic emissions of trace species 

This 1° x 1° gridded inventory for isoprene and monoterpene were computed using the LPJ-GUESS ecosystem model (Smith et al. 2001), at a monthly time step. This LPJ-GUESS model estimates the process-based BVOC emissions by incorporating process-based representations of plant physiology and ecosystem biogeochemistry. This inventory data set is available at both http://stormbringer.nateko.lu.se/public/pegasos/emissions/ and http://www.pole-ether.fr/eccad. 245 

Table 6.2.3 List of global scale natural BVOC emission inventories 

Inventory (release year) Period covered Categories Temporal variability Grid size Reference GEIA v1 1985-1990 Soil biogenic monthly 1° × 1° Yienger and Levy II et al. (1995) POET 1990 biogenic Year with seasonality 1° × 1° Grainer et al. (2005), and Olivier et al. (2003) MEGANv2 2000 biogenic Year with seasonality 0.5° × 0.5° Guenther et al. (2006) MEGAN-MACC 2000-2009 biogenic monthly 0.5° × 0.5° Guenther et al. (2012) MEGAN-ECMWF 1995-2009 biogenic monthly 0.5° × 0.5° Müller et al. (2008) MEGANv2.1-CH3OH 2003-2009 biogenic Yearly (with seasonality) 0.5° × 0.5° Stavrakou et al. (2011) GUESS-ES 1970-2009 biogenic monthly 1° × 1° Arneth et al. (2007), and Schurgers et al. (2009) Spatial distributions and temporal changes of terpenoid emissions in the Asian domain, as estimated from different global inventories, are shown in Figures 6.2.2-6.2.4. The terpenoid emissions are differently distributed by different global inventories due to the different algorithms used for terpenoid emission mechanisms (MEGAN-type inventories and GUESS-ES inventory), the different algorithms applied for isoprene in the canopy environment (MEGAN-MACC and MEGAN-ECMWF) and the different emission factor and vegetation distribution datasets (MEGAN2 and MEGAN-MACC). Especially, the GUESS-ES inventory shows distinctively different spatial distributions compared with the MEGAN-type inventories. For example, for isoprene, GUES-ES shows higher emissions over China and for most of the northern part of the domain and lower emissions over the Southeast Asia regions than the MEGAN-type inventories. For monoterpene, GUES-ES shows spatially unvaried emissions across the domain, except for some desert areas while MEGAN2 shows distinctively varying emissions with latitudinal bands (i.e., higher emissions at lower latitude and lower at higher latitude). 246 

Figure 6.2.2 Spatial distributions of isoprene emission flux in Asia derived from global scale emission inventory. Data sources: MEGAN-MACC, MEGAN2, and GUESS-ES from the ECCAD-Ether site (http://www.pole-ether.fr/eccad); MEGAN-ECMWF from the BIRA-IASB site (http://tropo.aeronomie.be/models/isoprene.htm). 

Figure 6.2.3 Spatial distributions of monoterpene emission flux in Asia derived from global scale emission inventory. Data sources: MEGAN2 and GUESS-ES from the ECCAD-Ether site (http://www.pole-ether.fr/eccad). 

From the investigation of the inter-annual variations of terpenoids in the Asian domain, no clear trend was observed from every global inventory. Isoprene emissions from all inventories, except for MEGAN2, annually vary within 10% in the Asia domain. We identified that MEGAN2 estimated about 40% higher isoprene emissions compared to other inventories in Asia for the year of 2000. However, it should be noted that the variation gaps between different sources of inventories can be much greater (or smaller) for specific locations and time periods. For the monoterpene, the variation 

> 145° E 135° E 125° E 115° E 105° E 95° E 90° E 85° E 80° E 75° E 70° E 65° E 50° N 45° N 40° N 35° N 30° N 25° N 20° N 15° N 10° N 5° N 0° 5° S 10° S

(a) MEGAN-MACC 

> 145° E 135° E 125° E 115° E 105° E 95° E 90° E 85° E 80° E 75° E 70° E 65° E 50° N 45° N 40° N 35° N 30° N 25° N 20° N 15° N 10° N 5° N 0° 5° S 10° S

(b) MEGAN-ECMWF 

> 145° E 135° E 125° E 115° E 105° E 95° E 90° E 85° E 80° E 75° E 70° E 65° E 50° N 45° N 40° N 35° N 30° N 25° N 20° N 15° N 10° N 5° N 0° 5° S 10° S

(c) GUESS-ES 

> 145° E 135° E 125° E 115° E 105° E 95° E 90° E 85° E 80° E 75° E 70° E 65° E 50° N 45° N 40° N 35° N 30° N 25° N 20° N 15° N 10° N 5° N 0° 5° S 10° S

(d) MEGAN2 

Isoprene flux (Mg/km2/yr) 0< 0.1 0.1 - 0.5 0.5 - 1 1 - 3 3 - 5 5 - 7 7 - 12 > 12 

Year 2000 Years 2000-2009 Years 2000-2009 Years 2000-2009 

> 145° E 135° E 125° E 115° E 105° E 95° E 90° E 85° E 80° E 75° E 70° E 65° E 50° N 45° N 40° N 35° N 30° N 25° N 20° N 15° N 10° N 5° N 0° 5° S 10° S 145° E 135° E 125° E 115° E 105° E 95° E 90° E 85° E 80° E 75° E 70° E 65° E 50° N 45° N 40° N 35° N 30° N 25° N 20° N 15° N 10° N 5° N 0° 5° S 10° S

Monoterpene flux (Mg/km2/yr) 0< 0.025 0.025 - 0.125 0.125 - 0.25 0.25 - 0.75 0.75 - 1.25 1.25 - 1.75 1.75 - 3 > 3 

(a) GUESS-ES (b) MEGAN2 Year 2000 Years 2000-2009 247 

difference was not compared due to the limited number of inventory sources. We only identified that MEGAN2 monoterpene emissions were 161% higher than GUESS-ES in Asia for the year of 2000. 

Figure 6.2.4 Time series of Asia BVOC emissions (isoprene and monoterpene) from 2000 to 2009. Data sources: MEGAN-MACC, MEGAN2, and GUESS-ES from the ECCAD-Ether site (http://www.pole-ether.fr/eccad); MEGAN-ECMWF from the BIRA-IASB site (http://tropo.aeronomie.be/models/isoprene.htm). 

6.2.1.5 Asian scale comparisons of multiple sources of BVOC emission estimates 

The annual isoprene trends at national scales derived from Asian studies were comparable to those from several global scale inventories but these estimations were generally upper- or lower-bounded from the overall variations (Figure 6.2.5) showing an annual difference of up to 310% (i.e., GUESS-ES vs. Klinger et al., (2002) at China). Meanwhile, the annual monoterpene trends and magnitudes from Asian studies were not comparable to those from GUESS-ES inventory showing an annual difference of up to 2,400% (i.e., GUESS-ES vs. Chang et al. (2009) at Taiwan). The main 248 

reason of this discrepancy might be the use of a different model framework for the monoterpene emission estimation (i.e., Guenther et al. model vs. Process-based model). In addition, the discrepancy between national scale and global scale estimations can be associated with the reason that global scale estimations cannot well represent regionally or locally varying biophenological emission characteristics of vegetation on smaller geographic grids. 

Figure 6.2.5 Annual BVOC emission estimates at Asian country levels from various sources for the period of 1999-2009. Data sources: MEGAN-MACC, MEGAN2, and GUESS-ES from the ECCAD-Ether site (http://www.pole-ether.fr/eccad); MEGAN-ECMWF from the BIRA-IASB site (http://tropo.aeronomie.be/models/isoprene.htm). 

6.2.1.6 Research priority and direction 

Regarding the improvement of biogenic emission inventory, many studies in Asia recommended research areas that must be performed with high priority. The commonly recommended research areas were vegetation distributions (e.g., vegetation cover and leaf area), EFs, weather factors, and the specific algorithms for BVOC compound species relating their emission to surrounded weather condition (e.g., canopy environment algorithm). Basically, each of these suggested areas is a key part in the recent biogenic emission modeling frameworks. A positive aspect found in Asian BVOC emission inventory studies is the effort to improve BVOC emission estimations by using their own representative database (e.g., available measured emission factor dataset, vegetation database, etc.) and more improved emission models (e.g., BEIS to MEGAN). Continuing these efforts can make a difference in the BVOC estimations in local/national scale by helping to reduce the gaps between model and real world emissions. Meanwhile, a problem awainting solution is to reduce uncertainties of BVOC emission estimations across the Asia domain. Some datasets developed by global research 249 

communities for biogenic emission estimations are easily accessible by any research community/group or person in Asia but region or local specific information are not. Collaboration works and sharing information through the Asian research network (e.g., EANET) may help to improve knowledge of current biogenic emissions and reduce uncertainties of biogenic emission inventories across the Asian region. 

Acknowledgements 

Acknowledge to the ECCAD-Ether (http://www.pole-ether.fr/eccad ) and the BIRA-IASB (http://tropo.aeronomie.be/models/isoprene.htm) for data distribution. 

6.2.2 Natural dust aerosol emissions 

Dust is defined as a suspension of solid particles in the air that is removed from the land surface by wind erosion and is small enough to be suspended in the atmosphere. Large amounts of dust particles are emitted from arid soils of the Earth mostly located in the so-called ‘dust belt’, which extends throughout North Africa, Middle East, Central and South Asia to China (Prospero et al, 2002). Other sources are placed in South to North America, Namibia and Australia (Rodriguez et al, 2012). 

6.2.2.1 Asian dust source regions and occurrence frequencies 

Three hourly present weather reports at the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) regular reporting stations located in the domain of 70 ˚-150 ˚E and 10 ˚-60 ˚N have been analyzed to identify dust occurrence locations and frequencies of Asian dust storms and dust rises for nine years (1998-2006). The geographical distribution of the Asian dust source region is given in Fig ure 6.2.6. The surface soil types in the Asian dust source region are composed of Gobi, sand, loess and mixed soil (Park and In, 2003; Park and Lee, 2004: Park et al., 2010). 250 

Figure 6.2.6 Geographical distribution of the surface soil types (Black, Gobi; Yellow, Sand; Red, Loess; Blue, Mixed) in the Asian dust source region. 

There are 167 regular reporting stations in the Asian dust source region, of which 24, 29, 35 and 79 stations are located in the Gobi, sand, loess and mixed soil regions, respectively. Using the three-hourly reporting data from these stations, dust occurrence reporting hours have been analyzed and given in Figure 6.2.7 (Park et al, 2010). 251 

Figure 6.2.7 The spatial distribution of the dust occurrence reporting frequency for nine years (1998-2006) in the Asian domain. The number indicates the dust occurrence reporting hours. 

The spatial distribution pattern of the dust occurrence reporting frequency in Figure 6.2.7 shows maxima at the Tengger Desert (103.0-106.0E, 38.5-39.6N), Badain Jaran Desert (100.0 ˚-104.0 ˚E, 39.5 ˚-41.3 ˚N), Mu Us Desert (108.0-110.0E, 38.0-39.0E), Taklamakan Desert (76 ˚-88 ˚E, 36.5 ˚-41.0 ˚N), the northwestern part of India and the south central part of Mongolia where the dust occurrence frequency is more than 250 for 9 years. Table 6.2.4 shows the total number of dust occurrence frequency in each month with the surface soil type in the Asian dust source region. In the Gobi region, the monthly maximum dust occurrence frequency of 5.5/month/site occurs in April and then it decreases with time to a minimum value of 0.6/month/site in January. The annual mean dust occurrence reporting frequency (hour) in the Gobi region is 19.8 per site. 252 

Table 6.2.4 Total number of dust occurrence reports (hour) in the Asian dust source region for nine years (1998-2006). The number in the parenthesis indicates the average occurrence frequency per site for nine years. 

In the sand region, the monthly mean maximum dust occurrence frequency of 7.1/month/site occurs in May and then it decreases rather quickly to reach minimum frequency of 0.3/month/site in October. The annual mean dust occurrence frequency of 31.7/year/site is the largest in the sand region among all other soil-type regions even though the dust occurrence frequency from October to the following January is rather small (Table 6.2.4). In the loess and the mixed soil regions, the dust occurrence is mainly confined in the period of March through June with a maximum frequency in April in both regions. The annual mean dust occurrence frequencies are 7.0 and 6.5 per site in the loess and the mixed soil-type regions, respectively. These are rather smaller than those in the Gobi (19.8/site) and sand (31.7/site) regions. This may be attributed to the crop land and the desert grass/crop land in the loess and the mixed soil regions. During the winter, the frozen soil in these regions prevents the dust rise while the growth of crops and/or grass after June makes it difficult to raise dust, resulting in a low dust occurrence frequency (Park et al, 2010). 

6.2.2.2 Asian dust emission and deposition 

To estimate the dust emission amount in the Asian dust source region, the Asian Dust Aerosol Model (ADAM2) (Park et al, 2010) has been employed to simulate the dust emission amount and the deposition amount for the whole year of 2010. Figure 6.2.8 shows the model simulated horizontal distributions of the annual total Asian dust emission and the annual total Asian dust deposition (dry + wet) in 2010 in the model domain. The highest dust emission of 2,237 t/km 2 /yr occurs at the southeastern end of Junggar Basin (around 92 ˚E, 253 

42 ˚N) in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region (Figure 6.2.8a). High dust emission zone ( > 500 t/km 2 /yr) extends southeastward from northwestern Mongolia along the southern parts of the Altay mountain range in Mongolia and the northern parts of China along the southern border of Mongolia including Badain Jaran Desert, Tengger Desert, Mu Us Desert and large parts of Inner Mongolia (Figure 6.2.8a). The annual total emission amount in 2010 is about 493.4 Tg, which is lower than that of IPCC report of 800 Tg. The present model domain does not include the Central Asia region. This may cause some differences in them. The annual Asian dust total deposition (dry + wet) in the model domain is given in Figure 6.2.8b. The highest deposition of 703.9 t/km 2 /yr occurs at the same place where the highest dust emission occurs (Figure 6.2.8a), suggesting about 32% of the dust emission being deposited at the same place. The emitted dust particles in the dust source region (Figure 6.2.8a) affect wide regions extending southward up to southern China and northern Philippines, eastward to the Northwestern Pacific Ocean and northward to the southern border of Russia (Figure 6.2.8b). The annual total deposition amount in 2010 is 371.8 Tg in the model domain, of which about 82% (305.3 Tg) comes from dry deposition (Figure 6.2.9a) and the rest of 18% (66.5 Tg) from wet deposition (Figure 6.2.9b). Most of dry deposition occurs in the Asian dust source region (Figure 6.2.9a) while a large portion of wet deposition occurs in the downwind regions of oceans (Figure 6.2.9b). About 38% of the annual total dust emission (493.4 Tg) in the Asian dust source region is transported out of the model domain. 

Figure 6.2.8 The spatial distributions of annual (a) total emission (t km -2 ) (b) total deposition (t km -2 ) of Asian dust in 2010. Numbers represent the local maximum value. 254 

Several sub-regions over the Asian dust source region are chosen (Figure 6.2.10) to show the temporal variation of the area averaged monthly total emission and deposition in 2010. 

Figure 6.2.10 Six chosen sub-regions over the Asian dust source region to show characteristic features of dust emission and deposition 

Figure 6.2.11 quite clearly shows that the Asian dust occurs all year round with a maximum dust emission in spring (March – May) and follows in winter (December – February) while a minimum in summer (June – August). The monthly total maximum dust emission of 43 t km -2 occurs in Region 4 in March with a minimum of 4 t km -2 in October. The ratio of total deposition to total emission ranges from 50% (Region 4) to 83% 

Figure 6.2.9 The temporal distributions of annual total (a) dry deposition (t km -2 ) and (b) wet deposition (t km -2 ) of Asian dust in 2010. 255 

(Region 2). The contribution of dry deposition to the total deposition ranges from 66% (Region 2) to 97% (Region 4), suggesting the importance of the dry deposition process in the Asian dust source region for the removal of the atmospheric aerosol. Figure 6.2.12 shows the global distribution of dust emissions (Tanaka and Chiba, 2006). The highest dust emissions occur in the Sahara Desert in North Africa, where the annual total dust emission is about 1,100 Tg. The total dust emission from Eastern China, Central Asia and Western China is about 365 Tg which is slightly lower than the presently estimated dust emissions (493.4 Tg). However, the global dust emission has a large inter-annual variation controlled primarily by climate. 

Figure 6.2.11 Temporal variations of monthly total emission ( ■, t km -2 ), dry deposition (■, t km -2 ), wet deposition ( ■, t km -2 ) and total (dry + wet) deposition ( ■,

t km -2 ) in 2010 in Region 1 to Region 6. Annual total emission and deposition in each Region are indicated. 256 

Figure 6.2.12 The global distribution of dust emissions (Tanaka and Chiba, 2006) 6.2.3 Biomass burning sources 6.2.3.1 Introduction 

Biomass burning defines the combustion of living or dead bio-organic materials, such as forest leaf litter, wood logs, solid biofuels, crop residues, household solid waste, etc. Although combustion of biofuels in residential activities, i.e., cooking or heating, constitutes a significant emission source related to energy consumption, open biomass burning or vegetation fire – including forest fires, agricultural fields, savanna and grassland burnings – has become an increasing concern during the last two decades because of the implications of its emission on air quality and more particularly on climate change. Large-scale open biomass burning, shortly named biomass burning in this review, leads to drastically change the land surface, which generates large amounts of trace gases and particulate matter, which plays important roles in atmospheric chemistry and climate. In Asia, it was pointed out that for certain pollutants, its emissions shared approximately 20-30% of the Asian total emissions (Streets et al., 2003). In Southeast Asia (SEA), biomass burning contributes to trans-boundary haze pollution started in 1997 with the large peat/forest fires in Indonesia. Due to the extension of haze area, which highly impacts the human health and economy of several countries, the Governments of the 10 ASEAN member countries signed the ASEAN Agreement on Trans-boundary Haze Pollution on 10 June 2002 in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. The Agreement is the first regional arrangement in the world that binds a group of contiguous states to tackle trans-boundary haze pollution resulting from land and forest fires. At the current stage of knowledge, there is still a large uncertainty on how climate change and global change will affect the frequency, intensity, duration and location of biomass burning in the short- and long-term. This makes its emissions a large source of uncertainty in future atmospheric composition. Therefore, biomass burning and its emissions need to be observed and modeled accurately to understand the composition of the atmosphere and how it changes at different temporal and spatial scales. Significant gaps remain in understanding the contribution of deforestation and savanna, forest, agricultural waste, and peat fires to emissions. 257 

Smoke from vegetation fires constitutes a major source of trace gases and particulates that strongly influence the composition of the atmosphere, as well as human health and security (Bowman et al., 2009). Indeed, exposure to open biomass burning smoke is associated with increased eye and respiratory symptoms, medication use, physician visits, and exacerbated asthma (Kuenzli et al., 2006). Also, large-scale open biomass burning can affect the global climate through emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols, and through the reduction of vegetation cover (Yevich and Logan, 2003). Advances during the last two decades in space–based observation of vegetation fires have enabled innovative ways of quantifying fire emissions and evaluating impacts on air quality and climate change. More particularly, the availability of new sensors and retrieval techniques provide the opportunity to derive more specific and significant information on fire occurrence, behavior, severity and effects. At the same time, fire and atmospheric modeling have greatly advanced on scales from much localized chemical reactions to inter–continental transport. International coordination activities supported by International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC), Integrated Land Ecosystem -Atmosphere Processes Study (iLEAPS), and WMO has been initiated since 2009 under the Interdisciplinary Biomass Burning Initiative (IBBI). Coordinated activities that will help to better quantify the present and future impact of biomass burning emissions on the composition and chemistry of the Earth’s atmosphere include interdisciplinary laboratory measurements, field campaigns that integrate ground-based and airborne observations, as well as detailed analysis of satellite data and numerical modeling results. In this review, we will first describe existing global inventories of emissions from biomass burning which are all based on satellite detection of fire occurrences. The state of emissions in Asia will be assessed using data from global inventories, with special focus on Southeast Asia. Finally, research priority and direction for future studies to improve the state of knowledge of biomass burning emissions in East Asia will be presented and discussed. Because an open burning is an incomplete combustion process without any emissions control, the pollutants of interest are mainly CO, PM, and BC. 

6.2.3.2 Global inventories of emission from biomass burning (1) GFED3 (Global Fire Emissions Database, version 3) 

GFED3, provides data between year 1997 and 2010. The database is operated by Vrije Universiteit -Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences (VU) - Amsterdam, Netherlands. From November 2000 onwards, it is for 90% based on mapped Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) burned area, aggregated from the native 500-meter resolution to 0.5 degrees. The remaining 10% and burned area for 1997 - October 2000 are based on relations between active fires (Along Track Scanning Radiometer (ATSR), Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission- Visible and Infrared Scanner (TRMM-VIRS), and MODIS) and mapped burned area for periods they overlap. The emissions estimates by GFED3 are built combining burned area data from MODIS direct broadcast algorithm with a biogeochemical model (Carnegie-Ames-Stanford-Approach (CASA)-GFED) that estimates fuel loads and combustion completeness for each monthly time step. These fuel loads are based on satellite derived information on vegetation productivity and characteristics to estimate carbon input, and carbon outputs through heterotrophic respiration, herbivory, and fires. The GFED database was developed when fire processes were included in the global biogeochemical 258 

CASA model (Potter et al., 1993), which simulates the exchange of carbon between the terrestrial vegetation and atmosphere. The main fire-related input dataset is burned area which is in version 3 derived from MODIS 500-meter burned area maps (Giglio et al., 2010) aggregated to 0.5° x 0.5° resolution for the period of overlap with Global Fire Assimilation System (GFAS). CASA predicts biomass stocks and the burned area is used to estimate how much of the biomass is subject to fire. The combustion completeness is calculated within the model based on meteorological conditions. Finally, EFs of Andreae and Merlet (2001) with annual updates are used to convert lost biomass into emissions of trace gases and aerosols. The core datasets are monthly burned area, monthly emissions (carbon emissions as well as a suite of trace gas and aerosol emissions), and fields to distribute the monthly emissions to a daily time step, or a three-hourly time step using a mean diurnal cycle. The current version of the burned area dataset is 4 (GFED4), for emissions it is version 3 (van der Werf et al., 2012) and version 4 will be released in early 2014. 

Figure 6.2.13 Annual burned area (as percentage of the area of the grid cell), averaged over 1997-2009. For November 2000 onwards it is for 90% based on mapped MODIS burned area using the direct broadcast algorithm ,aggregated from the native 500-meter resolution to 0.5 degree. The remaining 10% and burned area for 1997 - October 2000 are based on relations between active fires (ATSR, TRMM-VIRS, and MODIS) and mapped burned area for periods they overlap. 259 

Figure 6.2.14 Annual carbon emissions (as g C m-2 year-1), averaged over 1997-2009. These emissions estimates are built combining burned area data from above with a biogeochemical model (CASA-GFED) that estimates fuel loads and combustion completeness for each monthly time step. These fuel loads are based on satellite derived information on vegetation characteristics and productivity to estimate carbon input, and carbon outputs through heterotrophic respiration, herbivory, and fires. 260 

Table 6.2.5 Annual emissions estimates (Tg C year-1) over 1997 – 2009 for different regions where BONA is Boreal North America, TENA is Temperate North America, CEAM is Central America, NHSA is Northern Hemisphere South America, SHSA is Southern Hemisphere South America, EURO is Europe, MIDE is Middle East, NHAF is Northern Hemisphere Africa, SHAF is Southern Hemisphere Africa, BOAS is Boreal Asia, CEAS is Central Asia, SEAS is Southeast Asia, EQAS is Equatorial Asia, and AUST is Australia and New Zealand                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

> Region 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Mean Contribution (%) BONA 19 116 36 14 569 60 139 66 50 40 49 44 54 2.7
> TENA 2811 12 610 94611 20 13 890.5
> CEAM 14 60 14 27 913 28 827 20 14 14 19 20 1
> NHSA 20 51 14 19 17 954 26 13 11 25 13 13 22 1.1
> SHSA 201 412 298 137 143 231 214 327 459 241 572 194 91 271 13.4
> EURO 463952535472240.2
> MIDE 122122221231220.1
> NHAF 581 586 511 532 428 479 506 407 532 442 441 445 362 481 23.9
> SHAF 514 682 534 514 514 483 597 579 621 548 533 578 544 557 27.7
> BOAS 42 338 85 141 103 191 333 16 48 96 46 165 66 128 6.4
> TEAS 57 31 18 37 33 49 43 25 27 35 35 40 31 36 1.8
> CEAS 65 187 160 56 40 91 69 166 87 83 165 64 106 103 5.1
> EQAS 1069 184 33 21 70 285 71 109 123 368 21 25 101 191 9.5
> AUST 118 112 182 146 186 153 128 155 89 147 122 78 136 135 6.7
> Global 2705 2775 1901 1665 1561 2066 2118 1966 2105 2059 2043 1681 1524 2013 100

(2) Fire Inventory from NCAR version 1.0. (FINNv1) 

The FINN emission inventory provides daily, 1 km x 1 km resolution estimates of global fire emissions both for trace gases and aerosols. Like GFAS, FINN uses active fire observations from the MODIS Terra and Aqua satellite. However, in the case of FINN these observations are used to estimate burned areas rather than Fire Radiative Power (FRP). Additionally, FINN uses the MODIS land cover (IGBP classification) and the MODIS Vegetation Continuous Fields (VCF) products in its algorithm. The latter indicates the fraction of woody and non woody vegetation cover, and bare ground. Following Wiedinmyer et al. (2006) and Al-Saadi et al. (2008), for most land cover classes it was assumed that each fire count corresponds to a burned area of 1 km 2 , except for grasslands and savanna where it was assumed that each fire count corresponds to a burned area of 0.75 km 2 . If the pixel with the fire observation was partly covered by bare area, this percentage was deducted from the burned area (e.g., a fire observation in a pixel with 50% bare ground would result in a burned area of 0.5 km 2 ). Fuel or biomass loading (B) was assumed to be land cover specific and estimates from Hoelzemann et al. (2004) were used, with a few updates as described by Wiedinmyer et al. (2011). The fraction of biomass burned (FB) was assumed to be related to the woody vegetation cover based on relations 261 

found by Ito and Penner (2004) and are further described by Wiedinmyer et al. (2006, 2011). EFs from the literature survey of Akagi et al. (2011) are used. FINNv1 uses satellite observations of active fires and land cover, together with emission factors and estimated fuel loadings to provide daily, highly resolved (1 km) open burning emissions estimates for use in regional and global chemical transport models. FINNv1 provides daily, 1-km resolution, global estimates of the trace gas and particle emissions from open burning of biomass, which includes wildfire, agricultural fires, and pre- scribed burning and does not include biofuel use and trash burning. 

(3) Global Fire Emissions Database, version 2 (GFED2) 

GFED2 provided data between year 1997 and 2005. The database is operated by Vrije Universiteit -Faculty of Earth and Life Sciences (VU) - Amsterdam, Netherlands. The data are retrieved from MODIS (burned area and fire hot spots), TRMM-VIRS (fire hot spots), ATSR (fire hot spots), Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer - Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (AVHRR (NDVI)). The approach used to calculate burned areas for the 2001-2004 period is described in Giglio et al. (2006). Emission estimates, as well as burned areas for the 1997-2000 period, are described in Van der Werf et al. (2006). The method to derive the fraction of the emissions related to cropland burnings is described in Randerson et al. (2012). The used modelling framework enables the calculation of carbon emissions. EFs from Andreae and Merlet (2001) and Andreae (personal comm.) were used to derive trace gas emissions from the carbon emissions. Emissions for all the other species can be calculated using the carbon emissions: divide the carbon emissions in each grid cell by 0.45 to estimate dry matter (DM) emissions, and then use specific EFs in combination with the land cover classification (into savanna/herbaceous vegetation, tropical forest, and extratropical forest) that is also provided. This also allows for modifying the EFs for species already provided by using those resulted from reviewed research papers. 

(4) Global Fire Assimilation System (GFAS) 

GFAS emission inventory provides daily global emission estimates at 0.5° x 0.5° (GFASv1.0) and 0.1° x 0.1° (GFASv1.1) resolution, between year 2003 and the present. The database is operated by the European Center for Medium-range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) - Reading, United Kingdom. The GFASv1.0 calculates biomass burning emissions by assimilating FRP observations from the MODIS instruments onboard the Terra and Aqua satellites. FRP is extracted from MOD14 and MYD14, and geo-location from MOD03 and MYD03. Global FRP fields are derived from the satellite observations and corrected for partial cloud-cover, and observation gaps. Spurious signals from volcanoes, gas flares and other industrial activity are masked out by static blacklists which are updated regularly. Subsequently, FRP is converted to the combustion rate of DM with ecosystem-dependent conversion factors that are based on a previous inter-comparison with GFED (Heil et al., 2010). The DM combustion rate is then scaled linearly to derive constituent fluxes of 40 trace gas and aerosol ingredients of smoke. EF are taken from Andreae & Merlet (2001) with updates (M.O. Andreae, personal communication, 2012). In a final step, the total carbon emission flux is calculated from the fluxes of CO 2, CO, CH 4 , BC and OC. 262 

Figure 6.2.15 Daily average Fire Radiative Power (FRP) density [mWm −2 ] analysis of GFASv1.0 for 4 June 2011, based on observations from the two MODIS instruments. Equidistant cylindrical projection, 0.5 resolution (Kaiser et al., 2012). 

Figure 6.2.16 Average distribution of carbon combustion [g(C) a −1 m−2] during 2003 -2008 in GFEDv3.1 (top) and GFASv1.0 (bottom). Equidistant cylindrical projection, 0.5 resolution (ECMWF experiment IDs fhhi and ffxr) (Kaiser et al., 2012). 263 

Major upgrades which will be released in February/March 2014) include the following: 

 Injection height daily data as provided by a Plume Rise Model; 

 Statistical regression of the output when assimilating only Aqua or Terra observations so as to preserve consistency with data obtained assimilating Aqua and Terra observations. 

(5) Global Inventory for Chemistry Climate (GICC) 

GICC biomass burning inventory provides data between year 1900 and 2005 from GICC which was developed by (1) Laboratoire Atmosphères, Milieux, Observations Spatiales/CNRS (LATMOS) - Paris, France, and (2) Laboratoire d'Aérologie/CNRS (LA) - Toulouse, France. The data sources are Global Burned Area 2000 (GBA2000) burnt areas from SPOT-Vegetation, ATSR fire hot spots from ATSR, Global Land Cover 2000 (GLC2000) vegetation map from SPOT-Vegetation, and historical reconstruction of burnt areas from Mouillot and Field, 2005. For the recent period of 1997-2005, fire emission estimations were based on satellite products including GBA2000 burnt areas and ATSR fire counts, and on the GLC2000 vegetation map. Emissions are first estimated for the year 2000 from GBA2000 burnt areas as the product of burnt areas, biomass densities, burning efficiencies, and CO 2 EFs; the temporal and spatial distribution of CO 2 emissions is then derived through a calibration of ATSR fire counts on GBA 2000 emissions (this calibration is done for each vegetation class and for three latitudinal bands). For the 20 th century, average annual emissions for each decade were derived from a historical reconstruction of burnt surfaces at 1° x 1° (Mouillot and Field, 2005). The CO 2 emissions were calculated as the product of burnt areas, biomass densities, burning efficiencies, and CO 2 EFs. A scaling factor is applied for forest and savanna ecosystems separately, in order to ensure the continuity between the historical inventory and the recent 1997-2005 inventory. Finally, monthly emissions are evaluated using the seasonality derived from 1997-2005 emissions. For both inventories, trace gases and aerosols emissions are derived using Andreae and Merlet (2001) EFs. 

(6) African Monsoon Multivariate Analysis (AMMA) 

Biomass Burning emissions over Africa was built for AMMA using data between year 2000 and 2006 from AMMABB, which is operated by Laboratoire d'Aérologie/CNRS (LA) - Toulouse, France. The emissions data are derived from corrected L3JRC burnt areas (JRC, Ispra) and the GLC2000 vegetation map (JRC, Ispra) as the product of burnt areas with biomass density, burning efficiency, and EFs of the considered species (Liousse et al., 2010). 

(7) GUESS-ES 

GUESS-ES biogenic and pyrogenic emissions provides data between year 1970 and 2009 from GUESS-ES developed by University of Lund - Department of Physical Geography and Ecosystem Science (ULUND) - Lund, Sweden. The source of data for pyrogenic emissions simulations made use of observed burned areas from the GFED3 database (Giglio et al. 2010) and CRU TS 3.1 climate data 1901-2009. They simulate either natural vegetation or agricultural fields, approximated by grass. Information on agricultural fields are derived on a yearly basis from Ramankutty and Foley (1999, updated to 1970-2007, 2011). It should be noted that the version v002 is different from version v001 264 

described in Knorr et al. (2011) since v002 was run with 25 patches in order to reduce stochastic noise at the single-gridcell level. Other changes have a slight effect on simulated carbon balance. Data units are tons species per grid cell and month (pyrogenic) or tons carbon per grid cell and month (biogenic) to kg/m 2 /s. 

(8) Fire Locating and Modeling of Burning Emissions (FLAMBE) 

FLAMBE project was developed by the joint Navy, NASA, NOAA, and universities. It was used to investigate a consistent system of emissions (Reid et al., 2009). Hourly emissions from FLAMBE can be taken from the http://www.nrlmry.navy.mil/aerosol web/arctas flambe/data hourly/. The fire locations and emissions were computed based on the Global Land Cover Characterization Version 2 database (http://edc2.usgs.gov/glcc/glcc.php). This dataset contains hourly biomass burning of areas as well as carbon emissions in a certain location with the corresponding latitudes and longitudes. 

(9) Inter-comparison of global inventories 

The currently most used global inventories to assess the potential level of emissions from biomass open burning are summarized in Table 6.2.6. Actually, GFEDv3.1 and FINNv1 are the most frequently employed in regional and global air quality modeling, because of the available option in Goddard Earth Observing System (GEOS)-Chem, while GFAS is more designed for regional air quality forecast. Also, they offer the longest periods of data, i.e., 1997-Present for GFEDv3.1 and FINN and 2003-Present for GFAS. 265 

Table 6.2.6 Currently most used global inventories of biomass open burning emissions. Inventory Description 

GFASv1 MODIS 

FRP retrievals; Option in GEOS-Chem? : No 

Grid: 0.5º res. (v1.0); 0.1º res. (v1.1) 

Period: 2003-Present 

EFs: Andreae and Merlet (2001) 

GFEDv3.1 MODIS 

Burned area retrieval; Option in GEOS-Chem? : Yes 

Grid: 0.5º res. 

Period: 1997-Present 

EFs: Andreae and Merlet (2001) or Akagi et al. (2011) 

FINNv1 MODIS 

Active fire data retrieval; Option in GEOS-Chem? : Yes Grid: ≤ 1 km2 

Period: 1997-Present 

EFs: Akagi et al. (2011) 

GFAS provides global emissions from biomass burning to the other MACC (Monitoring Atmospheric Composition and Climate) services and to the general public. Emissions are calculated in real time and retrospectively from satellite-based observations of open fires. Major upgrades planned to be released in February/March 2014 include (1) Injection height daily data as provided by a Plume Rise Model, and (2) Statistical regression of the output when assimilating only Aqua or Terra observations, to preserve consistency with data obtained assimilating Aqua and Terra observations. GFAS enables to assess the seasonal variation of emissions in major regions of the world including North America, Central America, Southern Hemisphere America, Europe, Northern Hemisphere Africa, Southern Hemisphere Africa, Northern Hemisphere Asia, Southern Hemisphere Asia, Tropical Asia and Australia during 2003 to present. Figure 6.2.17 shows the daily variation of biomass burning activities observed during 2003-2014 over the Tropical Asia region, which includes Southeast Asia. 266 

Figure 6.2.17 Plots showing the daily development of the current fire activity compared to previous years. 

FINNv1 uses satellite observations of active fires and land cover, together with EFs and estimated fuel loadings to provide daily, highly resolved (1x1 km) open burning emissions estimates to be used in regional and global chemical transport models. FINNv1 provides daily, 1-km resolution, global estimates of the trace gas and particle emissions from open burning of biomass, which includes wildfire, agricultural fires, and prescribed burning and does not include biofuel use and trash burning. The EFs of different air pollutants of interest by vegetation types, which are incorporated in FINNv1 are shown in Table 6.2.7. 267 

Table 6.2.7 Land use/land cover classifications as assigned by the MODIS Land Cover Type, assigned generic land cover class, and EFs (g kg Biomass Burned −1 ) for the FINNv1 model. Sources of emission factors are differentiated by colors. (Wiedinmyer et al., 2011). 

The comparison of the annual average CO 2 emission estimated by FINNv1 and GFEDv3.1 is shown in Figure 6.2.18, which shows that FINNv1 predicts higher emissions in South America and Southeast Asia, whereas GFEDv3.1 produces higher estimates in Africa and boreal North America. The lower FINNv1 emission estimates in Africa could be the result of an underestimation of the area burned in this region where the assumed burnt area per hot spot could be too low for savannah fires. 

Figure 6.2.18 Annual average CO 2 emissions (2005–2009) for FINNv1 and GFEDv3.1 for different regions. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the annual estimates. 268 

Regarding GFED, it combines satellite information on fire activity and vegetation productivity to estimate gridded monthly burned area and fire emissions, as well as scalars that can be used to calculate higher temporal resolution emissions. In GFED v3.1, core datasets are monthly burned area, monthly emissions (carbon emissions as well as a suite of trace gas and aerosol emissions). Fields to distribute the monthly emissions to a daily time step, or a three-hourly time step using a mean diurnal cycle, are available. The current version of the burned area dataset is 4 (GFED4), while for emissions it is version 3 since version 4 will be released early 2014. 

Figure 6.2.19 Dominant fire type in each 0.5 ⁰ grid cell based on carbon emissions. Savanna fires include grassland fires; deforestation includes degradation. Woodland and savanna fires were separated based on the relative contributions from woody or herbaceous fuels to total emissions, respectively. 

Figure 6.2.19 shows dominant fire type in different regions of the world as captured by GFEDv3.1. It is noted that deforestation and agricultural burning are the major vegetation fires in the Northern Hemisphere of Asia. For the Equatorial region, in particular Indonesia, peat land fires are dominant. However, the uncertainty of the biomass burning emissions estimation by GFEDv3.1 for Asia may be high. This is mainly due to a lack of representative measurement sites in some regions as shown in Figure 6.2.20. 269 

Figure 6.2.20 Locations where simultaneous CO and CO 2 EFs were measured. Locations were stratified by biome (Biomass ecosystem) following A&M2001–2009; savanna and grassland (green), tropical forest (red), and extra-tropical forest (blue). Background map shows annual GFED3.1 fire emissions in g C m −2 year −1, averaged over 1997–2008, and plotted on a log scale. Field measurement locations (blue = extratropical forest, red = tropical forest, green = grassland and savanna fires) on top of mean annual GFED3 carbon emissions. Note that several important biomass burning regions such as Indonesia, Siberia, and woodland areas in Africa have received very little attention. (van Leeuwen and van der Werf, 2011). 

The inter-comparison of the three global biomass burning inventories underlines the followings: 

 Annual global fire emission estimates compared well between GFAS and GFED, while FINN was systematically about 30% lower; 

 Regionally, differences between GFAS and GFED can also be substantial; 

 Due to the higher sensitivity of active fire detection compared to burned area retrievals, GFAS and FINN are able to account for smaller fires than GFED; 

 GFAS uses biome-specific conversion factors, which were derived from a multi-annual fit to GFED estimates. 

6.2.3.3 State of biomass burning emissions in Asia 

Based on GFEDv3.1 data, the contribution of different regions of the world to the total global biomass burning emissions can be evaluated. Figure 6.2.21 shows the annual average emission of CO 2 (Tg) by regions during 1997-2010 using GFEDv3.1 data. The top three global biomass burning are Africa (52% of the total), followed by South America (16% of the total), and Asia (15% of the total), respectively. 270 

Figure 6.2.21 Annual emission of CO 2 (Tg/yr) by region averaged during 1997-2010 using GFEDv3.1 data. 

The yearly distribution (Figure 6.2.22) shows that the Asian and South American contributions may vary greatly year by year, while that from Africa is quite stable. 

Figure 6.2.22 Yearly emission of CO 2 (Tg) by region during 1997-2010 using GFEDv3.1 data. 

From Figure 6.2.23, it was found that after 1997, when the Asian CO 2 emission from biomass burning was about 3,600 Tg, the annual CO 2 emission never exceeded 1,600 Tg any more. The years 1998, 2002, and 2006 constitute the peak years after 1997, correlating well with the El Ninõ cycle in the region of Indonesia. 271 

Figure 6.2.23 Yearly emission of CO 2 (Tg) by region during 1997-2010 using GFEDv3.1 data. 

Using the annual average emission of CO 2 (Tg/yr) classified by country during 1997-2010 (Figure 6.2.24), it was found that the top three emitting countries in Asia are Indonesia (522 Tg yr -1 ), Myanmar (135 Tg yr -1 ), and Cambodia (72 Tg yr -1 ), which are all located in Southeast Asia (SEA). 

Figure 6.2.24 Annual average emission of CO 2 (Tg) by country during 1997-2010 using GFEDv3.1 data. 

Focusing on the biomass burning activities in SEA using carbon emissions data from GFEDv3.1 as an indicator, it is observed that C emissions from biomass burning in SEA during 1997-2010 are dominated by the emissions from Indonesia, especially in the peak years, i.e., 1998, 2002 and 2006 (Figure 6.2.25). It is noted that the year 2009 can be considered as a peak year for Indonesia, and that the emissions from Myanmar have an increasing trend since 2001 with peak years in 2004, 2007 and 2010. 272 

Figure 6.2.25 Yearly emission of C (Tg) by country during 1997-2010 using GFEDv3.1 data. 

Classified fire types in each country of SEA following the GFEDv3.1 method are reported in Figure 6.2.26. It can be observed that there is a clear distinction of fire type contribution between Southern and Northern SEA. Indeed, in the Southern SEA including Brunei, Indonesia and Malaysia, there is a significant share of peat fire, especially in Indonesia and Brunei; while in northern SEA including Cambodia, Laos PDR, Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam, deforestation constitutes the most dominant type, especially in Lao PDR and Myanmar 

Figure 6.2.26 Fire type contribution (Per Mille) by country in SEA during 1997-2010 using GFEDv3.1 data. 

Focusing on CO, one of the major air pollutants emitted from biomass burning, and for which biomass burning represents the largest global source, it can be noted that its yearly emission varies between the maximum of 337 Tg CO observed in 1997 and the minimum of 12 Tg CO in 2000, as shown in Figure 6.2.27. Also, it was found that the CO emission is well correlated with the biomass burning activities 273 

in Indonesia, where peat fires are dominating. 

Figure 6.2.27 Emission of CO (Tg/yr) from biomass burning in SEA during 1997-2010 using GFEDv3.1 data. 

Table 6.2.7 Comparison between biomass burning and anthropogenic emissions in SEA. 

A comparison between CO and BC emissions from biomass burning estimated using GFEDv3.1 and from anthropogenic sources as inventoried by Regional Emission inventory in ASia (REAS) version 2.1 for the period 2000 - 2008 is reported in Table 6.2.7. For CO, the anthropogenic emissions increased progressively year by year, ranging between 36 and 48 Tg per year, while the biomass burning emission coincided with the peak years in Indonesia, i.e., 95 Tg in 2002 and 123 Tg in 2006, respectively. For BC, the same pattern as in the case of CO is observed, i.e., emissions from biomass burning were higher than those from anthropogenic sources for the peak years in Indonesia (369 Gg in 2002 and 470 Gg in 2006, respectively). However, the increase in BC is smaller than in CO. It should be noted that the anthropogenic emissions of BC increased slightly year by year during 2000-2008, ranging between 315 Gg in 2000 and 371 Gg in 2006. 274 

The review of the state of biomass burning emissions in Asia using GFEDv3.1 data showed that they are dominated by the emissions occurred in SEA, with Indonesia as the leading emitter followed by Myanmar. It also revealed the following key issues: 

 GFEDv3.1 enabled to assess the emissions from biomass burning in SEA, in particular the inter-annual variability; 

 Uncertainties subsist and are still high due to lack of country/region specific data on biomass burning emission parameterization, i.e., type of vegetation, combustion completeness, and EFs. 

 Difficulty of GFEDv3.1 in detecting and estimating small fires, and hence there is a need of specific measurements, especially for agricultural burnings, which have significant contribution in China and Northern SEA countries, e.g., Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam. 

 EFs of different air pollutants from biomass burning vary substantially in time and space, even within a single biome; in addition, it is unknown whether the available field measurement locations provide a representative sample for the various biomes. 

 Upcoming products (e.g., GFASv1.2 and GFEDv4.0) should help improving the quality of fire detection, and local haze forecasting. 

6.2.3.4 Research priorities and recommendations 

In order to better understand the state of biomass burning emissions in East Asia, especially in SEA, and to improve our assessment of their impacts on air quality and climate change, the following research priorities can be outlined: 

 Field campaigns/experiments for measurement of specific parameters of fires occurred in SEA should be set-up, whether with national or international support; 

 From a global modeling perspective, future measurement campaigns could be more beneficial if measurements are made over the full fire season, and if relations between ambient conditions and EFs can both be monitored; 

 Development of the Asian database of biomass burning emissions vs. type of biomes and fires, combustion completeness, and environmental conditions, should be set as a short-term target to support the analysis of data collected from field campaigns/experiments vs. data from literature. To implement the above-mentioned research priorities, it is recommended to develop the following: 

 Database sharing through regional network, e.g., EANET, to support the development of the Asian database of biomass burning emissions; 

 Support researchers in the SEA region to get involved in international networks on regional/global air quality monitoring and modeling, and impacts of biomass burning on air quality and climate change, e.g., IGAC-IBBI. 275 

6.2.4 Volcano 6.2.4.1 Introduction 

Volcanoes emit many compounds, but an important gaseous air pollutant is SO 2 . Most volcanoes are located along tectonic plate boundaries where anthropogenic SO 2 emissions are not so significant (Diehl et al., 2012; Andres and Kasgnoc, 1998). Figure 6.2.28 shows the location of volcanoes in East Asia based on the AEROCOM (Aerosol Comparisons between Observations and Models) hindcast emission inventories (see below). Plenty of volcanoes exist especially around Indonesia, Japan, and the Philippines. There are only limited comprehensive SO 2 emission inventories for volcano. Andres and Kasgnoc (1998) developed a time-averaged inventory subaerial (directly venting to the atmosphere) volcanic SO 2 emissions. This inventory contributed to the Global Emissions InitiAtive (GEIA) version 1. However, the averaged period is too old (1970s to 1997) if data are used for comparison with recent anthropogenic emissions because large eruptions occurred intermittently after 1997 in East Asia. The AEROCOM project is an open international initiative of scientists interested in the advancement of the understanding of the global aerosol and its impact on climate. In the project, AEROCOM hindcast emission inventories were developed including SO 2 emissions from volcanoes from 1979 to 2009. This inventory will be introduced in the next section based on the information obtained from http://aerocom.met.no/download/emissions/AEROCOM_HC and READMEs described by Thomas Diehl. 

Figure 6.2.28 Location of volcanoes showing annual SO 2 emissions for 2009 in Tg yr -1 276 

6.2.4.2 AEROCOM hindcast emission inventory 

The AEROCOM hindcast emission inventory provides volcanic SO 2 emissions for all days from 1979 to 2009 for all volcanoes with the historical eruptions listed in the Global Volcanism Program’s (GVP’s) database provided by the Smithsonian Institution. Subglacial and submarine volcanoes are excluded. In this database, volcanoes are assigned post-eruptive, extra-eruptive, and pre-eruptive degassing rates depending on their eruptive state. For 49 volcanoes which erupted SO 2 continuously during the early 1970s and 1997, SO 2 emission rates estimated by Andres and Kasgnoc (1998) were used. When the SO 2 data were available from the TOMS and OMI instrument or COSPEC measurements, values were updated. Where data from instruments were not available for days of eruptive periods, average daily emission rates were computed from either the mass of the ejected magma and intra-eruptive degassing, or from the VSI (Volcanic SO 2 Index) corresponding to the VEI (Volcanic Explosivity Index) listed in the GVP table for the eruption. Basically, the plume height is derived from the VEI for days with SO 2 data from instruments or from the mass weighted average of the VEI-based plume height and the emission height for intra-eruptive degassing assumed to be at the elevation of the crater. Figure 6.2.29 shows the time series of SO 2 emissions from volcanoes in Indonesia, Japan, Philippines, and the rest of Asia estimated in AEROCOM hindcast emission inventory. For reference, anthropogenic SO 2 emissions of Indonesia and Japan obtained from Regional Emission inventory in ASia (REAS) 2.1 (Kurokawa et al., 2013) are also plotted. The astonishingly high peak in 1991 was caused by the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in the Philippines. The impact of this eruption on climate and stratospheric O 3 was considered to be the largest in the 20 th century (McCormick et al., 1995). The second largest peak in Figure 6.2.29 is by the Miyake-jima eruption in 2000. An et al. (2003) estimated using model simulations that, in September and October in 2000, SO 2 and sulfate concentrations in the surrounding areas downwind in the planetary boundary layer were increased by up to 300% and 150%, respectively, and total sulfur deposition amounts per month were also increased by up to 300%. Large SO 2 emissions from Miyake-jima were estimated to be continued longer than the Mt. Pinatubo emission. Both in Indonesia and Japan, total SO 2 emissions from volcanoes were much higher than those from anthropogenic sources. However, because of difficulty of monitoring and lack of information, uncertainties of volcanic SO 2 emissions are considered to be large. In addition, volcanoes, especially in the case of large eruptions, loft SO 2 high into the troposphere and stratosphere and transport over larger areas, which is not the case for anthropogenic emissions. Therefore, influences of SO 2 emissions from volcanoes should be taken into account carefully. 277 

Figure 6.2.29 Time series of volcanic SO 2 emissions in Indonesia (IND), Japan (JPN), Philippines (PHL), and the rest of Asia (OTH) with anthropogenic SO 2emissions of Indonesia and Japan estimated in REAS 2.1. 6.3 Anthropogenic Emissions 6.3.1 Introduction 

The Asian region has shown remarkable economic growth in the last three decades, which leads to large increased demand for energy, industrial products, infrastructure, etc. For example, in China, total fuel consumption increased about six times from 1980 to 2008 (Ohara et al., 2007; Kurokawa et al., 2013). As a result, Asia becomes the largest emitter region of air pollutants over the world. On the other hand, emission control technologies have been becoming introduced in Asian countries and thus, emissions of air pollutants and greenhouse gases in Asia show dramatic and complicated spatial and temporal variations. Therefore, estimating anthropogenic emissions in Asia is significantly important for understanding and controlling not only the regional but also the global atmospheric environment. Traditionally, anthropogenic emissions are estimated using a so-called bottom-up approach. Generally, emissions from stationary sources are calculated by multiplying the activity data (i.e., fuel consumption, production amount of industrial products, number of livestock, etc.) and corresponding emission factors and removal efficiencies. For road transport, emissions are estimated using number of vehicles, fuel consumption or annual distance traveled, and corresponding emission factors. SO 2emissions from combustion and metal smelting are estimated using information of the sulfur content of fuels or ores and the amount of sulfur removed (such as by flue-gas desulfurization (FGD)) or retained in bottom ash or in products). For more details about methodology to develop bottom-up emission inventory, see UNEP (2013). Another approach to estimate emissions is using inverse modeling techniques with observation data, in which emissions are optimized in order to reduce the differences between simulated and observed data. In particular, satellite observation data are suitable for the Asian region where spatial coverage of monitoring sites is poor. Recently, NO x emissions are often derived from inverse model calculations with satellite observed NO 2 vertical column densities (Martin et al., 2006; Mijling et al., 2012; Stavrakou et al., 2013). Inverse modeling is a powerful 

SO 2 [Tg/yr] 278 

method to evaluate and improve bottom-up emission inventories. For example, emission factors of CO in China were revised based on the results of inverse modeling studies (Streets et al., 2006). In this section, trends, current status, and uncertainties of emissions of air pollutants and greenhouse gases are described. Main focuses of this report are on emissions in East Asia including both North and Southeast Asia. Historical trends of global emissions are also briefly addressed. In order to keep consistency in discussion for trends and uncertainties, comprehensive Asian bottom-up emission inventories (TRACE-P, INTEX-B, REAS1.1 and 2.1, and Wang et al. (2014)) and global one (EDGAR 4.2) are mainly reviewed with additional studies for each species (see Table 6.3.1 for abbreviations). For references for discussion of uncertainties, Table 6.3.2 presents the uncertainties of emissions in China and developing countries except for China and India (hereafter OTHERs) estimated in REAS 2.1. Gaseous species (SO 2 , NO x, NMVOCs, NH 3 , and Methane (CH 4 )) are described from sections 6.3.2 to 6.3.7. Section 6.3.8 describes primary PM which includes fine and coarse PM with diameters less than or equal to 10 μm/2.5 μm (PM 10 /PM 2.5 ), BC or elemental carbon, and OC. For air toxics, sections 6.3.9 and 6.3.10 reviews emissions of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and Mercury. Section 6.3.11 presents a summary for anthropogenic emissions. 279 

Table 6.3.1 Abbreviations of emission inventories referred in section 6.3 

Abbreviations Description Reference EDGAR 4.2 Emission Database for Global Atmospheric Research version 4.2 http://edgar.jrc.ec.europa.eu/overview.php?v=42 EC-JRC/PBL, 2011 GAINS Greenhouse Gas and Air Pollution Interaction and Synergies Klimont et al., 2009 INTEX-B Emission inventory developed for Intercontinental Chemical Transport Experiment-Phase B (INTEX-B) mission http://cgrer.uiowa.edu/projects/emmison-data Zhang et al., 2009 REAS 1.11 Regional Emission inventory in ASia version 1.11 http://www.jamstec.go.jp/frsgc/research/d4/emission.htm Ohara et al., 2007 REAS 2.1 Regional Emission inventory in Asia version 2.1 http://www.nies.go.jp/REAS/ Kurokawa et al., 2013 TRACE-P Emission inventory developed for Transport and Chemical Evolution over the Pacific (TRACE-P) and Asia Pacific Regional Aerosol Experiment (ACE-Asia) missions Streets et al., 2003 

Table 6.3.2 Uncertainties of emissions in China and OTHERs * estimated in REAS 2.1 

Emission Sources SO 2 NO x CO NMVOCs PM 10 PM 2.5 BC OC China Power plants ±41 ±68 ±55 ±51 ±92 ±91 ±72 ±69 Industry ±50 ±60 ±123 ±118 ±146 ±169 ±172 ±207 Road transport ±43 ±48 ±59 ±90 ±89 ±89 ±111 ±121 Other transport ±59 ±86 ±133 ±114 ±185 ±168 ±197 ±190 Domestic ±60 ±99 ±174 ±229 ±244 ±257 ±297 ±316 Solvent use 0 0 0 ±127 0 0 0 0Total ±31 ±37 ±86 ±78 ±114 ±133 ±176 ±271 OTHERs Power plants ±47 ±63 ±104 ±76 ±65 ±67 ±114 ±135 Industry ±51 ±64 ±167 ±157 ±222 ±217 ±235 ±268 Road transport ±52 ±69 ±103 ±119 ±100 ±100 ±134 ±126 Other transport ±63 ±91 ±126 ±140 ±185 ±187 ±222 ±221 Domestic ±80 ±163 ±208 ±257 ±302 ±304 ±351 ±354 Solvent use 0 0 0 ±154 0 0 0 0Total ±35 ±47 ±131 ±111 ±194 ±208 ±257 ±286 * OTHERs means developing countries in Asia except for China and India. 280 

Figure 6.3.1 Time series of contributions from each region to global emissions of SO 2 ,NO x , NMVOCs, CO, NH 3 , CH 4 , and PM 10 in EDGAR 4.2 during 1970 and 2008. 281 

6.3.2 SO 2

The largest source of anthropogenic SO 2 emissions is fossil fuel combustion, especially from high sulfur containing fuels such as coal and heavy oil. Other major sources are industrial processes such as metal smelting and oil refinery. Contributions from both fossil fuel and biofuel combustion in small combustors are relatively small. 

6.3.2.1 Emissions in East Asia 

Figure 6.3.2 shows SO 2 emissions during 1980-2010 in China and East Asia (including Northeast and Southeast Asia) outside China (hereafter OEA) estimated in several published research papers. The trends of SO 2 emissions in East Asia are dominated by China. In China, SO 2 emissions increased monotonically from 1980 to the middle of the 1990s and then decreased slightly until the early 2000s. After that, emissions increased again drastically but many inventories indicated that the emissions began to decrease after 2006 because of the increasing penetration of FGD to large power plants in China (Lu et al., 2010). Zhao et al. (2013) and Wang et al. (2014) estimated decreased ratios of SO 2emissions in China from 2005 to 2010 about 11% and 15%, respectively. However, Chinese SO 2emissions in 2010 are still much higher than those in 1980 because of the strong increase in fuel consumption. In OEA, emission growth during the same period is relatively small. REAS 2.1 indicated that growth rate between 2000 and 2008 in Northeast Asia was -12% and, on the other hand, that in Southeast Asia it was +13%. Decrease of emissions in Northeast Asia outside China between 2000 and 2008 are also shown in other species (e.g., NO x , aerosols, etc.) in REAS 2.1 due to the implementation of emission regulation measures in Japan and the Republic of Korea. Several studies estimated uncertainties of SO 2 emissions in Asia. For China, TRACE-P, INTEX-B, and REAS 2.1 estimated 13%, 12%, and 31%, respectively. In general, uncertainties of SO 2 emissions are smaller than other species because a major source is perfect combustion of fossil fuels where uncertainties of activity data and emission factors are relatively small. Particularly in case of SO 2,emission factors strongly rely on sulfur contents of fuels which are relatively well examined. Therefore, TRACE-P, INTEX-B, and REAS 2.1 all estimated small uncertainties among all air pollutants. For other countries, TRACE-P estimated 9% for Japan and 27% for Southeast Asia. REAS 2.1 estimated 35% for OTHERs. Uncertainties of emissions in developed countries are smaller than developing countries because developed countries have much available and reliable information for estimating emissions compared to developing countries. On the other hand, recently the number of studies for emission inventories in China has been increasing, but that for Southeast Asian countries it has been limited. Therefore, uncertainties of emissions in Southeast Asian countries are relatively large. In general, this is a common tendency for all species. 

6.3.2.2 Global Emissions 

Figure 6.3.1 shows the contributions from each region to global emissions during 1970-2008 estimated in EDGAR 4.2. In 1970, the majority of emissions were from Europe, the US, and Canada. SO 2emissions in these regions began to decrease drastically after 1990 and their relative ratios were decreased from about 70% in 1970 to about 20% in 2008 due to the emission control strategy in these regions. On the contrary, emissions from other regions were increased especially in China after early 282 

2000. Relative contribution from East Asia to global total emissions is more than 40% in 2008. For global SO 2 emissions, international shipping is also the major source. Klimont et al. (2013) estimated that emissions from international shipping doubled from 1990 to 2010 and their relative ratios to global emissions were also increased from about 6% to 13%. Therefore, agreements conducted under the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, which limits on sulfur in shipping fuels, must be implemented successfully. For longer historical emissions, the reader is also referred to Lamarque et al. (2010). 

Figure 6.3.2 Time series of SO 2 emissions in China and East Asia outside China 6.3.3 NO ｘ

Anthropogenic NO x emissions are mainly from fossil fuel combustions at high temperature. Major sectors are large power generation facilities and industrial plants, and road transport, especially from diesel vehicles. Similar to SO 2 , emissions from small combustion facilities in residential sectors are relatively small. 

6.3.3.1 East Asian Emissions 

NO x emissions in China grew monotonically from 1980 to 2010 and in particular, growth rates after the early 2000s became dramatically large as shown in Figure 6.3.3. There are several regulation measures for NO x emissions in China such as low NO x burner in large power plants and vehicle emission control technologies or catalyzers. However, reductions of NO x emissions by such measures were limited compared to those of SO 2 by FGD (Zhang et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2013). Therefore, rapid emission growth during the 2000s almost directly reflects the economic growth and fuel consumption increase. Chinese NO x emissions in 2010 are about four times larger than those in 1980. Therefore, the progressive end-of-pipe control strategy as well as the control policies in China’s 12 th Five-Year Plan and recently released emission standards for various industrial sources should be successfully implemented (Wang et al., 2014). For OEA, in general, NO x emissions also increased between 1980 and 2010. Although NO x growth rates are smaller in OEA than in China and results in EDGAR 4.2 are almost constant after 1995, NO x emissions in OEA nearly doubled from 1980 to 2008. In REAS 2.1, similar to the case of SO 2 , emissions in Northeast Asia outside China decreased by 14% but those in Southeast Asia increased rapidly by 56% from 2000 to 2008. The large growth of NO xemissions in Southeast Asia is mainly due to road transport emissions. Major emission sources for NO x are perfect combustions of fossil fuels and thus, uncertainties of emissions are relatively small because of the similar reasons for SO 2 . Actually, TRACE-P, INTEX-B, and REAS 2.1 estimated uncertainties for China about 23%, 31%, and 37%, respectively, and these are   

> SO 2in China [Tg/yr] SO 2in EA outside China [Tg/yr] 283

smaller than other species such as CO and aerosols (see following sub-sections). Uncertainty for Southeast Asia in TRACE-P is higher (92%) and that for OTHERs in REAS 2.1 is also larger (47%) compared to China. This tendency is also similar to SO 2 .

6.3.3.2 Global Emissions 

In 1970, about 60% of NO x emissions in 1970 were from Europe, the US, and Canada, and only about 10% were from East Asia. Emissions in Europe and North America gradually decreased from 1970 to 2008 and those in East Asia increased during the same period especially after the early 2000s in China. As a result, emissions in East Asia and Europe, the US, and Canada were almost comparable (about 30%). Reductions of NO x emissions in Western countries were smaller than those of SO 2 and thus, global NO x emissions were also increased by about 60% from 1970 to 2008. For more long-term trends, please refer Lamarque et al. (2010). 

Figure 6.3.3 Time series of NO x emissions in China and East Asia outside China 6.3.4 Non-methane volatile organic compounds 

NMVOCs are emitted from a variety of sources including fuel combustion, solvents and paint use, industrial processes, and energy production and distribution. For stationary combustion, in general, contribution from biofuel usage in the residential sector is relatively large in developing countries. On the other hand, the relative ratio of emissions from solvents and paint use is larger in developed countries. For road transport, NMVOCs are emitted from both combustion processes (exhaust tailpipe emissions) and evaporation. If exhaust tailpipe emission controls are efficient, such as in developed countries, evaporative emissions can be a major source in the road transport sector. 

6.3.4.1 East Asian Emissions 

Time series of NMVOCs emissions in China show similar trends as NO x emissions although there are relatively large discrepancies between results using several inventories, as reported in Figure 6.3.4. There was a monotonic increase of NMVOCs emissions in China during 1980-2010 and most of the results show larger growth rates after 2000. In the 1980s and 1990s, a majority of emissions were from coal and biofuel combustion in the domestic sector (Klimont et al., 2002). Recently, contributions from road transport (including evaporation) and solvent use (including paint use) are rapidly growing in China (Wei et al., 2008). In Southeast Asia, both domestic and road transport emissions increased, but recently, contribution from road transport grew faster. As for other Northeast Asian countries, in REAS 2.1, emissions in Japan decreased almost constantly from 2000 to 2008. On the other hand, emissions in the Republic of Korea increased slightly during the same period due to solvent and paint     

> NO xChina [Tg/yr] NO xin EA outside China [Tg/yr] 284

use. Uncertainties for China estimated by TRACE-P, INTEX-B, and REAS 2.1 are 59%, 68%, and 78%, respectively. TRACE-P estimated much higher uncertainty for Southeast Asia (218%) and in REAS 2.1, uncertainty for OTHERs is estimated as 111%. Therefore, uncertainties for NMVOCs emissions are higher than those for SO 2 and NO x. One reason, especially in developing countries is that biofuel combustion is a major source for NMVOCs emissions. In general, uncertainties of emission factors for imperfect combustion are large. In addition, biofuel has less consistency in quality compared to fossil fuels and thus activity data (consumption amount) as well as emission factors have larger uncertainties. Another reason is that NMVOCs emissions have a variety of evaporative sources. They require different emission factors and corresponding activity data, but information is limited in Asian countries. For NMVOCs, uncertainty is important not only for total NMVOCs but also for individual species especially for atmospheric chemistry modeling studies. To mitigate this problem, Li et al. (2014) developed a detailed framework to speciate NMVOCs emissions to several chemical mechanisms often used in chemical transport models. However, Asian specific information is limited and further local measurements and analysis are needed. 

6.3.4.2 Global Emissions 

Emissions from Europe, the US, and Canada were more than half of the global total in 1970 and decreased especially after 1990 until about 25% in 2008. These reductions were compensated by constant growth of emissions in East Asia and other regions. Trend of global total NMVOCs emissions during 1970-2008 are relatively small and the growth rate between 1970 and 2008 was about 15%. Lamarque et al. (2010) gives more long-term emission trends for NMVOCs. 

Figure 6.3.4 Time series of NMVOCs emissions in China and East Asia outside China 6.3.5 CO 

A major anthropogenic CO emission source is incomplete combustion of fossil fuels and biofuels in the residential sector, small industrial boilers, and road vehicles. Emissions from large power plants are basically negligible because of their higher combustion efficiency. In addition to fuel combustion, industrial process, especially in the iron and steel industry, is also a major CO emission source. In developing countries, the majority of emissions are from stationary (non-mobile) sources, but in developed countries, contribution from the road transport sector is much higher. 

> NMVOC in EA outside China [Tg/yr] NMVOC in China [Tg/yr] 285

6.3.5.1 East Asian Emissions 

There are relatively large discrepancies in time series of CO emissions in China between several inventories as shown in Figure 6.3.5. Emissions of TRACE-P in 2000 are smaller than REAS, but results of Streets et al. (2006) which is the revised version of TRACE-P inventory are almost the same as the estimates of REAS. Streets et al. (2006) improved the emissions from cement kilns, brick kilns, and the iron and steel industry. Emissions of EDGAR 4.2 were about half of REAS inventory, but their trends between 1980 and 2008 are similar to those of REAS, indicating that the applied emission factor derived from common European techniques does not seem valid for Asian technology. Zhao et al. (2013) estimated almost stable CO emissions from 2006 to 2008, but values started to increase after that. In REAS 2.1, the growth rate of CO emissions in China between 2000 and 2008 is about 42% mainly due to emissions related to the production of steel, coke, cement, bricks, and similar commodities. Values and trends of CO emissions in OEA vary in each inventory. However, REAS 2.1, TRACE-P and INTEX-B estimate very similar values. In REAS 2.1, the majority of emissions in Southeast Asia was from biofuel combustion in the domestic sector and it showed an increasing trend. Furthermore, the growth rate of road transport emissions was much higher than in EDGARv4.2. For Japan and the Republic of Korea, emissions monotonically decreased from 2000 to 2008 by 28% and 23%, respectively, and were mostly attributed to road vehicles. Uncertainties of CO emissions in China were estimated as 156%, 70%, and 86% by TRACE-P, INTEX-B, and REAS 2.1, respectively. CO emissions in INTEX-B and REAS 2.1 were significantly improved because studies of CO emission factors in China were performed such as Streets et al. (2006). TRACE-P estimated uncertainty for Southeast Asia as 214% and REAS 2.1 calculated uncertainty for OTHERs as 131%. In general, compared to SO 2 and NO x , whose major source is also fuel combustion, uncertainties of CO emissions are larger because emission factors are variable by several orders of magnitude, depending on technology and condition and procedure of combustion, but smaller than those for primary particulate matter. 

6.3.5.2 Global Emissions 

Similar to the case of SO 2 and PM, emissions in Europe, the US, and Canada are decreasing and those in China and others are increasing, but their variability is relatively modest. As a result, global CO emissions gradually increased from 1970 to 1990 and began to decrease from the middle of the 1990s. Then, global CO emissions started to increase from 2000 onwards, reflecting the contributions from China mainly. For emissions before 1970, the reader is also referred to Lamarque et al. (2010). 

Figure 6.3.5 Time series of CO emissions in China and East Asia outside China 

> CO in EA outside China [Tg/yr] CO in China [Tg/yr] 286

6.3.6 NH 3

The majority of anthropogenic NH 3 emissions are from agricultural activities such as application of mineral N fertilizer and manure management of livestock. Unlike other species, humans and animals are also a source of NH 3 emissions. Especially in countries without sewage systems, contribution from human excreta is large. In addition, human respiration and perspiration has somewhat contribution for whole region. For combustion, emissions from fossil fuels are small but those from biofuels are relatively large. Other sources such as plants for fertilizer, road vehicles equipped with a three-way catalyst, and denitrification at combustion became important in the latest decade. These are generally emission sources in developed countries. 

6.3.6.1 East Asian Emissions 

Figure 6.3.6 shows that NH 3 emissions increased almost monotonically from 1980 to 2008 both in China and OEA although there are discrepancies in emission amounts between each inventory. Growth rates between 2000 and 2008 are 18% for China, -2% for Northeast Asia outside China, and 19% for Southeast Asia. Compared to other air pollutants, growth rates are relatively small and values were determined by those of agricultural emissions which comprised a large proportion of NH 3 emissions in Asia. In REAS 2.1, year-to-year variations in China and OEA were generally controlled by emissions from fertilizer applications. Emissions from latrines made considerable contributions to total emissions in REAS 2.1 (about 13%). For uncertainties, TRACE-P estimated 53% and 87% for China and Southeast Asia, respectively. In TRACE-P, values are larger than those for SO 2 and NO x , but smaller than those for primary particulate matter. It should be noted that these uncertainties were estimated for total annual emissions. However, seasonality is important for NH 3 emissions and it is difficult to collect corresponding information such as monthly amount of applied fertilizer, etc. Therefore, uncertainties for monthly emissions are expected to be higher than those for annual total. REAS 2.1 estimated uncertainties for NH 3 emissions without those from agricultural activities. Values for China and OTHERs were about 150%. Major factors for these uncertainties were activity data and emission factors for biofuel combustions and latrines. 

6.3.6.2 Global Emissions 

Trends of global NH 3 emissions are different from those of other species. Emissions from Europe are almost constant from 1970 to the late 1980s and then began to decrease. On the other hand, emissions from other regions generally show increasing trends. Growth rates of China and Others (including Central and South America, Africa, and South Asia) are larger than those of the US, Canada, and East Asia outside China (including Southeast Asia). As a result, global NH 3 emissions are increased almost monotonically from 1970 to 2008. With respect to growth rates from each sector from 1970 to 2008, the value of road transport is more than 300% which was much larger than that of agricultural sources (about 100%) although the relative ratio of emissions from road transport to total in 2008 was about 1%. Lamarque et al. (2010) provides for longer historical NH 3 emissions. 287 

Figure 6.3.6 Time series of NH 3 emissions in China and East Asia outside China 6.3.7 CH 4

Compared to other species, methane has another set of emission sources. The majority of emissions are from agricultural activities such as livestock enteric fermentation, rice cultivation, and manure management of livestock. For fossil fuel related sources, fugitive emissions are important such as from coal mining, production, processing, distribution, and storage of oil and gas. For coal mining, in general, emission factors are country-specific and different between underground and surface mining (Bibler et al., 1998; Cheng, et al., 2011). Methane emissions also result from the decay of organic waste in municipal solid waste landfills and wastewater treatment systems. Methane directly influences the climate system as a greenhouse gas and also has indirect impacts on air pollution and climate change as a precursor of tropospheric ozone. 

6.3.7.1 East Asian Emissions 

Figure 6.3.7 shows that results of REAS 2.1 and EDGAR 4.2 and those of REAS 1.11 and TRACE-P agree very well both for China and OEA. Although differences between EDGAR 4.2 and REAS 1.11 are large, trends of their emissions from 1980 to 2000 are very similar. In REAS 2.1, emissions in China gradually increased from 1980 to the middle of the 1990s and values were almost constant until the early 2000s. Then emissions increased dramatically mainly due to a rapid increase of emissions from coal mining, mostly of which is underground mining where the CH 4 emission factor is large. In 2000, emissions from coal mining are smaller than those from agricultural activities such as enteric fermentation of livestock and rice cultivation, but they became much larger in 2008. In Southeast Asia, the majority of emissions are still from agricultural activities, but REAS 2.1 estimated relatively large contributions as fugitive emissions from fossil fuels. In Japan and the Republic of Korea, the majority of CH 4 emissions in 2008 were from solid waste disposal and waste water treatment. Inter-annual variation of total CH 4 emissions in these countries was relatively small. TRACE-P estimated uncertainties of CH 4 emissions in China and Southeast Asia as 71% and 95%, respectively. Similar to NH 3 , these values were larger than SO 2 and NO 2 , but smaller than particulate matter. On the other hand, uncertainties for CH 4 emissions except for those from agricultural activities estimated in REAS 2.1 were 211% and 204% for China and OTHERs, respectively. These large uncertainties were mainly caused by fugitive emissions which should be estimated using more detailed methodology. However, it is not easy to collect accurate activity data and related information in the Asian region.   

> NH 3in China [Tg/yr] NH 3in EA outside China [Tg/yr] 288

6.3.7.2 Global Emissions 

European emissions increased from 1970 to around 1990 and then turned to decrease until 2000. Trends of emissions from the US, Canada, and East Asia outside China are very small and emissions from “Others” were increased almost monotonically from 1970 to 2008. Emissions in China gradually increased from 1970 to the early 2000s and then growth rate increased rapidly due to the emissions from coal mining as described above. As a result, global CH 4 emissions increased from 1970 to around 1990 and were almost constant until the early 2000s and then increased again rapidly. 

Figure 6.3.7 Time series of CH 4 emissions in China and East Asia outside China 6.3.8 Primary Particulate Matter 

Anthropogenic primary PM refers to particles emitted into the air directly from sources such as combustion of fuels and other materials. The major sources of PM are combustions of both fossil fuels and biofuels in power plants and industrial plants, on- and off-road vehicles, residential usages and industrial processes. PM emissions are quite dependent on the combustion and control technologies and fuel types. Therefore, contributions from each sector are different between developing and developed countries. In this sub-section, fine and coarse PM with diameters less than or equal to 10 μm/2.5 μm (PM 10 /PM 2.5 ) are described, as well as their organic components (BC and OC). 

6.3.8.1 PM 10 and PM 2.5 (1) East Asian Emissions 

Figure 6.3.8 shows time series of PM 10 and PM 2.5 emissions in China and East Asia outside China. It is indicated that trends of PM 10 and PM 2.5 were generally similar. In China, emissions increased until the middle of the 1990s because of economic growth accompanied with the increased consumption of fossil and biofuels. Then, emissions were decreased in the early 2000s because of gradual penetration of abatement equipment. Then, PM 10 and PM 2.5 emissions began to increase again because of rapid growth of energy demand and production of cement, steel, etc., which surpassed the effect of control technology (Lei et al., 2011). On the other hand, recent researches estimated decreasing trends from 2005 to 2010 insisting that emission controls in cement production and power plants were more effective (Zhao et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2014). But still the cement industry and residential sector especially by biofuel combustion are major emission sources in China (Lei et al., 2011; Zhao et al., 2013). For Southeast Asia, REAS 2.1 found that growth rates of PM 10 and PM 2.5 emissions in Southeast Asia between 2000 and 2008 were relatively small. Increased emissions from fuel   

> CH 4in China [Tg/yr] CH 4in EA outside China [Tg/yr] 289

combustion are partly cancelled out by the removal of emissions. In Southeast Asia, the largest contributing country was Indonesia and Vietnam ranked second. The majority of emissions in both countries were from the domestic sector, and in Vietnam, the largest contribution was from biofuel combustion in the residential sector. For Northeast Asia outside China, emissions showed decreasing trends. In Japan, PM 10 and PM 2.5 emissions decreased almost constantly in response to trends in road transport emissions which were reduced by filters with high removal efficiency. INTEX-B estimated uncertainties for PM 10 and PM 2.5 emissions in China as about 130% and in REAS 2.1, uncertainties for PM 10 and PM 2.5 were estimated as 114% and 133%, respectively. Compared to gaseous species (not only SO 2 and NO x but also CO and NMVOC), uncertainties for PM 10 and PM 2.5 were larger. This is because major emission sources for PMs are imperfect combustion of fossil fuels and biofuels. For industrial process emissions, although uncertainties for emission factors for PMs are also large, corresponding activity data such as production amounts of major industrial commodity are more accurate than biofuel consumption data. Therefore, the largest uncertainty is expected to be from biofuel combustion. Actually, REAS 2.1 estimated uncertainties for PM 10 and PM 2.5 as 194% and 208% for OTHERs. These are because for these countries, relative contributions of emissions from biofuel combustion were larger than those for China. 

(2) Global Emissions 

Figure 6.3.1 shows time series of global emissions of PM 10 based on country tables in EDGAR 4.2. General features of contributions from each region to global total PM 10 emissions between 1970 and 2008 are similar to those for SO 2 . Emissions in Europe, the US and Canada were decreased dramatically during these periods. Emission amounts in 2008 are about a quarter of those in 1970. On the other hand, emissions in other regions increased gradually except for China between the middle of the 1990s and early 2000s. Reflecting these variations, global total PM 10 emissions increased from 1970 to the middle of the 1980s and then decreased until the early 2000s and began to increase again rapidly. 

Figure 6.3.8 Time series of PM 10 and PM 2.5 emissions in China and East Asia outside China 6.3.8.2 Black Carbon 

Emissions of BC or elemental carbon also strongly depend on the process of combustion and contributions from each sector are different between developing and developed countries. In developing countries, dominant sources of BC emissions are residential combustion and small industry such as brick kilns. In particular, less efficient combustion of biofuel and coal is the major source. On        

> PM 2.5 /PM 10 in China [Tg/yr] PM 10 /PM 2.5 in EA outside China [Tg/yr] 290

the other hand, in developed countries, emissions are dominated by transport and industry sectors especially by on- and off-road diesel vehicles. BC is a primary component of PM in air pollution and also has a large warming impact on climate. Therefore, mitigation of BC emissions is considered to be effective both for reducing the adverse impacts on human health and slowing the rate of climate change (Bond et al., 2013). 

(1) East Asian Emissions 

Figure 6.3.9 shows that BC emissions in China increased from 1980 to the 1990s, decreased in the late 1990s and then began to grow again rapidly. These features are similar to those of PM 10 and PM 2.5 emissions described in section 6.3.8.1. The majority of emissions are from coal, diesel and biofuel combustions in residential and industry sectors. Reasons for the rapid increase after 2000 are slightly different in each study; REAS 2.1 and Qing and Xie (2012) estimated that the increase was due to the industry sector while Lei et al. (2011) and Lu et al. (2011) attributed the increase to both industry and residential sectors. All studies indicated the recent increase of emissions from road vehicles. On the other hand, Zhao et al. (2013) estimated almost stable emissions from 2005 to 2010, which means that effects of increased fuel consumption were canceled out by the introduction of control technologies. There are large differences between REAS 1.11 and REAS 2.1. A major reason is that emissions in Japan, and the Republic of Korea were obtained from different sources. Different biofuel statistics used in REAS 1.11 (RAINS-ASIA, IIASA, 2001) and REAS 2.1 (IEA, 2011) also caused the discrepancies especially in Southeast Asia. In REAS 2.1, BC emissions in Southeast Asia increased about 20% from 2000 to 2008. Most of emissions are from biofuel usage in the domestic sector, but the growth rate is the largest in the road transport sector. Similar to PM 10 and PM 2.5 , BC emissions in Japan have decreased due to the reduction of emissions from road transport and those in the Republic of Korea decreased slightly during 2000 and 2008 mainly due to contributions from road transport and industrial process, respectively. INTEX-B and REAS 2.1 estimated uncertainties of BC emissions in China as 208% and 176%, respectively. For OTHERs, uncertainty is estimated as 257% in REAS 2.1. All values are larger than those for PM 10 and PM 2.5 emissions. One reason for REAS 2.1 is that emission factors for BC were estimated based on those for PM, which means that some uncertainties were added to those for PM. Another reason is that relative ratios of emissions from biofuel combustion, which has the largest uncertainty in PM emissions, are larger for BC than PM 10 and PM 2.5 .

(2) Global emissions 

Bond et al., 2007 estimated global historical BC emissions from energy-related combustion from 1850 to 2000. Global BC emissions increased almost linearly from 1850 to 2000. Similar to the case of SO 2 ,BC emissions in Europe and North America show decreasing trends and relative ratios of emissions from China and other areas in Asia became larger. In 1950, more than half of global BC emissions were from combustion of coal and the rest were from that of diesel or biofuel. However, gradually, contributions from coal were decreased and those from diesel oil increased rapidly. In 2000, emissions from diesel oil, biofuel, and coal were about 40%, 35%, and 20% of global totals, respectively. 291 

Figure 6.3.9 Time series of BC emissions in China and East Asia outside China 6.3.8.3 Organic Carbon 

Emission sources of primary OC are mostly common to those of BC and the same as BC, OC is an important component of PM in air pollution. On the other hand, BC and OC have opposite effects on climate change, which means that OC is a cooling agent of the atmosphere. Therefore, information of OC/BC ratios in anthropogenic emissions is essential to evaluate the effects of emission mitigation policy on climate change. 

(1) East Asian Emissions 

According to the results from Lei et al. (2011), Lu et al. (2011) and REAS 2.1, about 60-70% of OC emissions were from biofuel combustions in the residential sector and the majority of the remaining part was from coal combustion. Therefore, trends were basically dominated by consumption of biofuel, but their values were different among each inventory. REAS 2.1 and Lu et al. (2011) both show increasing trends, about 22% from 2000 to 2008 and 43% from 2000 to 2010, respectively. Zhao et al. (2013) estimated a decreasing trend from 2005 to 2007 and then emissions were almost stable from 2007 to 2010 (Figure 6.4.10). For Japan and the Republic of Korea, general features of trends of OC emissions were almost the same as those for BC. REAS 2.1 estimated that growth rate between 2000 and 2008 in Southeast Asia was relatively small (about 10%) compared to BC (about 20%). As mentioned above, the largest emission source of OC is biofuel combustion and its OC/BC emissions ratio is also the largest among all source categories. Actually, INTEX-B and REAS 2.1 estimated the high OC/BC emissions ratios in the residential sector where the majority of OC emissions were from biofuel combustion (2.6 and 3.5 for China and 4.9 and 4.0 for Southeast Asia, respectively). Therefore, only reducing consumption of biofuel is expected not to be effective to mitigate the warming trend because reduced OC which has a cooling effect will cancel out the decreased warming effect by reduction of BC. On the other hand, the ratio of OC/BC in anthropogenic emissions is estimated to be small for diesel sources including diesel vehicle emissions. REAS 2.1 estimated the low OC/BC ratios in emissions from diesel combustion for China and Southeast Asia as 0.3 and 0.6, respectively. Bond et al. (2004) also estimated the low OC/BC emissions ratios as 0.3 both for diesel vehicles and boilers. For other sources, Lei et al. (2011) estimated the OC/BC rations in emissions from brick and coke production in China as 0.9 and 1.1, respectively. Reduction of emissions from diesel combustion and production of brick and coke is expected to be more effective to mitigate both air pollution and atmospheric warming compared to that from biofuel combustion. However, as will be described below, uncertainty of both BC and OC emissions is very high. Further 

> BC in China [Tg/yr] BC in EA outside China [Tg/yr] 292

studies for the OC/BC ratios in anthropogenic emissions are required. For uncertainties, INTEX-B and REAS 2.1 estimated 258% and 271%, respectively, for China. REAS 2.1 estimated uncertainty for OTHERs as 286%. The same as for BC, emission factors for OC were estimated based on those for PM. In addition, relative ratios of emissions from biofuel combustion to total are the largest in OC among PM. Therefore, both INTEX-B and REAS 2.1 estimated the largest uncertainties for OC among all gaseous and aerosol compounds. 

(2) Global Emissions 

Bond et al., (2007) estimated global OC emissions from fossil fuel and biofuel combustion from 1850 to 2000. Similar to BC, a linear growth was shown in OC emissions, but its growth rate is smaller than that of BC emissions. Clearly, a majority of sources is also biofuel combustion in global emissions. General features of contributions from each region to global total OC emissions from 1850 to 2000 are similar to those for BC. In general, variability of long-term trends for each region is relatively modest compared to the case of BC. 

Figure 6.3.10 Time series of OC emissions in China (left) and East Asia outside China (right) 

> OC in China [Tg/yr] OC in EA outside China [Tg/yr]

293 

6.3.9 Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) 

Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) are defined as organic substances that have toxic characteristics, persistent, bioaccumulate, and long-range transboundary atmospheric transportation and deposition. Furthermore, these are likely to cause significant adverse human health or environmental effects. The UNECE POP protocol focuses on a list of 16 substances (aldrin, chlordane, chlordecone, dieldrin, endrin, mirex, toxaphene, dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane (DDT), heptachlor, hexachloricyclohexane (HCH) including lindene, hexachlorobenzene (HCB), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), hexabromobiphenyl, dioxins and furans (PCDD/Fs), and polycyclic hydrocarbons (PAHs)) (UNEP, 2001; UNECE, 1979, 1998). Furthermore, a number of chemicals are currently being investigated for inclusion in the UNECE POPs protocol list as priority compounds. (Table 6.3.12.1) 

Table 6.3.3 Classification of POP addressed by the UNECE POP protocol                     

> POP types Primary origin 16 POPs PAH HCB PCBs PCDD/Fs Intentionally produced Pesticides/biocides Aldrin ✓✓
> Chlordane Chlordecone Dieldrin Endrin Mirex Toxaphene DDT Heptachlor Hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH) lindane Hexachlorobenzene (HCB) Industrial chemicals Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) ✓✓
> Hexabromobiphenyl (HBBP) Unintentionally formatted as by-products Specific high temperature Dioxins and furans (PCDD/F) ✓✓
> environment with chlorine
> tracers present Combustion derived chemical PAH ✓✓✓✓
> Industrial processes
> Candidate 8 POPs
> Dicoful Endosulfan Hexachlorobutadiene (HBU) Pentabromodiphenyl ether (PBDE)
> Pentachloribenzene (PCBe) Pentachlorophenol (PCP) Polychlorinated naftalenes (PCN)
> Short chanined chlorinated paraffins (SCCPs)

Although many emission inventories are available globally as well as for the UNECE-European region 294 

(e.g., Denier van der Gon et al., 2007), the POPs emission inventory in the Asian region is very limited (PAHs (Peking University’s group (Zhang et al., 2008; Zhang and Tao, 2009; Shen et al., 2013) and Regional Emission inventory in Asia for Persistent Organic Pollutants version (REAS-POP; Inomata et al., 2012)) and endosulfan (Jia et al., 2009, 2012). Therefore, in this section we focus only on PAHs. 

6.3.9.1 Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) (1) PAH emissions in East Asia 

PAHs are emitted into the atmosphere by incomplete combustion or pyrolysis of organic matter such as coal, oil, petroleum gas, and biomass (Ravindra et al., 2008). Figure 6.3.11 shows PAHs emission inventory in Northeast Asia with 0.5 ×0.5  latitude and longitude grid resolution in 2005 (Inomata et al., 2012). China was shown to be the most significant contributor of PAHs in Northeast Asia. The estimated annual emission of the 9 PAHs in China in 2005 was approximately 9.6 Gg yr -1 , which accounted for 92% of the total emissions (10.5 Gg yr -1 ) in Northeast Asia. In China, the dominant sources were domestic coal (47%), domestic biofuel (18%), and other coal transformations, including coke production (29%). 

Figure 6.3.11 Spatial distributions of the annual emissions of 9 PAHs at a 0.5   0.5 

resolution in 2005 in Northeast Asia by REAS-POP. The scale is expressed in the units of mg yr -1 m -2 (Inomata et al., 2012). (2) PAH emissions globally 

Shen et al. (2013) estimated the global atmospheric emissions of 16 PAHs for a period from 1960 to 2008. Figure 6.3.12 shows the global distribution of 16 PAHs emission density in 2007 with 0.1 ×0.1 

resolution. The relative contributions for the five source sectors (energy/industry, residential/commercial, transportation, agriculture, and deforestation/wildfire) for the main geographic regions are shown in the pie charts in Figure 6.3.12. The global total annual atmospheric emission of 16 PAHs in 2007 was 504 Gg with residential/commercial biomass burning (60.5%), open-fired biomass burning (agricultural waste burning, deforestation, and wildfire, 13.6%), and petroleum consumption by on-road motor vehicles (12.8%) as major sources. East Asia (111Gg), South Asia (87Gg), and Southeast Asia (52Gg) were the regions with the highest PAHs emission densities, contributing half of the global total PAHs emissions. The highest emission was from China (106 Gg), followed by India (67 Gg). 295 

Figure 6.3.12 Spatial distributions of 16 PAHs total emissions in the world in 2007 at 0.1 ×0.1  resolution (Shen et al., 2013). 

Figure 6.3.13 Time trends of PAH emissions during a period from 1960 to 2010 for (a) global, (b) developed countries, (c) developing countries. 

Figure 6.3.13 shows the temporal trend of global PAH emissions (global, developed countries, and developing countries (such as China, India, and Indonesia)) from 1960 to 2008 (Shen et al., 2013). Global total PAH emissions peaked at 592 Gg in 1995 and declined gradually to 499 Gg in 2008. The PAH emissions of developed countries peaked in the early 1970s (122 Gg) and decreased gradually (38 Gg in 2008) due to the introduction of emission mitigation technologies such as particulate traps, catalysts, advances in engine design and the subsequent decline in the PAH emissions from on-road motor vehicles. In contrast, the total PAHs emission in the developing country reached its peak around 1995 and gradually decreased after 1995 due to the reduction of residential, commercial, and industrial sources. 

6.3.10 Mercury 

Mercury (Hg) compounds are toxic air pollutants, causing severe harm to humans and ecosystems (e.g., UNEP, 2002; Pacyna et al., 2010). Mercury is emitted into the atmosphere from anthropogenic (chlor-alkali production, coal combustion, metals smelting, waste incineration, gold extraction and several other industrial and commercial sources) and natural sources (primary natural sources such as volcanoes, geothermal sources, topsoil enriched in mercury pertains, ocean) and re-emission processes of historically deposited mercury (vegetation, land, water surface) (e.g., Pirrone et al., 2010). Mercury 296 

emissions from anthropogenic sources exist in three forms: gaseous elemental mercury (Hg 0 ; 72%), gaseous oxidized mercury (Hg 2+ ; 22%), and particle-bond (Hg p ; 6%), whereas emissions from natural sources predominantly consists of Hg 0 (>99%) (Shetty et al., 2008; Muntean et al., 2014). 

6.3.10.1 Mercury emissions in East Asia 

East Asia is one of the largest source regions of mercury in the world due to China, the largest emitter in the world. 

Figure 6.3.14 Temporal variation of annual mercury emission in East Asia ( ♦) and China (●). 

Emissions of anthropogenic mercury from East Asia as well as from China have been increasing rapidly in recent years (Figure 6.3.14). Major sources in China are coal combustion (44%), non-ferrous metals smelters (33%), gold production (7.3%), cement production facilities (6%), mercury mines (5%), waste disposal (2%), and others (Pirrone et al., 2010). Regarding other countries, emission inventories for country basis are also available (China (Streets et al., 2005,2009; Pacyna et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2006; Weiss et al., 2007; Pirron et al., 2010), the Republic of Korea (Pacyna et al., 2006: Kim et al., 2010), Japan (Kida and Takahashi, 2008; Nansai et al., 2012)). The mercury emissions have clear seasonal variation, being higher in July (summer) and lower in December (winter). The greater emission in summer is due to the higher surface temperature and solar radiation enhanced the emissions from natural sources. 

6.3.10.2 Mercury emissions globally 

Figure 6.3.15 shows the global distribution of anthropogenic mercury emissions in 2005 (Pacyna et al., 2010). China is the largest global mercury emission country with 40% contributions, and followed by South America (15 countries such as Chile), the United States, India, Indonesia, and OECD Europe, which accounts for 5 to 7% each of the global emissions. The major emission sector contributors are from fossil-fuel combustion for power and heating (45%), (ferrous and non-ferrous) metal production (10%), large scale gold production (6%), artisanal small scale gold mining (18%), cement production (8%), chlor-alkali industry (2%), waste incineration, waste and other (6%), and dental amalgam (1%), and others (4%). However, the major emission sector contributions are different among countries. Emissions from artisanal and small scale gold production are important sources in China, Indonesia, South America, and Brazil, whereas emissions from power generation sector are dominant in the United State, OECD Europe, Central Europe, and India. The metal industry is also a substantial source         

> 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 Hg emission (ton/year) 0200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 Pacyna(2006) Wu(2006) Streets(2005) Pacyna(2006) Wu(2006) Weis (2007) Pirrone(2010) Streets(2009)

297 

of mercury in many regions (Southeastern Asia, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Oceania, and Canada. 

Figure 6.3.15 Global distribution of anthropogenic mercury emissions in 2005 (Pacyna et al., 2010). 

Figure 6.3.16 shows the compiled annual mercury emission from anthropogenic sources at global scale. During the period from 1995 to 2010, estimates of global anthropogenic emission are in the range of 1100-2500 ton yr -1 . According to the Emission Database for Global Atmospheric Research (EDGARv4.tox1; Muntean et al., 2014), the global mercury emissions reached 1,287 tons in 2008 with an annual growth rate of 1.3% since 1970. The increasing trend of mercury emissions is due to the Asian region. In particular, anthropogenic emission present a steady increase in India (27% from 1990 to 2000) and China (10% from 2001 to 2004) due to a rapid industrialization, population growth and a lack of emission controls. In contrast, the anthropogenic mercury emission in North America was reduced with more than 45% after the “1990 Clean Air Act Amendments” due to the stringent air quality regulations and pollution control (Shetty et al., 2008). 

Global 1995 2000 2005 2010 Hg emission (ton/year) 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 Streets(2009,2011) Rafaj(2013) Pacyna(2006,2010) Muntean(2014) AMAP/UNEP(2013) Pirron(2010) 

Figure 6.3.16 Global anthropogenic mercury emissions reported in different studies. 6.3.11 Summary and discussion for 6.3 

This section reviewed the anthropogenic emissions of air pollutants, greenhouse gases and air toxics in East Asia. For all species, the largest contributing country to Asian emissions is China and growth 298 

rates of their emissions are also the largest in China. In particular after the early 2000s, emissions from fossil fuel combustion in China increased rapidly. However, due to the introduction of FGD to large power plants, SO 2 emissions started to decrease after the later 2000s and recently, emission control strategies have been becoming effective for PMs. Further control measures are required to mitigate emissions not only for these species but also NO x and NMVOCs. For Southeast Asia, although amounts and growth rates are smaller than China, anthropogenic emissions also showed increasing trends with recent economic growth. Therefore, consideration of emission control measures also become important issues for Southeast Asian countries. On the other hand, for developed countries in East Asia (e.g. Japan and the Republic of Korea), recent anthropogenic emissions generally showed decreasing trends because of emission control strategies and relatively small economic growth compared to China and Southeast Asia. Uncertainties of emissions are determined by the accuracy of activity data, emission factors and removal efficiencies. Therefore, values vary for each emission inventory as well as emission sources, countries, and species. However, in general, relative uncertainties between emission sources and species in Table 6.3.2 are expected to be similar in each emission inventory. For activity data, uncertainties in fossil fuel consumption in major sectors, production of major industrial commodities, and registered number of vehicles are generally small because they are basic statistics for each country. On the other hand, uncertainties in biofuel consumption and statistics for minor industries are large. For emission factors, uncertainties of the parameters related to perfect combustion are smaller than those for incomplete combustion and evaporative sources. Studies of emission factors for large plants and road vehicles are relatively popular, but those for small facilities, especially in developing countries are poor. For species, SO 2 and NO x emission inventories have been traditionally studied well, but researches for NMVOCs and PM ones are still limited. As a result, uncertainties for PM which are mainly from imperfect combustion, especially using biofuels are much larger than those for SO 2 and NO x whose major emission source is perfect combustion in large combustion facilities and vehicles. Uncertainties for CO and NMVOC are between them. For NH 3 and CH 4 , Olivier et al. (1999) estimated global averaged uncertainties as about 100% for agricultural emissions. REAS 2.1 estimated large uncertainties for fugitive emissions of CH 4 as more than 200% mainly for emission from coal mining in China and those from oil and gas production in Southeast Asia. For countries, uncertainties for emissions in developed countries are generally smaller than those for developing ones because data and information required for emission inventories are relatively well established. Recently, studies for emission inventories in China are very active and as a result, uncertainties for their emissions are becoming small. On the other hand, the amount of research for emissions inventories in Southeast Asian countries is still limited and thus, their uncertainties are considered to be larger than those for China. Therefore, research activities to improve bottom-up emission inventory are needed particularly for Southeast Asian countries. In this report, comprehensive Asian and global emission inventories in Table 6.3.1 were reviewed. These inventories have been used for many atmospheric chemistry modeling studies for air pollution and climate change. In addition to these inventories, two major open-access data sets are available for studies of Asian atmospheric environment. For China, Multi-resolution Emission Inventory for China (MEIC) developed by Center for Earth System Science in Tsinghua University provides gridded emission data (http://www.meicmodel.org). For global emissions in 2008 and 2010, Hemispheric 299 

Transport of Air Pollution (HTAP) version 2 emission inventory are available (http://edgar.jrc.ec.europa.eu/htap_v2/index.php?SECURE=123). As mentioned, above, detailed emission inventories especially from Southeast Asian countries should be added to available data sets. For bottom-up emission inventory, continuous efforts are required not only to reduce the uncertainties but also expand the target periods. However, even the efforts of improving activity data and region specific parameters, it is somewhat impossible to avoid uncertainties in bottom-up emissions data. Furthermore, estimating “current” emissions by the bottom-up methodology is fundamentally impossible because the publication of statistics, required to estimate emissions, is generally a couple of years behind. To solve the problems, inverse modeling, in which emissions are optimized to reduce the differences between simulated and observed data, is a powerful method. Therefore, collaborative researches between bottom-up emission inventory, monitoring, and atmospheric chemistry modeling are strongly recommended. 

6.4 Summary 

East Asia became the region of the world with the largest air pollutant emissions. The natural and anthropogenic emissions in this important region are estimated with large uncertainties despite enormous international and national efforts. <Natural sources> Most of the Asian emission inventory for BVOChave used the empirical model algorithms suggested by Guenther et al., but some studies have made efforts to create the regional datasets for model input and employ the alternative estimation methods for model parameters. BVOC emissions, which are depending on many factors, have high uncertainty due to very limited studies on regional emissions in East Asia. The Asian dust aerosol is one of the prominent aerosol sources in Northeast Asia. The emission amount significantly depends on the used model and meteorological conditions. <Biomass burning > There are several global inventories of emission from biomass burning (e.g., GFED, GFAS, and FINN), but their regional differences are substantial. The biomass burning emissions in Asia using GFEDv3.1 are dominated by the emissions occurred in Southeast Asia, with Indonesia as the leading emitter followed by Myanmar. However, the uncertainties of emission inventories are high due to lack of country/region specific data, i.e., type of vegetation, combustion completeness, and emission factors. < Anthropogenic sources > The trends of anthropogenic emissions in East Asia are dominated by China for all species. Although growth rates are smaller than China, anthropogenic emissions in Southeast Asia also generally show increasing trends due to the increased energy consumptions. On the contrary, in Japan and the Republic of Korea, recent emissions generally show decreasing trends due to the effects of emission control and relatively small economic growth. For several species such as SO 2 and primary aerosols, emissions in Europe and North America decreased rapidly after the 1990s while emissions from East Asia were increasing. During the 2000s, relative ratios of emissions in East Asia became almost 300 

comparable or surpassed those of Europe and North America, especially due to the rapid growth of anthropogenic emissions in China. For PAH emissions, it was found that East Asia, South Asia, and Southeast Asia contributed to half of the global emissions. The highest emission was from China, followed by India. Emissions of anthropogenic Hg from East Asia have been increasing rapidly in recent years due to the increase of emissions from China. Asian countries contributed about 67% to the global Hg emissions from anthropogenic sources in 2005. The quality of anthropogenic emission inventory strongly depends on accuracy of activity data and emission factors. However, studies on emissions, especially in Southeast Asia and other developing countries, are still limited and thus, uncertainties of their inventories are still too high. 

References 

Air Pollution Studies No. 17, 2011, Hemispheric Transport of Air Pollution 2010, Part A: Ozone and Particulate Matter, edited by Frank Dentener, Terry Keating, and Hajime Akimoto, and prepared by Prepared by the Task Force on Hemispheric Transport of Air Pollution acting within the framework of the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution. Akimoto, H. and Narita, H. 1994. Distribution of SO 2, NO x , and CO 2 emissions from fuel combustion and industrial activities in Asia with 1° x 1° resolution, Atmos. Environ., 28: 213–225. Almut Arneth, Paul A. Miller, Marko Scholze, Thomas Hickler, Guy Schurgers, Benjamin Smith, I. Colin Prentice. 2007. CO 2 inhibition of global terrestrial isoprene emissions: Potential implications for atmospheric chemistry. Geophysical Research Letters, 34, L18813,doi: 10.1029/2007GL030615. Al-Saadi, Amber Soja, Brad Pierce, Chieko Kittaka, Louisa Emmons, Shobha Kondragunta, Xiaoyang Zhang, Christine Wiedinmyer, Todd Schaack, and Jim Szykman, 2006, Global Near-Real-Time Estimates of Biomass Burning Emissions using Satellite Active Fire Detections, Journal of Geophysical Research, 2003. Al-Saadi, J. A., Soja, A. J., Pierce, R. B., Szykman, J., Wiedinmyer, C., Emmons, L. K., Kondragunta, S., Zhang, X., Kittaka, C., Schaack, T., and Bowman, K., 2008, Evaluation of Near-Real-Time Biomass Burning Emissions Estimates Constrained by Satellite Active Fire Detections, J. Appl. Remote Sens., Vol. 2, doi:10.1117/1.2948785 AMAP/UNEP. Technical Background Report for the Global Mercury Assessment 2013. Norway/UNEP Chemicals Branch, Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme, Geneva, 2013. An, J., Ueda, H., Matsuda, K. Hasome, H., and Iwata, M. 2003. Simulated impacts of SO 2 emissions from the Miyake volcano on concentration and deposition of sulfur oxides in September and October of 2000, Atmos. Environ., 22: 3039-3046. Andreae, M. A., and P. Merlet, 2001, Emission of trace gases and aerosols from biomass burning, Global Biogeochemical Cycles, Vol. 15, No. 4, 955–966 Andres, R. J. and Kasgnoc, A. D. 1998. A time-averaged inventory of subaerial volcanic sulfur 301 

emissions, J. Geophys. Res., 103: D19, 25251-25261. Arneth, A., Miller, P., Scholze, M., Hickler, T., Schurgers, G., Smith, B., Prentice, I.C. 2007. CO 2Atkinson, R. and Arey, J. 2003. Gas-phase tropospheric chemistry of biogenic volatile organic compounds: a review, Atmos. Environ., 37 (Suppl. 2), The 1997 Southern California Ozone Study (SCOS97-NARSTO). Dedicated to the Memory of Dr. Glen Cass (1947-2001), S197-S219. Bao, H., Kondo, A., Kaga, A., Tada, M., Sakaguti, K., Inoue, Y., Shimoda, Y., Narumi, D., and Machimura, T. 2008. Biogenic volatile organic compound emission potential of forests and paddy fields in the Kinki region of Japan, Environmental Research, 106, 156-169, 2008. Bo, Y., Cai, H., and Xie, S. D. 2008. Spatial and temporal variation of historical anthropogenic NMVOCs emission inventories in China, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 8: 7297–7316, doi:10.5194/acp-8-7297-2008. Bond, T. C., Bhardwaj, E., Dong, R., Jogani, R., Jung, S., Roden, C., Streets, D. G., and Trautmann, N. M. 2007. Historical emissions of black and organic carbon aerosol from energy-related combustion, 1850-2000, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 21: GB2018, doi:10.1029/2006GB002840. Bond, T. C., Doherty, S. J., Fahey, D. W., Forster, P. M., Berntsen, T., DeAngelo, B. J., Flanner, M. G., Ghan, S., Kärcher, B., Koch, D., Kinner, S., Kondo, Y., Quinn, P. K., Sarofim, M. C., Schultz, M. G., Schulz, M., Venkataraman, C., Zhang, H., Zhang, S., Bellouin, N., Guttikunda, S. K., Hopke, P. K., Jacobson, M. Z., Kaiser, J. W., Klimont, Z., Lohmann, U., Schwarz, J. P., Shindell, D., Storelvmo, T., Warren, S. G., and Zender C., S. 2013, Bounding the role of black carbon in the climate system: A scientific assessment, J. Geophys. Res., 118, 5380-5552, doi:10.1002/2jgrd50171. Bond, T. C., Streets, D. G., Fernandes, S. D., Nelson, S. M., Yarber, K. F., Woo, J.-H., and Klimont, Z. 2004, A technology-based global inventory of black and organic carbon emissions from combustion, J. Geophys. Res., 109, D14203, doi:10.1029/2003JD003697. Bowman, David M. J. S., Jennifer K. Balch, Paulo Artaxo, William J. Bond, Jean M. Carlson, Mark A. Cochrane, Carla M. D’Antonio, Ruth S. DeFries, John C. Doyle, Sandy P. Harrison, Fay H. Johnston, Jon E. Keeley, Meg A. Krawchuk, Christian A. Kull, J. Brad Marston, Max A. Moritz, I. Colin Prentice, Christopher I. Roos, Andrew C. Scott, Thomas W. Swetnam, Guido R. van der Werf, Stephen J. Pyne, 2009, Fire in the Earth System, Science 324, 481 (2009), DOI: 10.1126/science.1163886 Cao, G., Zhang, X., and Zheng, F. 2006. Inventory of black carbon and organic carbon emissions from China, Atmos. Environ., 40: 6516–6527. Chaiyo U., Garivait S., and Wilairat Dechochai, 2011, Trace Elements and Carbon Contents in Particulate Emissions from Tropical Deciduous Forest Fires in Chiangmai, Thailand, 2011 2nd International Conference on Environmental Science and Technology, IPCBEE, vol.6 302 

2011. Chan, C. K., Yao, X. 2008. Air pollution in mega cities in China, Atmos. Environ., 42: 1-42. Chang, J., Ren, Y., Shi, Y., Zhu, Y., Ge, Y., Hong, S., Jiao, L., Lin, F., Peng, C., Mochizuki, T., Tani, A., Mu, Y. and Fu, C. 2012. An inventory of biogenic volatile organic compounds for a subtropical urban-rural complex. Atmospheric Environment, 56, 115-123. Chang, K. H., Chen, T. F., and Huang, H. C. 2005. Estimation of biogenic volatile organic compounds emissions in subtropical island -Taiwan. The Science of the total environment, 346, 184-199. Chang, K. H., Yu, J. Y., Chen, T. F., and Lin, Y. P. 2009. Estimating Taiwan biogenic VOC emission: Leaf energy balance consideration. Atmospheric Environment, 43: 5092-5100. Cheewaphongphan P. and Garivait S., 2013, Bottom up Approach to Estimate Air Pollution of Rice Residue Open Burning in Thailand, Asia-Pacific Journal of Atmospheric Science, 49 (2), 139-149, 201, DOI:10.1007/s13143-013-0015-0. Cheng, Y.-P., Wang, L., and Zhang, X.-L. 2011. Environmental impact of coal mine methane emissions and responding strategies in China, Intl. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 5, 157-166, Cho, K. T., Kim, J. C., and Hong, J. H. 2006. A Study on the Comparison of Biogenic VOC (BVOC) Emissions Estimates by BEIS and CORINAIR Methodologies. Journal of Korean Society for Atmospheric Environment, 22, 167-177 [in Korean]. Denier van der Gon, H., Bolscher, M., Visschedijk,A. and Zandveld, P. 2007. Emissions of persistent organic pollutants and eight candidate POPs from UNECE-Europe in 2000, 2010 and 2020 and the emission reduction resulting from the implementation of the UNECE POP protocol. Atmospheric Environment 41: 9245-9261. Diehl, T., Heil, A., Chin, M. Pan, X., Streets, D., Schultz, M., and Kinne, S. 2012. Anthropogenic, biomass burning, and volcanic emissions of black carbon, organic carbon, and SO 2 from 1980 to 2010 for hindcast model experiments, Atmos. Chem. Phys., Discuss., 12: 24895-24954, doi:10.5194/acpd-12-24895-2012. Duncan, B.N., Martin, R. V., Staudt, A. C., Yevich, R., Logan, J. A.), 2003, Interannual and seasonal variability of biomass burning emissions constrained by satellite observations, Journal of Geophysical Research, 108, no. D2, 4100, doi:10.1029/2002JD002378, 2003. EC-JRC/PBL (European Commission, Joint Research Center/Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency). 2011. Emission Database for Global Atmospheric Research (EDGAR), release version 4.2, available at: http://edgar.jrc.ec.europa.eu/index.php. Ellicott E.A., 2009, An approach to estimate global biomass burning emissions of organic and black carbon from MODIS fire radiative power, PhD Thesis, Faculty of the Graduate School, University of Maryland. Flores, J. M. A., Riziq, A., Borrmann, S., and Rudich, Y., 2011, Chemical, physical, and optical 303 

evolution of biomass burning aerosols: a case study, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 1491–1503, 201, www.atmos-chem-phys.net/11/1491/2011/doi:10.5194/acp-11-1491-2011. Friedrich, R. 2009. Natural and biogenic emissions of environmentally relevant atmospheric trace constituents in Europe. Atmos. Environ., 43: 1377-1379. Giglio, L., J. T. Randerson, G. R. van derWerf, P. S. Kasibhatla, G. J. Collatz, D. C. Morton, and R. S. DeFries, 2010, Assessing variability and long-term trends in burned area by merging multiple satellite fire products, Biogeosciences, 7, 1171–1186, 2010, www.biogeosciences.net/7/1171/2010/. Giglio, L., Van der Werf, G.R., Randerson, J.T., Collatz, G.J., and Kasibhatla, P.S., 2006, Global Estimation of Burned Area using MODIS Active Fire Observations, Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 6, 957-974. Granier, C., J.F. Lamarque, A. Mieville, J.F. Muller, J. Olivier, J. Orlando, J. Peters, G. Petron, G. Tyndall, S. Wallens. 2005. POET, a database of surface emissions of ozone precursors (available on internet at http://eccad.sedoo.fr.). Guenther A, Hewitt CN, Erickson D, Fall R, Geron C, Grae.del T, Harley P, Klinger L, Lerdau M, McKay Wa, Pierce T, Scholes B, Steinbrecher R, Tallamraju R, Taylor J, Zimmerman P. 1995. A Global-Model of Natural Volatile Organic-Compound Emissions, Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 100 (D5): 8873-8892. Guenther, A. 1997. Seasonal and spatial variations in natural volatile organic compound emissions. Ecological Applications 7, 34-45. Guenther, A., Baugh, B., Brasseur, G., Greenberg, J., Harley, P., Klinger, L., Serca, D., and Vierling, L. 1999. Isoprene emission estimates and uncertainties for the Central African EXPRESSO study domain, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 104 (D23): 30 625-30 639. Guenther, A., Jiang, X., Heald, C. L., Sakulyanontvittaya, T., Duhl, T., Emmons, L. K., Wang, X. 2012. The Model of Emissions of Gases and Aerosols from Nature version 2.1 (MEGAN2.1): an extended and updated framework for modeling biogenic emissions, Geosci. Model. Dev., 5, 1471?1492, doi:10.5194/gmd-5-1471-2012. Guenther, A., Karl, T., Harley, P., Wiedinmyer, C., Palmer, P. I., and Geron, C. 2006. Estimates of global terrestrial isoprene emissions using MEGAN (Model of Emissions of Gases and Aerosols from Nature), Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 3181-3210. Guenther, A., Monson, R.K., Fall, R. 1991. Isoprene and monoterpene emission rate variability: observations with eucalyptus and emission rate algorithm development. J. Geophys. Res. 96, 10799?10808. Guenther, A.B., Zimmerman, P.R., Harley, P.C., Monson, R. 1993. Isoprene and monoterpene emission rate variability: model evaluations and sensitivity analyses. J. Geophys. Res. 98, 12609?12617. 304 

Han, K. M., Park, R. S., Kim, H. K., Woo, J. H., Kim, J., Song, C. H. 2013. Uncertainty in biogenic isoprene emissions and its impacts on tropospheric chemistry in East Asia, The Science of the total environment, 463–464, 754-771. Heil, A., Johannes W. Kaiser, Guido R. van der Werf, Martin J. Wooster, Martin G. Schultz, Hugo Dernier van der Gon, 2010, Assessment of the Real-Time Fire Emissions (GFASv0) by MACC, Technical Memorandum No. 628, July 2010, European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecast. Hoelzemann, J., M. G. Schultz, G. P. Brasseur, C. Granier, and M. Simon, 2004, Global Wildland Fire Emission Model (GWEM): Evaluating the use of global area burnt satellite data, J. Geophys. Res., 109, D14S04, doi:10.1029/2003JD003666. Houghton, J., House, J. I., Pongratz, J., van der Werf, G. R., DeFries, R. S., Hansen, M. C., Le Quere, C., and Ramankutty, N., 2012, Carbon emissions from land use and land-cover change, Biogeosciences, 9, 5125–5142, 2012, www.biogeosciences.net/9/5125/2012/doi:10.5194/bg-9-5125-2012. Huang, X., Song, Y., Li, M., Li, J., Huo, Q., Cai, X., Zhu, T., Hu, M., and Zhang, H. 2012. A high-resolution ammonia emission inventory in China, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 26: GB1030, doi:10.1029/2011GB004161. IEA (international Energy Agency) 2011. Energy balances of non-OECD countries, IEA, Paris. IIASA (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis) 2001. RAINS-ASIA CD-ROM Version 7.52, Laxemburg, Austria. Inomata, Y., Kajino, M., Sato, K., Ohara, T., Kurokawa, J.-I., Ueda, H., Tang, N., Hayakawa, K., Ohizumi, T. and Akimoto, H. 2012. Emission and transport of particulate PAHs in Northeast Asia. Environmental Science & Technology 46: 4941-4949. Ito, A. and Penner, J. E., 2004, Global estimates of biomass burning emissions based on satellite imagery for the year 2000. Journal of Geophysical Research, 109, D14S05, doi:10.1029/2003JD004423. Janssens-Maenhout, G., Dentener, F., van Aardenne, J., Monni, S., Pagliari, V., Orlandini, L., Klimont, Z., Kurokawa, J., Akimoto, H., Ohara, T., Wankumuller, R., Battye, B., Grano, D., Zuber, A., Keating, T. 2012. EDGAR-HTAP: a harmonized gridded air pollution emission dataset based on national inventories, JRC Scientific and Technical Reports, ISBN 978-92-79-23123-0, doi: 10.2788/14102 Jia, H., Liu, L., Sun, Y., Cai, D., Hu, J., Ren, N. and Li, Y. 2012. Endosulfan in the Chinese environment: monitoring and modeling. Frontoers of Environmental Science & Engineering 6: 32-44. Jia, H., Sun, Y., Li, Y-F., Tian, C., Wang, D., Yang, M., Ding, Y., Ma, J. 2009. Endosulfan in China 2 –emissions and residues. Environmental Science Pollutants Research 16: 302-311. 305 

Junpen A., Garivait S., and Bonne S., 2013, Estimating Emissions from Forest Fires in Thailand Using MODIS Active Fire Product and Country Specific Data, Asia-Pacific Journal of Atmospheric Science. Junpen et al. (Savitri Garivait, Sebastien Bonnet, Adisak Pongpullponsak), 2014, Fire spread prediction for deciduous forest fires in Chiang Mai province, Science Asia. Kaiser, J.W. et al. (A. Heil, M. O. Andreae, A. Benedetti, N. Chubarova, L. Jones, J.-J. Morcrette, M. Razinger, M. G. Schultz, M. Suttie, and G. R. van der Werf), 2012, Biomass burning emissions estimated with a global fire assimilation system based on observed fire radiative power, Biogeosciences, 9, 527–554, 2012, www.biogeosciences.net/9/527/2012/doi:10.5194/bg-9-527-2012. Ki-Chul Choi, Jung-Hun Woo, Hyeon Kook Kim, Jieun Choi, Jeong-Hee Eum, and Bok H. Baek, 2013, Modeling of Emissions from Open Biomass Burning in Asia Using the BlueSky Framework. Asian Journal of Atmospheric Environment, Vol. 7-1, pp.25-37, March 2013, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.5572/ajae.2013.7.1.025. Kida, A., Takahashi, F. 2008. Japanese and global mercury emission inventories. Global Environmental Research 13: 167-180. Kim, H.-K., Woo, J.-H., Park, R. S., Song, C. H., Kim, J.-H., Ban, S.-J., and Park, J.-H. 2013. Impacts of different plant functional types on ambient ozone predictions in the Seoul Metropolitan Areas (SMA), Korea, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 13, 24925-24973. Kim, J.-H., Park, J.-M., Lee, S-B., Pudasainee, D., Seo, Y.-C. 2010. Anthropogenic mercury emission inventory with emission factors and total emission in Korea. Atmospheric Environment 44: 2714-2721. Klimont, Z., Cofala, J., Xing, J., Wei, W., Zhang, C., Wang, S., Kejun, J., Bhandari, P., Mathur, R., Purohit, P., Rafaj, P., Chambers, A., Amann, M., and Hao, J. 2009. Projections of SO 2 , NO x,and carbonaceous aerosols emissions in Asia, Tellus, 61B: 602-617. Klimont, Z., Smith, S. J., and Cofala, J. 2013. The last decade of global anthropogenic sulfur dioxide: 2000-2011 emissions, Environ. Res. Lett., 8: 014003, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/1/14003. Klimont, Z., Streets, D. G., Gupta, S., Cofara, J., Lixin, Fu., and Ichikawa, Y. 2002. Anthropogenic emissions of non-methane volatile organic compounds in China, Atmos. Environ., 36: 1309-1322. Klinger, L. F., Li, Q. J., Guenther, A. B., Greenberg, J. P., Baker, B., and Bai, J. H. 2002. Assessment of volatile organic compound emissions from ecosystem of China, J. Geophys. Res., 107 (D21), 4603, doi:10.1029/2001JD001076. Kuenzli N., Avol E., Wu J., Gauderman W.J., Rappaport E., Millstein J., Bennion J., McConnell R., Gilliland F.D., and Berhane K., 2006, Health effects of the 2003 southern California wildfire on children. Am. J. Resp. Crit. Care Med., 200604. 306 

Kurokawa, J., Ohara, T., Morikawa, T., Hanayama, S., Janssens-Maenhout, G., Fukui, T., Kawashima, K., and Akimoto, H. 2013. Emissions of air pollutants and greenhouse gases over Asian regions during 2000-2008: Regional Emission inventory in ASia (REAS) version 2, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 13: 10049-10123. Lamarque, J.-F., Bond, T. C., Eyring, V., Granier, C., Heil, A., Klimont, Z., Lee, D., Liousse, C., Mieville, A., Owen, B., Schultz, M. G., Shindell, D., Smith, S. J., Stehfest, E., van Aardenne, J., Cooper, O. R., Kainuma, M., Mahowald, N., McConnell, J. R., Naik, V., Riahi, K., van Vuuren, D. P. 2010, Historical (1850-2000) gridded anthropogenic and biomass burning emissions of reactive gases and aerosols: methodology and application, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10: 7017-7039, doi:10.5194/acp-10-7017-2010. Lamb, B.; Guenther, A.; Gay, D.; Westberg, H. 1987. A National Inventory of Biogenic Hydrocarbon Emissions. Atmospheric Environment, 21 (8): 1695-1705. Lei, Y., Zhang, Q., He, K. B., and Streets, D. G. 2011. Primary anthropogenic aerosol emission trends for China, 1990–2005, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11: 931-954, doi:10.5194/acp-11-931-2011. Leung, D. Y. C., Wong, P., Cheung, B. K. H., and Guenther, A. 2010. Improved land cover and emission factors for modeling biogenic volatile organic compounds emissions from Hong Kong, Atmospheric Environment, 44, 1456-1468. Li, M., Zhang, Q., Streets, D. G., He, K. B., Cheng, Y. F., Emmons, L. K., Huo, H., Kang, S. C., Lu, Z., Shao, M., Su, H., Yu, X., and Zhang, Y. 2014. Mapping Asian anthropogenic emissions of non-methane volatile organic compounds to multiple chemical mechanisms, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 14: 5617-5638, doi:10.5194/acp-14-5617-2014. Lin, C.-J., Pan, L., Streets, D.G., Shetty, S. K., Jang, C., Feng, X., Chu, H.-W. Chu and Ho, T.C. 2010. Estimating mercury emission outflow from East Asia using CMAQ-Hg. Atmospheric Chemistry Physics 10: 18531864. Liousse C., Guillaume, B., Gregoire, J.M., Mallet, M., Galy, C., Pont, V., Akpo, A., Bedou, M., Castera, P., Dungall, L., Gardrat, E., Granier, C., Konare, A., Malavelle, F., Mariscal, A. Mieville, R. Rosset, D. Serca, F. Solmon, F. Tummon, E. Assamoi, V. Yoboue, A., and Van Velthoven, P., 2010, Updated Africa biomass burning emission inventories in the framework of the AMMA-IDAF program, with an evaluation of combustion aerosols, Atmos. Chem. Phys.,10, 7347-7382. Lu, Z., Streets, D. G., Zhang, Q., Wang, S., Carmichael, G. R., Cheng, Y. F., Wei, C., Chin, M., Diehl, T., and Tan, Q. 2010. Sulfur dioxide emissions in China and sulfur trends in East Asia since 2000, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10: 6311–6331, doi:10.5194/acp-10-6311-2010. Lu, Z., Zhang, Q., and Streets, D. G. 2011. Sulfur dioxide and primary carbonaceous aerosol emissions in China and India, 1996–2010, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11: 9839–9864, doi:10.5194/acp-11-9839-2011. Martin, R. V., Sioris, C. E., Chance, K., Ryerson, T. B., Bertram, T. H., Wooldridge, P. J., Cohen, R. C., 307 

Neuman, J. A., Swanson, A., and Flocke, F. M. 2006, Evaluation of space-based constraints on global nitrogen oxide emissions with regional aircraft measurements over and downind of eastern North America, J. Geophys. Res., 111, D15308, doi: 10.1029/2005JD006680. Mccormick, M. P., Thomason, L. W., and Trepte, C. R. 1995, Atmospheric effects of the Mt. Pinatubo eruption, Nature, 373: 399-404. Mijling, B. and van der A., R. J. 2012, Using daily satellite observation to estimate emissions of short-lived air pollutants on a mesoscopic scale, J. Geophys. Res., 117, D17302, doi:10.1029/2012JD17817. Monks, P. S., Granier, C., Fuzzi, S., Stohl, A., Williams, M. L., Akimoto, H., Amann, M., Baklanov, A., Baltensperger, U., Bey, I., Blake, N., Blake, R. S., Carslaw, K. S., Cooper, O. R., Dentener, F. J., Fowler, D., Fragkou, E., Frost, G. J., Generoso, S., Ginoux, P., Grewe, V., Guenther, A., Hansson, H. C., Henne, S., Hjorth, J., Hofzumahaus, A., Huntrieser, H., Isaksen, I. S. A., Jenkin, M. E., Kaiser, J., Kanakidou, M., Klimont, Z., Kulmala, M., Laj, P., Lawrence, M. G., Lee, J. D., Liousse, C., Maione, M., McFiggans, G. B., Metzger, A., Mieville, A., Moussiopoulos, N., Orlando, J. J., O’Dowd, C. D., Palmer, P. I., Parrish, D. D., Petzold, A., Platt, U., P¨oschl, U., Pr´evˆot, A. S. H., Reeves, C. E., Reimann, S., Rudich, Y., Sellegri, K., Steinbrecher, R., Simpson, D., ten Brink, H., Theloke, J., van Der Werf, G. R., Vautard, R., Vestreng, V., Vlachokostas, C., and von Glasow, R. 2009. Atmospheric composition change – global and regional air quality, Atmos. Environ., 43: 5268–5350. Mouillot, F., and Field, C., 2005, Fire history and the global carbon budget: a 1º x 1º fire history reconstruction for the 20th century, Global Change Biology, 11, 1–23, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2486.2005.00920.x. Muller, J.-F.,T Stavrakou, S. Wallens, I. De Smedt, M. Van Roozendael, M. Potosnak, J. Rinne, B. Munger, A. Goldstein, A. Guenther. 2006. Global isoprene emissions estimated using MEGAN, ECMWF analyses and a detailed canopy environment model, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 8, 1329-1341. Muntean, M., Janssens-M, G., Song S., Selin, N.E., Olivier, J.G.J., Guizzardi, D., Mass, R., Dentener, F. 2014. Trend analysis from 1970 to 2008 and model evaluation of EDGARv4 global gridded anthropogenic mercury emissions. Science of total environment 494-495: 337-350. Nansai, K., Oguchi, M., Suzuki, N., Kida, A., Nataami, T., Tanaka, C. and Haga, M. 2012. High-resolution inventory of Japanese anthropogenic mercury emissions. Environmental Science & Technology 46: 4933-4940. Nassar, R., Logan, J. A., Megretskaia, I. A., Murray, L. T., Zhang, L., and Jones, Dylan B. A., 2009, Analysis of tropical tropospheric ozone, carbon monoxide, and water vapor during the 2006 El Ninõ using TES observations and the GEOS-Chem model, Journal of Geophysical Research, 114, D17304, doi:10.1029/2009JD011760, 2009. NIER (National Institute of Environmental Research), 2011. Development of an integrated Asian 308 

emission inventory for atmospheric and climatic modeling, Final Report, South Korea [in Korean]. Ohara, T., Akimoto, H., Kurokawa, J., Horii, N., Yamaji, K., Yan, X., and Hayasaka, T. 2007. An Asian emission inventory of anthropogenic emission sources for the period 1980–2020, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 7: 4419-4444, doi:10.5194/acp-7-4419-2007. Olivier J., J. Peters, C. Granier, G. Petron, J.F. Muller, and S. Wallens. 2003. Present and future surface emissions of atmospheric compounds, POET report #2, EU project EVK2-1999-00011. Olivier, J. G. J., Bouwman, A. F., van der Mass, C. W. M., Berdowski, J. J. M., Veldt, C., Bloos, J. P. J., Visschedijk, A. J. H., Zandveld, P. Y. J., and Haverlag, J. L. 1996, Description of EDGAR Version 2.0, A set of global emission inventories of greenhouse gases and ozone-depleting substances for all anthropogenic and most natural sources on a per country basis and on 1° x 1° grid, RIVM/TNO report. Pacyna, E.G., Pacyna, J.M., Steenhuisen, F., Wilson, S. 2006. Global anthropogenic mercury emission inventory for 2000. Atmospheric Environment 40: 4048-4063. Park, S.-U., and In, H.-J. 2003. Parameterization of dust emission for the simulation of the yellow sand (Asian dust) observed in March 2002 in Korea, Journal of Geophysics Research, 108 (D19), 4618. Park, S.-U., and Lee, E.-H. 2004. Parameterization of Asian dust (Hwangsa) particle-size distributions for use in dust emission model, Atmospheric Environment, 38. 2155-2162. Park, S.-U.,, Choe, A., Lee, E.-H., Park, M.-S., and Song, X. 2010. The Asian dust aerosol model 2 (ADAM2) with the use of normalized difference vegetation data (NDVI) obtained from the spot4/vegetation data, Theoretical and Applied Climatology, 101: 191-208. Pierce, T. E.; Waldruff, P. S. 1991. PC-BEIS: A Personal Computer Version of the Biogenic Emissions Inventory System. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association 1991, 41 (7), 937-941. Pirron, N., Cinnirella, S., Feng, X., Finkelman, R.B., Friedli, H.R., Leaner, J., Mason, R., Mukherjee, A.B., Stracher, G.B., Streets, D.G., Telmer, K. 2010. Global mercury emissions to the atmosphere from anthropogenic and natural sources. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 10: 5951-5964. Prospero, J. M., Ginoux, P., Torres, O., Nicholson, S., and Gill, T. 2002. Environmental characterization of global source of atmospheric soil dust identified with the Nimbus 7 Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) absorbing aerosol product, Reviews of Geophysics, 40, 1002. Qin, Y. and Xie, S. D. 2012. Spatial and temporal variation of anthropogenic black carbon emissions in China for the period 1980–2009, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 12, 4825-4841, 309 

doi:10.5194/acp-12-4825-2012. Rafaj, P., Bertok, I., Cofala, J., Schöpp, W. 2013. Scenarios of global mercury emissions from anthropogenic sources. Atmospheric Environment 79: 472-479.Bibler, C. J., Marshall, J. S., and Pilcher, R. C. 1998. Status of worldwide coal mine methane emissions and use, 35, 283-310. Randerson, J. T., Y. Chen, G. R. van der Werf, B. M. Rogers1 and D. C. Morton, 2012, Global burned area and biomass burning emissions from small fires, Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences (2005–2012), Volume 117, Issue G4, December 2012 DOI: 10.1029/2012JG002128. Ravindra, K., Sokhi, R., Grieken, R.V. 2008. Atmospheric polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: Source attribution, emission factors and regulation. Atmospheric Environment 42: 2895-2921. Reid, Jeffrey S., Edward J. Hyer, Elaine M. Prins, Douglas L. Westphal, Jianglong Zhang, Jun Wang, Sundar A. Christopher, Cynthia A. Curtis, Christopher C. Schmidt, Daniel P. Eleuterio, Kim A. Richardson, and Jay P. Hoffman, 2009, Global Monitoring and Forecasting of Biomass-Burning Smoke: Description of and Lessons From the Fire Locating and Modeling of Burning Emissions (FLAMBE) Program, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, 2, 3, 144-162. Rodriguez, S., Alastuey, A., and Querol, X. 2012. A review of methods for long term in situ characterization of aerosol dust, Aeolian Research, 6: 55-74. S. K. Akagi, R. J. Yokelson, C. Wiedinmyer, M. J. Alvarado, J. S. Reid, T. Karl, J. D. Crounse, and P. O. Wennberg, 2011, Emission factors for open and domestic biomass burning for use in atmospheric models, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 4039–4072, www.atmos-chem-phys.net/11/4039/2011/ doi:10.5194/acp-11-4039-2011. Schurgers, G., Arneth, A., Holzinger, R. and Goldstein, A.H. 2009. Process-based modelling of biogenic monoterpene emissions combining production and release from storage. Atmospheric Chemistry & Physics 9: 3409-3423. Shen, H., Huang, Y., Wang, R., Zhu, D., Li, W., Shen,G., Wang, B., Zhang, Y., Chen, Y., Lu, Y., Chen, H., Li, T., Sun, K., Li, B., Liu, E., Liu, J., Tao, S., 2013. Global Atmospheric Emissions of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons from 1960 to 2008 and future predictions. Environmental Science & Technology 47: 6415-6424. Shetty, S. K., Kin, C.-J., Streets, D.G., Jang, C., 2008. Model estimate of mercury emission from natural sources in East Asia. Atmospheric Environment 42: 8674-8685. Stavrakou, T., Guenther, A., Razavi, A., Clarisse, L., Clerbaux, C., Coheur, P.-F., Hurtmans, D., Karagulian, F., De Maziere, M., Vigouroux, C., Amelynck, C., Schoon, N., Laffineur, Q., Heinesch, B., Aubinet, M., Rinsland, C., and Muller, J.-F. 2011. First space-based derivation of the global atmospheric methanol emission fluxes, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 4873-4898, doi:10.5194/acp-11-4873-2011. 310 

Stavrakou, T., Müller, J.-F., Boersma, K. F., van der A, R. J., Kurokawa, J., Ohara, T., and Zhang, Q. 2013. Key chemical NO x sink uncertainties and how they influence top-down emissions of nitrogen oxides, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 13: 9057-9082, doi:10.5194/acp-13-9057-2013. Steiner, A., Luo, C., Huang, Y., and Chameides, W. L. 2002. Past and present-day biogenic volatile organic compound emissions in East Asia, Atmos. Environ., 36 (31): 4895-4905. Streets et al. (K.F. Yarber, J.-H. Woo, G.R. Carmichael), 2003, Biomass burning in Asia: annual and seasonal estimates and atmospheric emissions, Global Biogeochemical Cycles. Streets, D. G., Bond, T. C., Carmichael, G. R., Fernandes, S. D., Fu, Q., He, D., Klimont, Z., Nelson, S. M., Tsai, N. Y., Wang, M. Q., Woo, J.-H., and Yarber, K. F. 2003. An inventory of gaseous and primary aerosol emissions in Asia in the year 2000, J. Geophys. Res., 108: 8809, doi:10.1029/2002JD003093. Streets, D. G., Zhang, Q., Wang, L., He, K. B., Hao, J., Wu, Y., Tang, Y., and Carmichael, G. R. 2006. Revisiting China’s CO emissions after the Transport and Chemical Evolution over the Pacific (TRACE-P) mission: Synthesis of inventories, atmospheric modeling, and observations, J. Geophys. Res., 111: D14306, doi:10.1029/2006JD007118. Streets, D., Hao, J., Wu, J., Jiang, J., Chan, J., Tian, H., Feng, X. 2005. Antrhopogenic mercury emissions in China. Atmospheric Environment 39: 7789-7806. Streets, D.G. et al., 2013, Emissions estimation from satellite retrievals: A review of current Capability, Atmos. Environ., 77, 1011-1042. Streets, D.G., Zhang, Q., Wu, Y., 2009. Projections global mercury emissions in 2050. Environmental Science and Technology 43: 2983-2988. Tanaka, T. Y. and Chiba, M. 2006. A numerical study of the contributions of dust source regions to the global dust budget, Global Planet Change, 52: 88-104. Tie, X., Li, G., Ying, Z., Guenther, A., and Madronich, S. 2006. Biogenic emissions of isoprenoids and NO in China and comparison to anthropogenic emissions. The Science of the total environment, 371, 238-251. Tsui, J. K.-Y., Guenther, A., Yip, W.-K., and Chen, F. 2009. A biogenic volatile organic compound emission inventory for Hong Kong, Atmospheric Environment, 43, 6442-6448. UNECE, 1979. The 1979 Geneva convention on long-range transboundary air pollution; 1979. http://www.unece.org/env. UNECE, 1998. Convention on long-range transboundary air pollution. The 1998 Aarhus Protocol on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs). http://www.unece.org/env/lrtap/pops_hl.html. UNEP, 2001. The Stockholm convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants. Unaited Nations Environmental Programme. http://www.chem.unep.ch/pops/newlayout/repdocs.html. UNEP, 2013. Emission Inventory Manual, Atmospheric Brown Could of United Nations Environment 311 

Programme. http://www.unep.org/delc/Portals/119/atmospheric/ABC_EIM.pdf. van der Werf et al. (J. T. Randerson, L. Giglio, G. J. Collatz, M. Mu, P. S. Kasibhatla, D. C. Morton, R. S. DeFries, Y. Jin, and T. T. van Leeuwen), 2010, Global fire emissions and the contribution of deforestation, savanna, forest, agricultural, and peat fires (1997–2009), Atmos. Chem. Phys., 10, 11707–11735, 2010, www.atmos-chem-phys.net/10/11707/2010/doi:10.5194/acp-10-11707-2010. van der Werf, G. R., Peters, W., van Leeuwen, T. T., and Giglio, L., 2011, What could have caused pre-industrial biomass burning emissions to exceed current rates? Clim. Past, 9, 289–306, 2013, www.clim-past.net/9/289/2013/doi:10.5194/cp-9-289-2013. Van der Werf, G.R., Randerson, J.T., Giglio, L., Collatz, G.J., and Kasibhatla, P.S., 2006, Interannual variability in global biomass burning emission from 1997 to 2004, Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 6, 3423-3441. van Leeuwen, T. T. and van der Werf, G. R., 2011, Spatial and temporal variability in the ratio of trace gases emitted from biomass burning, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 3611–3629, 2011, www.atmos-chem-phys.net/11/3611/2011/doi:10.5194/acp-11-3611-2011. Wang, S. X., Zhao, B., Cai, S. Y., Klimont, Z., Nielsen, C. P., Morikawa, T., Woo, J. H., Kim, Y., Fu, X., Xu, J. Y., Hao, J. M., and He, K. B. 2014. Emission trends and mitigation options for air pollutants in East Asia, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 14: 6571-6603, doi:10.5194/acp-14-6571-2014. Wang, X., Situ, S., Guenther, A., Chen, F. E. I., Wu, Z., Xia, B., and Wang, T. 2011 Spatiotemporal variability of biogenic terpenoid emissions in Pearl River Delta, China, with high-resolution land-cover and meteorological data, Tellus B, 63, 241-254. Wang, Z. H., Bai, Y. H., Zhang, S. Y. 2003. A biogenic volatile organic compounds emission inventory for Beijing. Atmospheric environment, 37 (27): 3771-3782 Wei, W., Wang, S., Chatani, S., Klimont, Z., Cofala, J., and Hao, J. 2008. Emission and speciation of non-methane volatile organic compounds from anthropogenic sources in China, Atmos. Environ., 42: 4976–4988. Weiss-Penzias, P., Jaffe, D., Swartzedruber, P., Hafner, W., Chand, D., Prestbo, E., 2007. Quantifying Asian and biomass burning sources of mercury using Hg/CO ratio in pollution plumes observed at the Mount Bachelor observatory. Atmospheric Environment 41: 4366-4379. Wiedinmyer, C. , X. Tie, A. Guenther, R. Neilson, C. Granier, 2006, Future changes in biogenic isoprene emissions: how might they affect regional and global atmospheric chemistry?, Earth Interactions , Vol. 10, paper 3. Wiedinmyer, C., Akagi, S. K., Yokelson R. J., Emmon, L. K., Al-Saadi, J. A., Orlando, J. J., and Soja, A. J., 2011, The Fire INventory from NCAR (FINN): a high resolution global model to estimate the emissions from open burning, Geosci. Model Dev., 4, 625–641, 2011, www.geosci-model-dev.net/4/625/2011/doi:10.5194/gmd-4-625-2011. 312 

Wu, Y., Wang, S., Streets, D.G., Hao, J., Chan, M., Jiang, J. 2006. Trends in anthropogenic mercury emissions in China from 1995 to 2003. Environemntal Science and Technology 40: 5312-5318. Xu, S., Liu, W., Tao, S. 2006. Emission of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in China. Environemntal Science and Technology 30: 702-708. Y. Zhao et al. 2011. Quantifying the uncertainties of a bottom-up emission inventory of anthropogenic atmospheric pollutants in China, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 11, 2295–2308, Yarwood, G., G. Wilson, C. Emery, and A. Guenther. 1999. Development of GloBEIS - A State of the Science Biogenic Emissions Modeling System. Final Report. Prepared for Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission. Yevich, R. and J. A. Logan, An assessment of biofuel use and burning of agricultural waste in the developing world, 2003, Global Biogeochemical Cycles, Vol. 17, No. 4, 1095, doi:10.1029/2002GB001952. Yienger, J. J. and Levy II, H. 1995. Empirical model of global soil-biogenic NO emissions, J. Geophys. Res., 100 (D6), 11,447-11,464, doi:10.1029/95JD00370. Zhang Jian, Shobha Kondragunta, Jessica Ram, Christopher Schmidt and Ho-Chun Huang, 2012, Near-real-time global biomass burning emissions product from geostationary satellite constellation, Journal of Geophysical Research, 117, D14201, doi:10.1029/2012JD017459, 2012. Zhang, Q., Streets, D. G., Carmichael, G. R., He, K. B., Huo, H., Kannari, A., Klimont, Z., Park, I. S., Reddy, S., Fu, J. S., Chen, D., Duan, L., Lei, Y., Wang, L. T., and Yao, Z. L. 2009. Asian emissions in 2006 for the NASA INTEX-B mission, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 9: 5131-5153, doi:10.5194/acp-9-5131-2009. Zhang, Q., Streets, D. G., He, K. B., Wang, Y., Richter, A., Burrows, J. P., Uno, I., Jang, C. J., Chen, D., Yao, Z., and Lei, Y. 2007. NO x emission trends for China, 1995–2004: The view from the ground and the view from space, J. Geophys. Res., 112: D22306, doi:10.1029/2007JD008684. Zhang, Y., Dou, H., Chang, B., Wei, Z., Qiu, W., Liu, S., Liu, W. and Tao, S. 2008. Emission of Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from indoor straw burning and emission inventory updating in China. Annalytical New York Academy Science 1140: 218-227. Zhang, Y.X. and Tao, S. 2009. Global atmospheric emission inventory of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) for 2004. Atmospheric Environment 43: 812-819. Zhao, Y., Zhang, J., and Nielsen, P. 2013. The effects of recent control policies on trends in emissions of anthropogenic atmospheric pollutants and CO 2 in China, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 13: 487-508, doi:10.5194/acp-13-487-2013. Zheng, J., Zheng, Z., Yu, Y., and Zhong, L. 2010. Temporal, spatial characteristics and uncertainty of 313 

biogenic VOC emissions in the Pearl River Delta region, China, Atmospheric Environment, 44, 1960-1969. 314 315 

# Chapter 7 Mitigation technologies of air pollutant emissions in East Asia 7.1 Introduction 

Intensive economic activity of the last decades and the associated high energy consumption have caused significant emissions of air pollutants in East Asia. China and Japan have become the second and third largest economies in the world. Cofala et al. (2012) reports that East Asia contributes about 36%, 29%, and 36% to global emissions of sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ), nitrogen oxides (NO x ), and particulate matter less than or equal to 2.5 μm (PM 2.5 ), respectively. Moreover, both emission calculations and satellite observations indicate that NO x emissions in China have experienced rapid increase during 1995-2010, with an annual average growth rate ranging between 5.5-7% (Zhao et al., 2013c; Zhang et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2012). In light of this situation, the application of effective mitigation measures is very important for the improvement of regional and global atmospheric environment. With the objectives of air quality improvement, soil acidification control, and global warming mitigation, the governments of East Asia have taken substantial measures to improve energy efficiency and reduce emissions of air pollutants. During the 11 th Five Year Plan (2006-2010), the Chinese government set a target to reduce the energy use per unit Gross Domestic Production (GDP) and SO 2 emissions by 20% and 10%, respectively (The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 2006). Japan has taken aggressive steps to achieve the committed targets in the Kyoto Protocol, which requires that annual CO 2 emissions during 2008-2012 should be 6% lower than those of 1990 (IEA, 2008). The vehicle emission standards in China and Japan have also been updating continuously in the past decade. Many studies have been conducted to estimate East Asia’s air pollutant emissions, and evaluate the effects of control policies on emissions (Streets et al., 2003; Zhang et al., 2009; Ohara et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2013d; Klimont et al., 2013). However, most previous studies estimated the air pollutant emissions before or in 2006. Kurokawa et al. (2013) developed an Asian emission inventory for 2000-2008, but paid limited attention to the application status of energy saving and pollution control measures. Zhao et al. (2013d) evaluated the impact of control policies on air pollutant emissions in China during 2005-2010. A comprehensive review of the mitigation measures in East Asia in the last decade, including energy saving and end-of-pipe measures, has not been presented; and their impact on air pollutant emissions remains inadequately understood. Current legislation and its implementation appear insufficient to achieve expected improvements in air quality. Consequently, Chinese government aims to reduce NO x and SO 2 emissions further by 10% and 8%, respectively (compared with 2010) during the 12 th Five Year Plan (2011–2015). Further, in 2012, China issued a new air quality standard with a threshold of 35 μg m -3 for an annual average PM 2.5 concentration, the attainment of which requires simultaneous reduction of SO 2 , NO x , PM 2.5 , and non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOC) to a large extent (Wang and Hao, 2012). It is of strategic importance to indicate the dimensions of the effort to achieve the governmental target, and to evaluate the impact of further control measures on future emission pathways. Some previous studies have presented future emission projections (Streets and Waldhoff, 2000; Klimont et al., 2001; Cofala et al., 2007; Ohara et al., 2007; Klimont et al., 2009; Xing et al., 2011; Cofala et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2013c). However, these projections were based on the emissions for the year 2005 or earlier, and 316 underestimated China’s economic growth experienced in the last decade, especially during the period from 2006 to 2010. What’s more, these previous projections did not anticipate new emission control policies envisaged in the 12 th Five Year Plan (published in December 2011; The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 2011), which may fundamentally change the future emission pathway. Latest projections include Cofala et al. (2012) and Zhao et al. (2013c). Cofala et al. (2012) projected global emissions of SO 2, NO x and PM 2.5 for four energy scenarios developed by IEA (2012a). They reproduced the historical emission trends with up-to-date activity levels, but did not envisage further end-of-pipe mitigation measures in the future. Zhao et al. (2013c) developed six NO x emission scenarios up to 2030 based on the 2010 emission inventory, and quantified the effects of various control policies, but the future trends of other pollutants were beyond the scope of this study. A comprehensive projection of multiple pollutants’ emissions incorporating up-to-date base-year data, control measures scheduled to be implemented, and other potential energy saving and end-of-pipe measures at different stringency levels, will contribute to both air pollution study and future decision making, but has not been presented in the previous studies. This study aims to review the recent application status of mitigation measures and quantify the effects of various mitigation measures on future emissions. First, we reviewed major control policies in East Asia in the last decade, and evaluated the impact of mitigation measures on air pollutant emissions during 2005-2010. Then, we projected future emissions of SO 2 , NO x , NMVOC, and particulate matter (PM) up to 2030 for six emission scenarios (Table 7.1.1), considering both energy-saving and end-of-pipe measures. Eventually, we reviewed previously developed projections and compared them with our work in order to achieve a more complete understanding of the effects of various uncertain factors on emission trends. 

Table 7.1.1 Definition of the energy and emission scenarios in this study. 

Energy scenario name Energy scenario definition Emission scenario name Emission scenario definition Business as usual (abbr. BAU) The BAU scenario is based on current legislations and implementation status (until the end of 2010). BAU[0] The BAU[0] scenario assumes the same energy saving policies as the BAU scenario. For end-of-pipe control strategy, it assumes that all current legislation (until the end of 2010) and the current implementation status will be followed during 2011-2030. BAU[1] The BAU[1] scenario assumes the same energy saving policies as the BAU scenario. For end-of-pipe control strategy, it assumes that new pollution control policies would be released and implemented, representing progressive approach towards future environmental policies. BAU[2] The BAU[2] scenario assumes the same energy saving policies as the BAU scenario. For end-of-pipe control strategy, it assumes that the technically feasible control technologies would be fully applied by 2030, regardless of the economic cost. Alternative The PC scenario PC[0] The PC[0] scenario assumes the same energy saving 317 policy (abbr. PC) assumes that new energy-saving policies will be released and enforced more stringently, including life style changes, structural adjustment and energy efficiency improvement. policies as the PC scenario, and the same end-of-pipe control strategy as the BAU[0] scenario. PC[1] The PC[1] scenario assumes the same energy saving policies as the PC scenario, and the same end-of-pipe control strategy as the BAU[1] scenario. PC[2] The PC[2] scenario assumes the same energy saving policies as the PC scenario, and the same end-of-pipe control strategy as the BAU[2] scenario. 

7.2 Current application of mitigation technologies 

Mitigation measures contributing to reductions of air pollutant emissions include energy saving measures, e.g., energy efficiency improvements, co-generation of heat and power, fuel substitution and end-of-pipe control measures e.g., dust collector and flue gas desulfurization installations. Traditionally, legislation specifies maximum allowed concentration of a given compound in the flue gas (exhaust). However, a smart mix of measures to simultaneously address energy conservation, air pollution and climate change mitigation is considerably cheaper than tackling either issue separately (Wang and Hao, 2012). Therefore, in this paper we review both the energy saving and end-of-pipe measures in East Asia. The domain of East Asia consists of five countries, i.e., China, Japan, South Korea, North Korea, and Mongolia. We focus on China, Japan, and South Korea, which are key energy consumers in the region and dominate emissions of air pollutants. With respect to air pollution policy, Japan and Korea have the longest tradition while China’s emission regulation has been emerging in the last decade at an impressive rate and has very ambitious future goals. Therefore, special attention is given to developments in China. 

7.2.1 Energy saving technologies 

Japan, South Korea, and China have released a number of policies addressing energy conservation and climate change mitigation. All of these efforts have sizable impacts on emissions of air pollutants and greenhouse gases (GHG). Under the Kyoto Protocol, Japan has to reduce its GHG emissions by 6% by 2008-2012 from the base year of 1990. To meet its overall 6% Kyoto target, the government aimed for a 0.6% reduction in anthropogenic GHG emissions compared with the base year and for a forest sink of 13 million tons of carbon (equivalent to an emissions reduction of 3.8%) during the first commitment period. An additional reduction of 1.6% was intended to be achieved using Kyoto mechanisms. In the “New National Energy Strategy”, formulated in May 2006, the Japanese government set a long-term target to improve energy intensity of GDP by an additional 30% by 2030, and to reduce the share of oil in the total primary energy supply to 40% or less (IEA, 2008). The Government of South Korea has made a commitment to reduce its GHG emissions by 30% compared to its business as usual projection by 2020 and has integrated this commitment into its Strategy for Green Growth announced in 2008. Considering the low proportion of renewable sources in total primary energy supply in Korea, the government has established an 11% target of new and renewable energy in total primary energy supply by 2030 (IEA, 2012b). 318 The Chinese government has set a target to reduce CO 2 emissions per unit GDP by 40-45% in 2020 compared with the 2005 levels. Coal accounts for 70% of China’s primary energy, which is a major contributor to air pollution. China has a plan for renewable green energy to account for 15% of its energy mix by 2020. It is also planned that coal will account for less than 50% of total energy consumption by 2030 (Wang and Hao, 2012). 

7.2.1.1 Power plants 1) China 

China’s efforts to save energy in the power sector include the following measures: (1) retirement of high-emission small units and promotion of large units; (2) promotion of advanced coal-fired power generation technologies; and (3) promotion of clean energy power. During 2006-2010, the Chinese government has shut down 77GW of small coal-fired units, including nearly all units less than 50 MW, and some old units between 50 and 200 MW (NDRC, 2011). The small plant closure program will be extended to shut an additional 20 GW of small units during 2011-2015, implying almost all units less than 100MW would be phased out by 2015 (The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 2012). At the same time, most new units built after 2005 were larger than 300 MW, smaller units were strictly prohibited. As a result, the capacity share of the units equal to or larger than 300MW rose from 50% in 2005 to 73% in 2010 (The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 2012). In addition, advanced supercritical (SC) and ultra-supercritical (USC) units, with an energy efficiency of 45% in comparison with an efficiency of 38% for traditional sub-critical units, have been developing rapidly during 2005-2010. Li et al. (2012) reported that the total capacities of SC/USC units increased from 7.3 GW in 2005 to 81.0 GW in 2009, representing 13.4% of total coal-fired capacity. In effect, the coal consumption per unit electricity supplied decreased from 370 gce/kWh in 2005 to 333 gce/kWh in 2010 (The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 2012). Driven by subsidy polices of the Chinese government, from 2005 to 2010, the capacities of hydro power, natural gas power, wind power, and solar power have increased dramatically from 117GW, 12GW, 1.3GW, and 0.07GW to 213GW, 27GW, 31GW, and 0.24 GW, respectively. As of 2010, clean and renewable energy power have accounted for over 24% of the total electricity generation in China (China Electric Power Yearbook Committee, 2006, 2011). 

2) Other countries 

The installed power generation capacity in Japan was well diversified, with coal, oil, and natural gas, nuclear and hydro contributing about 27%, 8%, 27%, 26%, and 8% of the total electricity generation in 2010, respectively. Other newer renewable energy sources still only play a very minor role, even given the significant percentage increase of bio-fuel, solar and wind power since 2000. In 2011, the share of nuclear power generation dropped dramatically to less than 10%, owing to the Fukushima nuclear power plant accident on March 11, 2011 (International Energy Agency, http://www.iea.org/statistics/). Nuclear power plants have been playing a crucial role in Japan’s energy strategy since the 1990s. According to a Nuclear Energy National Plan formulated in 2006, the Japanese government aimed to increase nuclear power to 30% or even up to 40% of total power generation towards 2030 and beyond 319 (IEA, 2008). However, the Fukushima nuclear accident made the future of nuclear power in Japan more uncertain. In South Korea, fossil fuels, including coal, oil and natural gas, accounted for 65.7% of the total electricity generated, followed by nuclear at 32.5%, and hydro at 1.2% in 2009 (IEA, 2012c). Nuclear power is a major component of Korea’s energy policy, and its percentage in total power generation is expected to keep increasing in the next decade, as five reactors are under construction and six more have been announced (IEA, 2012b). Korea has become one of the leaders in efficient operation and low-cost construction of nuclear power plants. 

7.2.1.2 Industrial sector 1) China 

The most detectable energy saving measures in China’s industry sector was the replacement of out-of-date production technologies with more energy-efficient ones. Cement production technologies in China include shaft, precalcined, and other rotary kilns. The penetration of precalcined kilns, the most energy-efficient technology, increased from 45% to about 80% from 2005 to 2010. Within precalcined kilns, the proportion of large plants ( ≥4000 t/d) increased from 33% to 60% during the same period (Zhao et al., 2013c; Zhao et al., 2013d). This change in technology mix would lead to reduced emission factors for SO 2 and PM, but such benefits are accompanied by an increased NO xemission factor. The iron and steel industries involve a series of interrelated processes, including coke oven, sinter machine, pig iron production, steel production (basic oxygen furnace or electric arc furnace), casting, and steel rolling. The share of coke produced in machinery coking ovens (versus indigenous ovens) increased from 82% in 2005 to 87% in 2010, reaching a peak of 91% in 2007 (NBS, 2007, 2011; Huo et al., 2012). The technology of coke dry quenching have accounted for over 80% of the coke production by 2010, contrasted by less than 30% in 2005. The share of blast furnace larger than 1,000 m 3 increased from 48% to 61% during 2005-2010 (The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 2012). Significant progress has also been made in the recycling of waste heat. The release ratios of machinery coke oven gas declined from 5.7% to 1.4% between 2005 and 2010. The release ratio of blast furnace flue gas in the making of pig iron dropped from 8.4% to 5.0% in the same period, and the recycled flue gas in basic oxygen furnaces increased from 60 to 79 Nm 3 /t-steel (Zhao et al., 2013d; CISA, 2011). In effect, the average energy intensity of cement and crude steel production decreased by 29% and 12%, respectively, during the five years (The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 2012). Notable structural adjustment and energy efficiency improvement have also taken place in other industries, such as glass production, ammonia synthesis, etc. More detailed information is provided in Table 3 of our previous paper (Zhao et al., 2013c). 

2) Other countries 

Japan’s industrial sector has played a central role in the efficient use of energy in the past decades. The energy efficiency improvement in industry was achieved through a mix of regulatory measures, voluntary actions, and economic policies. Factories and other workplaces with high energy consumption are required to prepare and submit mid- and long-term energy plans and periodical reports on energy use according to related regulations. On-site investigations have been conducted 320 since 2001 on high-energy consuming factories. The government has established several fiscal schemes to assist small and medium-sized enterprises in reducing their CO 2 emissions. These schemes include subsidies for the introduction of energy-efficient equipment and government loans (IEA, 2008; Energy Conservation Center of Japan, 2011). Resulting from these measures, Japan’s energy use in the industrial sector as a proportion of the total has been declining, from 26% in 2000 to 18% in 2010 (IEA, 2002, 2012c). During the same period, the average energy consumption per ton production of cement and crude steel decreased by 6.3% and 5.6%, respectively (Wang, 2010). In addition, coal and heavy fuel used in the industrial furnaces were being replaced with gaseous fuels. The share of coal and petroleum products has decreased from 64% to 56% during 2000-2010 (IEA, 2002, 2012c). In South Korea, enhancing energy efficiency is particularly important given that manufacturing and energy intensive industries remain predominant in the Korean economy. In 2004, the Korean Government adopted a General Energy Conservation and Efficiency Improvement Plan. However, in 2006, the International Energy Agency noted that Korea’s energy intensity (energy use per unit of GDP) has not been notably improved compared with 1990. The new target set in the Strategy for Green Growth (from 0.328 toe/1000USD in 2007 to 0.290 toe/1000USD in 2013, and 0.233 toe/1000USD in 2020) appear to be an improvement on the targets in the General Energy Conservation and Efficiency Improvement Plan (IEA, 2012b; UNEP, 2010). These policies to reduce energy intensity in the industrial sector are enforced through a “voluntary agreement” between the government and large energy-consuming companies in order to reduce energy consumption. The government also tried to improve compliance by monitoring voluntary agreements with industry, to ensure they achieve the expected targets, and consider alternative policies in case voluntary targets are not met (IEA, 2006; UNEP, 2010). 

7.2.1.3 Domestic sector and open burning 1) China 

China’s energy saving measures in the domestic sector include lowering energy service demand and promotion of energy-efficient and low-emission technologies. The Chinese government released an “energy conservation design standard for new heating residential buildings” in 1986, which was updated by a new standard in 1996. The 1986 standard and 1996 standard implied the energy demand for heating per unit building area should be 30% and 50% lower than the original 1980 standard. According to the survey conducted by Ministry of Construction, the proportion of compliance (of the 1996 standard) increased from only 5.7% in 2000 to 95.7% in 2006, which contributed greatly to building energy conservation (THUBERC, 2009). A new energy conservation standard, implying 65% energy saving compared with the 1980 standard, was issued in March 2010 and was scheduled to be implemented from Aug 2010 onwards. This new standard is expected to be enforced effectively during the 12 th Five-Year Plan period (The State Council of the People's Republic of China, 2012). Replacement of energy-intensive technologies with clean or renewable energy sources is vital for both energy saving and emission reduction. The energy consumption for heating per unit building area using combined heat and power generation (CHP) accounts for only 65% that of residential boilers or stoves (THUBERC, 2009). The heat supplied by CHP increased from 1926 PJ to 2808 PJ during 2005-2010 (China Electric Power Yearbook Committee, 2006, 2011), and the share of district heating in North China increased consequently from 22% to 32% according to our bottom-up model. People 321 tend to use cleaner fuels for heating and cooking as incomes rise. Direct combustion of biomass has been gradually replaced with commercial fuels in the last decade, and its share in rural cooking decreased from 38% to 31% during 2005-2010 according to our bottom-up model. In addition, natural gas utilization as a residential fuel enjoys the highest priority according to the “national natural gas utilization policy” (NDRC, 2007). Biogas and solar water heaters were also promoted with subsidy policies. As a result, the production of biogas and ownership of solar water heater both doubled during 2005-2010. Since 1997, the government enacted a series of regulations and laws to prohibit field burning (Yan et al., 2006). China’s Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP) released a notice to strengthen the prohibition of open burning before the harvest season almost every year (http://www.zhb.gov.cn/). Moreover, since 2004, MEP has been monitoring agricultural field burning with satellites, and a report of the numbers and locations of fire points has been published every day (http://hjj.mep.gov.cn/stjc/). The utilization of remote sensing capability is beneficial for local officials to identify field open burning at the earliest time and subsequently take quick action to forbid such behaviour. 

2) Other countries 

Similar to the industrial sector, the Japanese government set a mandatory scheme for the reporting of energy efficiency measures for large-scale commercial and residential buildings. These measures are complemented by voluntary energy efficiency standards in the building codes, which were first introduced in 1980 and strengthened in 1992 (1993 for non-residential buildings) and 1999. As of 2005, 30% of newly-built houses and 85% of buildings with a total floor area greater than 2,000 m 2complied with the voluntary energy efficiency standards (IEA, 2008). The energy efficiencies of domestic appliances are limited by the ambitious Top Runner program, where energy efficiency performance targets are set by taking as the basis the level of the most energy-efficient products on the market at the time of the value-setting process. This program has been continuously extended to cover nearly all kinds of appliances in residential and commercial buildings, among other things such as vehicles (see the next section). Top Runner targets have been consistently met or exceeded. For example, the efficiency of air conditioners and refrigerators increased by 68% and 55% during the target period (1997-2004 for air conditioner, and 1998-2004 for refrigerators), both exceeding the targets of 66% and 31%. New targets were set for air conditioners and refrigerators the next year after the original targets were met (IEA, 2008; Energy Conservation Center of Japan, 2011). In Korea, the building energy codes have been at a relatively low level compared with other developed countries for a long time (IEA, 2006). A performance based strong building design code, which limits total energy use per unit area, applied to all commercial buildings over 10,000 square metres in July 2011 (IEA, 2012b). Korea is a world leader in district heating, an energy-efficient means of heating homes and providing heat to industrial facilities. About 1.8 million Korean households are now supplied with district heating and cooling, covering about 13% of the market (IEA, 2006, 2012b). Korea has also been working to promote the energy efficiency standards and labeling program, which has required companies to label the energy efficiency of products in 18 categories, including refrigerators, air-conditioners, etc. A ban on incandescent lights, which are 322 considered to have low energy performance, will be introduced by 2013 in order to promote the diffusion of LEDs with three to five times higher energy-efficiency (IEA, 2006, UNEP, 2010). 

7.2.1.4 Transportation sector 1) China 

The explosive growth of vehicle population is one of the major driving forces to the rapid growth in air pollutant emissions in China, especially in urban areas. Facing frequent traffic jams and severe air pollution episodes, Shanghai and Beijing have introduced laws to control vehicle population; more recently another eight cities consider similar restrictions. Efforts to establish a good public transportation system and to guide the public in choosing more efficient public transportation, especially in the urban areas, might help to reduce congestion and pollutant emissions (Wang and Hao, 2012). Several fuel efficiency standards for light-duty vehicles have been implemented in China, including “limits of fuel consumption for passenger cars” in 2004, and “limits of fuel consumption for light duty commercial vehicles” in 2007. As a result, during 2005-2010, the fuel efficiency of new gasoline passenger cars increased from 11.0 km l -1 to 13.5 km l -1 (Zhao et al., 2013c). A new standard entitled “fuel consumption evaluation methods and targets for passenger cars” was issued in 2011, which, if implemented successfully, would increase the fuel efficiency of gasoline passenger cars to 14.3 km l -1 by 2015. The implementation of fuel economy standards could have significant effects on energy conservation. Oliver et al. (2009) estimated that the implementation of fuel economy standards for light-duty passenger vehicles resulted in a conservation of about 2.3 billion liters (equivalent of 1.7 million tons) of gasoline during 2003-2006, and the corresponding expense savings due to avoided gasoline purchase totaled about 1.2 billion USD. Wang et al. (2010) indicated that the implementation of the 2011 standard during 2012-2020 will achieve a cumulative reduction in gasoline use by 5.31 billion liters. The fuel economy of new heavy duty diesel vehicles was roughly unchanged (about 3.6 km l -1 ) as of 2011. A “fuel consumption limits for heavy-duty commercial vehicles (the first stage)” was issued in January 2012, and was subsequently implemented in July, 2012. Due to a relatively limited understanding of the heavy-duty vehicle market and fuel consumption level at that time, this 1st stage standard was intentionally set at a level that manufacturers could meet relatively easily. In September 2012, China’s Ministry of Industry and Information Technology put forward a proposal for a 2nd stage fuel consumption standard for new commercial heavy-duty vehicles, which was expected to tighten vehicle consumption limits for tractors, trucks and coach by an average of 10.5% to 14.5% compared to the limits under the 1st stage standard (ICCT, 2013). The promotion of new energy vehicles is beneficial for both energy saving and relief of heavy pollution in urban areas. China has launched several initiatives to promote electric vehicles, of which the most important one was the “10 cities, 1,000 cars” project. This project, initiated in 2009, aimed to promote over 60,000 new energy vehicles in 13 cities (extended to 25 cities later) by the end of 2012. According to Yang (2012), the population of electric vehicles reached 12,000 in these 25 cities in 2010. The Chinese government issued a development plan for new energy vehicles in 2012, in which the population of electric vehicles was expected to increase to 0.5 million and 5 million in 2015 and 2020, respectively, through a series of subsidy policies. 323 

2) Other countries 

In Japan, despite the increase of vehicle population, the energy consumption in transport has remained stable or even decreased slightly since 1996 (Energy Conservation Center of Japan, 2011). This is mainly attributed to the improvements in the energy efficiency of both freight and passenger vehicles. Japan has included vehicles in its Top Runner Program. For passenger vehicles, there has been a consistent improvement in the average fuel economy from 13.5 km l -1 in 2000 to 17.8 km l -1 in 2009, combined with a recent reduction in annual driving distance (Energy Conservation Center of Japan, 2011). Japan was the first country in the world with fuel efficiency standards for heavy-duty vehicles. The energy efficiency of freight vehicles decreased from 851 kcal/t-km in 2000 to 722 kcal/t-km in 2008 (Institute of Energy Economics of Japan, 2010). In January 2006, the Korean government introduced its first mandatory fuel economy standards requiring car manufacturers to meet average fuel economy standards of 12.4 km/l for vehicles with engines of less than 1,500 cubic centimeters (IEA, 2006). In July 2009, Korea announced a new fuel economy standard for car manufacturers and importers of 17 km l -1 , which is similar to standards prevailing in the European Union and the United States (IEA, 2012b). Korea has been systematically promoting compressed natural gas (CNG) buses since 2000. The government provides financial assistance for the purchase of natural gas vehicles and partly supports fuel costs. In addition, Korea revised its Clean Air Conservation Act to replace buses with the most frequent circulation within the city limits with low-emission CNG buses. As of the end of 2008, 19,000 intra-city buses and 429 garbage trucks have utilized CNG. 

7.2.2 End-of-pipe control technologies 

Japan’s emission control policies are among the most stringent in the world. The Air Pollution Control Act was first introduced in 1968, and has been revised (introducing stricter limits) several times. Compared with Japan, China’s emission regulation has a shorter history but has been emerging at an impressive rate. The 11 th Five-Year Plan set targets to reduce SO 2 emissions by 10%, measured in 2010 against 2005 levels. The actual reduction in SO 2 emissions was as large as 14.3% during 2005-2010 (Chinese Environmental Statistical Bulletin, http://www.mep.gov.cn/zwgk/hjtj/). The 12 th Five-Year Plan aimed at 8% and 10% reductions in SO 2 and NO X emissions, respectively, for the period of 2010-2015. An aggressive Clean Air Action Plan was issued in September 2013. It aimed to reduce the PM 10 concentrations in major cities across China by 10%, measured in 2017 against 2012 levels. More stringent targets were set for major metropolitan regions. For example, it is required that the PM 2.5 concentrations of the Jing-jin-ji region, the Yangtze River Delta (YRD) region and the Pearl River Delta (PRD) region be reduced by 25%, 20%, and 15%, respectively, during the same period. Detailed control policies are also put forward to ensure the achievement of the aggressive targets. 

7.2.2.1 Power plants 1) China 

Power plants, due to their larger scales and easier inspection compared with other sources, have been the focus of China’s control policies in the past decade. Based on a thorough literature survey for the control policies and control technologies in power sector, we summaries the penetrations of major control technologies in the power sector of China, Japan, and South Korea in Table 7.2.1. 324 During the Chinese 10 th Five-Year Plan period (2001-2005), the State Environmental Protection Administration (SEPA) targeted to reduce the national SO 2 emissions in 2000 by 10% by the year 2005. The key measures to fulfill this target include the installation of flue gas desulfurization (FGD) in power plans. However, due to the massive increase in fossil-fuel consumption, the lag of the introduction of desulfurization equipment, and the low efficiency of the installed desulfurization devices, the national SO 2 emissions in 2005 were 27% higher than those in 2000 (Wang and Hao, 2012). The 11 th Five-Year Plan set targets to reduce SO 2 emissions by 10%, measured in 2010 against 2005 levels. To achieve the targets, several regulations have been enforced in the power sector: all new thermal power units as well as most existing ones must have FGD systems installed, and small units with low energy efficiency should be gradually shut down. By the year 2010, over 82.6% of coal-fired power plants (about 88% of pulverized coal combustion plants), up to 560 gigawatts (GW) have installed FGD (MEP, 2011). The amount of coal washing has increased from 0.70 billion tons in 2005 to 1.65 billion tons in 2010, resulting in a coal washing ratio increase from 33.3% in 2005 to 50.8% in 2010 (Wang and Hao, 2012). The recently released 12 th Five-Year Plan aims at another 8% reduction in total SO 2 emissions, measured in 2015 against 2010 levels. This new plan requires nearly all coal-fired power plants be equipped with high efficiency FGD facilities, and the removal rate be raised to as high as 95%. Low NO x combustion technology (mainly Low NO x Burner, LNB) was the only NO x control technology widely used in China’s power plants before 2005. The penetration of LNB (including the combination of LNB and flue gas denitrification) in coal-fired power plants was estimated to be 22.3% in 2000, 50.5% in 2005, and 87.9% in 2010, based on the assumptions of Zhao et al. (2013c). Flue gas denitrification, including selective catalytic reduction (SCR) and selective non-catalytic reduction (SNCR) began to be installed from 2005 onwards. The installed capacity of power plants equipped with SCR/SNCR increased from 4.2 GW in 2005 to 80.7 GW in 2010 (MEP, 2011), accounting for 1.1% and 12.8% of the total coal-fired power plants, respectively. 57% of the total SCR/SNCR capacities in 2010 were located in the three “key regions”, including the Greater Beijing region (including Beijing, Tianjin, Hebei), the Yangtze River Delta (YRD, including Shanghai, Jiangsu, Zhejiang), and the Pearl River Delta (PRD, mainly Guangdong province). Current control measures are not able to alter the growing trend of China’s NO x emissions. In the 12 th Five-Year Plan, the Chinese government aims to reduce the national 2010 NO x emissions by 10% by the year 2015. According to the plan, all new-built thermal power plants should be equipped with low NO xcombustion technologies and flue gas denitrification (SCR/SNCR) during 2011-2015, while existing thermal power plants should be upgraded with low NO x combustion technologies and large units ( ≥

300 MW) with flue gas denitrification. The control of particulate matter in the power sector has achieved noticeable progress. A stringent PM emission standard for power plants was issued in 2003 (GB13223-2003). Since then, all new and rebuilt units have to meet the PM in-stack concentration standard of 50 mg m -3 . As a result, over 92% of pulverized coal units installed electrostatic precipitators (ESP) by 2005, and the rest are equipped with wet scrubbers (WET). In addition, fabric filters (FF) have been put into commercial use for the large units in the past five years. The proportion of pulverized coal combustion units equipped with FF increased to 7% by 2010 (Zhao et al., 2013a). Furthermore, the rapid deployment of wet-FGD also helped to reduce PM emissions due to its ancillary benefit on PM removal (Zhao et al., 2010). In 2011, 325 MEP released a new emission standard for power plants with a PM concentration threshold of 30 mg m-3 for the whole country and 20 mg m -3 for “key regions”. Power plants burning low ash content coal could attain the 30 mg m -3 threshold by installing ESP and wet-FGD simultaneously. For units burning high ash coal, or when the 20 mg m -3 threshold applies, high efficiency deduster (HED), including FF and electrostatic-fabric integrated precipitator, it proves to be the only commercially available control technology. 

2) Other countries 

In Japan, application of best available technologies to control SO 2 , NO x , and PM is required for most power generation units across the country. The penetrations of wet-FGD, LNB+SCR and high efficiency deduster (HED, e.g., FF, and electrostatic-fabric integrated precipitator) are all as high as 90-100%, and increased slightly during 2005-2010 (Klimont et al., 2009). In South Korea, FGD systems have been installed for most power generation units; the penetration increased slightly from 95% to 97% during 2005-2010. For NO x , SCR has been the dominant control technology, with its share increasing from 56% in 2005 to 68% in 2010. About one-third of coal-fired power generation units have been equipped with HED by 2010, and the rest was equipped with ESP (NIER, 2010; NIER 2013; Clean Air Policy Supporting System, CAPSS, http://airemiss.nier.go.kr/). 326 

> Table 7.2.1 Penetrations of major control technologies in the power sector in China, Japan, and South Korea (% of fuel use).
> Energy technology Control technology Base year  BAU[0]/PC[0]  BAU[1]/PC[1]  BAU[2]/PC[2] 2005  2010  2020  2030  2020  2030  2030 Country  China  Japan  South Korea  China  Japan  South Korea  China  Japan  South Korea  China  Japan  South Korea  China  Japan  South Korea  China  Japan  South Korea  China  Japan  South Korea Grate boilers CYC (PM)  12  - - 12  - - 0 - - 0 - - 0 - - 0 - - 0 - -WET (PM)  88  - - 88  - - 100  - - 100  - - 100  - - 100  - - 0 - -HED (PM)  0 - - 0 - - 0 - - 0 - - 0 - - 0 - - 100  - -Pulverized coal combustion WET (PM)  8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0ESP (PM)  92  3 72  93  2 67  90  0 64  80  0 61  65  0 64  50  0 61  0 0 0HED (PM)  0 97  28  7 98  33  10  100  36  20  100  39  35  100  36  50  100  39  100  100  100 FGD (SO 2)  12  97  95  88  98  97  93  100  98  96  100  98  100  100  98  100  100  98  100  100  100 LNB (NO X) 53  10  23  75  0 13  82  0 13  84  0 13  8 0 13  0 0 13  0 0 0LNB+SNCR (NO X) 0 0 5 1 0 5 1 0 5 1 0 5 6 0 5 7 0 5 0 0 0LNB+SCR (NO X) 1 90  56  12  100  68  12  100  72  12  100  76  86  100  72  94  100  76  100  100  100 Fluidized bed combustion WET (PM)  8 - - 0 - - 0 - - 0 - - 0 - - 0 - - 0 - -ESP (PM)  92  - - 100  - - 90  - - 80  - - 65  - - 50  - - 0 - -HED (PM)  0 - - 0 - - 10  - - 20  - - 35  - - 50  - - 100  - -CFB-FGD (SO 2)  17  - - 53  - - 66  - - 80  - - 100  - - 100  - - 100  - -SNCR (NO X) 0 - - 0 - - 0 - - 0 - - 30  - - 80  - - 70  - -SCR (NO X) 0 - - 0 - - 0 - - 0 - - 5 - - 20  - - 30  - -Natural gas power LNB (NO X) 30  80  20  74  61  15  87  52  15  91  50  15  50  52  15  10  50  15  0 0 0LNB+SNCR (NO X) 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 5 0 0 9 0 0 10  0 0LNB+SCR (NO X) 0 20  30  5 39  46  5 48  50  5 50  54  45  48  50  81  50  54  90  100  100 Notes: CYC, cyclone dust collector; WET, wet scrubber; ESP, electrostatic precipitator; HED, high efficiency deduster; FGD, flue gas desulfurization; CFB-FGD, flue gas desulfurization for circulated fluidized bed; LNB, low NO X combustion technology; SCR, selective catalytic reduction; SNCR, selective non-catalytic reduction. The table gives the national average penetrations of major control technologies. However, the penetrations vary with provinces. The penetration of the “key region” is usually larger than that of other regions. 327

7.2.2.2 Industrial sector 1) China 

SO 2 and NO x control technologies have been rarely installed in the industry sector. In recent years, FGD units to control SO 2 have been installed for small number of coal-fired boilers and sintering plants in selected regions while SO 2 emissions from most industrial sources remain uncontrolled. Similarly for NO x , some new precalcined cement kilns were equipped with low NO x combustion measures, while end-of-pipe controls like SCR/SNCR have been seldom installed in the cement industry so far. According to current emission standard, the flue gas of dual-pressure nitric acid production processes could be exhausted if untreated, while other nitric acid production processes were usually equipped with SCR or absorption methods to attain the standard (Tang, 2006; Wang and Zeng, 2008). In contrast, China has been controlling PM emissions from industrial sources since the late 1980s. The Chinese government’s new emission standards were the driving force for the implementation of advanced PM control technologies. However, the emission standards for industrial sources have been updated slowly for a long time. Before 2010, effective industrial emission standards only include a comprehensive emission standard for industrial kilns and furnaces (GB9078-1988, 1996), and several emission standards for specific industries, such as industrial boilers (GB13271-1991, 2001), cement plants (GB4915-1985, 1996, 2004), and coking oven (GB16171-1996). The 11 th Five-Year Plan (for the period 2006-2010) requested to promote high efficiency FF in some high-emission industries, though none of the emission standards were updated during this period. In addition, as mentioned in Sect. 7.2.1.2, out-of-date production technologies have been rapidly replaced with larger-scale and more energy-efficient ones. The latter are usually accompanied with high efficiency end-of-pipe removal technologies. There is little statistical information on the penetration of PM control technologies in China’s emission sources. Therefore, we estimated their penetrations with limited survey results, and by assuming that the emission sources comply with the emission standards of the day when it was built or retrofitted. Most industrial boilers were historically equipped with WET and cyclone dust collectors (CYC), while high efficiency FF began to penetrate recently (Lei et al., 2011; Zhao et al., 2013a). There have been three emission standards for the cement industry in China (GB4915-1985, 1996, 2004). CYC was applied to recycle the raw material before publication of the first standard. After that, WET, ESP and FF were gradually developed and introduced into the marketplace, enabling cement plants to reduce PM emissions. Nearly all cement kilns have been equipped with ESP and FF by 2010. As mentioned above, the iron and steel industries involve a series of interrelated processes. The blast furnaces (for pig iron production) in China are usually equipped with washing tower and double venturi, which have approximately the same removal efficiency as the combination of ESP and WET. ESP and FF have become the major control technologies for sintering plants and basic oxygen furnace by 2010, while large numbers of electric arc furnace and coking ovens were equipped with WET (Lei et al., 2011; Zhao et al., 2013a). The penetrations of control technologies for industrial boilers are presented in Table 7.2.2, while those for industrial processes are summarized in Table 7.2.3. During 2010-2012, emission standards for specific industries, e.g., iron and steel, glass, non-ferrous metals, emerged explosively. These new standards imposed stringent threshold on SO 2 , NO x , and PM emissions, which will be described in detail in Sect. 7.3.2.2. 328 The only control measures for NMVOC emissions in China’s industry sector are associated with fossil fuel exploitation and distribution. China has released a series of emission standards for gasoline distribution, including GB20950 for bulk gasoline terminals, GB20951 for gasoline transport and GB20952 for gasoline service stations. The attainment of these standards requires: (1) installation of vapor recovery systems and modified loading techniques (Stage IA control) for loading and unloading operations; (2) improvement in the service station tank (Stage IB control, e.g., vapor balancing systems) and installation of vapor balancing system between a vehicle and service station tank (Stage II control); (3) installation of internal floating covers (IFC) or secondary seals for new-built or retrofitted storage tanks. These emission standards were scheduled to be implemented in relatively large cities of “key regions” from 2008-2010 onwards, and in relatively large cities in other provinces from 2012-2015 onwards. Considering the above, we estimated vapor recycling systems have been installed for about 16% of all the gasoline storage and distribution operations in China (see Table 7.2.3 for details). 

2) Other countries 

In Japan, industrial emissions are limited strictly by the Air Pollution Control Act, which was first introduced in 1968, and was revised (introducing stricter limits) several times. Detailed emission thresholds are set given the facility type (32 major types are distinguished, each type is further divided into several sub-types) and scale of the facility. The thresholds have generally remained unchanged since 1995, but they are still among the most stringent in the world. Industrial sources are frequently inspected by local government, typically every three years (Ministry of the Environment of Japan, 2013). Under strict regulations, the vast majority of blast furnace, basic oxygen furnace, electric arc furnace, and cement kilns are controlled with HED. The control measures portfolio for industrial boilers, sintering plants, glass production, and coke oven is a mix of ESP and HED. Effective SO 2 removal technologies are applied for various industries, including sintering, cement production, coke oven, sulfuric acid production, etc. According to the estimation of IIASA (http://gains.iiasa.ac.at/models/), the average removal efficiency for the above industrial sources is 70-80% in the period of 2005-2010. In contrast with PM and SO 2 , dominant control measures for NO x emissions are low NO x combustion technologies by 2010. Flue gas denitrification facilities are not wide-spread due to relatively high cost. 329 

> Table 7.2.2 Penetrations of major control technologies in industrial and domestic combustion sources in China, Japan, and South Korea (% of fuel use).
> Energy technology Control technology Base year  BAU[0]/PC[0]  BAU[1]/PC[1]  BAU[2]/PC[2] 2005  2010  2020  2030  2020  2030  2030 Country  China Japan  South Korea China Japan  South Korea China Japan  South Korea  China Japan  South Korea China Japan  South Korea China Japan  South Korea China Japan  South Korea Industrial grate boilers CYC (PM)  23  0 25  0 0 23  0 0 20  0 0 17  0 0 20  0 0 17  0 0 0WET (PM)  73  0 12  95  0 9 95  0 9 95  0 9 60  0 9 20  0 9 0 0 0ESP (PM)  0 50  16  0 50  16  0 50  16  0 50  16  20  50  16  40  50  16  0 0 0HED (PM)  0 50  47  5 50  52  5 50  55  5 50  58  20  50  55  40  50  58  100  100  100 FGD (SO 2)  0 42  80  1 42  85  1 42  88  1 42  90  40  42  88  80  42  90  100  100  100 LNB (NO X) 0 65  0 0 80  0 0 80  0 0 80  0 91  80  0 100  80  0 0 0 0LNB+SCR (NO X) 0 20  0 0 20  0 0 20  0 0 20  0 0 20  0 0 20  0 100  100  100 Residential boilers CYC (PM)  23  50  60  14  50  51  12  50  45  10  50  40  0 50  45  0 50  40  0 50  50 WET (PM)  63  0 40  78  0 49  81  0 55  85  0 60  80  0 55  60  0 60  50  0 0HED (PM)  0 50  0 0 50  0 0 50  0 0 50  0 20  50  0 40  50  0 50  50  50 DC (SO 2)  0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 10  0 0 20  0 0 40  0 0 100  100  100 Coal stoves  STV_ADV_C  0 25  10  0 50  13  0 50  18  0 50  20  10  50  18  30  50  20  100  100  100 Biomass stoves  STV_ADV_B  0 35  30  0 48  35  0 70  35  0 78  35  10  70  35  30  78  35  50  50  50 STV_PELL  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 50  50  50 Notes: DC, application of (low-sulfur) derived coal; STV_ADV_C, replacement of advanced coal stove; STV_ADV_B, replacement of advanced biomass stove (e.g. better combustion condition, catalytic stove); STV_PELL, biomass pellet stove.

330 Emission standards for industrial sources in South Korea are generally less stringent than those of Japan and more stringent than those of China (Ministry of Environment of South Korea, 2013). In contrast with Japan, the control measure portfolio for cement kilns is an equal mix of ESP and HED; ESPs still dominated the PM removal technologies for industrial boilers and sintering machines, and HEDs have not been widely applied. FGD system was widely applied for some high-emitting sources like industrial boilers and sintering plants, while penetrations of 85% and 100%, respectively, by 2010 (NIER, 2013; NIER 2010). Similar to Japan, dominant control measures for NO x emissions are low NO x combustion technologies by 2010. To reduce NMVOC emissions, the South Korean government has applied facility management standards for petroleum refineries and petrochemical product manufacturing facilities, oil storage facilities, gas stations, organic solvent and ink manufacturing facilities, and ship construction facilities in metropolitan areas, like the Seoul metropolitan region (Ministry of Environment of South Korea, 2013). 

Table 7.2.3 Penetrations of major control technologies for selected industrial process in China. (1) SO 2                                                   

> Industrial process Control technology Base year BAU[0]/PC[0] BAU[1]/PC[1] BAU[2]/PC[2] 2005 2010 2020 2030 2020 2030 2030 Sintering FGD 010 20 40 95 100 100 Coke oven FGD for coal filling process 000010 10 0FGD for coke oven gas 000010 10 0Combination of the technologies above 000030 50 100 Glass production (float process) FGD 000050 90 100 Sulfuric acid production Ammonia acid desulfurization method 000040 80 100

(2) NO X                                      

> Industrial process Control technology Base year BAU[0]/PC[0] BAU[1]/PC[1] BAU[2]/PC[2] 2005 2010 2020 2030 2020 2030 2030 Sintering SNCR 000036 54 20 SCR 000024 36 80 Precalcined cement kiln LNB 30 35 35 35 30 25 0LNB+SNCR 000030 45 0

331 LNB+SCR 0 0 0 0 20 30 100 Glass production (float process) OXFL 0 0 0 0 80 88 70 SCR 0 0 0 0 10 12 30 Nitric acid (dual pressure process) ABSP 10 12 12 12 18 18 18 SCR 15 18 18 18 72 82 82 ABSP+SCR 0 0 0 0 0 0 0Nitric acid (other process) ABSP 60 63 66 66 5 5 0SCR 30 32 34 34 15 15 0ABSP+SCR 0 0 0 0 80 80 100 Notes: ABSP, absorption method; OXFL, oxy-fuel combustion technology. 

(3) PM 

Industrial process Control technology Base year BAU[0]/PC[0] BAU[1]/PC[1] BAU[2]/PC[2] 2005 2010 2020 2030 2020 2030 2030 Sintering (flue gas) CYC 5 0 0 0 0 0 0WET 20 5 0 0 0 0 0ESP 65 75 80 80 70 60 0HED 10 20 20 20 30 40 100 Blast furnace (flue gas) WET 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 ESP 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 Basic oxygen furnace ESP 40 30 20 20 10 0 0HED 60 70 80 80 90 100 100 Electric arc furnace WET 60 30 20 20 0 0 0ESP 30 50 50 50 40 20 0HED 10 20 30 30 60 80 100 Coke oven WET 100 100 100 100 50 30 0HED 0 0 0 0 50 70 100 Precalcined cement kiln WET 1 0 0 0 0 0 0ESP 52 40 35 30 20 5 0HED 47 60 65 70 80 95 100 Glass production CYC 5 0 0 0 0 0 0332 WET 25 20 20 20 0 0 0ESP 68 75 75 75 85 75 0HED 3 5 5 5 15 25 100 Brick production CYC 40 30 30 30 20 0 0WET 8 20 20 20 40 50 0ESP 0 20 20 20 40 50 0HED 0 0 0 0 0 0 100 Notes: CMN, common control of fugitive emissions; HIEF, high-efficiency control of fugitive emissions. 333 

(4) NMVOC 

Industrial process Control technology Base year BAU[0]/PC[0] BAU[1]/PC[1] BAU[2]/PC[2] 2005 2010 2020 2030 2020 2030 2030 Coke oven No control 100 100 100 100 55 20 0End of pipe control measures 0 0 0 0 45 80 100 Refinery No control 100 100 87 80 20 0 0Leak detection and repair program 0 0 10 15 30 15 0Covers on oil and water separators 0 0 3 5 10 5 0Combination of the above options 0 0 0 0 40 80 100 Plant oil extraction No control 95 90 84 80 20 0 0Activated carbon adsorption 5 10 13 15 50 50 0Schumacher type DTDC and activated carbon adsorption 0 0 3 5 25 35 0Schumacher type DTDC and new recovery section 0 0 0 0 5 15 100 Pharmacy No control 100 100 90 85 15 0 0Primary measures and low-level end-of-pipe measures 0 0 10 15 50 30 0Primary measures and high-level end-of-pipe measures 0 0 0 0 35 70 100 Gasoline storage 

No control 100 95 75 60 25 0 0IFC (Internal floating covers or secondary seals) 

0 5 25 40 75 100 100 Gasoline loading and unloading 

No control 100 85 50 50 25 0 0Stage IA (Vapor recovery systems and modified loading techniques) 

0 15 50 50 75 100 100 service station 

No control 100 85 50 50 25 0 0Stage IB + Stage II (Improvement in service station tank and vapor balancing system between a vehicle and service station tank) 

0 15 50 50 75 100 100 334 Crude oil storage and distribution               

> No control 100 100 100 100 75 50 0IFC + Stage IA + Stage IB + Storage II 000025 50 100

7.2.2.3 Domestic sector 1) China 

The key emission sources are cooking and heating stoves burning solid fuels, primarily coal and fuelwood. There is only limited legislation addressing these sources although there have been several programmes and initiatives to introduce improved stoves as well as smokeless fuel (briquettes) or ban coal from city centres. Larger residential and commercial boilers (from a few hundred kW to over a MW size) are often equipped with WET and CYC (see Table 7.2.2). Previous research found briquette stoves have lower emission factors for SO 2 and PM (Lei et al., 2011). We estimate that in the period 2005-2010, briquette accounted for 6-7% of total residential coal consumption in China (NBS, 2007, 2008a, b, 2009, 2011a, b). 

2) Other countries 

In Japan, about half of all mid-size residential and commercial boilers are equipped with HED, driven by the stringent regulation of local government. The status of South Korea is similar to China, where dominant control technologies for mid-size residential and commercial boilers are CYC and WET. (Gains-Asia model of IIASA, http://gains.iiasa.ac.at/models/). In 2000, the Japanese government issued a regulation for small incinerators, with the purpose of mitigating dioxin pollution (Ministry of the Environment of Japan, 2013). In effect, small incinerators, once popular in Japan, dwindled rapidly, which proved beneficial for the reduction of PM emissions (Ministry of the Environment of Japan, 2013; Wakamatsu et al., 2013). The principal option to reduce the PM and NMVOC emissions of coal-fired or biomass stoves is a switch to a newer type of installation, e.g., installing a catalyst or non-catalyst insert, using primary and secondary air deflectors, etc. Such kinds of improved stoves, among others, are popular in the U.S. and have been gradually spreading in Japan and Korea(see Table 7.2.2). 

7.2.2.4 Transportation sector 1) China 

Implementation of more stringent emission standards is the most cost-effective way to control emissions from new vehicles. China has issued emission standards for new vehicles and engines based on European Union Standards, and the implementation time and penetrations of major vehicle emission standards in China is shown in Figure 7.2.1 and Table 7.2.4, respectively. At the national level, phase I, II and III standards (similar to Euro I, II and III, respectively) began to be put into effect in 2000, 2004, and 2007. The Euro IV standard for light duty vehicles were also implemented in 2011. Euro IV emission standard for heavy duty diesel vehicles was first planned to be implemented in 2010. However, it was postponed by the MEP due to several factors. For example, a sufficient supply of low sulfur fuel that complied with the Euro IV standard was unavailable (Wu et al., 2012). MEP recently 335 announced that it would finally be implemented in July 2013. The emission standards for new vehicles in China are still about seven years behind those in developed countries. Megacities including Beijing and Shanghai are subject to greater pressure for regulating vehicle emissions, and are therefore two to three years ahead of the national legislation. Recently, Beijing EPB began promoting regulations for new emission standards, i.e., Euro V in 2012 and Euro VI in 2016 (Wang and Hao, 2012). Studies indicate that due to the implementation of phase I-IV emission standards since 1995, Beijing’s fleet-average emission factors of CO, HC, NO x and PM 10 for light-duty gasoline cars decreased annually by 12.5%, 10.0%, 5.8% and 13.0%, respectively, and further improvement is expected, although the reductions in emissions are smaller owing to rapid growth of vehicle numbers (Wu et al., 2011). Except for the emission regulations for new vehicles, the pollution control of in-use vehicles needs to be enhanced through the retrofit or retirement of high-emission vehicles and the improvement of the vehicle emissions inspection and maintenance (I/M) system. In China, the old vehicles before phase I standard which account for only 17.1% of national total vehicles contribute to over 50% of air pollutant emissions. On the contrast, the phase III vehicles accounting for 25.4% of national total vehicles contribute to less than 6% of air pollutant emissions (Wang and Hao, 2012). However, before 2010, the retrofit or retirement of these high-emission vehicles has only been promoted in some large cities like Beijing and Guangzhou, with policies such as prohibition of high-emission vehicles in urban areas, and subsidies for replacing them with cleaner vehicles. MEP has announced to forbid high-emission public vehicles with “yellow labels” (gasoline vehicles before phase I standard and diesel vehicles before phase III standard) registered before 2005 by 2015 (The State Council of the People’s Republic of China, 2011). The I/M program was another effective means for reducing emissions of in-use vehicles. Beijing started preliminary I/M programs with two speed idle tests in 1995, and the complete I/M programs have been enforced since 1999. According to the accomplished study by Tsinghua University, the CO and HC emission from in-use vehicles has been significantly reduced by I/M programs in Beijing (Wang and Hao, 2012). Fuel quality plays a key role in the successful implementation of stringent emission standards. Sulfur content in the fuel is expected to decrease in conjunction with the enhancement of vehicle emission standards. Some large cities such as Beijing and Shanghai have made notable progress in lowering the sulfur content, but the fuel quality has been improving very slowly at the national level. The sulfur content of both gasoline and diesel fuel sold in Beijing and Shanghai has decreased to 50 ppm by 2008-2009, in contrast with national sulfur contents of 500 ppm and 2,000 ppm for gasoline and diesel, respectively (Wang and Hao, 2012). As mentioned above, insufficient supply of low sulfur fuel has postponed the implementation of Euro IV standard for heavy duty diesel vehicles by three years. 336 (a) 

(b) 

Figure 7.2.1 The implementation time of the vehicle emission standards: (a) BAU[0]/PC[0] scenario; (b) BAU[1]/PC[1]/BAU[2]/PC[2] scenario. The Arabic numbers 1-6 represent Euro I to Euro VI vehicle emission standards. Numbers in black represent standards released by the end of 2010, and that in red represent those to be released in the future. 

2) Other countries 

Japan’s emission standards for new vehicles are among the most stringent in the world. Since the introduction of the first regulation for light-duty vehicles in 1981 and for heavy-duty diesel vehicles in 1983, the emission standards of Japan have been continuously strengthened. For light duty vehicles, the short-term regulation, long-term regulation, new short-term regulation, new long-term regulation, and post-new long-term regulation were issued in 1992, 1994, 2001, 2005, and 2009, respectively. During the period 2005-2010, the prevailing emission standard for NO x and NMVOC in Japan (new long-term regulation) were comparable to that in U.S. (Tier II), and more stringent than that of European Union (Euro IV), though Euro V has taken into effect since the second half of 2009. The latest post-new long-term regulation added a limit for PM comparable to U.S. Tier II, while the limits for other pollutants remained the same as the new long-term standard. Similarly, for heavy duty vehicles, the short-term regulation, long-term regulation, new short-term regulation, new long-term regulation, and post-new long-term regulation were issued in 1994, 1998, 2003, 2005, and 2009 respectively. Before 2005, Japan’s NO x emission regulations for heavy duty vehicles had been stricter than in Europe and the United States. In 2004, Japan saw the commercial introduction, for the first time worldwide, of heavy-duty vehicles incorporating urea-SCR (Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association, 2011). Japan’s standard for the period of 2005-2010 (new long-term standard) is comparable to Euro V (issued in 2008), and between the 2004 and 2007 standards in the U.S. By the early 2010s, European, U.S. and Japanese regulatory values for NO x and PM emissions for diesel vehicles have been roughly similar. (Ministry of the Environment of Japan, 2013; Delphi Company, 2013a, b) 337 The Government of South Korea has gradually intensified the manufactured vehicle emission standards to the level of advanced countries. The Korean government started to establish national emission standards for gasoline vehicles and diesel vehicles by referring to those of the U.S. and Europe, respectively. Before 2006, gasoline vehicles standards corresponding to EPA Tier 0, EPA Tier I, and CARB Low Emission Vehicle I (LEVI), and diesel vehicle standards corresponding to Euro I – Euro III were issued sequentially. Following the first step, in December 2003, Korea issued new vehicle emission standards, which took effect in 2007. For example, the emission standards of gasoline vehicles were upgraded to the level of Ultra Low Emission Vehicles (ULEV), and the standards of diesel were strengthened to the levels of EURO IV, which have been applied since 2005 in Europe. As a third step, South Korea has adopted California’s Non Methane Organic Gases (NMOG) Fleet Average System (FAS) for gasoline-fueled vehicles, which has been in place in California since 2009, and in Korea starting from Jan 2013. FAS enables car manufacturers to have a range of models with different emissions levels. However, each carmaker’s fleet is required to meet a prescribed level of NMOG emissions on average (http://transportpolicy.net/). For diesel vehicles, Euro V was introduced starting from September 2009, and by 2014, diesel emissions will be regulated under Euro VI limit values. (Ministry of Environment of South Korea, 2013; Delphi Company, 2013a, b) 

Table 7.2.4 Penetrations of vehicle emission standards in China, South Korea and Japan (%). (1) China and South Korea (data shown in the following order: China/South Korea)                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

> Vehicle Standard Base year BAU[0]/PC[0] BAU[1]/PC[1] BAU[2]/PC[2] 2005 2010 2020 2030 2020 2030 2030 HDT-D NOC 19 0100000000000HDEUI 42 13 810 0000000000HDEUII 39 15 22 13 0000000000HDEUIII 035 70 33 7000700000HDEUIV 00024 19 10 0019 10 0000HDEUV 00012 75 48 100 041 48 0000HDEUVI 0000042 0100 32 42 100 100 100 100 HDB-D NOC 28 0800000000000HDEUI 40 13 18 10 0000000000HDEUII 32 15 24 13 3000300000HDEUIII 035 51 33 20 00022 00000HDEUIV 00024 18 10 2018 10 2000HDEUV 00012 59 48 98 032 48 8000HDEUVI 0000042 0100 25 42 90 100 100 100 LDT-D NOC 11 0000000000000

338 MDEUI 65 30 13 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0MDEUII 23 20 30 17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0MDEUIII 0 35 58 34 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0MDEUIV 0 0 0 27 99 25 100 0 26 25 0 0 0 0MDEUV 0 0 0 8 0 35 0 0 57 35 1 0 0 0MDEUVI 0 0 0 0 0 40 0 100 16 40 100 100 100 100 LDT-G NOC 27 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0LFEUI 56 15 13 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0LFEUII 16 33 29 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0LFEUIII 0 30 58 28 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0LFEUIV 0 7 0 38 98 23 100 0 28 23 0 0 0 0LFEUV 0 0 0 10 0 77 0 100 56 77 1 100 0 0LFEUVI 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 14 0 99 0 100 100 LDB-G NOC 31 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0LFEUI 54 15 22 10 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0LFEUII 15 33 23 12 4 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0LFEUIII 0 30 48 28 14 0 0 0 15 0 0 0 0 0LFEUIV 0 7 0 38 81 23 100 0 35 23 6 0 0 0LFEUV 0 0 0 10 0 77 0 100 36 77 25 100 0 0LFEUVI 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 70 0 100 100 CAR-G NOC 23 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0LFEUI 55 15 16 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0LFEUII 23 33 28 12 3 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0LFEUIII 0 30 53 28 9 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 0 0LFEUIV 0 7 0 38 88 23 100 0 30 23 1 0 0 0LFEUV 0 0 0 10 0 77 0 100 44 77 11 100 0 0LFEUVI 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 13 0 87 0 100 100 Notes: HDT-D, heavy duty diesel truck; HDB-D, heavy duty diesel bus; LDT-D, light duty diesel truck; LDT-G, light duty gasoline truck; LDB-G, light duty gasoline bus; CAR-G, gasoline car; HDEUI-HDEUIII, EURO I-III standards on heavy duty diesel road vehicles; MDEUI-MDEUIII, EURO I-III standards on light duty diesel road vehicles; LFEUI-LFEUIII, EURO I-III standards on light duty spark ignition road vehicles (4-stroke engines). 

(2) Japan 

Vehicle Standard Base year BAU[0]/ PC[0]/ BAU[0]/ PC[0]/ Vehicle Standard Base year BAU[0]/ PC[0]/ BAU[0]/ PC[0]/ 339 BAU[1]/ PC[1] BAU[1]/ PC[1] BAU[1]/ PC[1] BAU[1]/ PC[1] 2005 2010 2020 2030 2030 2005 2010 2020 2030 2030 HDT-D 

BST 41% 25% 0% 0% 0% LDT-G BST 38% 16% 1% 0% 0% ST 27% 19% 1% 0% 0% ST 4% 2% 0% 0% 0% LT 26% 25% 22% 0% 0% LT 10% 6% 0% 0% 0% NST 7% 11% 10% 0% 0% 1998R 14% 10% 6% 0% 0% NLT 0% 20% 22% 7% 0% NST 34% 31% 19% 0% 0% PNLT 0% 0% 44% 93% 100% NLT 0% 34% 24% 8% 0% HDB-D 

BST 52% 32% 0% 0% 0% PNLT 0% 0% 49% 92% 100% ST 19% 15% 2% 0% 0% LDB-B BST 12% 4% 0% 0% 0% LT 25% 24% 23% 0% 0% ST 4% 1% 0% 0% 0% NST 5% 8% 8% 0% 0% LT 4% 1% 0% 0% 0% NLT 0% 20% 22% 8% 0% 1998R 16% 6% 3% 0% 0% PNLT 0% 0% 45% 92% 100% NST 63% 35% 17% 0% 0% LDT-D 

BST 41% 27% 0% 0% 0% NLT 0% 52% 27% 10% 0% ST 27% 20% 0% 0% 0% PNLT 0% 0% 53% 90% 100% LT 27% 23% 22% 0% 0% CAR 

1983R 72% 32% 8% 0% 0% NST 5% 11% 10% 0% 0% NST 28% 37% 24% 0% 0% NLT 0% 20% 23% 7% 0% NLT 0% 31% 23% 9% 0% PNLT 0% 0% 46% 93% 100% PNLT 0% 0% 46% 91% 100% Notes: BST, before short term target; ST, short term target; LT, long term target; NST, new-short term target; NLT, new-long term target; PNLT, post new-long term target; 1998R, 1998 regulation; 1983R, 1983 regulation. 

7.2.2.5 Solvent use 1) China 

The Chinese government have released some standards to limit the solvent content in some kinds of solvent products, including wood paint, interior wall paints, adhesives for shoes production, decorative adhesives, and printing inks. Driven by these standards, the solvent contents of some 340 products decreased, and the penetration of low-solvent products increased during 2005-2010. Therefore, the emission factors of these sources decreased to some extent accordingly. Table 7.2.5 shows the penetrations of major control measures for solvent use. Despite the existing standards, most of the emissions from solvent use remain uncontrolled in China. 

2) Other countries 

With an objective to mitigate ozone (O 3 ) and particulate matter pollution, the Japan Ministry of Environment established in 2004 a scheme based on a mix of regulatory and voluntary approaches to reduce emissions of NMVOC from solvent, calling it a “best mix”. It aimed to reduce NMVOC emissions by 30% by 2010 from the 2,000 level, by utilizing both direct regulations (10%) and voluntary efforts (20%) (Ministry of the Environment of Japan, 2013). It was estimated that the actually achieved reductions were higher, but the O 3 and PM concentrations have not declined as expected (Wakamatsu et al., 2013). South Korea issued concentration limits for stack emissions of NMVOC for coating plants and more recently for gravure printing facilities. For outdoor application of paints, the government reached an agreement with producers regarding the development of low solvent products as well as improved application methods to minimize NMVOC emissions (Ministry of Environment of South Korea, 2013). 

Table 7.2.5 Penetrations of major control technologies for NMVOC emissions from selected solvent use types in China.                                                                                

> Solvent use type Control technology Base year BAU[0]/PC[0] BAU[1]/PC[1] BAU[2]/PC[2] 2005 2010 2020 2030 2020 2030 2030 Paint use in interior wall of buildings No control (GB18582-2001) 100 000000Decrease of solvent content--GB18582-2008 0100 95 90 70 00Decrease of solvent content--2004/42/EC stage 1 00510 30 80 0Decrease of solvent content--2004/42/EC stage 2 0000520 100 Paint use in external wall of buildings No control (solvent-based paint) 81.5 78 72.5 68.5 70 50 0Substitution with water-based paint 18.5 22 27.5 32.5 30 50 100 Paint use in vehicle manufacturing No control (water-based primer, solvent-based paint for other parts) 100 97 91 84 35 00Substitution with water-based paint 024615 30 0Adsorption, incineration 01510 40 65 0Substitution + adsorption, incineration 000005100

341 Paint use in vehicle refinishing No control (solvent-based paint) 95 92.5 87.5 82.5 80 40 0Sustitution with high solids or water-based paint 5 7.5 12.5 17.5 20 60 100 Paint use in wood coating No control (solvent-based paint) 93.5 89 79 69 50 15 0Incineration 0 0 2 4 15 25 20 Substitution with high solids paint 2 4 8 12 15 25 20 Substitution with water-based or UV paint 4.5 7 11 15 20 35 60 Offset printing No control (solvent-based ink) 94 90 85 80 60 15 0Substitution with water-based or UV ink 6 10 15 20 20 30 10 Add-on control technology 0 0 0 0 20 55 90 Flexography and rotogravure printing (for packaging) No control (solvent-based ink) 70 64 55 45 30 0 0Substitution with low solvent or water-based ink 30 35 40 45 40 30 0Add-on control technology 0 1 5 10 10 30 0Substitution + add-on control technology 0 0 0 0 20 40 100 Flexography and rotogravure printing (for publication) No control (solvent-based ink) 90 85 80 75 62.5 5 0Substitution with low solvent or water-based ink 10 15 20 25 22.5 40 0Add-on control technology 0 0 0 0 15 50 0Substitution + add-on control technology 0 0 0 0 0 5 100 Screen printing No control (solvent-based ink) 90 85 80 75 62.5 5 0Substitution with low solvent or water-based ink 10 15 20 25 22.5 40 0Add-on control technology 0 0 0 0 15 50 0Substitution + add-on control technology 0 0 0 0 0 5 100 Adhesive use in wood processing No control 100 97.5 92.5 87.5 90 60 0Add-on control technology 0 2.5 7.5 12.5 10 40 100 Adhesive use in manufacturing of shoes No control (solvent-based adhesive) 90 87 82.5 80 70 50 10 Substitution with low solvent adhesive 10 13 17.5 20 30 50 90 Add-on control technology 0 0 0 0 0 0 0342 

7.2.3 Effect of current mitigation technologies on air pollutant emissions 

The historical emissions of China are estimated with a model structure developed in our previous paper (Zhao et al., 2013c). The emissions from each sector in each province were calculated from the activity data (energy consumption, industrial products, etc.), technology-based uncontrolled emission factors, and penetrations of control technologies. The data sources for China are described in our previous paper (Zhao et al., 2013b). The historical emissions of Japan are consistent with the JATOP Emission Inventory-Data Base (JEI-DB), developed by Japan Petroleum Energy Center (JPEC) (JPEC, 2012a, b, c). Special attention was paid to the road vehicle emissions. The basic concept of estimation is multiplying the traffic volume (considering vehicle type mix ratio by regulations), and the emission factor. JPEC adjusts that value with correction factors: a deterioration correction factor depending on accumulated mileage, a temperature correction factor and a humidity correction factor. It also includes original research data including start emission factor, evaporative emission factors, high emission vehicle ratio, and vehicle usage profile from a questionnaire survey (JPEC, 2012c). The emissions from other sources was calculated using local statistical information and emission factors, and allocated to area (1 km x 1 km) and time (hourly) (JPEC, 2012a). The historical emissions of South Korea were calculated by the National Institute of Environmental Research (NIER) in South Korea, and the data sources are described in some research reports and a web-based database (NIER, 2010; NIER 2013; CAPSS, http://airemiss.nier.go.kr/). It should be noted that Continuous emissions monitoring systems (CEMSs) were installed the most of large point sources from the year 2002. The emission for those stacks have been estimated using CEMSs for years 2007-2010 (pre-2007, the emission factor method). There are “not-so-small” emission gaps before and after 2007 due to this methodological change. We, therefore, substituted pre-2007 emissions for those stacks using extrapolation of 2007-2010 “CEMS-based” estimation considering the changes of control measures. The emissions for North Korea, Mongolia, and Hong Kong & Macao are adopted from the Gains-Asia model of IIASA (http://gains.iiasa.ac.at/models/). National energy consumption and air pollutant emissions in East Asia are summarized in Table 7.2.6 and Table 7.2.7, respectively. The sectoral emissions in China are given in Figure 7.3.1, and those in Japan and South Korea are shown in Figure 7.3.2. 

7.2.3.1 NO x

The total NO x emissions in East Asia were 29.7Mt in 2010 and the growth rate was 25% during 2005-2010. This trend was dominated by the increase in emissions from China, since China contributed 82-88% of total NO x emissions in East Asia. During this period, NO x emissions in China increased by 34%, driven by the rapid increase of industry and transportation. The emission from power plants stopped growing by 2010 owing to the application of LNBs and promotion of clean energy power. But the emissions from industry and 343 transportation kept growing rapidly because of the swift growth in industrial energy consumption and vehicle populations. NO x emissions from East Asia except China decreased by 13% during the five years, mainly attributed to the reductions in emissions from Japan (21% reduction). The implementation of tight emission standard for new vehicles, and subsequently the large reduction in Japan’s transportation sector is the main driving force to this decline. The emissions of South Korea decreased slightly by 5%, also owing to the implementation of new vehicle standards. 

7.2.3.2 SO 2

The total SO 2 emissions in East Asia decreased by 15% from 30.4Mt in 2005 to 25.9Mt in 2010. The emissions from China accounts for as large as 94% of the total SO 2 emissions in East Asia. During 2005-2010, both China and the regions except China experienced a 15% decline in SO 2 emissions. The decline in China’s SO 2 emissions is mainly attributable to the large scale deployment of FGD for power plants. In comparison, SO 2 emissions from China’s industrial sector kept increasing during this period, slowing down the declining rate of total SO 2 emissions; this is consistent with the recent estimates by Zhang et al. (2012b), Lu et al. (2011), Klimont et al. (2013). SO 2 emissions of Japan decreased by 20%, mainly attributed to the increasing penetration of highly-efficient desulfurization technologies in the industrial sector, and the replacement of coal and oil with clean and renewable energy. South Korea’s SO 2 emissions roughly remained constant, because the reduction of the emissions from power plants (owing to the deployment of FGDs) was offset by the increasing emissions from industrial sources. 

7.2.3.3 PM 10 and PM 2.5 

In 2010, the total PM 10 and PM 2.5 emissions in East Asia were 15.8 Mt and 11.8 Mt, respectively. During 2005-2010, the PM 10 and PM 2.5 emissions decreased by 15% and 11%, respectively. This trend was also dominated by the trend in emissions from China, as China’s PM 10 /PM 2.5 emissions represent 94% of those of East Asia. China’s PM 10 and PM 2.5 emissions decreased by 15% and 12%, respectively, during the five years. We estimate that emissions of power plants and the cement industry experienced the fastest decrease (43-47% reduction from 2005-2010), as a result of the rapid evolution of end-of-pipe removal equipment (seeTable 7.2.1 and Table 7.2.3). The emissions of industrial combustion and steel industry increased by 14-32%, while the emissions of other sectors kept relatively stable. PM 10 and PM 2.5 emissions decreased by 7% and 8% in East Asia except China. The declining rate is as large as 19-28% in Japan, and transportation sector contributes 70% of this decline. Emissions from South Korea increased somewhat due to the increase in industrial fuel consumption, which is further a result of the relatively stable energy intensity of the industrial sector (see Sect. 7.2.1.2). 

7.2.3.4 NMVOC 

The total NMVOC emissions in East Asia were 22.9Mt in 2010, and experienced a 15% growth during 2005-2010, as an integrated effect of a 21% increase in emission from China (contributing 84-88% of the total emissions), and a 17% reduction in emissions from other countries. 344 In China, the NMVOC emissions from transportation and residential combustion decreased owing to improving vehicle emission standards and the replacement of biomass with cleaner energy sources. However, these reductions were offset by the dramatic increase of emissions from industrial process (+46%) and solvent use (+102%), leading to a 21% increase of the total NMVOC emissions. Japan’s NMVOC emissions decreased by 30% mainly because of the implementation of stringent vehicle emission standards. In South Korea, although the enhancement of vehicle emission standards lowered NMVOC emissions from transportation, the emissions from solvent use increased even more rapidly, leading to a 15% increase in total NMVOC emissions. 

Table 7.2.6 Summary of national energy consumption in East Asia (Unit: EJ/year). 

2005 2010 BAU PC 2020 2030 2020 2030 China, mainland 85.31 121.75 169.41 199.55 144.39 155.01 Power plants 18.87 25.52 37.45 43.93 32.23 36.07 Other conversion 3.11 5.30 5.98 6.49 5.07 4.84 Industry 37.79 58.16 73.64 81.68 62.83 66.51 Residential 18.12 20.79 28.05 32.78 22.96 24.01 Transportation 6.73 11.00 22.91 33.02 20.04 22.11 Loss 0.69 0.98 1.37 1.64 1.26 1.46 Coal 58.01 82.93 106.83 118.80 83.84 80.31 Oil 12.48 18.28 33.36 45.31 28.62 29.68 Gas 1.80 4.19 7.87 10.99 8.40 14.35 Biomass 7.60 7.21 7.35 6.74 6.30 6.21 Other renewables and nuclear 5.43 9.15 14.01 17.71 17.24 24.45 Japan 22.03 21.36 21.78 21.86 20.93 20.09 Power plants 5.59 5.22 5.63 6.07 5.54 5.35 Other conversion 1.62 2.25 2.27 2.21 2.13 1.93 Industry 5.61 5.32 5.62 5.57 5.45 5.30 Residential 5.03 4.86 5.17 5.48 5.02 5.28 Transportation 4.17 3.71 3.10 2.53 2.80 2.23 Coal 4.23 4.79 4.73 4.47 4.46 2.45 Oil 9.97 8.47 7.45 6.70 6.78 5.84 Gas 3.79 4.33 4.92 5.12 4.43 4.46 Biomass 0.29 0.30 0.42 0.54 0.50 0.68 Other renewables and nuclear 3.76 3.50 4.30 5.07 4.82 6.68 345 South Korea 8.90 10.59 12.33 13.31 11.81 12.22 Power plants 2.33 2.85 3.52 4.00 3.40 3.65 Other conversion 0.48 0.98 1.03 1.03 0.95 0.89 Industry 3.01 3.58 3.99 4.17 3.87 3.95 Residential 1.71 1.83 2.19 2.40 2.11 2.25 Transportation 1.37 1.34 1.61 1.70 1.48 1.49 Coal 2.05 3.17 3.22 3.31 3.00 1.75 Oil 3.90 4.10 4.43 4.45 4.26 4.16 Gas 1.23 1.59 2.16 2.29 1.93 2.13 Biomass 0.09 0.13 0.19 0.28 0.22 0.37 Other renewables and nuclear 1.62 1.64 2.37 3.02 2.49 3.91 North Korea 1.42 1.55 1.95 2.51 1.90 1.96 Mongolia 0.12 0.09 0.08 0.08 0.06 0.04 Hong Kong & Macao, China 0.76 0.93 1.30 1.39 1.16 1.08 Taiwan, China 4.43 4.24 4.27 4.43 3.94 4.16 Total 122.97 160.51 211.12 243.13 184.20 194.57 Total (except mainland China) 37.66 38.75 41.70 43.59 39.80 39.56 

Table 7.2.7 Summary of national air pollutant emissions in East Asia (Unit: Mt/year). 

Base year BAU[0] BAU[1] BAU[2] PC[0] PC[1] PC[2] 2005 2010 2020 2030 2020 2030 2030 2020 2030 2020 2030 2030 

NO X

China, mainland 19.48 26.05 31.69 35.35 19.18 15.82 10.18 26.32 25.16 15.95 11.47 7.18 Japan 2.050 1.616 1.033 0.860 1.033 0.860 0.461 0.954 0.727 0.954 0.727 0.392 South Korea 1.112 1.055 0.809 0.697 0.809 0.697 0.245 0.778 0.575 0.778 0.575 0.210 North Korea 0.276 0.284 0.345 0.481 0.345 0.481 0.086 0.342 0.375 0.342 0.375 0.067 Mongolia 0.064 0.058 0.055 0.057 0.055 0.057 0.041 0.052 0.047 0.052 0.047 0.034 Hong Kong & Macao, China 0.199 0.230 0.229 0.260 0.229 0.260 0.039 0.208 0.218 0.208 0.218 0.033 Taiwan, China 0.551 0.440 0.348 0.342 0.348 0.342 0.091 0.316 0.287 0.316 0.287 0.076 Total 23.73 29.74 34.51 38.05 21.99 18.51 11.14 28.97 27.39 18.60 13.70 8.00 Total except mainland China 4.252 3.682 2.819 2.697 2.819 2.697 0.963 2.649 2.229 2.649 2.229 0.813 

SO 2

China, mainland 28.70 24.42 29.07 30.68 20.59 18.23 13.37 22.24 19.49 15.69 11.55 8.34 Japan 0.705 0.562 0.520 0.518 0.520 0.518 0.294 0.507 0.470 0.507 0.470 0.268 South Korea 0.410 0.400 0.408 0.358 0.408 0.358 0.162 0.384 0.301 0.384 0.301 0.141 346 North Korea 0.268 0.297 0.368 0.471 0.368 0.471 0.099 0.363 0.333 0.363 0.333 0.070 Mongolia 0.087 0.073 0.065 0.073 0.065 0.073 0.011 0.054 0.036 0.054 0.036 0.005 Hong Kong & Macao, China 0.022 0.016 0.019 0.021 0.019 0.021 0.007 0.017 0.016 0.017 0.016 0.006 Taiwan, China 0.244 0.139 0.115 0.119 0.115 0.119 0.026 0.104 0.122 0.104 0.122 0.026 Total 30.44 25.91 30.57 32.24 22.08 19.78 13.97 23.67 20.77 17.12 12.83 8.85 Total except mainland China 1.735 1.486 1.496 1.559 1.496 1.559 0.599 1.431 1.278 1.431 1.278 0.516 

PM 10 

China, mainland 18.61 15.81 16.24 15.26 13.24 10.53 6.64 13.13 11.15 10.76 7.52 4.17 Japan 0.206 0.167 0.137 0.125 0.137 0.125 0.087 0.131 0.111 0.131 0.111 0.078 South Korea 0.093 0.116 0.115 0.117 0.115 0.117 0.062 0.112 0.111 0.112 0.111 0.059 North Korea 0.596 0.558 0.557 0.599 0.557 0.599 0.134 0.477 0.444 0.477 0.444 0.099 Mongolia 0.053 0.040 0.034 0.035 0.034 0.035 0.008 0.029 0.019 0.029 0.019 0.004 Hong Kong & Macao, China 0.039 0.043 0.049 0.046 0.049 0.046 0.012 0.043 0.033 0.043 0.033 0.009 Taiwan, China 0.095 0.085 0.078 0.081 0.078 0.081 0.035 0.072 0.066 0.072 0.066 0.029 Total 19.69 16.81 17.21 16.26 14.21 11.53 6.98 13.99 11.94 11.62 8.31 4.45 Total except mainland China 1.082 1.007 0.970 1.002 0.970 1.002 0.338 0.864 0.784 0.864 0.784 0.277 

PM 2.5 

China, mainland 13.34 11.79 11.74 10.87 9.61 7.29 4.31 9.43 7.73 7.71 5.03 2.50 Japan 0.142 0.102 0.084 0.077 0.084 0.077 0.051 0.077 0.064 0.077 0.064 0.044 South Korea 0.112 0.128 0.128 0.134 0.128 0.134 0.054 0.119 0.121 0.119 0.121 0.051 North Korea 0.407 0.383 0.401 0.426 0.401 0.426 0.101 0.349 0.329 0.349 0.329 0.078 Mongolia 0.025 0.019 0.016 0.016 0.016 0.016 0.004 0.014 0.010 0.014 0.010 0.002 Hong Kong & Macao, China 0.023 0.024 0.026 0.027 0.026 0.027 0.006 0.023 0.022 0.023 0.022 0.005 Taiwan, China 0.057 0.049 0.045 0.047 0.045 0.047 0.019 0.041 0.038 0.041 0.038 0.016 Total 14.11 12.49 12.44 11.60 10.31 8.02 4.54 10.05 8.31 8.33 5.61 2.70 Total except mainland China 0.766 0.705 0.700 0.727 0.700 0.727 0.234 0.622 0.584 0.622 0.584 0.195 

NMVOC 

China, mainland 18.89 22.86 26.29 28.97 22.90 20.46 12.62 23.70 24.30 20.53 16.80 10.37 Japan 1.755 1.223 1.218 1.268 1.218 1.268 0.297 1.217 1.262 1.217 1.262 0.291 South Korea 0.756 0.866 0.875 0.943 0.875 0.943 0.286 0.743 0.794 0.743 0.794 0.253 North Korea 0.401 0.389 0.463 0.577 0.463 0.577 0.081 0.423 0.481 0.423 0.481 0.068 Mongolia 0.022 0.020 0.019 0.019 0.019 0.019 0.004 0.017 0.016 0.017 0.016 0.004 Hong Kong & Macao, China 0.123 0.138 0.160 0.178 0.160 0.178 0.146 0.156 0.170 0.156 0.170 0.140 Taiwan, China 0.599 0.402 0.243 0.203 0.243 0.203 0.166 0.223 0.180 0.223 0.180 0.147 Total 22.55 25.90 29.27 32.16 25.88 23.64 13.60 26.48 27.20 23.31 19.70 11.27 Total except mainland China 3.657 3.039 2.977 3.188 2.977 3.188 0.980 2.780 2.902 2.780 2.902 0.901 347 

7.3 Scenarios for the future application of mitigation technologies 

To quantify the effects of various energy saving and end-of-pipe measures on future air pollutant emissions, in this study we developed energy scenarios and emission scenarios for SO 2 , NO x , PM, and NMVOC based on the energy scenarios. The scenarios are developed with the same model structure as that for the estimation of historical emissions developed in our previous paper (Zhao et al., 2013c). As for the future projection, the driving forces (e.g. GDP, population) are assumed first, then energy service demand is estimated based on driving forces. The future technology distribution and energy efficiencies are assumed and the energy consumption is calculated. Both historical and future emissions are derived from energy consumption, emission factors and assumptions on the penetration of control technologies. Please refer to Zhao et al. (2013c) for a detailed description. We developed two energy scenarios, a business as usual scenario (BAU) and an alternative policy scenario (PC). The BAU scenario is based on current legislations and implementation status (until the end of 2010). In the PC scenario, we assume the introduction and strict enforcement of new energy-saving policies, including lifestyle changes, structural adjustment, and energy efficiency improvement. Life style changes imply slower growth of energy service demand, including energy-intensive industrial products, building area and domestic service demand, vehicle population, electricity production, and heat supply, due to more conservative lifestyles. Structural adjustment includes promotion of clean and renewable fuels and energy-efficient technologies, such as renewable energy power and CHP for power plants and heat supply sector, respectively, arc furnace and large precalcined kilns for industrial sector, biogas stoves and heat pumps for domestic sector, electric vehicles and bio-fuel vehicles for transportation sector, etc. Assumed energy efficiency improvement includes the improvement of the energy efficiencies of single technologies in each sector. We developed three end-of-pipe control strategies for each energy scenario, including baseline (abbr. [0]), progressive (abbr. [1]), and maximum feasible control strategies (abbr. [2]), thereby constituting six emission scenarios (BAU[0], BAU[1], BAU[2], PC[0], PC[1], and PC[2]). The control strategy [0] assumes that all current pollution control legislation (until the end of 2010) and the current implementation status would be followed during 2011-2030. The control stategy [1] assumes that new pollution control policies would be released and implemented in China, representing a progressive approach towards future environmental policies. For other countries, we assume the same assumption as strategy [0]. The control strategy [2] assumes the technically feasible control technologies would be fully applied by 2030, regardless of the economic cost. The definition of the energy scenarios and emission scenarios are summarized in Table 7.1.1. In this paper we focus on the development of energy scenarios and emission scenarios for China. The scenarios for other countries are adapted from those developed by IIASA in a project funded by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and World Meteorological Organization (WMO) (UNEP and WMO, 2011). Both the energy consumption and air pollutant emissions were calculated with a five-year resolution, though the parameters and results are presented for selected years only. Detailed assumptions of the energy scenarios and emission scenarios are documented below. 348 

7.3.1 Development of energy scenarios 

For countries except for China, our BAU and PC scenarios are consistent with the energy pathways of the reference scenario and 450 ppm scenario in UNEP and WMO (2011), which were based on the reference and 450 ppm scenarios presented in the World Energy Outlook 2009 (IEA, 2009), respectively. While the reference scenario considers the current energy and climate related policies, the 450 ppm scenario explores what the global energy consumption could involve if countries take coordinated actions to restrict the global temperature increase to 2 Ԩ. The details of the energy scenarios are described in UNEP and WMO (2011) and IEA (2009). For China, we have developed two energy scenarios with the same names in our previous paper (Zhao et al., 2013c). Our BAU and PC scenarios in this study are the same as those in Zhao et al. (2013c). Presented below is a brief description of the assumptions and results of the energy scenarios. Please refer to Zhao et al. (2013c) for detailed information. The government aims to develop China into a medium developed country by 2050, which implies the GDP per capita should be over 20,000 USD. We assumes the annual average GDP growth rate is 8.0% from 2011 to 2015, 7.5% from 2016 to 2020, 6.5% from 2021 to 2025, and 5.5% from 2026 to 2030, respectively. Based on these assumptions and population development as discussed below, GDP per capita is estimated at about 9,700 USD (at the 2005 exchange rate) or about 11,400 USD (2007 exchange rate) in 2030. The national population is projected to increase from 1.34 billion in 2010 to 1.44 billion in 2020 and 1.47 billion in 2030, and urbanization rate (proportion of people in urban areas) is assumed to increase from 49.95% in 2010 to 58% and 63% in 2020 and 2030, respectively. The total electricity production is projected to be 10-12% lower in PC scenarios that of the BAU senario, as a result of lower demand in final consumption sectors. The PC scenario considers aggressive development plans for clean and renewable energy power generation proposed by China Electricity Council and other research. Consequently, the proportion of electricity production from coal-fired power plants is expected to decrease to 57% in 2030 in PC scenarios, contrasted by 73% in the BAU scenario. As for coal-fired power, ultra-supercritical units and integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) units are expected to be applied in large scale within 5 years and in 5-10 years, respectively, with more optimistic progress in the PC scenario. The share of CHP in heat supply is assumed to increase from 61% in 2010 to 65%/72% in 2030 under the BAU/PC scenario, attributable to the promotion of the government. We projected lower yields of energy-intensive industrial products in the PC scenario than those of the BAU scenario because of a more conservative life style. The shares of less energy-intensive technologies are assumed to be higher in the PC scenario than the BAU scenario. For example, the share of precalcined kilns in China’s cement production is projected to approach 100% in 2030 in the PC scenario, and 85% of them have a capacity larger than or equal to 4,000t/d. However, energy-intensive shaft kilns are still expected to account for 15% of cement production in 2030 under the BAU scenario. For the domestic sector, China’s building area per capita in the PC scenario is expected to be 3-4 m 2lower than that of the BAU scenario in both urban and rural area. The energy demand for heating per unit area is somewhat lower in our PC scenario because of implementation of new energy 349 conservation design standards. In urban areas, coal is expected to be replaced by natural gas, electricity, heat pumps, and solar water heaters, except that district heating from CHP is expected to be promoted. In rural areas, coal and traditional biomass are expected to be replaced by electricity, biogas, heat pumps, and solar water heaters, with faster progress in the PC scenario. Driven by the prohibition of the government, the crop residue burned in the field is expected to decline by 10% every five years in both BAU and PC scenarios. China’s vehicle population, especially passenger car ownership is assumed to maintain its rapid growth. The vehicle population per 1,000 persons is projected at 380 and 325 in BAU and PC scenarios, respectively. The PC scenario assumes an aggressive plan to promote electric vehicles; the market share of hybrid electric vehicles (HEV), plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV) and electric vehicles (EV) in passenger cars are estimated to be 25%, 28% and 2% in 2030, respectively. While the BAU scenario considers the current fuel-efficiency standard, the PC scenario anticipates progressive implementation of new standards, resulting in 33% and 57% improvement in the fuel economy of new passenger cars and new heavy duty vehicles by 2030 (compared with 2010), respectively. Table 7.2.6 shows current and future energy consumption in East Asia. Total energy consumption in East Asia was 123 EJ in 2005 and 161 EJ in 2010. The energy consumption of China accounts for 69-76% of the total energy amount during 2005-2010, followed by 13-18% for Japan, and about 7% for South Korea. By 2030, the total energy consumption is projected to increase to 243 EJ under the BAU scenario and to 195 EJ under the PC scenario, 51% and 21% larger than that of 2010. Of all the countries, China is expected to experience the fastest growth rate in energy consumption. By 2030, China’s energy consumption is projected to increase by 64% and 27% from the 2010 level in BAU and PC senarios, respectively. Industry fuel consumption is expected to increase notably slower than the total fuel use in both scenarios resulting from the economic structure adjustment. In contrast, the energy consumption of transportation is projected to increase dramatically by 200% and 101% in BAU and PC scenarios, respectively, measured in 2030 against the 2010 levels, driven by the swift increase in vehicle population. The growth rate of energy consumption in other sectors is close to that of the total amount. Because of the energy saving measures, the energy consumption of power plants, industry, residential, and transportation sectors in the PC scenario are 18%, 19%, 27%, and 33% lower than the BAU scenario, respectively. Coal continues to dominate China’s energy mix, but the proportion decreases from 68% in 2010 to 60% and 52% in 2030 under the BAU and PC scenarios, respectively. In contrast, the shares of natural gas and “other renewable energy and nuclear energy” are estimated to increase from 3.4% and 7.5% in 2010 to 5.5% and 8.9% in 2030 under the BAU scenario, and 9.3% and 15.8% under the PC scenario, respectively. By 2030, the energy consumption of East Asia except China is projected to increase slightly by 12% and 2% from the 2010 level in BAU and PC scenarios, respectively. Japan and South Korea are two major energy consumers except China. Under current policies, Japan’s energy consumption are projected to increase very slightly by 2% from 2010 to 2030, because of slow economic growth rate and a tendency towards higher energy efficiency resulting from current legislation. Due to the implementation of low carbon policies intended to limit CO 2 concentrations to 450 ppm, Japan’s energy consumption would be reduced by 6% by 2030 from the 2010 level. This reduction is mainly attributed to the decline in energy consumption of the transportation sector, resulting from improved 350 fuel economy and reduced mileage travelled. By 2030, South Korea’s energy consumption is expected to increase by 26% and 15% from the 2010 level, respectively. Similar to China, there is also an evident trend towards clean and renewable energy in Japan and South Korea. For example, from 2010 to 2030, the shares of coal and petroleum products in Japan’s energy consumption are expected to decrease from 22% and 40%, to 20% and 31% under BAU scenarios, and further to 12% and 29% under the PC scenario. In contrast, the proportion of renewable energy would increase from 16% in 2010 to 23% and 33% in 2030 under BAU and PC scenarios, respectively. 

7.3.2 Development of emission scenarios 

For the countries except for China, our control strategies [0] and [2] are consistent with the control stategies of the reference scenario and maximum feasible reduction scenario in UNEP and WMO (2011), respectively. While control strategy [1] assumes new pollution control policies would be implemented progressively in China, it has the same assumption as control strategy [0] for other countries for the following reasons: (1) China accounts for 89%, 95%, 94%, 94%, and 90% of the total NO x , SO 2 , PM 10 , PM 2.5 , and NMVOC emissions in East Asia; (2) Japan and Korea already have stringent environmental policies in the base year, the progressive control strategy for other countries expect China is not that meaningful. The major assumptions underlying control strategies [0] and [2] are simple and straight forward. Control strategy [0] assumes current legislation and implementation status, which has already been documented in detail in Sect. 7.2.2. Control strategy [2] assumes full application of best available technologies in the world. Therefore, in the following text, we will focus on the assumptions for China and leave out the details for other countries. The penetrations of major control technologies in China, Japan and South Korea are summarized in Table 7.2.1 – Table 7.2.4. 

7.3.2.1 Power plants 

As documented in Sect. 7.2.2.1, the recently released 12 th Five-Year Plan set specific targets and proposed detailed technological roadmaps for the reduction of SO 2 and NO x emissions from power plants. For PM emissions, the government did not set a total emission target, but the new emission standard for power plants released in 2011 set a strict threshold for PM concentrations in flue gas, implying the installation of HED. The BAU[0]/PC[0] scenario considers only the control policies released before the end of 2010. In other words, NO x and PM emissions are mainly controlled with LNB and ESP, respectively. The penetration of FGD would increase quite slowly. The BAU[1]/PC[1] scenario is designed based on the 12 th Five-Year Plan and the 2011 emission standard for 2011-2015, and the assumption that high efficiency control technologies will continue to spread gradually after 2015. The penetration of FGD is assumed to approach 100% by 2015. All new-built thermal power plants should be equipped with low NO x combustion technologies and flue gas denitrification (SCR/SNCR) from 2011 onwards. Existing thermal power plants should be upgraded with low NO x combustion technologies, and large units ( ≥300 MW) should be upgraded with flue gas denitrification during 2011-2015. SCR/SNCR will gradually penetrate to smaller units after 2015. More ambitious application of measures is required in the “key regions”. For PM, HED would spread much more rapidly, with its share approaching 35% and 50% in 2020 and 2030, respectively. In BAU[2]/PC[2] scenario, the best available technologies, 351 i.e. FGD, LNB+SCR, and HED for PM, are assumed to be fully applied by 2030. Table 7.2.1 gives the national average penetration of control technologies. Note that the penetrations in the “key regions” are usually larger than those of other regions. 

7.3.2.2 Industrial sector 

As described in Sect. 7.2.2.2, the latest national emission standard for industrial boilers was released in 2001 (GB13271-2001). Several provinces including Beijing and Guangdong have issued local standards recently. The BAU[0]/PC[0] scenario was designed based on current legislation, i.e., nearly no control measures are utilized for SO 2 and NO x emissions, and WET remains a dominant control technology for PM emissions. The BAU[1]/PC[1] scenario is based on the 12 th Five-Year Plan during 2011-2015; progressive control measures would be enforced after 2015 as an extension of the 12 th Five-Year Plan. For SO 2 , FGDs are assumed to be promoted in large scales, penetrating 20%, 40%, and 80% of the total capacity by 2015, 2020, and 2030, respectively. For NO x , newly built industrial boilers are required to be equipped with LNB, and existing boilers in the “key regions” are beginning to be retrofitted with LNB during 2011-2015. The vast majority of existing boilers are expected to be equipped with LNB by 2020. For PM, ESP and HED would be gradually promoted to replace the relatively low-efficient WET. In the BAU[2]/PC[2] scenario, the most efficient removal technologies, including FGD, LNB+SCR, and HED would be fully applied. The emissions from “industry process” were mainly regulated by the “emission standard for industrial kiln and furnace” before 2010 (see Sect. 7.2.2.2). Standards for specific industry were only issued for cement plants (GB4915-2004), and coking oven (GB16171-1996). However, new emission standards for various industries were issued explosively during 2010-2012, which might significantly alter the emission pathways in the future. A series of new emission standards for the iron and steel industry were released in 2012, including the standards for sintering, iron production, steel production, steel rolling and so on. Sintering machine acts as the main source for SO 2 and NO x emissions in iron and steel industry, and also an important source for PM emissions. Wet-FGDs are required to be installed in order to attain the SO 2concentration threshold, and the 12 th Five-Year Plan also requires large-scale deployment of FGD. The threshold for NO x concentration can be attained without additional control technologies. However, the 12 th Five-Year Plan requests newly built sintering plants to be equipped with flue gas denitrification (SCR/SNCR). Most sintering plants could meet the PM threshold with simultaneous installation of FGD and ESP. However, HED is required for those in “key regions” and those with poor raw material quality. The BAU[0]/PC[0] scenario assumes the control legislations as of 2010. The BAU[1]/PC[1] scenario is developed on the basis of the 2012 standard and the 12 th Five-Year Plan. FGD would be installed for most sintering machines and SCR/SNCR for newly built machines during 2011-2015; the penetrations would increase gradually afterwards. While ESP remains the dominant PM removal technology, HED is assumed be promoted gradually. FGD, SCR, and HED would be fully applied in the BAU[2]/PC[2] scenario. The blast furnaces (for pig iron production) in China are usually equipped with washing tower and double venturi, which remains the best available technology nowadays. The 2012 emission standard for steel production (with basic oxygen furnace and electric arc furnace being the major technology) implies that low-efficient WET should be phased 352 out, and HED needs to be installed for newly built facilities. While BAU[0]/PC[0] assumes the emission standard before 2010, BAU[1]/PC[1] assumes the retirement of WET and gradual promotion of HED, according to the 2012 emission standard. BAU[2]/PC[2] assumes full utilization of HED. The current emission standard for the cement industry was released in 2004. The SO 2 and NO xthreshold could be met without additional control measures, and the PM threshold could be met with both ESP and HED. Therefore, we assume the control technology mix of 2010 would be kept in the BAU[0]/PC[0] scenario. In 2012, MEP published a draft new emission standard to seek suggestions from the public. As a cement clinker could absorb most SO 2 produced due to its basic nature, even the strenghthend SO 2 limit could be attained under good technical conditions. The attainment of the NO xlimit calls for the update with low NO x combustion technology (or installation of SNCR if the update is not applicable) for existing kilns, and simutaneous utilization of low NO x combustion technology and SNCR/SCR for new kilns. The BAU[1]/PC[1] scenario is designed based on the 2012 draft standard and the 12 th Five-Year Plan. Newly built precalcined kilns (mostly ≥ 4000 t/d) are required to be equipped with flue gas denitrification (SCR/SNCR), and existing precalcined kilns should be retrofitted with low NO x combustion technology during 2011-2015. SCR/SNCR is assumed to continue to spread gradually after 2015. HED would be promoted gradually to meet the strengthened PM threshold for new kilns. The BAU[2]/PC[2] scenario assumes full application of desulfurization facilities, LNB+SCR, and HED. As for coke ovens, we assume no control measures for SO 2 and NO x emissions, and continuous application of WET for PM emissions in the BAU[0]/PC[0] scenario. In the BAU[1]/PC[1] scenario, we assume the installation of FGD for coal filling process (contributing about 50% emissions), or FGD for coke oven gas (contributing about 30% emissions) for newly built plants to meet the requirement of a new standard issued in 2012 (GB16171-2012). In addtion, new plants are assumed to be equipped with HED, also required by the new standard. The BAU[2]/PC[2] scenario assumes full application of best desulfurization, denitrification, and PM removal facilities. As for glass production, the BAU[0]/PC[0] scenario assumes no control measures for SO 2 and NO xemissions, and the current mix of PM removal technologies. The BAU[1]/PC[1] scenario is designed according to the new emission standard released in 2011, though enforced leniently because of difficulty in implementation. FGD, as well as end-of-pipe NO x control technologies, typically oxy-fuel combustion technology (OXFL) or SCR would be applied gradually for both existing and new plants. Out-of-date PM removal technologies, e.g., WET, would be phased out. For the brick industry, about 30% of plants remain uncontrolled by 2010. The draft new emission standard in 2009 calls for PM removal efficiency over 60% for existing plants, and over 80% for new plants. In the BAU[1]/PC[1] scenario, PM emissions from brick plants are assumed to be controlled according to the standard, though enforced leniently due to difficulty in inspection. To attain the new emission standard for the nitric acid industry (GB26131-2010), the dual-pressure process should be equipped with the absorption method (ABSP) or SCR, while other processes need to adopt both ABSP and SCR. The BAU[0]/PC[0], BAU[1]/PC[1] and BAU[2]/PC[2] scenarios assume the technology mix of 2010, lenient enforcement of the new standard, and stringent enforcement of the new standard, respectively. In BAU[0]/PC[0] scenarios, we assume the emission standards for gasoline distribution (GB20950, GB20951, and GB20952) would continue to be enforced in the future. In BAU[1]/PC[1] scenario, the 353 enforcement of Stage IA, Stage IB, and Stage II controls would be extended to all cities in China, and IFC would be applied for both new-built and existing storage tanks. In addition, similar control technologies would be applied for crude oil distribution. As a result, the application rate of IFC, Stage IA, and Stage IB+Stage II control measures in gasoline storage and distribution would approach 75% and 100% by 2020 and 2030, respectively. The application rate in crude oil distribution would be 25% and 50% by 2020 and 2030, respectively (see Table 7.2.3). For BAU[2]/PC[2] scenarios, these control measures would be fully applied by 2030. For other industries with NMVOC emissions, nearly no control measures are assumed for the BAU[0]/PC[0] scenario. In the BAU[1]/PC[1] scenario, we assume that new NMVOC emission standards (similar to or slightly less stringent than EU Directive 1999/13/EC and 2004/42/EC, depending on specific industry) will be released and implemented in key provinces as of 2015, and in other provinces as of 2020. Afterwards, the emission standards will become more stringent gradually. In terms of technologies, we would prefer basic management techniques (e.g., leakage detection and repair system for refinery, improved solvent management for paint production) when they are applicable. End-of-pipe measures (condensation, adsorption, absorption, incineration, etc.) are adopted when a high removal rate is required. The penetration of selected control measures assumed for key sources are summarized in Table 7.2.3. 

7.3.2.3 Domestic sector 

Control policies have seldom been proposed for the domestic sector in China. In the BAU[0]/PC[0] scenario, we assume no control measures except for the continuous application of CYC and WET for domestic boilers. In BAU[1]/PC[1], HED and low-sulfur derived coal are assumed to be promoted gradually, both penetrating 20% and 40% of the total capacity by 2020 and 2030, respectively. In addition, we take into consideration the replacement with advanced coal stove, and advanced biomass stove (e.g. better combustion condition, catalytic stove) where applicable, which are beneficial for the reduction of PM and NMVOC. The BAU[2]/PC[2] scenario, assumes the application of best-available technology neglecting economic costs. 

7.3.2.4 Transportation sector 

In the BAU[0]/PC[0] scenario, only existing standards (released before the end of 2010) are considered. In the BAU[1]/PC[1] scenario, all the current standards in Europe are assumed to be implemented in China gradually, and the time intervals between the releases of two stage standards would be a little shorter than those of Europe. The implementation timeline of the emission standards is given in Figure 7.2.1. The removal efficiencies of the future emission standards are from the GAINS-Asia model of IIASA (Amann et al., 2008; Amann et al., 2011). The BAU[2]/PC[2] scenario assumes the same assumptions on the implementation timeline of new standards as the BAU[1]/PC[1] scenario. In addition, old vehicles with high emissions are phased out at a faster pace through forcible measures and economic subsidies. The proportions of vehicles subject to different emission standards are summarizd in Table 7.2.4. 

7.3.2.5 Solvent use 354 While the BAU[0]/PC[0] scenario considers only several national standards limiting the NMVOCs contents in some solvent products (see Sect. 7.2.2.5), BAU[1]/BAU[1] scenario assumes that new NMVOC emission standards (similar to or slightly less stringent than EU Directive 1999/13/EC and 2004/42/EC, depending on specific industry) will be released and implemented in key provinces as of 2015, and in other provinces as of 2020. Afterwards, the emission standards will become more stringent gradually. Potential mitigation measures to attain the European standards differ greatly for different emissions sources because of discrepant spraying technologies and various chemical proporties of the solvent used. However, these measures could be categorized into two kinds, i.e., substitution with environmentally friendly products (including high solids product, water-based product, and UV product, etc.) and add-on control technologies (including condensation, adsorption, absorption, incineration, etc.). Substitution measures are preferred when applicable, and add-on control technologies would be mainly installed in the newly-built factories. The penetration of selected control measures assumed for key sources are summarized in Table 7.2.5. We consider the ban of biomass open burning in the BAU[2]/PC[2] scenario. 

7.3.3 Effects of mitigation measures on air pollutant emissions 

The air pollutant emissions in each scenario are estimated based on the assumptions in Sect. 7.3.1 and Sect. 7.3.2. Table 7.2.7 shows the national air pollutant emissions in East Asia under each scenario. Figure 7.3.1 shows the emissions by sector in China, and Figure 7.3.2 shows the emissions by sector in Japan and South Korea. 355 (a) 

(b) (c) 

(d) (e) 

Figure 7.3.1 Emissions of major air pollutants in China and their sectoral distribution during 2005-2030: (a) NO X; (b) SO 2 ; (c) PM 10 ; (d) PM 2.5 ; (e) NMVOC. 356 

(a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

(e) 

Figure 7.3.2 Emissions of major air pollutants in Japan and South Korea and their sectoral distribution during 2005-2030: (a) NO X; (b) SO 2 ; (c) PM 10 ; (d) PM 2.5 ; (e) NMVOC. JP and SK in the legend represent Japan and South Korea, respectively. 7.3.3.1 NO x

Under current legislation and current implementation status, NO x emissions in East Asia are projected to increase by 28% by 2030 from the 2010 levels. The implementation of assumed energy saving measures and “progressive” end-of-pipe control measures are expected to reduce NO x emissions by 28% and 36%, respectively from the baseline projection. With the enforcement of maximum feasible 357 reduction measures, the remaining emissions account for only 21% of the baseline projection, or 27% of the 2010 levels. Special attention is paid to China given its huge emissions. China’s growth potential under current legislations (36%) is significantly larger than the average of East Asia (28%), resulting from the great increase in energy consumption and weak control measures already in effect. The share of China in East Asia’s NO x emissions would increase to 93% under baseline projection. The enforcement of energy saving measures leads to 29% reduction from the baseline projection. With the implementation of the 12 th Five Year Plan and slowly strengthened end-of-pipe control policies after 2015, China’s NO x emissions could be reduced by nearly 40% (of the baseline projection). The most effective control measures are the installation of SCR/SNCR and the application of tight vehicle standards, which together contribute to nearly 80% of this reduction. The maximum feasible control measures could reduce China’s NO x emissions to 20% of the baseline projection, or 28% of the 2010 levels. It should be noted that the NO x emissions are projected at 22.9 Mt in 2015 under the BAU[1] scenario, 12.2% lower than that of 2010. This implies that if the control policies in the 12 th Five-Year Plan could be implemented successfully (as assumed in the BAU[1] scenario), the national target to reduce the NO x emissions by 10% during 2011-2015 would be achieved. Under current legislation and implementation status, the NO x emissions in East Asia except China are expected to decrease by 27%, with especially rapid decline in Japan (47%) and South Korea (34%). The decrease is mainly attributable to the continuously increasing proportion of vehicles subject to stringent emission standards. With the enforcement of energy saving policies intended to limit global temperature increase to 2 Ԩ, NO x emissions in East Asia except China, and two major energy consumers therein (Japan and South Korea) are all expected to be reduced by 15-17% in 2030 compared with the baseline projection. These policies are most effective for the power sector, as renewable and nuclear power generation are almost “zero emissions” compared with traditional coal power. The full application of maximum feasible control measures would reduce the NO x emissions in East Asia except China, Japan and South Korea to only 30%, 46% and 30% of the baseline projection, or 22%, 24% and 20% of the 2010 levels, respectively. 

7.3.3.2 SO 2

The SO 2 emissions in East Asia are predicted to have a 24% growth from 2010 to 2030 if we stick to current legislation and current implementation status. The enforement of advanced energy-saving measures could lead to substantial reduction in SO 2 emissions (36% reduction) from the baseline projection, exceeding the effect of progressively implemented end-of-pipe control measures (25%). FGD facilities have been intensively installed by 2010 in most industrial sources of Japan and power plants of China and South Korea. Therefore, the reduction potential through the installtion of end-of-pipe control technologies would be less and less in the future, revealing the importance of energy-saving measures for further reduction of SO 2 emissions. With the full application of best available technologies, the remaining SO 2 emissions in East Asia account for only 27% of the baseline projection, or 34% of the 2010 levels. Similar to NO x , China’s SO 2 emissions have a larger growth potential than the average of East Asia during 2010-2030 under current policy and current implementation status. Implementation of new energy saving measures and “progressive” end-of-pipe control measures could lead to 36% and 26% 358 reductions of China’s SO 2 emissions (compared with the baseline projection). Consistent with the total emissions in East Asia, the contribution of energy saving measures evidently exceeds the planned end-of-pipe control policies. As the power sector has largely been equipped with FGD facilities in the base year, industrial boilers and industrial process contribute 82% of the SO 2 emission reduction achieved through installation of desulfurization facilites. In the maximum feasible reduction scenario, SO 2 emissions are estimated at only 27% of the baseline projection, or 34% of the 2010 levels. We also note that the SO 2 emissions are projected to be 21.7 Mt in 2015 under the BAU[1] scenario, 11.1% lower than that of 2010. This implies that if the control policies in the 12 th Five-Year Plan could be implemented successfully (as assumed in the BAU[1] scenario), the national target to reduce the SO 2 emissions by 8% during 2011-2015 would be achieved. The SO 2 emissions in East Asia except China, and two major energy consumers therein (Japan and South Korea) are expected to stay relatively stable until 2030 under current legislations. The implementation of new energy saving polices could lead to 9-18% reduction in SO 2 emissions from the levels of baseline projection. The reduction is mainly achieved through the promotion of nuclear and renewable power generation and replacement with a cleaner fuel type in the industrial sector. Under the maximum feasible reduction measures, the SO 2 emissions in East Asia except China, Japan and South Korea would be reduced to 33%, 52% and 39% of the baseline projection, respectively. 

7.3.3.3 PM 10 and PM 2.5 

PM 10 /PM 2.5 emissions in East Asia are projected to remain relatively stable up to 2030 under the current policies, resulting from the balance between growing energy consumption and existing control policies (in particular, vehicle emission standards). New energy saving policies and progressive end-of-pipe control measures result in about 28% and 23% reduction in PM 10 /PM 2.5 emissions from the levels of baseline projection, respectively. Full application of best available technologies could reduce PM 10 /PM 2.5 emissions to about one quarter of the levels of the baseline projection or the base year. China’s future PM 10 /PM 2.5 emission trends under the studied scenarios are quite similar to all of East Asia. Similar to SO 2 , the effects of advanced energy saving polices (resulting in about 29% reduction of PM 2.5 emissions from baseline projection) exceeds the planned end-of-pipe control measures (about 25% reduction). With the energy saving measures applied, the reduction in emissions from the residential sector is especially impressive (nearly 60%), resulting from the replacement of coal/biomass with cleaner fuel types. The most effective end-of-pipe control policies are the application of recently released new emission standards for various industrial sources. We estimate that these new industrial standards lead to over 20% of China’s total PM 10 /PM 2.5 emissions. If the best available technologies are fully applied, the PM 10 /PM 2.5 emissions would be reduced to about one quarter of the levels of baseline projection or the levels of the base year. The PM 10 /PM 2.5 emissions in East Asia are also expected to remain relatively stable up to 2030 under the current policies. An exception is Japan, whose PM 10 /PM 2.5 emissions are projected to decrease about one quarter by 2030. The major driving force underlying such a decline is increasing proportion of vehicles regulated by newer emission standards. The implementation of new energy saving policies 359 is expected to reduce the PM 2.5 emissions of East Asia except China, Japan and South Korea by about 20%, 17%, and 9%, respectively. With full application of best available control technologies, the PM 2.5 emissions in East Asia except China, Japan and South Korea would account for about one quarter, half and 40% of the levels of the baseline projection. 

7.3.3.4 NMVOC 

Under current legislation and current implementation status, NMVOC emissions in East Asia are projected to increase by 24% by 2030 from the 2010 levels. The implementation of assumed energy saving measures and “progressive” end-of-pipe control measures are expected to reduce NO xemissions by 15% and 23%, respectively, from the baseline projection. Up to 62% of the total NMVOC emissions are expected to remain, even when the assumed energy saving measures and progressive end-of-pipe control measures are enforced together. There remains large potential to reduce the NMVOC emissions beyond the progressive control strategies, since the full application of best available technologies could reduce NMVOC emissions to only 35% of the baseline projection. China’s NMVOC emissions are estimated to increase by 27% from 2010 to 2030 under current policy and current implementation status. This upward trend is stronger than East Asia’s average but weaker than China’s NO x emissions. The emissions from transportation and residential sectors are expected to decline as a result of existing emission standards for vehicles and the dwindling direct combustion of biomass in the residential sector. By carrying out a series of energy saving policies, total emissions are expected to decrease by 16% from the baseline projection. Emissions from the residential sector decrease most notably because of the substitution of biomass by cleaner fuels. Another 26% could be reduced if progressive end-of-pipe control measures are implemented, and the most effective measures are the substitution with low solvent products and add-on removal technologies such as incineration and adsorption in the industrial and solvent use sectors. With full implementation of the best available technologies, the NMVOC emissions could be reduced to about one third of the levels of the baseline scenario. The emissions in East Asia except China are expected to increase by 5% from 2010 to 2030 under current legislation. The growth rates in Japan and South Korea are 4% and 9%, respectively. This slight upward trend is an integrated effect of the reduction in transportation emissions owing to increased share of low-emission vehicles, and the increase of emissions from solvent use owing to inadequate control policies. By 2030, solvent use contributes about 80% of total NMVOC emissions in both Japan and Korea under the baseline projection. As solvent use has little to do with fuel consumption, the implementation of energy saving policies has very limited effects on the reduction of NMVOC emissions. In contrast, the full application of end-of-pipe control measures would reduce the emissions from solvent use dramatically, thereby reducing about three quarters of the total NMVOC emissions from the baseline projection. 

7.4 A review of future scenarios in the literature 

A number of studies have presented emission projections for East Asia. As documented above, in 2010, China contributes 89%, 95%, 94%, 94%, and 90% of the total NO x , SO 2 , PM 10 , PM 2.5 , and NMVOC emissions in East Asia, respectively. As a developing country, China has substantial potential to reduce air pollutant emissions with the implementation of aggressive control policies, and 360 is therefore believed to dominate the emission trends of East Asia in the next 20 years. In addition, many previous studies on emission projection have focused on China. Some Asian or global studies did incorporate Japan, South Korea, and other countries, but they seldom show emissions of these countries seperately, making it difficult to review their emission projections. Given the reasons above, we would just review the previous studies on China’s emission projection in this section. Early projections (reported before 2005) of China’s emissions (van Aardenne et al., 1999; Streets and Waldhoff, 2000; Klimont et al., 2001; Klimont et al., 2002) were based on the emissions in 1995 or before. They usually substantially underestimated the rapid economic growth during 2000-2010. In addition, none of them anticipated the aggressive control policies in China since 2005. Therefore, these projections have deviated greatly from the actual status. In this study, we just reviewed recent emission projections reported since 2005 (or using a base year of 2000 or later), which have been summarized in Figure 7.4.1. 

(a) 

010 20 30 40 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 

> NO X emissions (Mt)

This study-BAU[0] This study-BAU[1] This study-BAU[2] This study-PC[0] This study-PC[1] This study-PC[2] Amann et al. (2008)-current legislation Amann et al. (2008)-advanced control technology Amann et al. (2008)-optimized Ohara et al. (2007)-policy f ailure Ohara et al. (2007)-best guess Ohara et al. (2007)-optimistic Xing et al. (2011)-current legislation and implementation Xing et al. (2011)-improved energy ef f iciency and current environmental legislation Xing et al. (2011)-improved energy ef f iciency and better implementation of environmental policy Xing et al. (2011)-improved energy ef f iciency and strict environmental legislation Cof ala et al. (2007)-current legislation Cof ala et al. (2007)-maximum f easible reduction Cof ala et al. (2012)-current policy Cof ala et al. (2012)-new policy Cof ala et al. (2012)-high energy ef f iciency Cof ala et al. (2012)-450 ppm Zhao et al. (2013d) Kurokawa et al. (2013) 

(b) 

010 20 30 40 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 

> SO 2 emissions (Mt)

This study-BAU[0] This study-BAU[1] This study-BAU[2] This study-PC[0] This study-PC[1] This study-PC[2] Amann et al. (2008)-current legislation Amann et al. (2008)-advanced control technology Amann et al. (2008)-optimized Ohara et al. (2007)-policy f ailure Ohara et al. (2007)-best guess Ohara et al. (2007)-optimistic Xing et al. (2011)-current legislation and implementation Xing et al. (2011)-improved energy ef f iciency and current environmental legislation Xing et al. (2011)-improved energy ef f iciency and better implementation of environmental policy Xing et al. (2011)-improved energy ef f iciency and strict environmental legislation Cof ala et al. (2007)-current legislation Cof ala et al. (2007)-maximum f easible reduction Cof ala et al. (2012)-current policy Cof ala et al. (2012)-new policy Cof ala et al. (2012)-high energy ef f iciency Cof ala et al. (2012)-450 ppm Zhao et al. (2013d) Kurokawa et al. (2013) Lu et al. (2011) Klimont et al. (2013) 

(c) 

0510 15 20 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 

> PM 10  emissions (Mt)

This study-BAU[0] This study-BAU[1] This study-BAU[2] This study-PC[0] This study-PC[1] This study-PC[2] Xing et al. (2011)-current legislation and implementation Xing et al. (2011)-improved energy ef f iciency and current environmental legislation Xing et al. (2011)-improved energy ef f iciency and better implementation of environmental policy Xing et al. (2011)-improved energy ef f iciency and strict environmental legislation Zhao et al. (2013d) Kurokawa et al. (2013) 

(d) 

04812 16 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 

> PM 2.5  emissions (Mt)

This study-BAU[0] This study-BAU[1] This study-BAU[2] This study-PC[0] This study-PC[1] This study-PC[2] Amann et al. (2008)-current legislation Amann et al. (2008)-advanced control technology Amann et al. (2008)-optimized Cof ala et al. (2012)-current policy Cof ala et al. (2012)-new policy Cof ala et al. (2012)-high energy ef f iciency Cof ala et al. (2012)-450 ppm Zhao et al. (2013d) Kurokawa et al. (2013) 361 (e)       

> 010 20 30 40 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030
> NMVOC emissions (Mt)
> This study-BAU[0] This study-BAU[1] This study-BAU[2] This study-PC[0] This study-PC[1] This study-PC[2] Ohara et al. (2007)-policy f ailure Ohara et al. (2007)-best guess Ohara et al. (2007)-optimistic Xing et al. (2011)-current legislation and implementation Xing et al. (2011)-improved energy ef f iciency and strict environmental legislation Wei et al. (2011)-current legislation Wei et al. (2011)-advanced control measures Kurokawa et al. (2013)

Figure 7.4.1 Comparison of emission estimation in this study with other studies: (a) NO x;(b) SO 2 ; (c) PM 10 ; (d) PM 2.5 ; (e) NMVOC. Scenarios from the same study are shown with symbols of the same color, and only the historical emissions for the first scenario are shown. Some points for the years 2020 and 2030 are shifted a little left or right, in order to avoid overlapping. Note that the current legislation scenario in Amann et al. (2008) is consistent with the baseline scenario in Klimont et al. (2009), and the historical emission trends of Zhao et al. (2013a) is consistent with this study. Therefore, Klimont et al. (2009) and Zhao et al. (2013a) are not shown in the figures. 7.4.1 NO x emission scenarios 

Ohara et al. (2007) projected NO x emissions in China until 2020 by using the emissions for 2000 and three scenarios, a policy failure scenario, a “best guess” scenario, and an optimistic scenario. The projections of all three scenarios for 2010 were much lower than our estimates, indicating they underestimated the economic growth during 2000-2010. The three scenarios projected growth rates ranging between 51% and -10% for the period 2010-2020. In contrast, even the progressive control strategy in our study results in a larger decline of NO x emissions (-26% in BAU[1] scenario and -39% in PC[1] scenario) during the same period, due to the implementation of the control measures scheduled for the 12 th Five-Year Plan. Amann et al. (2008) developed three scenarios until 2030 based on the emissions in 2005. The current legislation scenario assumed current legislation and current enforcement, while the advanced control technology scenario assumed across-the-board application of advanced control technologies; principally consistent with existing German legislation. The optimized scenario was a least cost optimization scenario that would achieve the same health benefit as the advanced control technology scenario. Xing et al. (2011) projected NO x emissions for 2020 with four scenarios based on the emissions of 2005, including a scenario assuming current legislation and implementation status, a scenario assuming improvement of energy efficiencies and current environmental legislation, a scenario assuming improvement of energy efficiencies and better implementation of environmental legislation, and a scenario assuming improvement of energy efficiencies and strict environmental legislation. These two studies were actually conducted in cooperation. Similar to Ohara et al. (2007), their projections for 2010 were also significantly lower than our estimation. For the growth rates until 2020 or 2030, all the scenarios in these two studies projected a larger increase or smaller decline than our progressive control strategy assuming the enforcement of the 12 th Five Year Plan. Cofala et al. (2012) projected the NO x emissions until 2030 with the 2010 emissions and four scenarios envisaging energy saving measures at different stringency levels. The projected change rates for the period 2010-2030 range between 16% and -24%. Since no end-of-pipe control measures beyond the baseline are considered, it is only meaningful to compare these scenarios with our BAU[0] and PC[0] scenarios, which projected the growth rates for the same 362 period at 36% and -3%, respectively. This study predicted a stronger growth potential of China’s energy consumption in the future, leading to different growth rates above. 

7.4.2 SO 2 emission scenarios 

Most of the studies reviewed here have more or less envisaged China’s aggressive SO 2 control policies since 2005. Ohara et al. (2007) predicted that SO 2 emissions would change by 27%, -11% and -23% during 2010-2020 in the policy failure scenario, the “best-guess” scenario and the optimistic scenario, respectively, comparable to our BAU[0], PC[0], and BAU[1] scenarios, respectively. Amann et al. (2008) failed to reproduce the declining trend during 2005-2010, but the control policies assumed in its most aggressive scenario (the advanced control technology scenario) resulted in a similar decline rate as our progressive control strategy. The growth rates projected in all the four scenarios of Xing et al. (2011) are higher than our BAU[1] scenario, indicating that his assumptions of future SO 2 control policies are more conservative than our progressive control strategy based on the 12 th Five Year Plan. Cofala et al. (2012) predicted the SO 2 emissions to decrease by 20-40% during 2010-2030 with four scenarios assuming different energy saving policies, while our BAU[0] and PC[0] scenarios predicted the change rates at 26% and -20%, respectively. As described in Sect. 7.4.1, the differences are also attributed to a stronger growth potential of China’s energy consumption predicted in our study. 

7.4.3 PM emission scenarios 

China has been implementing PM control policies for several decades. Therefore, all of the scenarios reviewed here have envisaged progressively released PM control policies in the future. The PM 10 emissions growth rate until 2020 of the least aggressive scenario in Xing et al. (2011) in comparable to our BAU[0] scenario, and the most aggressive scenario is comparable to our PC[1] scenario, indicating similar stringency levels of the control policies assumed in these two studies up to 2020. Amann et al. (2008) predicted a slight increase of PM 2.5 emissions during 2005-2010, in contrast with a 12% decline estimated in our study using statistical data. However, the growth rate for the period 2010-2030 in its current legislation scenario is quite close to our BAU[0] scenario; the growth rates in its advanced control technology scenario or optimized scenario are close to our PC[1] scenario. Cofala et al. (2012) projected the change rate of PM 2.5 emissions for 2010-2030 between -20% and -34% with four energy scenarios, which are comparable to the projected change rates of our BAU[0] (-8%) and PC[0] (-34%) scenarios. 

7.4.4 NMVOC emission scenarios 

Only three studies have projected China’s NMVOC emissions since 2005. Compared with our study, Ohara et al. (2007) made similar estimations of NMVOC emissions in 2010, but predicted much higher growth rates for the period 2010-2020 in all its three scenarios, as Ohara et al. (2007) hardly assumed any effective control measures in these scenarios. Xing et al. (2011) and Wei et al. (2011) have considered the effect of recent vehicle emission standards on NMVOC emissions, and envisaged progressively emerging control polices until 2020, and therefore achieved similar growth rates to ours for both baseline and policy scenarios. Given China is still in the starting stage of NMVOC emission controls, and new policies might only emerge gradually in the next 5-10 years, the emission trends 363 should not deviate greatly from the baseline until 2020. However, control measures at different stringency levels might result in dramatically different emissions by 2030. Our study is the first one to quantify the effect of potentially new policies on NMVOC emission trends until 2030. 

7.5 Summary 

In this study we reviewed the application status of air pollution mitigation measures in East Asia in the last decade, and projected future emissions of SO 2 , NO x , PM 10 /PM 2.5 , and NMVOC up to 2030 with six emission scenarios envisaging both energy-saving measures and end-of-pipe control measures. Major countries in East Asia (e.g., China, Japan, and South Korea) have implemented considerable policies for energy conservation and air pollution mitigation. The Chinese government set targets to reduce energy consumption per unit GDP and total SO 2 emissions by 20% and 10%, respectively, measured in 2010 against 2005 levels. In the long term, China aims to reduce CO 2 emissions per unit GDP by 40-45% in 2020 compared with the 2005 levels. Japan has taken substantial actions to achieve the target of 6% reduction in GHG emissions from 1990 to 2008-2012, required by the Kyoto Protocol. During 2005-2010, the emissions of SO 2 and PM 2.5 in East Asia decreased by 15% and 11%, respectively, mainly attributable to the large scale deployment of FGD for China’s power plants, and the promotion of high-efficient PM removal technologies in China’s power plants and cement industry. During this period, the emissions of NO x and NMVOC increased by 25% and 15%, driven by the rapid increase in the emissions from China owing to inadequate control strategies. In contrast, the NO x and NMVOC emissions in East Asia except China decreased by 13-17% mainly due to the implementation of tight vehicle emission standards in Japan and South Korea. Under the current legislation and current implementation status (BAU[0] scenario), NO x , SO 2 , and NMVOC emissions in East Asia are estimated to increase by about one quarter by 2030 from the 2010 levels, while PM 2.5 emissions are expected to decrease by 7%. Assuming enforcement of new energy-saving policies, emissions of NO x , SO 2 , PM 2.5 and NMVOC in East Asia are expected to decrease by 28%, 36%, 28%, and 15%, respectively, compared with the baseline case. The implementation of the “progressive” end-of-pipe control measures is expected to lead to another one third reduction of the baseline emissions of NO x , and about one quarter reduction for SO 2 , PM 2.5 , and NMVOC. Exploring the potential of currently known best available technologies, their full implementation could reduce the emissions of NO x, SO 2 , and PM 2.5 in East Asia to only about one quarter and NMVOC to one third of the levels of the baseline projection. Comparison with emission projections in the literature indicates that this study (1) reproduces the recent emission trends until 2010; (2) projects larger reductions in NO x and SO 2 emissions by considering aggressive govermental plans and standards scheduled to be implemented in the next decade; (3) quantifies the significant effects of detailed progressive control measures on NMVOC emissions up to 2030; and (4) quantifies the technologically feasible reduction potentials. The results of this study have important policy implications. Firstly, this study indicates that the successful implementation of the control policies set in China’s 12 th Five Year Plan, the recently released emission stardards for various industrial sources, and slowly strengthened control measures after 2015 (as assumed in the “progressive” end-of-pipe control strategy) could reduce China’s emissions of NO x , SO 2 , and PM 2.5 significantly. The resulted NO x , SO 2 , and PM 2.5 emissions would be 364 16-26% lower than the 2010 levels by 2020, and even lower by 2030, demonstrating a high mitigation potential when these legislations are enforeced efficiently. Therefore, we believe it is essential to support and monitor the progress of implementation of these legislations. Secondly, the contributions of advanced energy saving measures to the reduction of SO 2 and PM 2.5 emissions exceeds those of progressive end-of-pipe control measures by 2030. Since end-of-pipe control technologies, e.g., FGD facilities and high-efficient dedustors, have already been widely applied in typical sources in the base year, their reduction potential would become smaller and smaller in the future. The energy saving measures would play an irreplacable role for further reduction of air pollutant emissions. Thirdly, control policies for NMVOC emissions are sadly lacking in China and South Korea at present, this study demonstrates that the simultaneous enforcement of energy saving measures and progressive end-of-pipe control measures (mainly assuming enforement of European standards) could reduce 38% of the total NMVOC emissions from the levels of baseline projection, even though large reduction potential still remains. Relative policies should be carefully optimized to reduce NMVOC emissions efficiently and effectively. 

References 

Amann, M., Jiang, K. J., Hao, J. M., and Wang, S. X. 2008. Scenarios for cost-effective control of air pollution and greenhouse gases in China. International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Amann, M., Bertok, I., Borken-Kleefeld, J., Cofala, J., Heyes, C., Hoglund-Isaksson, L., Klimont, Z., Nguyen, B., Posch, M., Rafaj, P., Sandler, R., Schopp, W., Wagner, F., and Winiwarter, W. 2011. Cost-effective control of air quality and greenhouse gases in europe: Modeling and policy applications. Environmental Modelling & Software 26: 1489-1501. China Electric Power Yearbook Committee. 2006. China electric power yearbook 2006. China Electric Power Press, Beijing, China. China Electric Power Yearbook Committee. 2011. China electric power yearbook 2011. China Electric Power Press, Beijing, China. China Iron and Steel Association (CISA). 2011. China steel yearbook 2005-2010. the Editorial Board of China Steel Yearbook, Beijing. Cofala, J., Amann, M., Klimont, Z., Kupiainen, K., and Hoglund-Isaksson, L. 2007. Scenarios of global anthropogenic emissions of air pollutants and methane until 2030. Atmospheric Environment 41: 8486-8499. Cofala, J., Bertok, I., Borken-Kleefeld, J., Heyes, C., Klimont, Z., Rafaj, P., Sander, R., Schöpp, W., and Amann, A. 2012. Emissions of air pollutants for the world energy outlook 2012 energy scenarios. International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Delphi Company. 2013a. Worldwide emission standard: Heavy duty and off-highway vehicles, available at www.Delphi.Com/emissions-hd. Delphi company, Troy, Michigan, U.S. 365 Delphi Company. 2013b. Worldwide emission standard: Passenger cars and light duty vehicles, available at www.Delphi.Com/emissions-pc. Delphi company, Troy, Michigan, U.S. Energy Conservation Center of Japan. 2011. Japan energy conservation handbook 2011, available at http://www.Asiaeec-col.Eccj.Or.Jp/databook/2011/. Energy Conservation Center of Japan, Tokyo, Japan. Huo, H., Lei, Y., Zhang, Q., Zhao, L. J., and He, K. B. 2012. China’s coke industry: Recent policies, technology shift, and implication for energy and the environment. Energy Policy 51: 397–404. Institute of Energy Economics of Japan. 2010. Handbook of energy & economic statistics in Japan. Institute of Energy Economics of Japan, Tokyo, Japan. International Council on Clean Transportation (ICCT). 2013. Proposed national fuel consumption standard for commercial heavy-duty vehicles in China, available at http://www.Theicct.Org/sites/default/files/publications/icctupdate_chinahdv_jan2013.Pdf. International Energy Agency (IEA). 2002. Energy balances of oecd countries 1999-2000. International Energy Agency, Head of Publications Service, Paris, France. International Energy Agency (IEA). 2007. Energy balances of oecd countries 2004-2005. International Energy Agency, Head of Publications Service, Paris, France. International Energy Agency (IEA). 2008. Energy policy of iea countries: Japan 2008 review. International Energy Agency, Paris, France. International Energy Agency (IEA). 2009. World energy outlook 2009. International Energy Agency, Paris, France. International Energy Agency (IEA). 2012a. Energy policy of IEA countries: Korea 2012 review. International Energy Agency, Paris, France. International Energy Agency (IEA). 2012b. Energy balances of OECD countries 2009-2010. International Energy Agency, Head of Publications Service, Paris, France. International Energy Agency (IEA). 2012c. World energy outlook 2012. International Energy Agency, Paris, France. Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association. 2011. PM/PM 2.5 in ambient air & related activities in Japan. Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association, Tokyo, Japan. Japan Petroleum Energy Center (JPEC). 2012a. Speciation profiles of VOC, PM, and NO x emissions for atmospheric simulations of PM 2.5 . Japan Petroleum Energy Center, Tokyo. Japan Petroleum Energy Center (JPEC). 2012b. Emission inventory of sources other than road transport in Japan. Japan Petroleum Energy Center, Tokyo. Japan Petroleum Energy Center (JPEC). 2012c. Emission inventory of road transport in Japan. Japan Petroleum Energy Center, Tokyo. 366 Klimont, Z., Cofala, J., Schopp, W., Amann, M., Streets, D. G., Ichikawa, Y., and Fujita, S. 2001. Projections of SO 2 , NO X, NH 3 and VOC emissions in East Asia up to 2030. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 130: 193-198. Klimont, Z., Streets, D. G., Gupta, S., Cofala, J., Fu, L. X., and Ichikawa, Y. 2002. Anthropogenic emissions of non-methane volatile organic compounds in China. Atmospheric Environment 36: 1309-1322. Klimont, Z., Cofala, J., Xing, J., Wei, W., Zhang, C., Wang, S., Kejun, J., Bhandari, P., Mathur, R., Purohit, P., Rafaj, P., Chambers, A., and Amann, M. 2009. Projections of SO 2 , NO X and carbonaceous aerosols emissions in Asia. Tellus Series B-Chemical and Physical Meteorology 61: 602-617. Klimont, Z., Smith, S. J., and Cofala, J. 2013. The last decade of global anthropogenic sulfur dioxide: 2000-2011 emissions. Environmental Research Letters 8: 1-6. Kurokawa, J., Ohara, T., Morikawa, T., Hanayama, S., Greet, J.-M., Fukui, T., Kawashima, K., and Akimoto, H. 2013. Emissions of air pollutants and greenhouse gases over asian regions during 2000–2008: Regional emission inventory in Asia (reas) version 2. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics Discussions 13: 10049-10123. Lei, Y., Zhang, Q., He, K. B., and Streets, D. G. 2011. Primary anthropogenic aerosol emission trends for China, 1990-2005. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 11: 931-954. Li, Y. 2012. Dynamics of clean coal-fired power generation development in China. Energy Policy 51: 138-142. Lu, Z., Zhang, Q., and Streets, D. G. 2011. Sulfur dioxide and primary carbonaceous aerosol emissions in China and India, 1996-2010. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 11: 9839-9864. Ministry of Environment of South Korea. 2013. Air & climate change policies in South Korea. http://eng.me.go.kr/content.do?method=moveContent&menuCode=pol_cha&categoryCode=04. access: 01 August, 2013. Ministry of Environmental Protection of China (MEP). 2011. Bulletin of urban sewage treatment facilities, and flue gas desulfurization/denitrification facilities of coal-fired power plants. http://www.mep.gov.cn/gkml/hbb/bgg/201104/t20110420_209449.htm. access: 5 May 2012. Ministry of the Environment of Japan. 2013. Air & transportation policies in Japan. http://www.env.go.jp/en/air/. access: 01 August, 2013. National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). 2007. China energy statistical yearbook 2006. China Statistics Press, Beijing. National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). 2008a. China energy statistical yearbook 2008. China Statistics Press, Beijing. 367 National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). 2008b. China energy statistical yearbook 2007. China Statistics Press, Beijing. National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). 2009. China energy statistical yearbook 2009. China Statistics Press, Beijing. National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). 2011a. China energy statistical yearbook 2011. China Statistics Press, Beijing. National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). 2011b. China energy statistical yearbook 2010. China Statistics Press, Beijing. National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC). 2007. National natural gas utilization policy. http://www.sdpc.gov.cn/zcfb/zcfbtz/2007tongzhi/t20070904_157244.htm. access: 1 May 2012. National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC). 2011. Bulletin of the progress in shutting down small power generation units. http://www.sdpc.gov.cn/zcfb/zcfbgg/2011gg/t20110422_407267.htm. access: 5 May 2012. Natlonal Institute of Environmental Research (NIER). 2010. The methodology of national air pollutants emission estimation ii, 2010. Natlonal Institute of Environmental Research, Inchon, South Korea. Natlonal Institute of Environmental Research (NIER). 2013. A study on the characteristics of the process facilities using sems data. Natlonal Institute of Environmental Research, Inchon, South Korea. Ohara, T., Akimoto, H., Kurokawa, J., Horii, N., Yamaji, K., Yan, X., and Hayasaka, T. 2007. An asian emission inventory of anthropogenic emission sources for the period 1980-2020. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 7: 4419-4444. Oliver, H. H., Gallagher, K. S., Tian, D. L., and Zhang, J. H. 2009. China’s fuel economy standards for passenger vehicles: Rationale, policy process, and impacts. Energy Policy 37: 4720-4729. Streets, D. G., and Waldhoff, S. T. 2000. Present and future emissions of air pollutants in China: SO 2 ,NO X, and CO. Atmospheric Environment 34: 363-374. Streets, D. G., Bond, T. C., Carmichael, G. R., Fernandes, S. D., Fu, Q., He, D., Klimont, Z., Nelson, S. M., Tsai, N. Y., Wang, M. Q., Woo, J. H., and Yarber, K. F. 2003. An inventory of gaseous and primary aerosol emissions in Asia in the year 2000. Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 108: D21. Tang, W. Q. 2006. Domestic nitric acid production and market analysis. Chemical Engineering Design 16: 34-39. 368 The State Council of the People’s Republic of China. 2006. The eleventh five-year plan for national economic and social development of the People’s Republic of China. http://www.gov.cn/gongbao/content/2006/content_268766.htm. access: 2 Feb 2013. The State Council of the People’s Republic of China. 2011. The twelfth five-year plan for environmental protection. http://www.gov.cn/zwgk/2011-12/20/content_2024895.htm. access: 20 April 2012. The State Council of the People’s Republic of China. 2012. The twelfth five-year plan for energy saving and emission reduction. http://www.gov.cn/zwgk/2012-08/21/content_2207867.htm. access: 2 Feb 2013. Tsinghua University Building Energy Research Center (THUBERC). 2009. Annual report on China building energy efficiency. China Architecture & Building Press, Beijing. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and World Meteorological Organization (WMO). 2011. Integrated assessment of black carbon and tropospheric ozone. United Nations Environment Programme and World Meteorological Organization, Nairobi, Kenya. van Aardenne, J. A., Carmichael, G. R., Levy, H., Streets, D., and Hordijk, L. 1999. Anthropogenic NO X emissions in Asia in the period 1990-2020. Atmospheric Environment 33: 633-646. Wakamatsu, S., Morikawa, T., and Ito, A. 2013. Air pollution trends and measure in Japan. Asian Journal of Atmospheric Environment. Wang, Q. W., and Zeng, W. P. 2008. Summary of nitric acid production technologies and the outlook of dual-pressure process. Nitrogenous Fertilizer Technology 29: 33-42. Wang, Q. Y. 2010. Chinese energy data 2010. The Energy Foundation, Beijing. Wang, S. X., and Hao, J. M. 2012. Air quality management in China: Issues, challenges, and options. Journal of Environmental Sciences-China 24: 2-13. Wang, Z., Jin, Y. F., Wang, M., and Wu, W. 2010. New fuel consumption standards for Chinese passenger vehicles and their effects on reductions of oil use and CO 2 emissions of the Chinese passenger vehicle fleet. Energy Policy 38: 5242-5250. Wei, W., Wang, S. X., Hao, J. M., and Cheng, S. Y. 2011. Projection of anthropogenic volatile organic compounds (vocs) emissions in China for the period 2010-2020. Atmospheric Environment 45: 6863-6871. Wu, Y., Wang, R. J., Zhou, Y., Lin, B. H., Fu, L. X., He, K. B., and Hao, J. M. 2011. On-road vehicle emission control in Beijing: Past, present, and future. Environmental Science & Technology 45: 147-153. Wu, Y., Zhang, S. J., Li, M. L., Ge, Y. S., Shu, J. W., Zhou, Y., Xu, Y. Y., Hu, J. N., Liu, H., Fu, L. X., He, K. B., and Hao, J. M. 2012. The challenge to NO X emission control for heavy-duty diesel vehicles in China. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 12: 9365–9379. 369 Xing, J., Wang, S. X., Chatani, S., Zhang, C. Y., Wei, W., Hao, J. M., Klimont, Z., Cofala, J., and Amann, M. 2011. Projections of air pollutant emissions and its impacts on regional air quality in China in 2020. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 11: 3119-3136. Yan, X. Y., Ohara, T., and Akimoto, H. 2006. Bottom-up estimate of biomass burning in mainland China. Atmospheric Environment 40: 5262-5273. Yang, Z. D. 2012. Well-to-wheels analysis of energy consumption and CO 2 emissions of electric-powered vehicles in China. Master thesis. School of Environment. Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, 83 pp. Zhang, Q., Streets, D. G., Carmichael, G. R., He, K. B., Huo, H., Kannari, A., Klimont, Z., Park, I. S., Reddy, S., Fu, J. S., Chen, D., Duan, L., Lei, Y., Wang, L. T., and Yao, Z. L. 2009. Asian emissions in 2006 for the nasa intex-b mission. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 9: 5131-5153. Zhang, Q., He, K. B., and Huo, H. 2012. Cleaning China’s air. Nature 484: 161-162. Zhao, B., Wang, S. X., Dong, X. Y., Wang, J. D., Duan, L., Fu, X., Hao, J. M., and Fu, J. 2013a. Environmental effects of the recent emission changes in China: Implications for particulate matter pollution and soil acidification. Environmental Research Letters 8. Zhao, B., Wang, S. X., Wang, J. D., Fu, J., Liu, T. H., Xu, J. Y., Fu, X., and Hao, J. M. 2013b. Impact of national NO X and SO 2 control policies on particulate matter pollution in China. Atmospheric Environment 77: 453-463. Zhao, B., Wang, S. X., Xu, J. Y., Fu, K., Klimont, Z., Hao, J. M., He, K. B., Cofala, J., and Amann, M. 2013c. NO x emissions in China: Historical trends and future perspectives. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 13: 9869-9897. Zhao, Y., Wang, S. X., Nielsen, C. P., Li, X. H., and Hao, J. M. 2010. Establishment of a database of emission factors for atmospheric pollutants from Chinese coal-fired power plants. Atmospheric Environment 44: 1515-1523. Zhao, Y., Zhang, J., and Nielsen, C. P. 2013d. The effects of recent control policies on trends in emissions of anthropogenic atmospheric pollutants and CO 2 in China. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 13: 487–508. 370 371 

# Chapter 8 Climate interaction and co-benefits/co-control approaches 8.1 Overview 

Historically, air pollution and climate change has been treated separately both in scientific research and mitigation policy. However, recent research revealed that not only present day daily meteorological variability, but long-term climate change would affect air quality significantly even though the emissions of air pollutants do not change. The latter has received growing attention because air composition changes driven by human activities have resulted in unprecedented climate change, which is expected to continue for the future (IPCC, 2007). Air pollution meteorology under the future climate is projected to differ from the present (Jacob and Winner, 2009). Surface ozone (O 3 ) among other air pollutants has been a major target of concern affected by future climate change. Surface ozone is in general positively correlated with temperature since the higher temperature increases the emissions of biogenic Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs), which is one of the precursors of surface ozone and also favors the reaction kinetics to form ozone in the atmosphere. This correlation implies that global warming aggravates ozone air quality known as “climate penalty” (Jacob and Winner, 2009, and references therein). In addition to ozone, Particulate Matter (PM ) concentration is also known to be affected by climate change. Responses of individual PM components to climate change are more complex than that of ozone (Jeong and Park, 2013). For example, warming climate increases sulfate (SO 42- ) owing to faster oxidation of sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ) but decreases nitrate (NO 3- ) by shifting the gas-aerosol equilibrium toward gas phase. Organic aerosols (OA) and soil dust concentrations vary sensitively with their natural sources, which are subject to climate change. Model simulation studies show changes in both O 3and PM 2.5 are dominated by future changes in emissions of precursor as compared to the direct effect of change in meteorology (Wang et al., 2013; Jiang et al., 2013). Inversely, scientific research also revealed that increased emission and atmospheric burden of some air pollutants have substantial impacts on climate either positively or negatively. Actually, it has been known that the temperature rise at present since the preindustrial era has been brought on not only by the increase of well-known greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), methane (CH 4 ), nitrous oxide (N 2 O), and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), but a substantial fraction has been ascribed to the increase of short-lived air pollutants such as tropospheric ozone and black carbon (BC) (IPCC, 2007). It has also been known that the increase of aerosols has reversed the effect on climate resulting in the alleviation of long-term warming, particularly in the Northern Hemisphere. Tropospheric ozone is known to have positive radiative forcing (RF) and its globally averaged RF has been estimated in the range of 0.25 to 0.63 W m -2 (IPCC, 2007). The effects of aerosols on climate are more complex since they depend on the chemical composition. Typical scattering aerosols such as SO 42- , NO 3- and OC result in significant surface cooling, whereas absorbing aerosols such as black carbon and brown carbon cause atmospheric heating (Ramanathan and Carmichael, 2008). East Asia is the largest source region of gaseous air pollutants and aerosols (Fig. 1.1.1; Streets et al., 2009). For example, observation at Gosan, a remote site in Cheju Island, Republic of Korea, revealed that the annual average clear-sky direct forcing at the surface was -27.55±9.21 W m -2 and at the top of the atmosphere (TOA) was -15.79±4.44 W m -2 , thereby leading to a large atmospheric heating of 11.76±5.82 W m -2 (Kim et al., 2010). In addition to the direct 372 

effects of aerosols on RF, the aerosol indirect effect has a large impact on regional precipitation (for example, Huang et al., 2007). The impact of air pollution on climate change has recently been attracting much attention from the viewpoint of mitigation policy for near-term climate change and air pollution alleviation. This approach is called the co-benefit approach for climate and air pollution, and triggered by the report of UNEP/WMO (20011) and UNEP (2011). These reports focused on BC and CH 4 as targeted species to be co-controlled together with CO 2 , and demonstrated the advantage on alleviating climate change and air pollution impacts on human health and agricultural crops. They also analyzed feasible control technologies and policies and estimated the cost. Several papers reported that the decrease of global NO x emissions from surface sources increases CH 4 in a longer term due to the decrease of global OH radicals. As a result, the decrease of NO xemissions would lead to positive RF due to the increase of CH 4 even though it decreases O 3 , (for example, Shindell et al., 2009; Derwent et al., 2008). In contrast, the reductions of NMVOC and CO increase OH radicals and contribute the reduction of RF by decreasing CH 4 (Fiore et al., 2009; Bernsten et al., 2005). Fry et al. (2012) clearly showed that simultaneous reduction of NO x and NMVOC/CO would decrease RF by effectively decreasing O 3 without the increase of CH 4 . As shown in Chapter 2 and 3 in this review, East Asia is suffering from serious air pollution of PM 2.5 and O 3 , and alleviation of air quality by reducing the emissions of NO x /NMVOC is mandatory. Under such circumstances, simultaneous control of NO x /NMVOC and CH 4 could be the most appropriate way for the co-benefit, co-control approach. Recent policy initiatives relating to the short-lived climate pollutants (SLCP) co-benefits include the establishment of the Asian Co-benefits Partnership (ACP) (IGES, 2014) and the formation of the Climate and Clean Air Coalition to Reduce Short Lived Climate Pollutants (CCAC) (Lode, 2013; UNEP, 2014). The ACP was launched in 2000 with the support of the Ministry of the Environment, Japan, to facilitate the mainstreaming of co-benefits into sectorial development plans, policies and projects in Asia. Main functions of the ACP include; information sharing and knowledge management, development of co-benefits policies and projects in Asia and strengthening of regional cooperation to promote co-benefits. ACP members include various stakeholders including government agencies, international development organizations, academia, civil society and private sectors. The CCAC was launched in 2011 by the US government in line with the concept of the UNEP reports mentioned above as a voluntary, non-legally binding partnership aimed at bringing together many diverse, experienced, and influential players around the world. It aims at leveraging high-level engagement and political will to catalyze concrete and substantial action to reduce SLCPs in ways that protect the environment and public health, promote food and energy security, and address near-term climate change. 

8.2 Interaction of climate change and air pollution in East Asia 

Air pollution, build-up of toxic gases and aerosols in the atmosphere, has been exacerbated in East Asia owing to increases in anthropogenic emissions in accordance with economic growth (Ohara et al., 2007). Most air pollutants have an influence on the climate system. Hence, air pollution adds additional complications to the projections of regional climate change. Recent studies showed that a set of pollutants commonly referred to as SLCPs including CH 4 , BC a major component of PM, and 373 

tropospheric ozone are responsible for a substantial fraction of both global warming experienced to date and the current rate of warming, and can directly or indirectly lead to hazardous air pollution, with various detrimental impacts on human health, agriculture, and ecosystems (Hu et al., 2013; Levy et al., 2008). East Asia, the largest source region of air pollutants, would be subject to climate change driven by SLCPs relative to other regions (Shindell et al., 2008). In addition, studies are looking at the potential effects of projected climate change on air pollution levels. Carbon dioxide build-up in the atmosphere is a primary cause for climate change along with contributions from other long-lived greenhouse gases. A number of previous model studies have examined the effect of 21st century climate change driven by long-lived greenhouse gases on tropospheric ozone and PM concentrations, two major pollutants, as reviewed by Jacob and Winner (2009) and Fiore et al. (2012). The reviews suggested that the warming climate would likely worsen ozone air quality in polluted regions but result in more complex responses for PM air quality. The responses of air pollution to the warming climate are highly model dependent and disagree at the regional level mainly because of large uncertainty with a projection of synoptic weather conditions such as precipitation, wind, relative humidity, temperature, and cloud cover (Fiore et al., 2012). Process-level studies are thus necessary to focus on the local to regional level changes and their effects on air pollution although a regional climate projection is considerably more challenging than the global one (Fiore et al., 2012). The issue of inter-linkages between air pollution and climate change is particularly complicated because of their complex nonlinear interactions (Feichter et al., 2004). Improving knowledge on this subject is critically important for East Asia. Here we review previous studies of air pollution and its interaction with climate change, primarily focusing on East Asia. Most previous global model studies included results for East Asia, but in-depth analyses tend to focus on developed countries in Europe and North America (Fiore et al., 2012, and references therein). This review exclusively includes previous studies focusing on East Asia alone. 

8.2.1 The effects of air pollution on climate change 

In the troposphere, ozone absorbs effectively the solar and terrestrial radiation, and the global mean net radiative forcing of tropospheric ozone has been estimated in the range of 0.25 to 0.65 W m-2 (IPCC, 2007). In East Asia, ozone background concentrations have been found to increase over the past (Tanimoto et al., 2009), and are expected to increase in the future owing to the increase in NO xemissions (Ohara et al., 2007; Yamaji et al., 2012), implying increasing regional warming by the ozone forcing. The effects of aerosols on the climate system are complex depending on the chemical compositions of aerosols (Ramana et al., 2010). Typical scattering aerosols such as ammonium sulfate and nitrate result in significant surface cooling, whereas absorbing aerosols including BC and brown carbon aerosols cause atmospheric heating (Ramanathan and Carmichael, 2008). East Asia is the largest source region of anthropogenic aerosols (Streets et al., 2009). Natural aerosols including soil dust from the deserts and smoke aerosols from wildfires are additional important seasonal contributors to aerosol loadings in East Asia. Thus, emission controls in this region, especially over China, can have a significant impact on both regional and global climate (Saikawa et al., 2009). Based on the seven-year analysis of AERONET observations at Gosan, Republic of Korea, Kim et 374 

al. (2010) showed a relatively low single scattering albedo (SSA<0.93) for February-May, which is indicative of moderate to high absorbing aerosols and supportive of the large surface dimming and equally large atmospheric heating. The average AERONET retrieved SSA is about 0.9 in the visible wavelength range at all stations in China during the East Asian Studies of Tropospheric Aerosols: an International Regional Experiment (Li et al., 2007). The presence of absorbing aerosols mixed with scattering aerosols in East Asia has caused strong cooling at the surface and substantial warming in the atmosphere as revealed by previous studies based on shipboard (Markowicz et al., 2003), ground-based radiometers (Kim et al., 2005; Yoon et al., 2005), aerosol transport-radiation models (Takemura et al., 2003), in situ measured aerosol data and radiative transfer models (Conant et al., 2003), and satellite radiance measurements (Nakajima et al., 2003). For example, at Gosan, the annual average clear-sky direct forcing at the surface was -27.55±9.21 W m-2 and at the top of the atmosphere (TOA) was -15.79±4.44 W m-2, thereby leading to an atmospheric absorption of 11.76±5.82 W m-2, which is translated to an atmospheric heating of 1.5 to 3.0 K day-1 (Kim et al., 2010). However, understanding the effect of the radiative forcing by ozone and aerosols on regional climate is challenging because the atmospheric responses are very complex to which ozone and aerosol concentrations are highly sensitive. In addition, the interaction between air pollution and climate is also known to be highly nonlinear (Feichter et al., 2004). An understanding on this nonlinear interaction between the two can be achieved by using a sophisticated earth system model that includes a fully coupled chemistry-climate simulation (Isaksen et al., 2009). A few modeling studies, although they did not account for the two-way interaction, investigated the effect of aerosols on regional climate in East Asia. For example, Menon et al. (2002) argued that the presence of absorbing aerosols such as BC has modified summer precipitation trends in China over the past several decades, with increased rainfall in the south and drought in the north. The effect of absorbing aerosols was found to be significant in regional climate in Asia (Ramanathan et al., 2007; Wu et al., 2008a). Kim et al. (2007) also showed that the presence of scattering sulfate aerosols leads to reduction in rainfall over central East Asia and moderately enhanced precipitation over southern China in spring. These studies mostly investigated the direct effect of aerosols on regional climate. Huang et al. (2007) used a regional coupled climate-chemistry-aerosol model to investigate the direct and indirect effects of anthropogenic sulfate and carbonaceous aerosols on regional climate in East Asia and suggested that the aerosol indirect effect has the largest impact on regional precipitation. Climate change, induced by long-lived greenhouse gases as well as SLCPs, affects meteorological conditions, which in turn determine distributions of air pollutants including SLCPs. The two-way interaction between the climate system, meteorology and air pollution would be a great challenge to advance our capability to predict environmental changes over East Asia in the future. Along with this interaction, a more accurate projection of future emission changes is crucial to prepare an adaptation strategy for future environmental changes. East Asia is an economically diverse region. Therefore, it is difficult to project future societal and economical changes and their resultant emissions. It is necessary to develop a framework of integrated studies with improved models and extensive observations suited for East Asia to address all the sensitive regional issues and to improve our knowledge on regional changes for the future. 375 

8.2.2 The effects of climate change on air pollution 

Surface ozone is positively correlated with temperature, resulting from increases of biogenic VOCs and faster chemical production (Katragkou et al., 2011; Lin et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2013; Nolte et al., 2008; Rasmussen et al., 2012; Wu et al., 2008b). This correlation implies that global warming aggravates ozone formation in polluted continents as known as the climate penalty (Lin et al., 2008; Murazaki and Hess, 2006; Tao et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2008b), which was consistently shown from the model perturbation studies (Jacob and Winner, 2009, and references therein). But the magnitude of this climate penalty for ozone is highly region dependent because projected background ozone levels are also influenced owing to the ozone chemical loss increased by humidity which is projected to increase under a warming climate and which decreases tropospheric ozone levels (Dentener et al., 2006). Very few studies have examined this issue focusing on East Asia. Recently, Wang et al. (2013) used a global 3-D chemical transport model (GEOS-Chem) driven by climate simulations based on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) A1B scenario of greenhouse gas emissions to quantify the climate penalty for surface ozone in China and showed a West-East contrast of ozone changes driven by climate change in 2050 as shown in Figure 8.2.1b. The climate penalty over East China arises from the combination of enhanced biogenic emissions of ozone precursors (Figure 8.2.1 b-c) and changes in meteorological conditions, whereas the decrease of surface ozone (climate benefit) over West China can be attributed to the reduced ozone background as a result of accelerated ozone destruction (Wang et al., 2013). They also suggested higher ozone sensitivity to the domestic emission under the future climate than the present because of higher biogenic VOCs emissions, implying more stringent regulations required for ozone precursor emissions to meet the air quality criteria in the future. Finally they explored the change of future ozone accounting for both climate and emission changes. Although the two factors contribute to increases in ozone, the latter is dominant in China (Figure 8.2.1d). Liu et al. (2013) used the Weather Research and Forecasting Model with Chemistry (WRF/Chem) model to examine the effect of climate and emission changes in the future on surface ozone concentrations over South China and reached a similar conclusion as in Wang et al. (2013) that climate warming increases surface ozone because of the climate penalty, but the anthropogenic emissions have a greater impact on the surface ozone concentration compared to the effect of climate change. Yamaji et al. (2008) investigated surface ozone changes with different future projections of anthropogenic emissions primarily in China under the present climate condition in East Asia and showed that the surface ozone in central China is largely affected by NO x emission changes but is less sensitive to VOC emission changes. One interesting implication for the future change is that the transboundary transport from China offsets the effect of domestic NO x emission decreases in Republic of Korea and Japan and results in slight increases in local ozone concentrations under the worst scenario (Yamaji et al., 2008). Saikawa et al. (2011) suggested that the effective regulation of China’s road transport sector would be of significant benefit for future air quality both within China and across East Asia. Although these studies did not account for the change of synoptic transport patterns under the future climate condition, the effects of the Chinese anthropogenic emissions on regional air quality remain similar in the future (Jiang et al., 2013). 376 

Figure 8.2.1 (a) The annual-mean distribution of surface ozone over China in the present-day climate and emissions; (b) The effect of climate change in 2050 relative to the present (2000) on annual-mean surface ozone with no anthropogenic emission changes; (c) Same as b, but without the increase in biogenic emissions of VOCs in the 2050 climate; (d) The combined effect of the 2000-2050 global changes in both climate and emissions on the annual-mean distribution of surface ozone over China. Adapted from Wang et al. (2013). 

PM in the atmosphere consists of sulfate, nitrate, ammonium, OA, BC, and soil dust aerosols. Anthropogenic emissions are the main source of these aerosols except for soil dust, which are wind-blown minerals from arid and semi-arid regions. Sulfate is the most dominant aerosol species in East Asia, followed by OA and nitrate aerosol (Zhang et al., 2007). Responses of individual PM components to climate change are more complex than that of ozone as shown by Jeong and Park (2013), who examined the effects of the meteorological variability on aerosol concentrations in East Asia using the GEOS-Chem model driven by assimilated meteorology for the past. For example, a warming climate increases sulfate owing to faster oxidation of SO 2 but decreases nitrate, which is shifted to the gas phase with increasing temperature. OA and soil dust concentrations vary sensitively with their natural sources (e.g., vegetation and deserts), which are subject to climate change. Recently, Jiang et al. (2013) used a similar approach as used in Wang et al. (2013) to investigate the effect of future climate and anthropogenic emission changes on PM concentrations in China. Figure 8.2.2 shows changes in PM 2.5 concentrations (PM diameter < 2.5 m) owing to climate change alone. In general, PM 2.5 changes correspond well with changes in precipitation (not shown) 377 

although changes of individual components slightly differ for the reasons discussed above. Similar to ozone, the simulated changes in PM 2.5 are also dominated by future changes in emissions; concentrations of PM 2.5 in eastern China are simulated to decrease by 10-30% relative to the present-day values in DJF, 30-40% in JJA, and 20- 40% in SON (Figure 8.2.3). 

Figure 8.2.2 Predicted changes in surface-layer concentrations of aerosols ( g m -3 ) due to changes in climate alone from the present day (1996–2005) to the future (2046–2055). Greenhouse gases follow the IPCC scenario A1B. Anthropogenic emissions are held at present-day values, but natural emissions may change in response to climate. The dotted areas are statistically significant at the 95% level, as determined by Student’s two-sample t test. Adapted from Jiang et al. (2013). 

Figure 8.2.3. Predicted changes in surface-layer concentrations of aerosols ( g m -3 )due to changes in both climate and anthropogenic emissions from the present day (1996–2005) to the future (2046–2055). Almost all the changes over China are statistically significant at the 95% level, as determined by Student’s two-sample t test. Adapted from Jiang et al. (2013). 

The model studies discussed above are somewhat limited by coarse horizontal resolutions of the model or by the future projection based on the greenhouse gas and air pollutant emissions pathway from the selected IPCC SRES scenarios. Recently, the IPCC recommends the use of a newly developed set of scenarios, Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) scenarios that allow uniformly an aggressive reduction of air pollutant emissions. A number of modeling studies estimated the changes in the tropospheric ozone and PM based on the RCP scenarios (Butler et al., 2012; Cionni et al., 2011; Kawase et al., 2011; Szopa et al., 2013; Takemura, 2012), but their focuses are primarily on the global changes. 378 

8.3 SLCPs co-benefits/co-control approach 

The SLCPs co-benefit/co-control approach has recently been attracted much attention as a new policy tool to mitigate near-term climate change and improve air quality simultaneously. Justification of SLCPs control from a climate change mitigation side is that while the CO 2 emission reduction is essential for alleviating long-term global warming and climate change, it does not help the near-term mitigation because of its long atmospheric lifetime. Mitigation of near-term climate change can only be achieved by reducing the emissions of SLCPs. Early introduction of SLCPs control coupled with the stringent CO 2 control can also bring the leveling-off of future global mean temperature at a lower level. On the other hand, from an air quality improvement side, more stringent emission reduction of air pollutants can be achieved with less cost by combining with the CO 2 reduction policy, e.g. improvement of combustion efficiency, fuel conversion, etc., than controlling air pollutants alone. Figure 8.3.1 illustrates the change in radiative forcing of atmospheric species between the preindustrial to the present (IPCC, 2007). As shown in Figure 8.3.1, tropospheric O 3 and BC has positive radiative forcing in addition to well-known long-lived greenhouse gases (LLGHG). Here, tropospheric O 3 and BC are specified as SLCP and targeted in the SLCP co-benefit approach since the reduction of atmospheric concentrations of these species are beneficial to control global warming/climate change in addition to human health and other environmental impacts. Comprehensive assessment of the multiple benefits of measures to reduce emissions of black carbon and methane, and co-emitting species was made by UNEP-WMO (2011) in the Integrated Assessment of Black Carbon and Tropospheric Ozone , which was followed by Near-term Climate Protection and Clean Air Benefits: Actions for Controlling Short-term Climate Forcers (UNEP, 2011), which are fundamentally augmented based on the paper by Shindell et al. (2012). In these reports, climate impacts and direct effects on human health and agricultural crops have been assessed in an integrated manner, and the term of “the short-lived climate forcers (SLCFs)” was used for air pollutants that have positive radiative forcing to enhance global warming and climate change. More recently, however, the term of “SLCPs” is used in the policy-related issues such as in CCAC initiative (Lode, 2013; UNEP, 2014). Since it is now widely used hoping to appeal more easily to the public, the term of SLCPs is exclusively used in this review. In this section after reviewing the UNEP’s approach, some discussion on the additional regional control of NO X /NMVOC will be made considering the particular situation on air pollution in East Asia reflecting the introductory discussion in Chapter 1. Recent policy initiatives for SLCPs co-benefit approach related in East Asia are introduced in the last subsection. 

Figure 8.3.1 Radiative forcing from pre-industrial (IPCC, 2007). 379 

8.3.1 UNEP’s assessment for near-term global warming and benefits for human health and crop yields 

Figure 8.3.2 (UNEP/WMO, 2011) illustrates the justification of SLCFs control approach combined with stringent CO 2 control to reduce near-term global warming and staying within the critical global average temperature threshold, e.g. 2C since the preindustrial level as proposed by UNEP’s reports. Under the reference scenario for the CO 2control, global mean temperatures are projected to rise about a further 1.3 C (within a range of 0.8-2.0 C) from 2010 by the middle of this century bringing the total of warming from pre-industrial levels to about 2.2 C. Also shown is the fairly aggressive scenario to reduce CO 2 emissions designated as “CO 2 measures.” It can be seen that although the CO 2 measures clearly lead to long-term control of the temperature rise after a few decades, it does little to mitigate warming over the next 20-30 years until the middle of this century. Figure 8.3.2 shows near-term warming can effectively be controlled by the CH 4 + BC measures since their atmospheric lifetime is short (about 8-10 years for CH 4 and only weeks for BC) and the reductions of their emissions can be reflected in their atmospheric concentrations and radiative forcing more or less instantaneously within a year to a few years. Thus, it is suggested that rapid implementation of SLCP mitigation measures together with measures to reduce CO 2 emissions, would greatly improve the chances of keeping the Earth’s temperature increase to less than 2 Crelative to pre-industrial levels in the near term. 

Figure 8.3.2 Deviation of temperatures from 1900 and future projection under various scenarios (UNEP/WMO, 2011). 380 

It is well known that temperature changes can vary regionally even in response to relatively uniform 

forcing from LLGHGs (IPCC, 2007). Figure 8.3.3 shows that the warming is projected to increase for all regions with some variation under the reference scenario, and the SLCP measures provide the benefit for reducing warming in all regions including Northeast and Southeast Asia, and Pacific. The impacts on climate are suggested by the UNEP/WMO report (2011) not only for global and regional temperature rise but also for the change in tropical rainfall patterns and Asian monsoons. According to the co-benefit measures, the reduction of both O 3 and particle are predominantly in the northern hemisphere, which would lead to temperature gradients between the two hemispheres that influence rainfall patterns throughout the tropics. It is well known that PM 2.5 and ground-level O 3 causes premature deaths primarily from respiratory and heart diseases as well as acute and chronic bronchitis and other non-fatal diseases that increase hospital visits and loss of work (see also Chapter 2, Section 2.3 and Chapter 3, Section 3.3). Under the reference scenario, changes in concentrations of PM 2.5 and O 3 in 2030, relative to 2005, would have substantial effects globally on premature deaths related to air pollution. Figure 8.3.4 depicts comparison of premature mortality by region showing the change in 2030 in comparison with 2005 for the reference scenario and reference plus CH 4 + BC measures. As shown in Fig. 8.2.6, over Northeast, Southeast Asia and Pacific, premature deaths are projected to decrease substantially due to reductions in PM 2.5 in some areas. In South, West and Central Asia, however, premature deaths are projected to rise significantly due to growth in emissions in the reference scenario. Based on this figure, it is suggested that more than 80% of the health benefits of implementing all measures occur in Asia. 

Figure 8.3.3 Comparison of regional mean warming over land ( ℃) showing the change in 2070 compared with 2005 for the reference scenario and the CH 4 + BC measures scenario (UNEP/WMO, 2011). 

Figure 8.3.4 Comparison of premature mortality (millions of premature deaths annually) by region showing the change in 2030 in comparison with 2005 for the reference scenario and the reference plus CH 4 + BC measures (UNEP/WMO, 2011). 381 

Ozone is toxic to plants showing visible leaf health, growth, and productivity for crops (see also Chapter 3, Section 3.3). Although full implementation of CH 4measures results in significant reductions of O 3 concentrations leading to avoided yield losses of four staple crops (maize, rice, soybean and wheat) each year, the regional picture shows considerable difference. As shown in Figure 8.3.5, under the reference scenario, O 3 concentrations over Northeast, Southeast Asia and Pacific are projected to increase substantially resulting in additional crop yield losses substantially, while it is projected to decrease strongly in North America and Europe, while change will be minimal over Africa, and 

Figure 8.3.5 Comparison of crop yield losses (million tons annually of four key crops – wheat, rice, maize and soy beans combined) showing the change in 2030 in comparison with 2005 for the reference scenario and the reference plus CH 4 + BC measures (UNEP/WMO, 2011). 

Figure 8.3.6 Percentage change in anthropogenic emissions of the indicated pollutants in 2030 relative to 2005 for the reference, CH 4 , BC and CH 4 + BC measures scenario (UNEP/WMO, 2011). 382 

Latin America and Caribbean. The CH 4 co-control measures lead to reduced O 3 concentration with substantial benefits to crop yield especially in Asia, both in Northeast, Southeast Asia and Pacific, and South, West and Central Asia according to the UNEP/WMO (2011). Overall, Asia is the region that could most benefit from SLCP mitigation according to the UNEP assessment; implementing BC measures addressing the transport and residential sector and open biomass burning could bring health benefits and reducing CH 4 emissions from coal mines could bring crop benefits. Figure 8.3.6 shows the percentage change in anthropogenic emissions of indicated pollutants in 2030 relative to 2005 for reference, CH 4 , BC and CH 4 + BC measures scenarios proposed by the Assessment. It can be seen that the BC and CH 4 +BC measures are expected to result in the reduction of other air pollutants as shown in Figure 8.3.6, and the health and crop benefits mentioned above are the results of the effect including all these auxiliary reduction of air pollutants. 

8.3.2 Other studies 

Radiative forcing from 1750 to 2000 due to radiatively active species has been evaluated based on abundance and emissions in Figure 8.3.7 (Shindell et al., 2009). In abundance-based analysis instantaneous global-averaged RF of CO 2is 1.69 W m -2 followed by 0.48 W m -2 of CH 4 and 0.37 W m -2 of tropospheric O 3while SO 42- and NO 3- aerosol give negative values of -0.38 and -0.11 W m -2 . In the emission-based analysis it can be noted that the instantaneous RF of NO x is negative since it induces negative forcing of CH 4 , NO 3- , and SO 42- . The negative forcing of CH 4 has been brought since the increase of global NO x emission decreases OH radical concentrations, which results in the increase of CH 4 . There are several other studies that concluded reduction of CH 4 emissions leads to the reduction of tropospheric O 3 (Fiore, et al., 2002; West et al., 2007; Fiore et al., 2008). Several other studies have revealed that the reduction of global NO x emission alone will reduce the OH radical concentration and the increase of CH 4 concentration, which results in the increase of RF (Fuglestvelt, 1999; Derwent et al., 2008, West et al., 2009). Although less attention has been placed on the effect of regional CO and NMVOC emissions on tropospheric CH 4 and global and regional net RF, reduction of CO and NMVOC has been reported to reduce CH 4 and RF in contrast to NO x(Collins et al., 2002; West et al., 2009; Fiore et al., 2009). It should be noted, however, that it is customary to control NO x is accompanied by the controls of NMVOC since it has been well established that the reduction of NO x and NMVOC are the most effective way to reduce surface O 3in a local, regional and intercontinental-transported scales (Finlayson Pitts and Pitts, 2000; Fiore et 

Figure 8.3.7 Radiative forcing from 1750 to 2000. (Shindell et al., 2009) 383 

al., 2009). Effects of simultaneous reductions of NO x , CO and VOC have been evaluated by Naik et al. (2005) and Fry et al. (2012). Figure 8.3.8 shows the change of radiative forcing due to CH 4 and O 3 for the individual -20% reduction of NO x , CO, and NMVOC, and simultaneous -20% reduction of NO x /CO/NMVOC as well as for the -20% reduction of CH 4 (Fry et al, 2012). As shown in Figure 8.3.8, reduction of NO x alone leads to the reduction of RF due to the decrease of O 3 but also to the increase of RF due to the increase of CH 4 owing to the decrease of OH radicals leading to the resultant small positive RF. Reduction of NMVOC and CO decreases RF by decreasing both O 3 and CH 4 . The relative contribution to the negative RF by the decrease of O 3 is larger than CH 4 for NMHC and the opposite tendency can be seen for CO. The simultaneous reduction of NO x , NMHC and CO demonstrates large negative forcing of O 3 due to the reduction of O 3 concentration. In this case forcing by CH 4 is minimal since the simultaneous reduction of O 3 precursors does not affect the OH radical concentration and CH 4 concentration is not affected much. Meanwhile, global anthropogenic CH 4 emission reductions are shown to produce the most negative RF mainly due to direct reductions of CH 4 forcing itself as a greenhouse gas as has been suggested earlier (Fiore et al., 2002; Shindell et al., 2005; and West et al., 2007). 

8.3.3 Recent policy initiatives for SLCPs co-benefit approach 

SLCPs have been receiving attention since the late 2000s, especially in Europe and North America. Following their concerns, Asian countries also paid attention to SLCPs by sharing information at various relevant platforms such as EANET, the Male Declaration initiative and the ABC Asia project. Some recent policy initiatives relating to SLCP include, but are not limited to, the establishment of ACP and formation of CCAC. In addition to the ACP and CCAC, there are many other on-going initiatives in Asia, which are relevant to SLCP mitigation measures. Some of such initiatives include Project Surya, the Global Methane Initiatives, the Asian Clean Air Partnership Initiatives, etc. From their websites and other relevant documents, such as the work plans, their major activities are reviewed in this Section. 

Figure 8.3.8 Global annual average RF (mW m -2 ) for the HTAP ensembles of 11 models (for O 3 and CH 4 forcing) and four models (for SO 42- forcing) due to multi-model mean changes in steady state O 3 , CH 4 and SO 42-(adapted from Fry et al., 2012). 384 

Asian Co-benefits Partnership (ACP) 

Reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions can be accomplished through policies, programs or projects conceived specifically for that purpose. Or it can be achieved with policies, programs or projects designed to meet immediate development priorities such as improving urban air quality, water quality, and waste management while taking into account longer term climate concerns. Policies, programs, or projects considering both development and climate objectives can deliver 

co-benefits. In recent years, a variety of stakeholders in Asia have demonstrated that integrating co-benefits into decision-making processes can reduce GHG mitigation costs or bring carbon finance to development needs. However, the absence of a mechanism to share information and coordinate stakeholders on these issues has hampered mainstreaming co-benefits into national development strategies and plans as well as sectoral policies, programs, or projects in Asia. Selected representatives from leading international organizations and government agencies discussed a possibility to create an informal network to improve stakeholder cooperation and knowledge management on co-benefits in Asia, at the first International Forum for a Sustainable Asia and the Pacific (ISAP) in June 2009 in Japan. Based on the support received at the follow-up meetings, ACP was formally launched at the Better Air Quality 2010 Conference in Singapore with the support of 100 participants and the Ministry of the Environment, Japan. The goal of the ACP is to support the mainstreaming of co-benefits into sectoral development plans, policies and projects in Asia. The ACP serves as an informal and interactive platform to improve information sharing and stakeholder coordination on co-benefits in Asia. Main functions of the ACP include 

 Information sharing and knowledge management, including knowledge generation and dissemination; 

 Enhanced communication among ACP members; 

 Development of co-benefits policies and projects in Asia; and 

 Strengthening of regional cooperation to promote co-benefits ACP members include various stakeholders working on co-benefits in Asia, including government agencies, international development organizations, academe, civil society and the private sector. The Institute for Global Environmental Strategies (IGES) serves as the secretariat for the Partnership. The Advisory Group, comprising Asian country representatives and international organizations, provides advice to the Secretariat on the ACP and its activities. While the ACP not only covers SLCPs but all areas of co-benefits including conventional CO 2co-benefits, its major focus shifts more to SLCPs. Various activities such as preparation on fact sheets, co-benefits case studies, guidelines, and manuals have been issued and uploaded on the ACP website (http://www.cobenefit.org), based on the ACP Work Plans 2010-2011 and 2012-2013. One of the recent achievements has been the publication of the ACP White Paper 2014 – Bringing Development and Climate Together in Asia. 385 

Climate and Clean Air Coalition to Reduce Short-Lived Climate Pollutants (CCAC) 

Compelling scientific evidence indicates that a rapid reduction of SLCPs could deliver near term multiple benefits for near term climate protection, public health and food and energy security. Recent reports discussed earlier in this chapter have identified many cost-effective readily available options for addressing SLCPs. This is recognizing this urgent and collective challenge that in February 2012, six countries and UNEP decided to establish CCAC to translate the science into policy and action. 

The CCAC is a voluntary, non-legally binding partnership aimed at bringing together many diverse, experienced, and influential players around the world to leverage high-level engagement and political will to catalyse concrete and substantial action to reduce SLCPs in ways that protect the environment and public health, promote food and energy security, and address near term climate change. The Coalition is open to countries and non-state entities that are committed to taking action on SLCPs, and wish to join in this global effort. All Partners in the CCAC recognize that actions on SLCPs must complement and supplement, not replace, global action to reduce CO 2 , in particular efforts under the UNFCCC. The Coalition intends to enhance global, regional, and national public and private efforts to reduce SLCPs by: 

 Raising awareness of SLCPs impacts and mitigation strategies; 

 Enhancing and developing new national and regional actions, including by identifying and overcoming barriers, enhancing capacity, and mobilizing support; 

 Promoting best practices and showcasing successful efforts; and 

 Improving scientific understanding of short lived climate pollutant impacts and mitigation strategies. The Coalition is a Partner-led effort bringing together governments, intergovernmental organizations, representatives of the private sector, the environmental community, and other members of civil society. Organizational structure of the Coalition includes the following; 

 A High-Level Assembly composed of ministers and head of Partners organization Coalition Partners provides high level political support to the CCAC activities and set forth its strategic directions; 

 A Working Group with representatives from all Partners oversees the cooperative actions of the Coalition; 

 A Scientific Advisory Panel is responsible for keeping the Coalition abreast of new science developments on SLCPs, answer specific questions of the Coalition and inform policy discussions; 

 A Secretariat is hosted by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in Paris. In two years the CCAC membership has grown more than 10 fold with almost 90 Partners in April 2014, including about 40 country partners including the European Commission, together with other 386 

non-state partners. Bangladesh, Japan, Republic of Maldives, Republic of Korea, and Mongolia are the country partners of the Coalition in Asia. It would also be interesting to list key regional non-state partners such as IGES, Clean Air Asia, ICIMOD, etc. The work of the Coalition is currently structured around 10 high-impact initiatives guiding collective and individual actions of the CCAC Partners. These initiatives for rapid delivery of scaled-up climate and clean air benefits by reducing key SLCPs. The seven sectoral initiatives include: 

 Reducing Black Carbon Emissions from Heavy Duty Diesel (HDD) Vehicles and Engines 

 Mitigating Black Carbon and Other Pollutants from Brick Production 

 Mitigating SLCPs from the Municipal Solid Waste Sector 

 Promoting HFC Alternative Technology and Standards 

 Accelerating Methane and Black Carbon Reductions from Oil and Natural Gas Production 

 Addressing SLCPs from Agriculture 

 Reducing SLCPs from Household Cooking and Domestic Heating 

 In addition, the Coalition identified three major cross-cutting efforts to be undertaken in order to accelerate emissions reductions across all short-lived climate pollutants. 

1. Regional assessment of SLCPs 

The aim of the Initiative is to provide the targeted scientific and policy information needed to identify, accelerate and scale-up regionally relevant SLCP mitigation measures. 

2. Financing of SLCP mitigation 

While multiple means of financing SLCP mitigation already exist they are not currently translating into high-enough levels of financial flows. In order to take advantage of all mitigation opportunities, the Coalition will seek to act as a catalyst of scaled-up SLCP mitigation financing and will work with governments, the private sector, donors, financial institutions, expert groups and investors’ networks to bolster these financial flows. 

3. Promoting SLCP National Action Plans 

Measures to mitigate SLCPs have been assessed at a global and regional level and now need to be incorporated into national policies and actions. Through this cooperative initiative, the Coalition Partners work with interested national governments to support the rapid roll-out of national action planning for SLCP mitigation that will enable countries to identify achievable ‘quick-win’ benefits, and to prepare the ground for large-scale implementation of mitigation measures geared to their unique national circumstances, priorities and particular mix of SLCP sources. The Coalition will develop a program to support National Action Plans for SLCPs, including national inventory development, building on existing air quality, climate change and development agreements, and assessment, prioritization, and demonstration of promising SLCP mitigation measures. Many of these initiatives have now successfully completed their first phase of activities supported by the CCAC Trust Fund and individual action from Partners. Some of them are highlighted below: 387 

As part of its first activities, the Initiative convened an Intergovernmental Regional Consultation on SLCPs in the Asia Pacific in February 2013 in Bangkok hosted by Japan and Bangladesh, with representatives from 19 countries. Participants issued a statement calling for enhanced action in the region with a set of specific recommendations (available from the website: http://www.unep.org/ccac/Portals/50162/docs/Bangkok_Meeting_Statement_Finalized.pdf). As afollow-up, a sub-regional meeting for the ASEAN region and some other countries will be organized next year to discuss the issues important to the region, integrate SLCPs into sectoral discussions, and share experiences on and promote national planning. Under the supporting national planning for action on SLCPs Coalition Partners work with interested national governments to support the integration of SLCP into national planning to identify achievable ‘quick-win’ benefits, and to prepare the ground for large-scale priorities and a particular mix of SLCP sources. Under the HDD initiative, the Coalition Partners are working to virtually eliminate fine particles and black carbon emissions from new and existing heavy-duty diesel vehicles and engines. The CCAC has supported the creation of an ASEAN Coalition for Cleaner Fuels and Vehicles, worked with Bangladesh and Vietnam to improve emission standards and establish national taskforces on HDD vehicles. Activities are now scaling up including through programmes being developed with China and Indonesia for national vehicle emissions and fuel standards and local policies. Under the MSW initiative, the Coalition Partners are working directly with cities and national governments to reduce emissions of SLCPs across the MSW sector. The first phase of activities have focused on a number of pilot cities who have completed work plans to address SLCP emissions from the sector and are beginning to implement including Penang (Malaysia); Ho Chi Minh City (Vietnam); and Phitsanulok (Thailand). These cities will act as ambassadors in their region and countries. The initiative is now increasing action and engaging with more cities including Surabaya (Indonesia), Cebu (Philippines) and other Asian cities. A Regional Asian workshop will take place in Surabaya on 23-24 February 2014. 

Other relevant Initiatives in Asia 

Since Asia is a key region for the SLCP reduction, many relevant initiatives have been underway or even completed in the region. Some of them are highlighted below: Project Surya: Project Surya aims to mitigate the regional impacts of global warming by immediately and demonstrably reducing atmospheric concentrations of black carbon, methane, and ozone. Project Surya will replace the highly polluting cookstoves traditionally employed in rural areas with clean-cooking technologies. Metaphorically, Surya will create a black carbon hole within weeks of introducing the energy-efficient technologies. Project Surya employs innovative sensing technologies to measure the positive climate and health impacts that result from this dramatic reduction in black carbon in unprecedented scale and resolution. In its first phase, starting from October 2009, Project Surya targeted three regions in rural India: one region in the Himalayas, one region in the Indo-Gangetic Plains, and one region in South India for deployment. ABC Asia: Atmospheric brown clouds (ABC), observed as widespread layers of brownish haze, are regional scale plumes of air pollutants, consisting of mainly aerosol particles, such as BC, and precursor gases which produce aerosols and ozone. ABCs and their interaction with build-up of 388 

GHGs significantly affect the regional climate, hydrological cycle, glacial melting, agriculture and human health. The effect of ABCs on climate, hydrological cycle, glacier melting, agriculture and human health is an outstanding problem which prevents a complete understanding of climate change and its impacts, and needs to be more fully explored. Asia is the first region to start intensive research and make observations to investigate various aspects of ABC. IBAQ: The Integrated Programme for Better Air Quality (IBAQ) addresses key leverage points for better air quality, including research, development of policy and best practice tools and frameworks, strengthening public participation and using e-learning as a powerful and efficient tool for change. The overall objective of IBAQ is to improve air quality and contribute to more livable and healthy cities in Asia. The focus will be on cities with high impact potential as well as potential for leveraging wider change. The IBAQ programme is being discussed and will be finalized shortly. The initial period of the programme is five years. The Partners include the Ministry of Environment, Japan (MOEJ), Clean Air Asia (CAA), the Asia Center for Air Pollution Research (ACAP) and IGES. 

8.4 Summary 

Although air pollution and climate change issues have been treated separately, until recently, scientific research has revealed that air pollutants affect climate change and climate change affects air quality significantly. Understanding the effect of the radiative forcing by ozone and aerosols on regional climate is challenging because the atmospheric responses are very complex. A more accurate projection of future emission changes is crucial to prepare an adaptation strategy for future environmental changes. The impact of climate change on air quality is best known as “the climate penalty,” which means that for example ozone air quality is aggravated by the increase of temperature accompanying global warming. The SLCPs co-benefit/co-control approach has recently been attracting much attention as a new policy tool to mitigate near-term climate change and improve air quality simultaneously. Early introduction of SLCPs control coupled with the stringent CO 2 control can bring the leveling-off of future global mean temperature at a lower level. On the other hand, from an air quality improvement side, more stringent emission reduction of air pollutants can be achieved with less cost by combining with the CO 2 reduction policy. As SLCPs with positive radiative forcing, black carbon (BC), tropospheric ozone (O 3 ) and methane (CH 4 ) have been identified by recent review by UNEP. In order to mitigate much more serious O 3 air pollution in East Asia as compared to Europe and North America, reduction of NO x /NMVOC together with CH 4 may also be recommended as SLCP co-control approach. Recent policy initiatives for SLCPs co-benefit approach have been reviewed which included ACP, Climate and Clean Air Coalition to Reduce Short-Lived Climate Pollutants (CCAC), and other relevant initiatives in Asia, e.g. Project Surya, Atmospheric Brown Clouds (ABC) Asia, and the Integrated Programme for Better Air Quality (IBAQ). 389 

References 

ACP, 2014. Asian Co-benefits Partnership websites (http://www.cobenefit.org) ACP. Asian Co-benefits Partnership (ACP) Work Plan 2010-2011, Work Plan 2012-2013 Berntsen, T. K., Fuglestvedt, J. S., Joshi, M. M., Shine, K. P., Stuber, N., Ponater, M., Sausen, R., Hauglustaine, D. A. and L. Li, 2005. Response of climate to regional emissions of ozone precursors: sensitivities and warming potentials, Tellus, 57B, 283–304. Butler T.M., Stock Z.S., Russo M.R., Denier van der Gon H.A.C., and Lawrence M.G., 2012. Megacity ozone air quality under four alternative future scenarios. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 12 (10), 4413-4428. Cionni I., Eyring V., Lamarque J.F., Randel W.J., Stevenson D.S., Wu F., Bodeker G.E., Shepherd T.G., Shindell D.T., and Waugh D.W., 2011. Ozone database in support of CMIP5 simulations: results and corresponding radiative forcing. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 11 (21), 11267-11292. Collins, W. J., Derwent, R. G., Johnson, C. E., and Stevenson, D. S., 2002., The oxidation of organic compounds in the troposphere and their global warming potentials, Climate Change, 52, 453-479. Conant W.C., Seinfeld J.H., Wang J., Carmichael G.R., Tang Y.H., Uno I., Flatau P.J., Markowicz K.M., and Quinn P.K., 2003. A model for the radiative forcing during ACE-Asia derived from CIRPAS Twin Otter and R/V Ronald H. Brown data and comparison with observations. J. Geophys. Res. 108 (D23). F. Dentener, D. Stevenson, K. Ellingsen, T. van Noije, M. Schultz , M. Amann, C. Atherton, N. Bell, D. Bergmann, I. Bey, L. Bouwman, T. Butler, J. Cofala, B. Collins, J. Drevet, R. Doherty, B. Eickhout, H. Eskes, A. Fiore, M. Gauss, D. Hauglustaine, L. Horowitz, I. S. A. Isaksen, B. Josse, M. Lawrence, M. Krol, J. F. Lamarque, V. Montanaro, J. F. Müller, V. H. Peuch, G. Pitari, J. Pyle, S. Rast, J. Rodriguez, M. Sanderson, N.H.Savage, D. Shindell, S. Strahan, S. Szopa, K. Sudo, R. Van Dingenen, O. Wild, and G. Zeng, 2006. The global atmospheric environment for the next generation. Environmental Science & Technology 40 (11), 3586-3594. Derwent, R. G., Stevenson, D. S., Doherty, R. M., Collins, W. J., Sanderson, M. G., Johnson, C. E., Radiative forcing from surface NO x emissions: spatial and seasonal variations, Climatic Change, DOI 10.1007/s10584-007-9383-8. Feichter J., Roeckner E., Lohmann U., and Liepert B., 2004. Nonlinear aspects of the climate response to greenhouse gas and aerosol forcing. Journal of Climate 17 (12), 2384-2398. Finlayson-Pitts, B. J. and J. N. Pitts, Jr., Chemistry of the Upper and Lower Atmosphere, Academic Press, 2000. Fiore A.M., et al., 2012. Global air quality and climate. Chemical Society Reviews 41 (19), 390 

6663-6683. Fiore, A. M., Jacob, D. J., and Field, B. D., 2002. Linking ozone pollution and climate change: The case for controlling methane, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29, 1919, doi:10.1029/2002GL15601. Fiore, A. M., West, J. J., Horowitz, L., W., Naik, V. and Schwarzkopf, M. D., 2008. Characterizing the tropospheric ozone response to methane emission controls and benefits to climate and air quality, J. Geophys. Res., 113, D08307, doi:10.1029/2007JD009162. Fiore, A. M., Dentener, F. J., Wild, O., Cuvelier, C., Schultz, M. G., Hess, P., Textor, C., Schulz, M., Doherty, R. M., Horowitz, L. W., MacKenzie, I. A., Sanderson, M. G., Shindell, D. T., Stevenson, D. S., Szopa, S., van Dingenen, R., Zeng, G., Atherton, C., Bergmann, D., Bey, I., Carmichael, G., Collins, W. J., Duncan, B. N., Faluvegi, G., Folberth, G., Gauss, M., Gong, S., Hauglustaine, D., Holloway, T., Isaksen, I. S. A., Jacob, D. J., Jonson, J. E., Kaminski, J. W., Keating, T. J., Lupu, A., Marmer, E., Montanaro, V., Park, R. J., Pitari, G., Pringle, K. J., Pyle, J. A., Schroeder, S., Vivanco, M. G., Wind, P., Wojcik, G., Wu, S., and Zuber, A., 2009. Multimodel estimates of intercontinental source-receptor relationships for ozone pollution, Journal of Geophysical Research, 114, D04301, doi:10.1029/2008JD010816. Fry, M. M. et al., 2012. The influence of ozone precursor emissions from four world regions on tropospheric composition and radiative climate forcing, Journal of Geophysical Research, 117, D07306, doi:10.1029/2011JD017134. Fuglestveldt, J. S., Berntsen, T. K., Isaksen, I. S. A., Ma, H., Liang, X.-Z., Wang, W.-C., 1999. Climatic forcing of nitrogen oxides through changes in tropospheric ozone and methane; global 3D model studies, Atmos. Environ., 33, 961-977. Hu A.X., Xu Y.Y., Tebaldi C., Washington W.M., and Ramanathan V., 2013. Mitigation of short-lived climate pollutants slows sea-level rise. Nature Climate Change 3 (8), 730-734. Huang Y., Chameides W.L., and Dickinson R.E., 2007. Direct and indirect effects of anthropogenic aerosols on regional precipitation over East Asia. Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 112 (D3). IGES, 2014. Asian co-benefit partnership. http://www.cobenefit.org/ IPCC, 2007. Climate Change 2007: The Scientific Basis, Cambridge Univ. Press, New York. IPCC, 2007. Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Pachauri, R.K. and A. Reisinger (Eds.), IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland. I.S.A. Isaksen, C. Granier, G. Myhre, T.K. Berntsen, S.B. Dalsøren, M. Gauss, Z. Klimont, R. Benestad, P. Bousquet, W. Collins, T. Cox, V. Eyring, D. Fowler, S. Fuzzi, P. Jöckel, P. Laj, U. Lohmann, M. Maiones P. Monks, A.S.H. Prevot, F. Raes, A. Richter, B. Rognerud, M. Schulz, D. Shindell, D.S. Stevenson, T. Storelvmo, W.-C. Wang, M. van Weele, M. Wild, D. Wuebbles, 2009. Atmospheric composition change: Climate-Chemistry interactions. Atmospheric Environment 43 (33), 5138-5192. 391 

Jacob D.J., and Winner D.A., 2009. Effect of climate change on air quality. Atmospheric Environment 43 (1), 51-63. Jeong J.I., and Park R.J., 2013. Effects of the meteorological variability on regional air quality in East Asia. Atmospheric Environment 69 (0), 46-55. Jiang H., Liao H., Pye H.O.T., Wu S., Mickley L.J., Seinfeld J.H., and Zhang X.Y., 2013. Projected effect of 2000-2050 changes in climate and emissions on aerosol levels in China and associated transboundary transport. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 13 (16), 7937-7960. Katragkou E., Zanis P., Kioutsioukis I., Tegoulias I., Melas D., Krüger B.C., and Coppola E., 2011. Future climate change impacts on summer surface ozone from regional climate-air quality simulations over Europe. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 116 (D22), D22307. Kawase H., Nagashima T., Sudo K., and Nozawa T., 2011. Future changes in tropospheric ozone under Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). Geophysical Research Letters 38 (5), L05801. Kim M.K., Lau W.K.M., Kim K.M., and Lee W.S., 2007. A GCM study of effects of radiative forcing of sulfate aerosol on large scale circulation and rainfall in East Asia during boreal spring. Geophysical Research Letters 34 (24). Kim S.W., Choi I.J., and Yoon S.C., 2010. A multi-year analysis of clear-sky aerosol optical properties and direct radiative forcing at Gosan, Korea (2001-2008). Atmos. Res. 95 (2-3), 279-287. Kim S.W., Jefferson A., Yoon S.C., Dutton E.G., Ogren J.A., Valero F.P.J., Kim J., and Holben B.N., 2005. Comparisons of aerosol optical depth and surface shortwave irradiance and their effect on the aerosol surface radiative forcing estimation. J. Geophys. Res. 110 (D7). Levy H., Schwarzkopf M.D., Horowitz L., Ramaswamy V., and Findell K.L., 2008. Strong sensitivity of late 21st century climate to projected changes in short-lived air pollutants. Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 113 (D6). Li Z.Q., et al., 2007. Preface to special section on East Asian studies of tropospheric aerosols: An international regional experiment (EAST-AIRE). J. Geophys. Res. 112 (D22). Lin J.-T., Patten K.O., Hayhoe K., Liang X.-Z., and Wuebbles D.J., 2008. Effects of Future Climate and Biogenic Emissions Changes on Surface Ozone over the United States and China. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology 47 (7), 1888-1909. Liu Q., Lam K.S., Jiang F., Wang T.J., Xie M., Zhuang B.L., and Jiang X.Y., 2013. A numerical study of the impact of climate and emission changes on surface ozone over South China in autumn time in 2000–2050. Atmospheric Environment 76, 227-237. Lode, B.: 2013. The climate and clean air coalition to reduce short-lived climate pollutants (CCAC), 392 

ASIL Insights, 17, 1-6. http://www.asil.org/insights/volume/17/issue/20/ Markowicz K.M., Flatau P.J., Quinn P.K., Carrico C.M., Flatau M.K., Vogelmann A.M., Bates D., Liu M., and Rood M.J., 2003. Influence of relative humidity on aerosol radiative forcing: An ACE-Asia experiment perspective. J. Geophys. Res. 108 (D23). Menon S., Hansen J., Nazarenko L., and Luo Y.F., 2002. Climate effects of black carbon aerosols in China and India. Science 297 (5590), 2250-2253 Murazaki, K. and Hess P., 2006. How does climate change contribute to surface ozone change over the United States? Journal of Geophysical Research, 111, D05301, doi:10.1029/2005JD005873. Naik, V., Mauzerall, D., Horowitz, L., Schwarzkopf, A. M., Ramaswamy, V., and Oppenheimer, M., 2005. Net radiative forcing due to changes in regional emissions of tropospheric ozone precursors, J. Geophys. Res., 110, D24306, doi:10.1029/2005JD005908. Nakajima T., Sekiguchi M, Takemura T, Uno I., Higurashi A., Kim D., Ju Sohn B., Oh. S., Nakajima Y. T., Ohta S., Okada I. Takamura T. and Kawamoto K. 2003. Significance of direct and indirect radiative forcings of aerosols in the East China Sea region. J. Geophys. Res. 108 (D23). Nolte C.G., Gilliland A.B., Hogrefe C., and Mickley L.J., 2008. Linking global to regional models to assess future climate impacts on surface ozone levels in the United States. J. Geophys. Res 113, D14307. Ohara T., Akimoto H., Kurokawa J., Horii N., Yamaji K., Yan X., and Hayasaka T., 2007. An Asian emission inventory of anthropogenic emission sources for the period 1980-2020. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 7 (16), 4419-4444. Ramana M.V., Ramanathan V., Feng Y., Yoon S.C., Kim S.W., Carmichael G.R., and Schauer J.J., 2010. Warming influenced by the ratio of black carbon to sulphate and the black-carbon source. Nature Geoscience 3 (8), 542-545. Ramanathan V., Ramana M.V., Roberts G., Kim D., Corrigan C., Chung C., and Winker D., 2007. Warming trends in Asia amplified by brown cloud solar absorption. Nature 448 (7153), 575-U575. Ramanathan V., and Carmichael G., 2008. Global and regional climate changes due to black carbon. Nature Geoscience 1 (4), 221-227. Rasmussen D.J., Fiore A.M., Naik V., Horowitz L.W., McGinnis S.J., and Schultz M.G., 2012. Surface ozone-temperature relationships in the eastern US: A monthly climatology for evaluating chemistry-climate models. Atmospheric Environment 47 (0), 142-153. Saikawa E., Kurokawa J., Takigawa M., Borken-Kleefeld J., Mauzerall D.L., Horowitz L.W., and Ohara T., 2011. The impact of China's vehicle emissions on regional air quality in 2000 and 2020: a scenario analysis. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 11 (18), 9465-9484. 393 

Saikawa E., Naik V., Horowitz L.W., Liu J.F., and Mauzerall D.L., 2009. Present and potential future contributions of sulfate, black and organic carbon aerosols from China to global air quality, premature mortality and, radiative forcing. Atmospheric Environment 43 (17), 2814-2822. Shindell D.T., Levy H., Schwarzkopf M.D., Horowitz L.W., Lamarque J.F., and Faluvegi G., 2008. Multimodel projections of climate change from short-lived emissions due to human activities. Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 113 (D11). Shindell, D. T., Faluvegi, G., Bell, N., and Schmidt, G. A., 2005. An emission-based view of climate forcing by methane and tropospheric ozone, Geophys. Res. Lett., 32, L04803, doi:10.1029/2004GL021900. Shindell, D. T., Faluvegi, G., Koch, D. M., Schmidt, G. A., Unger, N., Bauer, S. E., 2009. Improved attribution of climate forcing to emissions, Science, 326, 716-718. Shindell, D. T., Johan C. I. Kuylenstierna, Elisabetta Vignati, Rita van Dingenen, Markus Amann, Zbigniew Klimont, Susan C. Anenberg, Nicholas Muller, Greet Janssens-Maenhout, Frank Raes, Joel Schwartz, Greg Faluvegi, Luca Pozzoli, Kaarle Kupiainen, Lena Höglund-Isaksson, Lisa Emberson, David Streets, V. Ramanathan, Kevin Hicks, N. T. Kim Oanh, George Milly, Martin Williams, Volodymyr Demkine, and David Fowler. 2012 Simultaneously mitigating near-term climate change and improving human health and food security, Science 335, 183-189. Shindell, D.T., Levy H., Schwarzkopf M.D., Horowitz L.W., Lamarque J.F., and Faluvegi G., 2008. Multimodel projections of climate change from short-lived emissions due to human activities. Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 113, D11109, doi:10.1029/2007JD009152. Streets D.G., Yan F., Chin M., Diehl T., Mahowald N., Schultz M., Wild M., Wu Y., and Yu C., 2009. Anthropogenic and natural contributions to regional trends in aerosol optical depth, 1980–2006. J. Geophys. Res. 114. Szopa S., et al., 2013. Aerosol and ozone changes as forcing for climate evolution between 1850 and 2100. Climate Dynamics 40 (9-10), 2223-2250. Takemura T., 2012. Distributions and climate effects of atmospheric aerosols from the preindustrial era to 2100 along Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) simulated using the global aerosol model SPRINTARS. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 12 (23), 11555-11572. Takemura T., Nakajima T., Higurashi A., Ohta S., and Sugimoto N., 2003. Aerosol distributions and radiative forcing over the Asian Pacific region simulated by Spectral Radiation-Transport Model for Aerosol Species (SPRINTARS). J. Geophys. Res. 108 (D23). Tanimoto H., Ohara T., and Uno I., 2009. Asian anthropogenic emissions and decadal trends in springtime tropospheric ozone over Japan: 1998–2007. Geophys. Res. Lett. 36 (23). 394 

Tao Z., Williams A., Huang H.-C., Caughey M., and Liang X.-Z., 2007. Sensitivity of U.S. surface ozone to future emissions and climate changes. Geophysical Research Letters 34 (8), L08811. UNEP, 2010. The Emissions Gap Report – Are the Copenhagen Accord Pledges Sufficient to Limit Global Warming to 2 ℃ or 1.5 ℃?UNEP, 2011. Near-term Climate Protection and Clean Air Benefits: Actions for Controlling Short-Lived Climate Forcers. Nairobi: UNEP. http://www.unep.org/pdf/Near_Term_ Climate_Protection_ &_Air_Benefits.pdf UNEP, 2014. Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC), http://unep.org/ccac/ UNEP/WMO, 2011. Integrated Assessment of Black Carbon and Tropospheric Ozone: Summary for Decision Makers. http://www.unep.org/dewa/Portals/67/pdf/Black_Carbon. pdf. US Environment Protection Agency, 2012. Reducing Black Carbon Emissions in South Asia – Low Cost Opportunities WMO/GAW (Global Atmospheric Watch), 2012. WMO/IGAC Impacts of Megacities on Air Pollution and Climate, Lead authors: Tong Zhu, Megan Melamed, David Parrish et al. Wang Y., Shen L., Wu S., Mickley L., He J., and Hao J., 2013. Sensitivity of surface ozone over China to 2000–2050 global changes of climate and emissions. Atmospheric Environment 75 (0), 374-382. West, J. J., Naik, V., Horowitz, L. W., and Fiore, A. M., 2009. Effect of regional precursor emission controls on long-range ozone transport — Part 2: Steady -state changes in ozone air quality and impacts on human mortality, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 9, 6095-6107. West., J. J., Fiore, A. M., Naik, V., Horowitz, L. W., Schwarzkopf, M. D., and Muzerall, D. L., 2007. Ozone air quality and radiative forcing consequences of changes in ozone precursor emissions, Geophys. Res. Lett., 34, L06806, doi:10.1029/2006GL029173. Wu J., Fu C., Xu Y., Tang J.P., Wang W., and Wang Z., 2008a. Simulation of direct effects of black carbon aerosol on temperature and hydrological cycle in Asia by a Regional Climate Model. Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics 100 (1-4), 179-193. Wu S., Mickley L.J., Leibensperger E.M., Jacob D.J., Rind D., and Streets D.G., 2008b. Effects of 2000–2050 global change on ozone air quality in the United States. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 113 (D6), D06302. Yamaji K., Ohara T., Uno I., Kurokawa J., Pochanart P., and Akimoto H., 2008. Future prediction of surface ozone over East Asia using models-3 community multiscale air quality modeling system and regional emission inventory in Asia. Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 113 (D8). Yamaji K., Uno I., and Irie H., 2012. Investigating the response of East Asian ozone to Chinese emission changes using a linear approach. Atmos. Environ. 55, 475-482. 395 

Yoon S.C., Won J.G., Omar A.H., Kim S.W., and Sohn B.J., 2005. Estimation of the radiative forcing by key aerosol types in worldwide locations using a column model and AERONET data. Atmos. Environ. 39 (35), 6620-6630. Zhang Q., J. L. Jimenez, M. R. Canagaratna, J. D. Allan, H. Coe, I. Ulbrich, M. R. Alfarra, A. Takami, A. M. Middlebrook, Y. L. Sun, K. Dzepina, E. Dunlea, K.Docherty, P. F. DeCarlo, D. Salcedo, T. Onasch, J. T. Jayne, T. Miyoshi, A. Shimono, S. Hatakeyama, N. Takegawa, Y. Kondo, J. Schneider, F. Drewnick, S. Borrmann, S. Weimer, K. Demerjian, P. Williams, K. Bower, R. Bahreini, L.Cottrell, R. J. Griffin, J. Rautiainen, J. Y. Sun, Y. M. Zhang, and D. R. Worsnop, 2007. Ubiquity and dominance of oxygenated species in organic aerosols in anthropogenically-influenced Northern Hemisphere midlatitudes. Geophys. Res. Lett. 34 (13). Zhao C., Wang Y.H., Yang Q., Fu R., Cunnold D., and Choi Y., 2010. Impact of East Asian summer monsoon on the air quality over China: View from space. J. Geophys. Res. 115. 396 397 

# Chapter 9 Conclusions and Recommendations 

For the past 50 years, Asia has been a home for the world’s fastest economic growing countries, starting from Japan to Korea, Singapore, and now to China, and India, two of the fastest growing major economies. East Asian and Southeast Asian countries’ economies heavily depend on manufacturing, emitting various air pollutants in a large quantity. This report reviews the present status of air pollution and their environmental impacts focused mainly on East Asia and Southeast Asia. Specifically, the present status of particulate matter (PM) and haze, oxidants, and acidification and eutrophication, including their environmental impacts, are reviewed. In addition, air toxics and climate-air pollution interaction are included as the more recent atmospheric environmental issues. 

Particulate Matter (PM) and Haze 

It was estimated that the PM level could be reduced to a safer level, and about 300,000-700,000 premature deaths could be prevented in developing countries. The seriousness of PM pollution in East and Southeast Asian countries has been unveiled by a series of international field campaigns, such as the Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX), Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE)-Asia, the East Asian Study of Tropospheric Aerosols and their Impact on Regional Climate (EAST - AIRC), and Atmospheric Brown Cloud (ABC). The East and Southeast are identified as one of the five major regional hot spots where anthropogenic aerosol optical depth exceeded 0.3 and the absorption AOD exceeded 0.03. Atmospheric measurements have developed quickly in East Asia during the past decade. However, the number of monitoring sites is still limited in the East and to make things worse only part of the monitoring data is accessible. Additionally, the official monitoring mainly focuses on the routine measurement of regular pollutants but rarely focuses on the atmospheric chemistry. The long-term measurement data is also very limited in most countries of East Asia. Currently, EANET set up their measurement sites mainly in Japan and Southeast Asia. There are only several sites in China, which contributed to the largest pollutant emission in East Asia, of which most of are background sites. It is suggested that additional sites will be set up in some proper locations in the North China Plain and East China, where the strongest human activities occur. As for the aerosol measurement within the framework of EANET, carbonaceous aerosol measurement is suggested to be added as carbonaceous aerosol is playing a more dominant role in the formation of haze. The sampling resolution of filters at most EANET sites is from weekly to bi-weekly. The coarse time resolution could cause smoothing of typical short pollution episodes and difficulties of analyzing temporal variations, employment for model evaluation, and so on. In East Asia, rapid industrialization and an increase in automotive vehicles on the continent have contributed to the recent increases of PM concentrations. This increase subsequently has increased the PM levels of downstream countries. The health effect attributable to transboundary PM pollution has not been well investigated. The chemical composition of PM varies with areas and emission sources, hence the study on the effect of PM chemical composition should be investigated for different areas. This type of investigation also makes it possible to distinguish local PM and transboundary PM, which leads to the study on transboundary PM attribution. 398 

Studies on long term effects of PM in East Asia showed inconsistent results, partly because the studies were not designed for evaluating air pollution effects. Cohort studies specifically designed for air pollution effect evaluation with sufficient size are needed. 

Tropospheric Ozone 

Together with PM, ozone frequently violates the WHO guidelines causing a significant adverse impact on human health and vegetation. Regional-scale distributions and seasonal cycles along with controlling factors are well understood by enhanced observational evidence and model analysis in East and Southeast Asia. General consensus has been reached that long-term trends in East Asia are increasing. Despite the recent advances in ozone monitoring and modeling, there are still a number unresolved problems as listed below. - The long term trends were not quantitatively reproduced by state-of-science models incorporating the latest emissions inventories. - Interannual variations have not been sufficiently explored. - Monitoring of ozone precursors and tracers need to be enhanced, particularly free tropospheric data, which is very limited, needs to increase. - The impacts of climate change on the source-receptor relationship needs to be explored more. Multi-country collaboration for studies with consistent methodology are necessary. The study should include a sufficient number of cities, including those with negative or non-significant ozone effect. The adverse impact of ozone on vegetation is deemed to be serious with possible increasing trends to make it necessary to take measures to minimize the ozone induced reduction in agricultural production in Asia. However, experimental and field studies are substantially lacking neither to ascertain the above assessment nor to contemplate efficient control measures. The species or cultivar difference in the sensitivity to the ozone should be considered to evaluate the present and future effects of the ozone on crops and the critical levels of ozone for protecting agricultural production in Asia. A similar study is also necessary to forest tree species with the additional study on the combined effects of the ozone and other environmental stresses on Asian forest tree species. 

Acidification and Eutrophication 

The acid deposition has been studied extensively for the characterization of precipitation and the impact assessment on soil and vegetation by field measurement and for the analysis of acid deposition phenomena and source-receptor relations by modeling since the 1980s. It has been reported that a significant decrease of soil pH in the last 20 years or so in China and Japan was probably caused by acid rain. Despite these studies, soil acidification manifested by field observations in East Asia are still very limited to draw a reliable scientific conclusion. Based on input–output measurements conducted in Japan and China, a majority of ecosystems have a high nitrogen retention ability, whereas nitrogen saturation occurred in some particular forested ecosystems. Spatial distribution of nitrate concentrations in stream water in Japan 399 

showed that there were some areas with high concentrations in the vicinity of large cities and intensive agricultural areas, and the area with the highest concentrations were located on the air mass advection path from central Tokyo. The field measurements and modeling in the 1990s and 2000s, and the recent studies in the 2010s all noted that the sulfur and nitrogen depositions have increased in China and Japan from the 1980s to 2000s most likely due to increased emissions of SO 2 and NO x in China. Recently, some researchers suggested that sulfur deposition might start to decrease as early as after 2006. The long-term data on inland water chemistry is limited in the Asian region. Re-measurement of previously surveyed points or assessment of the public data on water quality may be informative to evaluate the current situation on inland water acidification and nitrogen leaching. Regional scale evaluations of acidification and nitrogen leaching are necessary. It should be useful to analyze the causal relationship between regional deposition and impacts by the collaboration of atmospheric modeling and impact research. A significant advance has been made in acid deposition monitoring and modeling in the past 20 years or so in East Asia. However, there are large differences among the reported source-receptor analysis results and the parameterizations of individual processes still heavily rely on the United States’ and Europe’s studies. On the other hand, there are only limited studies in literature for Southeast Asia. In addition, collecting data on biogeochemical cycles especially in Southeast Asia and analysis on interactions between nitrogen and carbon cycles are recommended as a future initiative. 

Air Toxics 

The POPs concentration in environmental samples have been evaluated under the Global Monitoring Plan of the Stockholm Convention (GMP). Japan organized the POPs Monitoring Project in East Asian Countries (POPSEA project) from 2002. Participating countries are Cambodia, Indonesia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Mongolia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam. These studies demonstrated that the environmental POPs level and emission strength are assessed to not be significant, which may cause only a moderate environmental impact. The monitoring methodologies have already been established in advanced countries (Japan, South Korea, Singapore and China). However, the amount of POPs monitoring data in the East Asia sub-region is still low and the preparation of the emission inventory is not enough. The preparation of detailed emission inventory should be expected to consider trans-boundary pollution and establishing the measure against POPs issues. 

Emission Inventories 

East and Southeast Asia became the regions of the world with the largest air pollutant emissions surpassing those in Europe and North America. The natural and anthropogenic emissions in this important region are only estimated with large uncertainties despite enormous international and national efforts. The uncertainties of biogenic volatile organic compounds (VOC) emission inventories are very high in the Asian region. More and continuous studies to understand and evaluate the 400 

fundamental model and key parameters of biogenic emission estimations are required at many places. The Asian dust emission could be varied significantly depending on the used model and meteorological conditions. It is desirable for more reasonable estimations of emission amounts to use an ensemble average of several different dust emission models for several years. In order to better understand the state of biomass burning emissions in East Asia, especially in Southeast Asia, field campaigns/experiments for measurement of regional specific parameters of fires are needed. Additionally, Asian databases of biomass burning emissions as well as their fundamental information, such as type of biomes and fires, combustion completeness, and environmental conditions, should be set up. The quality of anthropogenic emission inventory strongly depends on the accuracy of activity data and emission factors. However, studies for emissions, especially in Southeast Asia and other developing countries, are still limited and thus, uncertainties of their emissions are large. Therefore, it is recommended that research activities (e.g., survey of detailed activity data and region-specific emission factors) and capacity building for their activities are required in many countries, especially in Southeast Asia. Verification, improvement and updates of anthropogenic and natural emission inventories based on ground and satellite observations, chemical transport modeling and inverse modeling are essential in reducing uncertainties. This work requires strong collaborative and integrated research among emission inventory developing, monitoring, chemical transport modeling, and inverse modeling groups. 

Mitigation Measures of air pollutant emissions in East Asia 

The major countries and regions in East Asia (e.g., China, Japan, and South Korea) have implemented considerable policies for energy conservation and air pollution mitigation. Particularly, the Chinese government sets targets to reduce energy consumption per unit GDP and total SO 2 emissions by 20% and 10%, respectively, measured in 2010 against 2005 levels. In the long term, China aims to reduce CO 2 emissions per unit GDP by 40-45% in 2020 compared with 2005 levels. Japan has taken substantial actions to achieve the target of a 6% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from 1990 to 2008-2012, required by the Kyoto Protocol. During 2005-2010, the emissions of SO 2 and PM 2.5 in East Asia decreased by 15% and 11%, respectively, mainly attributable to the large scale deployment of FGD for China’s power plants, and the promotion of high-efficient PM removal technologies in China’s power plants and cement industry. During this period, the emissions of NO X and NMVOC increased by 25% and 15%, driven by the rapid increase in the emissions from China owing to inadequate control strategies. In contrast, the NO X and NMVOC emissions in East Asia except China decreased by 13-17% mainly due to the implementation of tight vehicle emission standards in Japan and South Korea. The successful implementation of the control policies set in China’s 12 th Five Year Plan, the recently released emission standards for various industrial sources, and slowly strengthened control measures after 2015 (defined as a “progressive” end-of-pipe control strategy) could reduce China’s emissions of NO X, SO 2 , and PM 2.5 significantly. The resulted NO X, SO 2 , and PM 2.5 emissions would be 16-26% lower than the 2010 levels by 2020, and even lower by 2030. Therefore, it is essential to support and monitor the progress of the implementation of these 401 

legislations. The contributions of advanced energy saving measures to the reduction of SO 2 and PM 2.5 emissions exceed those of progressive end-of-pipe control measures by 2030. The energy saving measures would play an irreplaceable role for further reduction of air pollutant emissions. The full application of best available technologies could reduce the emissions of NO X, SO 2 , and PM 2.5 in East Asia to only about one-quarter and NMVOC to one-third of the levels of the baseline projection. There are still large reduction potentials for major air pollutants using currently known control technologies. 402 

# Abbreviations List AA : Unchambered Field Plots ABA : Abscisic acid ABC : A s i a n B r o w n C l o u d s ABSP : Absorption Method ACAP : Asia Center for Air Pollution Research ACE : Aerosol Characterization Experiment ACE-Asia : Asia Pacific Regional Aerosol Experiment Missions ACP : Asia Co-benefit Partnership ADAM2 : Asian Dust Aerosol Model2 ADS : Asian Dust Storm AEROCOM : Aerosol Comparisons between Observations and Models AERONET : Asian sites of Aerosol Robotic Network AMMA : African Monsoon Multivariate Analysis ANC : Acid Neutralizing Capacity AOD : Aerosol Optical Depth APHENA : A Combined European and North American Approach APX : Ascorbate Peroxidase AQI : Air Quality Index ASPA : Area-weighted Surface Pressure Anomaly ATSR : Along Track Scanning Radiometer AVHRR : Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer BaP : Benzo[a]pyrene BASE-ASIA : Biomass-burning Aerosols in South-East Asia BAU : Business as Usual Scenario BC : Base Cations BC : Black Carbon BEIS : Biogenic Emission Inventory System BIBLE : Biomass Burning and Lightning Experiment BMR : Bangkok Metropolitan Region BVOC : Biogenic volatile organic compounds CAA : Clean Air Asia CALIPSO : Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations CAM : C o m mu n i t y A t mo s p h e r e M o d e l CanMETOP : Canadian Model for Environmental Transport of Organochlorine Pesticides 403 

CASA : Carnegie-Ames-Stanford-Approach CAT : Activities of Catalase CAWNET : China Atmosphere Watch Network CC : Cis-Chlordane CCAC : Clean Air Coalition to Reduce Short-Lived Climate Pollutants CEC : Cation Exchange Capacity CEMSs : Continuous Emissions Monitoring Systems CF : Charcoal-Filtered Air CFCs : Chlorofluorocarbons CHP : Combined heat and power generation CLE : Current Legislation CLRTAP : Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution CMA : China Meteorological Administration CMAQ : Community Multi-scale Air Quality CNG : Compressed Natural Gas CO : Carbon Monoxide COP : Conference of Parties CSHNET : Chinese Sun Hazemeter Network CTM : Chemical Transport Models CYC : Cyclone Dust Collectors DA : Data Assimilation 3-D CTM : Three-dimensional chemical transport models DDE : Dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene DDT : Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane DfSR : Diffuse Surface Solar Radiation DHSBR : Dinghushan Biosphere Reserve DHSLTNR : DingHuShan Long-term Nitrogen Research DHZR : Dihydrozeatin DIN : Dissolved Inorganic Nitrogen DiSR : Direct Surface Solar Radiation DL-PCBs : Dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls DM : Dry Matter DOC : Dissolved Organic Carbon DON : Dissolved Organic Nitrogen EANET : Acid Deposition Monitoring Network in East Asia EAST-AIRC : East Asian Study of Tropospheric Aerosols and their Impact on Regional Climate 404 

ECMWF : European Center for Medium-range Weather Forecasts EDGAR : Emission Database for Global Atmospheric Research version ED-XRF : Energy Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence EF : Emission Factor ENVISAT : Environmental Satellite EPA : Environmental Protection Agency ESP : Electrostatic Precipitators EV : Electric Vehicle EXMAN : Experimental Manipulation of Forest Ecosystems in Europe FA : charcoal-filtered air FACE : Free-Air Concentration Enrichment FAS : Fleet Average System FB : Fraction of biomass burned FCs : charcoal-filtered air FF : Fabric Filters FGD : Flue Gas Desulfurization FINN : Fire Inventory from NCAR FRP : Fire Radiative Power GA 3 : Gibberellins A 3GAINS : Greenhouse Gas and Air Pollution Interaction and Synergies GAM : Generalized Additive Model GBA : Global Burned Area GDP : Gross Domestic Production GEF : Global Environment Facility GEIA : Global Emissions InitiAtive GEOS : Goddard Earth Observing System GFAS : Global Fire Assimilation System GFED : Global Fire Emissions Database GHA : Greater Hangzhou Area GHG : Greenhouse Gases GICC : Global Inventory for Chemistry Climate GLC : Global Land Cover GloBEIS : Global Biosphere Emissions and Interactions System GMI : Global Modeling Initiative GMP : Global Monitoring Plan 405 

GOCART : Goddard Chemistry Aerosol Radiation and Transport GOME : Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment GVP : Global Volcanism Program HBCD : Hexabromocyclododecane HCB : Hexachlorobenzene HCBD : Hexabromodutadienes HCH : Hexachlorocyclohexane HDD : Heavy Duty Diesel HDDM : High-order Decoupled Direct Method HED : High Efficiency Deduster HEV : Hybrid Electric Vehicle I/M : Inspection and Maintenance IAA : Indole-3-acetic acid IBAQ : Integrated Programme for Better Air Quality IBBI : Interdisciplinary Biomass Burning Initiative ICP-Forest : International Co-operative Programme on Assessment and Monitoring of Air Pollution Effects on Forests IEA : International Energy Agency IFC : Internal Floating Covers IGAC : International Global Atmospheric Chemistry IGCC : Integrated gasification combined cycle IGES : Institute for Global Environmental Strategies iLEAPS : Integrated Land Ecosystem - Atmosphere Processes Study INDOEX : Indian Ocean Experiment INTEX-B : Emission inventory developed for Intercontinental Chemical IPA : Isopentenyl-adenosine IPCC : Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC SRES : Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Special Report on Emissions Scenarios ISCCP : International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project JEI-DB : JATOP Emission Inventory-Data Base JMA : Japan Meteorological Agency JPHC : Japan Public Health Center LAI : Leaf Area Index LATMOS : Laboratoire Atmosphères Milieux, Observations Spatiales/CNRS 406 

LEVI : Low Emission Vehicle I LIDAR : Light Detection and Ranging LNB : Low NO x Burner MACC : Monitoring Atmospheric Composition and Climate MAHs : Monocyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons MAX-DOAS : Multi-Axis Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy MDAR : Monodehydroascorbate Reductase MEGAN : Model of Emissions of Gases and Aerosols from Nature MEP : Ministry of Environment Protection of China MICS-Asia : Model Inter-Comparison Study for Asia MISR : Multi-angle Imaging SpectroRadiometer MODIS : Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer MoEJ : Ministry of the Environment, Japan MOHYCAN : MOdel for Hydrocarbon emissions by the CANopy MOZART : Model for OZone and Related chemical Tracers NAQPMS : Nested Air Quality Prediction Modeling System NDVI : Normalized Difference Vegetation Index NF : Non-Filtered Air NFCs : Open-top Chambers Ventilated with Ambient NIER : National Institute of Environmental Research NIES : National Institute for Environmental Studies NITREX : Nitrogen saturation experiments NMHC : Non-Methane Hydrocarbons NMOG : Non Methane Organic Gases NMVOC : Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds NOECs : No Observed Effect Concentrations nss : non-sea-salt OA : Organic Aerosol OC : Organic Carbon OCAWNET : Chinese Meteorological Administration Atmosphere Watch Network OCPs : Organochlorine Pesticides OCRB : Open Crop Residue Burning OMI : Ozone Monitoring Instrument ONR : Office of Naval Research ONRG : Office of Naval Research-Global OTC : Open-Top Chambers 407 

OXFL : Oxy-Fuel Combustion Technology PAEs : Phthalate Esters PAHs : Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons PAN : Peroxyacetyl Nitrate PAR : Photosynthetically Active Radiation PAS : Passive Sampler PBDEs : Polybrominated diphenyl ethers PC : Policy Scenario PCBs : Polychlorinated biphenyls PCDDs : Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins PCDFs : Polychlorinated dibenzofurans PCNs : Polychlorinated naphthalene PeCB : Pentachlorobenzene PFC : Policy failure case PFOS : Perfluorooctane Sulfonic Acid PFOSF : Perfluorooctanesulfonyl Fluoride PHEV : Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle PM : Particulate Matter POPs : Persistent Organic Pollutants PPFD : Photosynthetic Photon Flux Density PRIF : Potential Receptor Influence Function PSC : Policy success case PUF : Polyurethane foam RAPIDC : Programme on Regional Air Pollution in Developing Countries RAQMS : Regional Air Quality Model System RCP : Representative Concentration Pathways REAS : Regional Emission Inventory in Asia REF : Reference case REOF : Rotated Empirical Orthogonal Function RF : Radiative forcing ROS : Reactive Oxygen Species SAR : Simulated Acid Rain SC : Stockholm convention SC : Supercritical SCCPs : Short-chained chlorinated paraffines SCIAMACHY : SCanning Imaging Absorption spectroMeter for Atmospheric 408 

SCR : Selective Catalytic Reduction SEM : Scanning Electron Microscopy SEPA : State Environmental Protection Administration SLCPs : Short-Lived Climate Pollutants SNCR : Selective Non-Catalytic Reduction SPM : Suspended Particulate Matter SRR : Source-Receptor Relationships SWR : Shortwave Radiation TC : Trans-chlordane TF HTAP : Task Force on Hemispheric Transport of Air Pollution TM : Transport Model TOA : Top of the atmosphere TOMS : Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer TRACE-P : Transport and Chemical Evolution over the Pacific (TRACE-P) TRMM-VIRS : Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission- Visible and Infrared Scanner TSP : Total Soluble Protein TSP : Total Suspended Particles UFA : unfiltered air ULEV : Ultra Low Emission Vehicles ULUND : University of Lund - Department of Physical Geography and Ecosystem Science UNECE : United Nations Economic Commission for Europe UNEP : United Nations Environment Programme UNU : United Nations University USC : Ultra-Supercritical VCF : Vegetation Continuous Fields VEI : Volcanic Explosively Index VOCs : Volatile Organic Compounds VSI : Volcanic SO 2 Index WET : Wet Scrubbers WMO : World Meteorological Organization WRF : Weather Forecast Model ZR : Zeatin riboside 409 

# Members of the Reviewing Committee on the Status of Air Pollution in East Asia 

Co-Chairs 

Prof. Seogyeon Cho Professor, Department of Environmental Engineering, Inha University Republic of Korea Prof. Wilfredo M. Carandang Professor and Assistant to the Chancellor Institute of Renewable Natural Resources College of Forestry and Natural Resources University of the Philippines Los Banos College Philippines 

RC Members 

Dr. Hiroshi Tanimoto Head, Global Atmospheric Chemistry Section Center for Global Environmental Research National Institute for Environmental Studies Japan Prof. Joshua S. Fu Professor Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering University of Tennessee U.S.A Prof. Junko Shindo Professor Graduate School of Medicine and Engineering Department of Environmental Sciences University of Yamanashi Japan Prof. Katsunori Suzuki Director/Professor Environment Preservation Center Kanazawa University Japan Dr. Savitri Garivait Associate Professor/Chairperson of Environment Division Environment Division The Joint Graduate School of Energy and Environment (JGSEE) King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi (KMUTT) Thailand 411 

# Secretariats of the Reviewing Committee on the Status of Air Pollution in East Asia 

Name Position Department/Organization Dr. Hajime Akimoto Director General ACAP Dr. Sukjo Lee Deputy Director General ACAP Mr. Yusuke Kusakawa Deputy Director General ACAP Mr. Jiro Sato Assistant Deputy Director General ACAP Dr. Tsuyoshi Ohizumi Head Atmospheric Research Department/ACAP Ms. Naoko Take Chief Senior Researcher Dr. Junichi Kurokawa Senior Researcher Dr. Yayoi Inomata Senior Researcher Dr. Mingqun Huo Researcher Dr. Hiroyuki Sase Head Ecological Impact Research Department/ACAP Dr. Naoyuki Yamashita Researcher Dr. Keiichi Sato Chief Senior Researcher Data Management Department/ACAP Mr. Shiro Toda Head Planning and Training Department/ACAP Dr. Ken Yamashita Chief Information and Investigation Section/Niigata Prefectural Institutes of Public Health and Environment Sciences Dr. Takuya Shiozaki Deputy Director Environmental Sciences Department/Japan Environment Sanitation Center
