Title: Illegal Immigrants Getting Taxpayer-Funded Home Loans – California Globe

URL Source: https://californiaglobe.com/fl/reality-vs-narrative-in-crazifornia-illegal-immigrants-getting-taxpayer-funded-home-loans/

Markdown Content:
Why are illegal immigrant aliens getting so many taxpayer-funded benefits and services?

That’s a loaded question. But it’s also one in which the legal taxpaying citizens deserve an answer to.

These future Democrat voters currently being hustled into the United States to replace disgruntled Californians and Americans are receiving benefits ahead of America’s poor, homeless, veterans, and taxpayers.

In California, the latest program, The California Dream For All Shared Appreciation loan program, initiated in 2023 to assist qualified first-time homebuyers with down payments, is being amended to include illegal immigrants who want to buy a home.

Many of our adult offspring can’t even afford to buy a home in California. If it’s so important for the state to help low-and middle-income individuals buy homes, maybe we start with our own citizens since it’s coming out of taxpayers’ pockets?

Ahh, but that does not fit the narrative. The program wasn’t really designed to help just any low-and middle-income individuals buy homes – no, the program really is “Investing in diverse communities with financing programs that help more Californians have a place to call home.”

“Diverse communities.” This meets the narrative – “Underserved” black and brown people, and now illegal immigrants.

Assemblyman Joaquin Arambula. (Photo: Kevin Sanders for California Globe)

(Photo: Kevin Sanders for California Globe)

Assemblyman Joaquin Arambula (D-Fresno), authored AB 1840, which will expand the eligibility requirement for California’s first-time homebuyer loan program to allow illegal immigrants who reside in-state to use it.

Arambula told KTLA that the program doesn’t address eligibility based on immigration status. “The program hasn’t been clear about eligibility for undocumented individuals, and AB 1840 addresses that issue.”

Except that’s not exactly true. Foreign buyers and foreign investors buy a lot of property in California already.

The language in the bill tells us more:

“Expand opportunities for California households to accumulate wealth for themselves and their families. **The agency shall make any necessary program adjustments consistent with the requirements of this chapter,** which may include limiting the percentage of appreciation payable under the program, to ensure that design of the loan product is not an unreasonable impediment to homeowner wealth creation.”

and:

“An applicant under the program shall not be disqualified solely based on the applicant’s immigration status.”

“The requirements, such as being a first-time homebuyer and using the property as a primary residence, haven’t changed. However, income limits, which vary by county, changed to 120% of Area Median Income, down from 150%.”

Lowering the requirements has been tried, and it failed. Remember the housing bubble and crash of 2007-2008 where low-income people unable to qualilfy for home purchases were granted loans anyway, and eventually could not repay the loans?

Why do Democrats always come back to the same failed programs? Reality vs. the narrative – it makes them appear to be doing something, regardless of the outcome.

Then-President Barack Obama ordered banks to make the subprime mortgages, putting home-buyers on the hook for loans they couldn’t pay. (Here is a thorough, detailed article on how Obama pushed thousands of credit-poor blacks into homes they couldn’t afford, and as a civil-rights attorney, he sued banks to rubberstamp mortgages for urban residents).

What Assemblyman Arambula and the State of California is doing is similar. And rather than getting government out of the way in order for home builders to build more much-needed homes and apartments, the left is manipulating the loan system again.

They even say it aloud:

“CalHFA wants to ensure that this round of funding is distributed as equitably as possible and to make sure that there is plenty of time for potential homebuyers to learn about the program, work with a mortgage professional, and submit their applications,” Eric Johnson, spokesperson for California Finance Housing Agency, told KTLA.

“With ultra-expensive housing and high interest rates, purchasing a home in California can be a challenge, but Johnson encourages prospective home buyers to keep their hopes high.”

“People should not lose hope, as it’s still possible to buy your first home in California,” Johnson said.

Even Fed Chairman Jerome Powell admits that the problem is “the underlying housing shortage” which causes “upward pressure on housing prices.”

Just as President Obama’s housing policies led directly to millions of families (families of color in particular) losing their homes, California appears to be doing the same. And if the purchasers are not legal residents of the state and country, then who is really on the hook for the home loans?

We know who.
