Title: 

URL Source: https://muslimadvocates.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Timeline-of-Record-of-Bigotry.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 17 Feb 2020 16:27:58 GMT

Markdown Content:
A Record of Bigotry and Hate: 

# Donald Trump’s Long History of Anti -Muslim Animus 

In January 2017, just days after his inauguration as President of the United States, Donald Trump issued the first iteration of his signature Muslim Ban policy, 

preventing the nationals of several overwhelmingly Muslim countries from entering the United States. Over the next several months, and in the face of multiple legal 

challenges, President Trump has proceed ed to issue two subsequent versions, the most recent of which went into full effect in December 2017. 

As the Muslim Ban has repeatedly wound its way through the courts, President Trump's lawyers and supporters have argued that the Ban is not driven by ant i-

Muslim animus. Donald Trump's own words, however, belie those assertions. As highlighted in this fact sheet, and as Muslim Advocates' new issue brief lays out in 

detail, Donald Trump has a lengthy and undeniable history of hostility and animosity towar ds Muslims. And now that he is president, those sentiments are being 

translated into policy. You can read Muslim Advocates' full issue brief here. 

Trump falsely  claims  to have 

watched Muslims in NJ 

celebrate after the 9/11 

attacks. Despite being quickly 

and  widely  debunked , Trump 

continues  to repeat t he 

falsehood. 

> Apr. 2011

Trump  says  there 

is "absolutely" a 

Muslim problem, 

and that the 

Koran "teaches 

some very 

negat ive vibe." 

> Oct./ Nov. 2015

Trump repeatedly  calls 

for  suspicionless 

surveillance  of American 

Muslims and  mosques ,

indicates his  support  for a 

Musl im  registry , and says 

there is " absolutely  no 

choice " but to  shut  down 

U.S. mosques. 

> Dec. 2015

Trump  announces 

that he is "calling 

for a total and 

complete 

shutdown o f

Muslims entering 

the United States." 

> Mar . 2016

Trump  states  that he believes 

"Islam hates us," that 

Muslims harbor 

"unbelievable hatred," and 

that it is "v ery hard" to 

separate "radical Islam"  from 

the religion  as a whole .

> Apr. 2018

After the Supreme Court 

hears oral argument in the 

Muslim Ban case, Trump 

again refuses to back away 

from his campaign pledge, 

saying  there  is  “nothing to 

apologize for.” 

Trump  valorizes  a U.S. 

General on t he basis of a  long -

debunked myth  claiming he 

once subdued a Muslim 

insurgency in the Philippines 

by extrajudicially executing 

Muslim prisoners using 

bullets dipped in pigs’ blood. 

Trump  retweets  three anti -Muslim 

propaganda videos  originally posted  by 

Jayda Fransen , the deputy leader of an 

extreme far -right British nationalist 

group . The videos purport to show 

Muslims engaged in acts of violence 

and destroying Christian symbols. 

> Aug. 2017
> Nov. 2017

For  years, Trump has  demanded  that U.S. 

leaders make use of the phrase “radical 

Islamic terroris m,”  a problematic  phrase that 

reinforces a false synonym y between “Islam” 

and “ terrorism. ” Since becoming President, 

Trump has used the phrase in public on at 

least 26 different occasions, often while 

advancing his trademark anti -Muslim policies.
