Title: untitled

URL Source: https://portals.iucn.org/library/sites/library/files/documents/1990-010.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 28 Apr 2025 09:30:38 GMT

Markdown Content:
# -Rabbits, Hares and Pikas 

# Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan Compiled and edited by Joseph A. Chapman and John E.C. Flux IUCN/SSC Lagomorph Specialist Group Rabbits, Hares and Pikas 

# Status Survey and 

# Action Plan Compiled and edited by Joseph A. Chapman and John E.C. Flux IUCN/SSC Lagomorph Specialist Group  

> of Oman

# Foreword 

The IUCN/SSC Lagomorph Specialist Group was constituted in as part of a determined effort by the Species Survival Commission to broaden the base of its activities by incorporat-ing a large number of new Groups into its membership. By the end of 1979, the Lagomorph Group had attracted from Europe, Asia, Africa, the Americas and the Pacific 19 highly motivated biologists with a concern for problems of conservation of 

gomorphs in their respective lands, and a willingness to do something about them. In August 1979, the young Group held its inaugural meeting at the University of Guelph, Ontario, in conjunction with the first World Lagomorph Conference. The conference empha-sized the importance of lagomorphs in world systems and the Proceedings were later published under the auspices of IUCN in a valuable volume distributed by the University. The Lagomorph Specialist Group reviewed for the first time the status of the worlds’ lagomorphs, critically examined those species which appeared to require attention, and listed important decisions for future conservation action concerning the volcano rabbit diazi (Mexico), riverine rabbit 

(South Africa), hispid hare 

hispidus (India and Nepal), Sumatran rabbit 

(Indonesia) and Amami rabbit (Japan). Emphasis was placed on the need for a comprehensive 

review of hares and for the development of programs for monitoring lagomorphs and their habitat wherever required. The need to bring these matters to the attention of Govern-ments was given high priority. Project proposals resulting from these deliberations were submitted to the Commission for inclusion in the IUCN Conservation Programme for Sustain-able Development. The Lagomorph Group, building on its good start, soon as-sumed responsibility for providing the information necessary for preparing and updating lagomorph entries in the Red Data Book and for submissions to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). It holds a strong position against the introduction of the eastern cottontail to Europe, and has willingly participated in discussions on the subject when re-quested. The Group also continues to take the lead in keeping lagomorphs on conference agenda at international meetings, and has widened its in recent years to look at the status of some of the lesser known races or subspecies of the more common lagomorphs. Lagomorphs are relatively small mammals and do not excite the curiosity and appeal of some of their larger kind. There has thus never been much financial support for 

conservation. But they are of critical importance in world ecosystems and I applaud the action taken by the Species Survival Commission in setting up this Group when it did. I am particularly pleased that IUCN has agreed to fund this publica-tion of the Lagomorph Specialist Group Action Plan. The achievement of main objectives depends to a large extent on the continued activities of small teams of dedicated people like those who constitute this Group; the publication will give them an opportunity to say what they are trying to do. Ken Myers 

Foundation Chairman IUCN/SSC Lagomorph Specialist Group 

# Editors’ Notes and Acknowledgements 

This action plan and review of the status of the world’s 

gomorphs would not have been possible without the efforts of many people and organisations. This work is truly collaborative in nature and although individuals are listed for each chapter, credit for the entire action plan must be shared. Section Three is the result of the efforts of all of the listed authors, although we make special mention of Andrew Smith whose efforts on the 

Ochotona were immense. Brad Quayle prepared the maps and figures. Lori Samson and Cindy Howard helped prepare the manuscript. We are grateful to William Oliver for use of his painting of the volcano rabbit as a frontispiece. Steve Humphrey of the Florida State Museum and Don Wilson of the United States National Museum provided infor-mation about some of the little known Finally, the patience and support of Simon Stuart is gratefully acknowl-edged, as is the generous support of WWF The World Wide Fund for Nature in funding this publication in particular and the SSC Action Planning Programme in general. Joseph A. Chapman and John E.C. Flux Editors 

> 111

# Authors’ Addresses and Affiliations 

Renate Angermann Museum fur Naturkunde der Humbold-Universitat Invalidenstrasse 43 104 Berlin GERMANY Diana J. Bell University of East Anglia School of Biological Sciences Norwich NR4 7TJ UNITED KINGDOM 

G. Ceballos Centro de 

Apdo. Postal 70-275 Mexico, D.F. 04510 MEXICO Joseph A. Chapman Office of the Dean College of Natural Resources Utah State University Logan, UT 843225200 UNITED STATES Ken R. Dixon Department of Game 600 N. Capital Way Olympia, WA 98504 UNITED STATES F.C. Dobler Department of Game 600 N. Capital Way Olympia, WA 98504 UNITED STATES Andrew G. Duthie Mammal Research Institute University of Pretoria Pretoria 0002 SOUTH AFRICA Margarita Erbajeva Siberian Department Geological Institute USSR Academy of Sciences Pavlov Street 2 Ulan-Ude 670042 SOVIET UNION John E. Fa c/o Mrs R. Williamson 

Irish Town GIBRALTAR John E.C. Flux Dept. of Scientific Industrial Research Land Resources Private Bag Lower Hutt NEW ZEALAND Nikolai A. Formozov Department of Vertebrate Zoology Faculty of Biology Moscow State University Moscow 119899, SOVIET UNION R.K. Ghose Mammal and Osteology Section Zoological Survey of India 8 Lindsay Street Calcutta, 70016 INDIA John A. Gibb 3 Wairere Road Belmont Lower Hutt NEW ZEALAND Robert S. 

Smithsonian Institution 1000 Jefferson Drive, S.W. Washington DC 20560 UNITED STATES Ken Myers 14 Close Belmont North N.S.W. 2280 AUSTRALIA William L.R. Oliver Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust Les Augres Manor Jersey, Channel Islands UNITED KINGDOM Terry Robinson Mammal Research Institute University of Pretoria Pretoria 0002 SOUTH AFRICA Eberhard Schneider Institut fur Wildbiologie and Jagdwissenschaft Fortliche Fakultat Gottingen-Weende Busgenweg 3 GERMANY Andrew T. Smith Department of Zoology Arizona State University Tempe, AZ 85287 UNITED STATES Simon Stuart SSC Executive Office IUCN Avenue du Mont-Blanc 1196 Gland SWITZERLAND Ken Sugimura Kansai Research Centre Forestry and Forest Products Research Institute 

Kvoto 612 JAPAN Zheng Changlin Northwest Plateau Institute of Biology Academia 

Xining, Qinghai 810001 PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA Section 1: Introduction 

# Chapter 1: Introduction and Overview of the Lagomorphs 

# Joseph A. Chapman and John E.C. Flux Lagomorphs are found throughout the world either as native or introduced species. They range in size from the small, rodent-like pikas (some less than to rabbits (one to four kilograms) to the largest hares (in excess of five kilograms). The harvest of lagomorphs for both sport and commercial use is widespread. Rabbit and hare hunting date back thou-sands of years in Europe and even today they remain the mainstay of sport hunting in many countries, especially France, Germany and Poland. In North America, the eastern cottontail is the number one game animal, with more cotton-tails shot and more money and time spent on this species than on any other hunting activity. Although the number of extant lagomorphs is relatively small in comparison to the rodents, they have been a very successful group. Lagomorphs occur from the equator to 

from sea level to over in the mountains and in diverse habitats from desert to tropical forest. There are about 78 living species including 25 pikas, 29 hares and 24 rabbits (Figure 1.1; Table 2.1). Lagomorphs were originally classified as rodents 

plicidentata) and it was not until 1912 that the order 

pha was officially recognized as being distinct from the Rodentia. Anatomically, the lagomorphs can be separated from other rodent-like mammals by the presence of a second set of incisors called “peg” teeth which are located directly behind the upper front incisors. The pikas (ochotonids) have 26 teeth (dental formula i. c. O/O, p. and rabbits and hares have teeth (dental formula i. c. O/O, p. m. All lagomorphs possess an elongated rostrum of the skull reinforced by a lattice work of bone 

tions), a feature unique to the order (see Figure 1.2). 

The pikas are in the monotypic family Ochotonidae, which includes a single genus, Ochotona. The jackrabbits and hares are in the family Leporidae and the genus all are true hares. The rabbits are also in the family Leporidae, but they include the genera 

Romerolagus, Pronolagus, 

and Although many of these genera include species commonly referred to as “hares” (for example the hispid hare) they are all true rabbits. The pikas are small rodent-like lagomorphs that have a long and distinct ancestry separate from the leporids back to at least the Eocene epoch (50 million years ago). Some early workers suggested that the ochotonids were ancestral to the rabbits and hares, but this does not now appear to be the case. Pikas are highly adapted to their alpine and steppe 

## Ochotonidae Leporidae Pikas Jackrabbits and Hares 

Ochotona 

“Numeral after genus is number of species in group 

Genera or Genera with at least one endangered species 

Rabbits 

Amami Rabbit 

Rock Hare Pronolagus (3) 

Volcano Rabbit 

Hispid Hare 

European Rabbit (1) 

Cottontails (

Pygmy Rabbit (1) 

Riverine Rabbit 

Bunyoro Rabbit (1) 

Sumatran Rabbit      

> Figure 1.1 Families and genera of the lagomorphs of the world Figure 1.2 Skull of the marsh rabbit from Georgia, United States (NCSM 267). Left: ventral view of cranium and dorsal view of mandible. Centre: dorsal view of cranium. Right:lateral view of cranium and mandible. Drawn by Wilma Martin, and reproduced by permission of the American Society of Mammalogists from Species no. 153.

ments, both morphologically and behaviorally. All the Leporidae are adapted for quick movement and Objectives 

flight from danger. Their hind legs are long and adapted to running or bounding (cursorial) locomotion. Their ears are The objectives of this Action Plan are: large and to permit detection of approaching dan-ger; in desert forms they are said to function as heat radiators. 1. To provide an overview of the state of knowledge about Some of the larger hares reportedly reach speeds of lagomorphs. when in full flight and can maintain for long periods. Unlike the pikas, their eyes are large and suited to their 2. To provide a contemporary framework about their 

crepuscular and nocturnal habits. These features are most to man and the world’s ecosystems. veloped in the hares. Most of the rabbits rely on burrows (warrens) or thick brush cover to avoid predators. 3. To review their status on a worldwide scale. The young of the hares are born fully furred and with their eyes open, in little more than a shallow depression or “form”. 4. To make recommendations for conservation action to On the other hand, rabbits may build nests or elaborate prevent the extinction of any lagomorph species and to warrens in which to raise their young. These nests are allow their populations to recover to safe and productive tial because young rabbits are born naked, their eyes tightly levels. closed, and must be cared for by the mother (doe) for up to two to three weeks. The lagomorphs with the greatest natural distribution 

are the pikas and hares, although lagomorphs reach their greatest evolutionary diversity in the rabbits. The New World genus (the cottontails), with 13 species, is the most successful group of rabbits from an evolutionary point of view. The European rabbit although widely in-troduced and domesticated by man, was historically limited to the Mediterranean region. Other genera such as 

(the Amami rabbit) and (the hispid hare) appear to be “primitive” evolutionary branches, now confined to islands or small areas of special habitat. Many of the unusual and little known forms are threatened or endangered. 

# Evolution of the Modern Lagomorphs 

One question which has interested scientists is, why are there so few lagomorph species (78) relative to rodents (Rodentia 1,685) and even-toed ungulates (Artiodactyla The best explanation probably has to do with lagomorphs’ slow, conser-vative diversification in early geological time, leading to bounding locomotion in the rabbits and hares and the small limbs and size of the alpine pikas. Adaptive radiation appears to be occurring in the eastern cottontail 

of the neotropics, although this may be because of habitat alterations caused by man. Only recently have scientists begun to understand and study wide variety of environments and situations, but because they actively the relationships which exist between the various are mammalian herbivores low in the food chain, their habitat lagomorph forms. These studies have involved traditional must provide forage and adequate escape cover. Even so, morphological and dental criteria as well as genetic and mortality rates may reach 90% annually in the jackrabbits and parasite study. Even with this recent work, our best hares cottontails European rabbit 

charts are left with major gaps. ctolagus) and steppe-dwelling pikas (Ochotona). 

For example, the relationship between the cottontails 

and the pygmy rabbit remains un-clear. Some workers consider them to be the most distant of relatives, while others consider them members of the same genus, Current genetic studies are helping to clarify this question. The dendrogram in Figure 1.3 is based on a composite of the works of many scientists (Dawson 1981, Gureev 1964, among others). In general terms, mortality in lagomorphs can be attrib-uted to predation and disease which result from (1) extreme fluctuations in environmental factors, (2) innate dispersal, (3) density dependent dispersal brought on by limited resources and exhaustion of available plant resources. In temperate and northern latitudes, seasonal climatic variations play an important role as well. This is exemplified by the modification of reproductive patterns in various latitudes. In New World rabbits 

and a direct correlation occurs between lati-tude and litter-size, with species or subspecies occurring in the north producing the largest litters which are generally corre-lated with the shortest breeding seasons et 

1974). In hares the same direct correlation between litter-size and latitude, and inverse correlation between breeding season and latitude, results in an almost constant annual production of young per female for all species (Flux 1981). 

# Role in Ecosystems 

Lagomorphs make up the base of many predator-prey sys-tems. Their intermediate size and great abundance put them in a position to support a community of small to medium-sized predators. Weasels, foxes, coyotes, cats, civets and many large birds of prey are all sustained by lagomorph populations. Most lagomorphs are selected for high rates of reproduc-tion (“r”). Their numbers are regulated by extrinsic and intrinsic factors and the dispersal of both young and adults. Lagomorphs have evolved survival mechanisms suited to a Even more interesting is the relationship between latitude and the length of the gestation period. Rabbits occurring in northern latitudes have the shortest gestation periods. The     

> L e p u s Ochotona
> I
> ?
> I
> WI
> Pratilepus
> ?
> I
> stock
> Figure 1.3 Composite phylogeny of the genera of the lagomorpha (based on Dawson 1981, Gureev 1964 and others).

3vantage of this arrangement is obvious. At northern locales a shortened gestation period permits the maximum number of Pikas are highly territorial lagomorphs whose behavioral patterns are remarkably similar throughout their range. 

young to be produced during the period of most suitable ritories are maintained in both sexes by scent marking and weather. Conversely, it is advantageous for rabbits to have vocalizations. They are the only lagomorphs in which 

longer gestation periods in subtropical and tropical locales tions appear to be highly developed. Perhaps even more because young rabbits born more fully developed are better interesting is their caching behavior. They store food in “hay able to avoid predators and fend for themselves (Chapman piles” which they vigorously defend. 1984). Rabbit behavior varies from the highly territorial, 

European rabbit to the non-territorial eastern cottontail 

# Lagomorphs as models for biological and The behavior of the cottontails is classified into two main 

# ecological Research categories: non-social and social behavior. Non-social behav-ior is commonly observed in lone animals and consists of the Lagomorphs, especially the rabbits and hares, are ideally suited as models for ecological research. They are the right size and temperament to permit ease of handling, they have high rates of population turnover and they inhabit a broad range of ecologically diverse environments. For example, Dixon and Chapman (1980) used cottontails to develop new methods of studying home range in brates. The technique, which is called ‘harmonic mean meas-ure of animal activity,” was first used on the brush rabbit 

bachmani and has already gained wide acceptance for many groups of animals. The work of Keith (1981) and his colleagues in Wisconsin using snowshoe hare americanus, as models for preda-tor-prey interactions is another example of the use of 

gomorphs in ecological research. Fox (1981) and his associ-ates have used the European rabbit as a tool in medical research by developing genetically pure races of rabbits for use in studying a variety of inheritable diseases in humans. The vast amount of medical research based on domestic forms of the European rabbit is too well-known to require elaboration. uses of the lagomorphs can be expected to remain important for very practical reasons. These are but a few examples of the importance of 

gomorphs in research endeavors. Man’s interactions with and following behaviors: exploration, escape, concealment, dust-ing, loafing, feeding, drinking and grooming. Social behavior is further divided into two categories: the first category is separated into basic male and female postures, vocalizations and movements; and the second category consists of adult social interactions leading to either reproductive or domi-nant-subordinate interactions and Holler 1964). 

The social structure of those cottontails studied is based upon a linear dominance hierarchy of the males. The male hierarchy relates to competition between males for estrous females. The intensity of the aggression is proportional to the receptivity of the female and is most intense when the compe-tition is for a female in estrous and Holler 1964). Under these conditions, the dominant male is usually able to maintain contact with the female. Dominant male rabbits enjoy the greatest freedom in the social organization and are involved in the greatest number of Observation of the formation of breeding groups in 

male-female interactions. Linear dominance hierarchies for females are not well-defined. However, dominance of unre-

suggests that breeding groups form around a nucleus ceptive females over males serves an important reproductive of several females. Female rabbits apparently choose areas within the habitat on the basis of superior food and cover. function. This factor is significant during times of nest build-ing, parturition, or nursing, when a male’s harassment is detrimental to the female. These hierarchies tend to be quite stable. 

# Lagomorph Behavior 

Lagomorph behavioral patterns and displays are as varied as the species themselves. The behavior of the European rabbit has been studied more than that of any other lagomorph. Much of the work has been done in Australia and the United Kingdom, where rabbit control has been of great importance. There has also been considerable behavioral work on the pikas in Japan, the United States and the Soviet Union. These investigations have been purely scientific in nature, with little emphasis on applied problems. By comparison, there has been relatively little work done on the cottontails and jackrabbits and even less on many of the other genera. For the purpose of this discussion we will consider all three groups of lagomorphs, i.e., pikas, rabbits and hares. Sexually active males become associated with these females and form breeding units and Holler 1964). Territoriality occurs in swamp rabbits aquaticus 

but not in eastern cottontails. Territoriality by dominant males amounts to defense of an area around the females, which follows the localized movements of the breeding group. Synchronized reproduction for the European rabbit and cot-tontails is well documented. Female aggression is most likely to occur just prior to the onset of seasonal reproductive behavior and during periods of the seven- or twelve-day sexual cycle. The nearest thing to courtship behavior in cottontails is a dash and jump sequence and related displays and Holler 1964, Tefft and Chapman 1987). The senses are important in the social life of cottontails. Sight is important in its function of recognizing the various 

4movements and postures of conspecifics. Hearing is suggested as an important sense for swamp rabbits which utilize a series of vocalizations in their behavioral sequences. Vocalizations are also reported for the brush rabbit bachmani and pygmy rabbit idahoensis, and are part of the copulatory behavior of the volcano rabbit diazi 

(Tefft and Chapman 1987). Olfaction is of prime importance in the swamp rabbit and the European rabbit as males sniff spots other rabbits have vacated and, most importantly, follow the trails of females in estrus. Male cottontails nuzzle the anal region of females just prior to parturition and subsequent estrus. This undoubtedly serves as a stimulatory cue to these males of the female’s reproductive readiness. North American jackrabbits and other hares have a com-plex mating behavior involving fighting between males and between males and females. This “boxing” and rebuff behav-ior is frequently followed by a sexual chase, during which time the male chases the female in a zigzag manner. Copulation occurs following the chase if the female, which is almost invariably dominant over the male, is receptive (Schneider 

1978). 

Hares apparently depend more on hearing than sight to avoid danger. Two types of escape response have been noted in jackrabbits: (1) the sneak, in which the hare tries to escape a distant predator by moving into dense vegetation and 

freezing, in which the hare tries to hide from the predator. When the hare realizes that these responses have failed and it has been seen, it sprints for open country and tries to outrun its pursuer (Dunn et al. 1982). Vocalizations are also used by hares. Females acting ag-gressively toward males grunt as they lay their ears back and prepare to strike with the forefeet. Loud high-pitched screams may be given when the animals are handled or caught by predators (Dunn et al. 1982). All of the lagomorphs groom extensively. Licking the body, cleaning the feet and dusting are all common behaviors. In heavy rain, water is dislodged by vigorous shaking and in wet grass the feet are kicked from time to time to dry them. 

# Lagomorph Conservation and Management 

On a worldwide scale, conservation and management of 

gomorphs includes: (1) habitat management, (2) stocking programs, (3) harvest, (4) control and (5) protection. Habitat management has been most intensive for the North American cottontail. These animals use a wide variety of disturbed, successional and transitional habitats which are readily created by planting, clearing or burning. The essential components of good cottontail habitat are an abundance of well-distributed escape cover interspersed in open grassy areas with abundant forbs. An old pasture is considered among the best habitats for cottontails. Stocking programs for lagomorphs have occurred virtually on a worldwide basis, beginning at least 2,000 years ago, and often with less than desirable results. The most notable stock-ing programs are those which led to the establishment of the European rabbit in Britain, Australia, New Zealand and 

Others have included the establishment of the European hare in Canada, South America, Australia and New Zealand and cottontails in Europe. The transplanting of 

gomorphs from one continent to another can have disastrous consequences, both economic and biological, and should be vigorously opposed. In North America, stocking programs for the cottontail have been carried out for many years and only recently have sportsmen and others begun to realize the problems associ-ated with the practice. In general, these programs have been carried out with little or no regard for disease transmission, impact on native species, or evaluation of survival of the introduced rabbits. Similarly, in Europe, the translocation of thousands of hares each year continues despite evidence of the futility of this practice. Chapman and Morgan (1973) have researched and sum-marized the situation in the mid-Atlantic region of North America. Originally, the southeastern subspecies of the east-ern cottontail S. was an abundant inhabitant of the glades and river bottoms, while the New England cottontail S. 

inhabited woodlands more typical of higher ele-vations or more northern latitudes. The situation began to change in the 1920’s when hunters suspected a decline in cottontail populations. In response wildlife agencies, hunt clubs and private individuals in the region inaugurated a massive program of cottontail importations. Large-scale transplanting began during the 1920’s and continued well into the 1950’s. Eastern cottontails of several subspecies have been introduced from Kansas, Missouri, Texas and other states into the mid-Atlantic regions. Importations have since diminished, but even today some rabbits are transplanted by private indi-viduals. In the 1930’s Pennsylvania was importing and releasing 50,000 cottontails annually. In the mid-1930’s, the folly of such introductions in terms of their failure to support the annual harvest, the general failure of the phenotype released in Pennsylvania and the logistical problems of releasing 50,000 rabbits in an area of 115,000 square kilometers was consid-ered. During the importation programs came under scrutiny from persons concerned about the policy of introduc-ing alien rabbits. They believed that introduced animals could bring new diseases and parasites to the area and that the introduced rabbits might not survive. The importation pro-grams then began to slow. Recent research has shown that introduction programs produced a series of fundamental changes in the populations of the eastern cottontail in the 

Atlantic region. Chapman and Fuller (1975) concluded "1. The mid-Atlan-tic region’s native subspecies of eastern cottontail S. 

no longer exists in pure form within the region; inter-breeding with introduced rabbits has obliterated the genotype or form, a fact which can be demonstrated genetically and 5morphologically. 2. Intergrade eastern cottontails are the inheritors of a genetic vigor which renders them highly 

colonizers in both stable and changing environments. 3. The native New England cottontail has not interbred freely with the introduced eastern cottontails and has not adapted to changing environmental conditions. 4. Intergrade eastern cottontails are now displacing New England cottontails in the mountainous woodlands of the mid-Atlantic region.” There have been major and fundamental changes in the rabbit populations of North America. These changes include redistribution of lagomorph species (i.e., transplanting east-ern forms to the west coast) and changes in the genetic makeup of resident forms. In Europe and Asia, the long history of translocations of lagomorphs has gone largely unre-corded. Occasionally lagomorph populations reach densities in which their feeding activities become detrimental to the envi-ronment. In North America these problems involve snipping or girdling alpine trees by pikas and snowshoe hares, or damage to agricultural areas by cottontails or more often jackrabbits. In western North America, the jackrabbits occa-sionally have become rampant pests which required 

scale control. However, probably the best known control efforts have involved attempts to regulate numbers of the European rabbit in Australia. After years of research a measure of control was obtained by introducing a virus isolated from the forest rabbit of South America. This virus is harmless to the cottontails but is virulent and deadly to the European rabbit. Following the introduction of myxomatosis into the wild rabbits of Australia, massive die-offs occurred relieving the country of a devastating pest. At present, the rabbits are beginning to develop a level of immunity to the disease and their numbers are starting to increase. At some point the population will reach a balance with the disease. The question is, at what population level? In Britain, 30 years after the introduction of myxomatosis, rabbit numbers are still increas-ing and now exceed half the pre-myxomatosis levels in many areas. Five genera of lagomorphs have populations so small or habitats so restricted that complete protection is required. These species include the Amami rabbit 

the volcano rabbit diazi, the hispid hare 

hispidus, the riverine rabbit and the Sumatran rabbit netscheri. The Tehuantepec jackrabbit Tres Marias cottontail 

graysoni, Omilteme cottontail S. Kozlov’s pika 

koslowi and the Muli pika 0. are also threat-ened or endangered. It is apparent that those lagomorphs which are considered rare or endangered are generally monotypic, often relict or isolated species, whose specialized habitat is under threat. Conservation of these forms requires the establishment of natural reserves which will protect these interesting and little known animals. 

# References                                              

> Chapman, J.A. 1984. Latitude and Gestation Period in New World rabbits (Leporidae: and Amer. Natur.
> Chapman, J.A. and Fuller, K.B. 1975. Our changing cottontails.
> Atlantic Natur.
> Chapman, and Morgan, R.P. 1973. Systematic status of the cottontail complex in western Maryland and nearby West Virginia.
> Monogr. 36: l-54.
> C.H., Sadler, and Hazelwood, D.H. 1974. Geographic variations in litter size and onset of breeding in cottontails.
> Manage.
> Dawson, M.R. 1981. Evolution of the Modern Lagomorphs. In: Myers, and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), Proceedings of the World Lagomorph Conference. Guelph Univ. Press, Guelph, Ontario. Pp. l-8. Dixon, R.R. and Chapman, J.A. 1980. Harmonic mean measure of animal activity areas. Ecology
> Dunn, J.P., Chapman, and Marsh, R.E. 1982. Jack rabbits. In: Chapman, J.A. and Feldhamer, G.A. (Eds), Mammals of North America, Biology Management and Economics. Johns Hopkins Univ. Press Baltimore and London, Pp. 124-145. Flux, J.E.C. 1981. Reproductive strategies in the genus Lepus. In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), Proceedings of the
> Lagomorph Conference. Guelph Univ. Press, Guelph, Ontario. Pp. 155-174. Fox, R.R. 1981. Genetics of the Rabbit. In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, C.D. Proceedings of the Lagomorph Conference.
> Guelph Univ. Press, Guelph, Ontario. Pp. 8-15. Gureev, AA. 1964. Zaitzeobraznye (Lagomorpha) in Fauna SSSR, Mammalia Akad. Nauk. SSR, Inst.
> Keith, L.B. 1981. Population Dynamics of Hares. In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), Proceedings of the Lagomorph Conference. Guelph Univ. Press, Guelph, Ontario. Pp. 395-440.
> H.M. and Holler, N.R. 1964. Social behavior in confined populations of the cottontail and swamp rabbit. Monogr.
> 13: l-39. Schneider, E. 1978. BLV Verlagsgesellschaft, Munich.
> Tefft, B.C. and Chapman, J.A. 1987. Social behavior of the New England cottontail, transitionalis (Bangs) with a review of social behavior in New World rabbits (Mammalia: Leporidae).
> Rev. Vie)

# Chapter 2: Lagomorph Classification 

# Renate Angermann, John E.C. Flux, Joseph A. Chapman, Andrew T. Smith Lagomorphs are a very distinct order of small to 

sized herbivores. They are now once again considered to be most closely related to rodents (Li et 1987) but there are recognizable fossils of both pikas and rabbits dating back to before the Oligocene. The order Lagomorpha is characterized by the presence of small peg-like teeth immediately behind the incisors, found in no other mammals. The two families, Ochotonidae and 

ridae, are likewise easily distinguishable. The Ochotonidae (pikas) have hind legs not much longer than the forelegs; are very small; have rounded ears as wide as they are long; and a skull with no supraorbital bones and a relatively short nasal region. The Leporidae, on the other hand, are larger, with hind legs longer than the forelegs; have long ears; and a skull with prominent supraorbital bones and a long nasal region. Within the Ochotonidae there is only one living genus, 

Ochotona (the pikas), while the Leporidae comprise ten or eleven genera (depending on whether the pygmy rabbit, 

is recognized as distinct or included within the genus 

Most of the genera within the Leporidae are monotypic (that is, they include only a single problem: Pen (the pose no taxonomic species) so they Amami rabbit), 

(the Sumatran rabbit), (the volcano rabbit), (the European rabbit), (the Bunyoro rabbit), (the riverine rabbit) and 

(the hispid hare). includes three species of red rockhares which are restricted to Africa and have so far escaped any taxonomic disputes; but the remaining genus 

Lepus (the jackrabbits and hares) gives rise to many irrecon-cilable problems. Standard texts such as Walker’s Mammals of the World (4th Edition) and Mammal Species of the World (Honacki, 

and list 18 to 19 species of Ochotona 

and 19 to 22 species of Lepus. The similarity in numbers of species, however, can mask much divergence in the actual names being used. Thus, the four most recent independent lists of Lepus names (Angermann 1972, Sokolov 1977, Corbet and Hill 1980 and Honacki et al. 1982) “agree” on 19 to 23 species in this genus but use a total of 30 different specific names (see Flux and Angermann 1984, whose suggested revised list of names has also found little general support). A similar problem exists with Ochotona, where the close morphological similarities among species have presented major obstacles to taxonomists; one form has been treated as a full species by one author and included in three separate species by others! The difficulties in taxonomy in Ochotona and Lepus are only partly attributable to a shortage of material in museums and of taxonomists to collect and study the data; they are also fundamentally difficult species to deal with. For the Ochotona 

the problem is one of speciation on separate mountain tops or other remote settings where members of a population proba-bly recognize each other by sound rather than sight; hence museum specimens may lack the critical distinguishing fea-ture. The genus is also relatively old, so a profusion of isolated relict species could be expected. In Lepus, on the other hand, the difficulty is one of a young, rapidly expanding genus which has found its open grassland habitat becoming widespread through the activity of pastoralists and agriculturalists. Coupled with that is their great mobility; hares can travel 20km in a night and populations may shift hundreds of kilome-ters if driven by snow or drought. Once again, the critical dis-tinguishing feature is lacking in museum collections: members of a population probably recognize each other primarily by scent. For the purpose of an action plan it seems necessary to adopt a conservative taxonomy which acknowledges the high-est ranking which some recognized specialist has given to that 

In effect, we choose to err on the safe side by giving any doubtful species the benefit of the doubt. It is too late, once a population has become extinct, to realize that it was really a unique species and not just a variety of something else. Hence the species checklist which follows includes all those which we, or some lagomorph authority, currently feel are or could be distinct. No list can ever be final and we discuss the conflicting opinions under each species to give the reasons for our selection where possible. 

# References 

Angermann, R. 1973. Die Hasentiere. In: 12:422-

440. Kindler Verlag, Zurich. Corbet, and Hill, world list of mammalian species. British Museum (Nat. Hist.), London. Flux, J.E.C. and Angermann, R. 1984. Report on the symposium: “Taxonomy of the genus Lepus,” Helsinki, 20 August 1982. 

Newsletter 4:3-11. 

Honacki, J.H., K.E. and Koeppl, J.W. 

of the Allen press and ASC, Lawrence, Kansas. Li, C. K., Wilson, R.W. Dawson, M.R. and Krishtalka, L. 1987. The origin of rodents and lagomorphs. Mammalogy 1: Chap-ter 3. Nowak, R.M. and Paradiso, J.L. 1983. Walker’s mammals of the 

4th Edn., Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, Baltimore. Sokolov, V.E. 1977. Mammal Order: Lagomorpha, Rodentia. Vysshaya Shkola, Moskva. Table 2.1 Checklist of world lagomorphs 

Common name Distribution 

ORDER LAGOMORPHA Family Ochotonidae (Includes Lagomyidae) 

Ochotona Link, 1795. 

Ochotona 1773) Alpine, or Altai pika Mountainous areas bordering Desert on the north (Altai, 

Khangai Mountains, etc.), and south and east of Lake Baikal eastward to the upper Amur River drainage (Kazakh SSR, RSFSR, USSR; MPR; northern Xinjiang, PRC). Isolated population in the Helan Shan, PRC. Locally common, isolated tions may be threatened. 

Ochotona Lyon 1907 Western Shanxi, Southern Shanxi, southwestern Gansu, eastern and southern Locally common, isolated popula-Qinghai, northwestern Sichuan, PRC. tions may be threatened. Mountains of central and southern Alaska northern British Columbia, Canada. USA; Northwest Locally common. Gansu, or Gray pika Collared pika Black-lipped, or Plateau pika Daurian pika 

Ochotona (Nelson 1893) 

Ochotona (Hodgson 1858) Southern Xinjiang, Qinghai, Xizang and western Sichuan, PRC; trans-Hima-

Nepal; and Sikkim, India. Abundant. 

Ochotona daurica 1776) Desert steppes of the region throughout the MPR and adjacent regions of the USSR and PRC (eastern Qinghai, Gansu, Ningxia, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Nei Mongol, Liaoning, northern Hebei). Abundant. 

Ochotona erythrotis (Biichner 1890) Red-eared, or Chinese Red pika Forrest’s pika Gaoligong pika Glover’s pika Himalayan pika Northern, or Siberian pika Burchan Budda Mountains of Qinghai to western central Gansu and southern Xinjiang, PRC. Unknown. 

Ochotona Thomas 1923 Northwest Yun India; Bhutan. nan, southeast Xizang, PRC; northern , Sikkim, Unknown. Mount Gaoligong, northwest Yunnan Province, PRC. Unknown. Southwest Qinghai, northeast Xizang, northwest Yunnan and western 

PRC. Unknown. Unknown. Abundant. 

Ochotona Feng 1973 Mount (Everest) area, southern Xizang, PRC. 

Ochotona hyperborea 1811) Widely distributed in montane taiga of boreal Asia: Ural Mountains, from the east bank of the lower and middle Lena River eastward throughout the Chukotsk and Koryak peninsulas, Peninsula, Sakhalin Island, through the upper Lena River drainage, Transbaikaliya and the Amur region, USSR, the northern mountains of the MPR; the northeastern provinces of the PRC (Nei Mongol, Liaoning, Jilin, Heilongjiang); northern Korea; and northern Japan (Hokkaido). Table 2.1 Checklist of world lagomorphs, contd . . . Common name Distribution Status 

Borohoro Shan, Xinjiang, PRC. Unknown. Li and Ma 1986  

> Ochotona

1894)   

> Ochotona Zadacensis

(Gunther 1875)   

> Ochotona macrotis

(Gunther 1875) Ili pika Kozlov’s pi ka Ladak pika Large-eared pika Arkatag Range, Xinjiang, PRC. Endangered. Mountains of Kashmir, India; Qinghai, Xizang, and Xinjiang, PRC. Unknown. Pamir Mountains and western Tien Shan (Tadzhik SSR, Kirgiz SSR, and southeast Kazakh SSR, USSR); Hindu Kush (northeastern Afghanistan); Karakoram Range (Pakistan); Himalayan Mountains (northern India; 

em Nepal; Bhutan; adjacent Xizang, PRC); and the Kunlun and associated ranges across central western PRC (Xizang, Xinjiang, Qinghai), and westward into the high mountains of Sichuan and Yunnan, PRC. Locally common.  

> Ochotona muliensis

Pen and Feng 1962 Muli pika Western Sichuan, PRC. Rare and threatened.   

> Ochotona nubrica

Thomas 1922 Nubra pika Ladak (Pakistan); northern Nepal; Sikkim, India; northern Bhutan; and southern Xizang, PRC. Unknown.  

> Ochotona

(Gray 1867) pika Desert region from Kazakh SSR, Tuva ASSR, USSR; western Xinjiang, Nei Mongol, PRC. Locally abundant, isolated 

lations may be threatened.  

> Ochotona

(Richardson 1828) American pika Mountainous areas throughout western North America (British Columbia, Alberta, Canada; Washington, Oregon, Nevada, California, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, Utah, Colorado, New Mexico, USA). Locally common.  

> Ochotona

1768) Steppe, or Little pika Steppe regions from the upper Volga River and southern Ural Mountains south and east to the border of China (RSFSR and Kazakh SSR, USSR). Locally common, to populations that are rare and declining.  

> Ochotona

(Ogilby 1839) Royle’s pi ka Along the Himalayan from Pakistan; through Kashmir, northwestern India; Nepal; and adjacent Xizang, PRC). Locally common.   

> Ochotona rufescens

(Gray 1842) Afghan pika Patchy distribution in mountains of southern 

ghanistan; and Baluchistan, Pakistan. 

Iran; Locally abundant, isolated lations may be threatened.  

> Ochotona

(Severtzov 1873) Turkestan red pika Ranges of the Tien Shan, Pamir, Kirgiz the Great), Gissar, and other systems in Uzbek SSR, Kirgiz SSR, Tadzhik SSR and Kazakh SSR, USSR and northern Afghanistan. Locally common.  

> Ochotona thibetana

(Milne-Edwards 1871) Moupin pika Southeastern Qinghai, southern Gansu, southern Shaanxi, western Sichuan, western Hubei, western Yunnan, southern Xizang, PRC; northern Burma; Bhutan; and Sikkim, India. Locally common, isolated 

lations may be threatened.  

> Ochotona

Argyropulo 1948 Thomas’s pi ka Isolated mountain ranges from Gansu, Qinghai, and Sichuan, PRC. Unknown; likely threatened. 

contd... Table 2.1 Checklist of world lagomorphs, contd . . . Common name Distribution Status 

Family Leporidae 

Thomas, 1929  

> monticularis

(Thomas 1903) 

Blyth, 1845  

> hispidus

(Pearson 1839)  

> Lepus

Linne, 1758  

> Lepus

Mearns 1890 Riverine rabbit Hispid hare Antelope jackrabbit Deelfontein and region east of Calvinia (Western and central Karoo), central Cape Province (South Africa). Rare and endangered. Northeast India through southern Himalayas and Nepal, khpur to Upper Assam (India), Tripura, and Bangladesh. and from Rare and endangered. Southern New Mexico 

Tiburon Island. 

northern Nayarit Locally common.  

> Lepus americanus

Erxleben 1777 Snowshoe hare Southern and central Alaska to southern and central coasts of Hudson Bay to Newfoundland, south to the southern Appalachians, southern Michigan, North Dakota, north central New Mexico, south central Utah, and east central California. Locally common.  

> Lepus

Linnaeus 1758   

> Lepus brachyurus

Temminck 1845 Arctic hare Japanese hare  

> Lepus

Gray 1837 Black-tailed jackrabbit Arctic North America. Locally common. Honshu, Shikoku, Kyushu, Islands and Sado Island (Japan); eastern Siberia (USSR) to Korea. Locally common. Hildalgo and southern Queretaro to northern Sonora and Baja California (Mexico), north to southwest Oregon and central Washington, southern Idaho, eastern Colorado, southern South Dakota, Western Missouri, and northwestern Arkansas. Locally common.  

> Lepus

Wagler 1830 (Includes and mexicanus) Lepus capensis Linnaeus 1758 (Includes and granatensis) Lepus castroviejoi Palacios 1976  

> Lepus comus

1927  

> Lepus

Thomas 1892  

> Lepus europaeus

1778 White-sided jackrabbit Central Oaxaca (Mexico) to southeastern Arizona and southwestern New Mexico (USA). Locally common, declining. Cape hare Africa (in non-forested areas), Spain, from Arabia through the northern half of China to the Pacific coast. central Asia, and Locally common. Broom hare Yunnan hare Korean hare European or brown hare Between Sierra de and de Labra (northern Spain). Locally common. Yunnan, southern China Unknown. Korea Locally common. Open woodland, steppe and subdesert of the Palearctic from southern Sweden and Finland to Britain (introduced to Ireland), through Europe and Asia Minor to the west Siberian lowlands; also introduced into North and South America and Australasia. Very common.  

> Lepus

Thomas 1902 Ethiopian Ethiopia Locally common. contd... Table 2.1 Checklist of world lagomorphs, contd . . . Common name Distribution Status 

Lepus Wagner 1844 Tehuantepec jackrabbit Bare and endangered. Locally common. Lepus hubessinicus and Ehrenberg 1832 

Lepus Swinhoe 1870 

Lepus insularis Bryant 1891 

Lepus 1861 

Lepus melainus Li and Luo 1979 

Lepus F. Cuvier 1823 (Includes 

Lepus Hodgson 1840 

Lepus Merriam 1900 Abyssinian hare Hainan hare Black jackrabbit Manchurian hare Manchurian black hare Indian hare Hainan Island only. Espiritu Santo Island (Baja California, Mexico). Manchuria; North Korea; Amurland (eastern Siberia). Forest of central Manchuria. Pakistan; India; Sri Lanka; introduced into Java and Mauritius. Rare. No information restricted. Unknown. Local. Locally common. Woolly hare Alaskan hare Northern India to Kansu, Yunnan, and Szechuan (China). Coastal lowlands of the Aleutian Island chain and Tundra or Alaska (USA). Unknown. Locally common. alluvial plains of 

Lepus peguensis Blyth 1855 (Includes siamensis) Lepus F Cuvier 1823 

Lepus sinensis Gray 1832 (Includes coreanus) Lepus Petter 1963 

Lepus Linnaeus 1758 Burmese hare Burma to Indochina. Unknown. Scrub hare Chinese hare South Africa; Namibia. Unknown. Unknown. Southeastern China; Taiwan; South Korea. Ethiopian highland hare Highlands of central Ethiopia. Palearctic from Scandinavia to Siberia south to Hokkaido, Sikhoto 

Mountains, Altai, northern Tien Shan, northern Ukraine, and Lithuania; isolated populations in the Alps, Scotland and Ireland. Southern Alberta to southwestern Ontario, south to south-western Wiscon-sin, central Kansas, north central New Mexico, west to central Nevada, east central California, and south central British Columbia. Locally common. Mountain, Blue or Snow hare Locally common. 

Lepus townsendii 1839 White-tailed jackrabbit Locally common. 

Lepus Thomas 1893 (includes crawshayi, whytei) Lepus yarkundensis Gunther 1875 African savanna hare Scrub savanna over most of Africa. Locally common. Yarkand hare Steppes of southwestern Sinkiang (Chinese Turkestan). Rare. 

contd... Table 2.1 Checklist of world lagomorphs, contd . . . 

Common name 

Brachylagus Merriam, 1891 

Brachylagus idahoensis (Merriam 1891) 

Nesolagus Major, 1899 

Lilljeborg, 1873 

cuniculus (Linnaeus 1758) 

Lyon, 1904 

(Stone 1900) 

Poelagus St. Leger, 1932 

Poelagus majorita (St. Leger 1932) 

Lyon, 1904 

Pronolagus crassicaudatus (I. 

1832) 

Pronolagus randensis 1907 

Pronolagus tupestris (A. Smith 1834) 

Romerolagus Merriam, 1896 

Romerolagus diazi (Ferrari-Perez 1893) 

Sylvilagus Gray, 1867 

Sylvilagus aquaticus 1837) Pygmy rabbit Sumatran rabbit European rabbit Amami rabbit Bunyoro rabbit Greater red 

Jameson’s red 

Smith’s red 

Teporingo, volcano rabbit 

Distribution Status 

Southwest Oregon to east central California, southwestern Utah, north to southeastern Montana; isola ted populations in west central Washington; 

Locally common. Sumatra, restricted to montane forest. Rare and endangered. Western and southern Europe through the Mediterranean region to Morocco and Very common. northern Algeria; present on all continents except Antarctica and many Oceanic islands through introduction. Amami Island (Japan). Very rare Locally common. Southern Sudan; northwestern Uganda; northeastern Zaire; Central African Republic; Angola. Locally common. South Africa, in rocky situations. Locally common. Locally common. South Africa; eastern Botswana; Zambia; Namibia. South Africa to Kenya, in disjunct populations. Mountain slopes bordering Valley of Mexico near Mexico City. Rare and endangered. Eastern Texas and eastern Oklahoma to Carolina , north to southern Illinois (USA). Alabama and northwestern Very common. Northeastern Puebla and western Veracruz to central Montana and southwestern North Dakota, north central Utah, central Nevada, and north central California, south to Baja California and central Sinaloa (Mexico). Very common. audubonii (Baird 1858) or Audubon’s cottontail 

bachmani (Waterhouse 1839) Brush rabbit Western Oregon (USA from the Columbia River to Baja California west to Cascade-Sierra Nevada Range. (Mexico), Very common. Southern (Mexico) to Peru, Bolivia, northern Argentina, and 

ern Brazil. Locally common. Sylvilagus (Li n ne 175 8) Forest rabbit, Tapeti 

contd... Table 2.1 Checklist of world lagomorphs, . . . 

Common name 

(Waterhouse 1848) Mexican cottontail 

Harris 1932 Dice’s cottontail  

> Sylvilagus

(J.A. Allen 1890) Eastern cottontail 

(J.A. Allen 1877) Tres Marias cottontail  

> Sylvilagus

(Nelson 1904)  

> Sylvilagus mansuetus

Nelson 1907  

> Sylvilagus

1837) Omilteme cottontail San Jose Brush rabbit Mountain or Nuttall’s cottontail 

1837) Marsh rabbit  

> Sylvilagus transitionalis

(Bangs 1895) New England cottontail 

Distribution 

Southern Sinaloa to eastern Oaxaca and Veracruz (Mexico). Mountains of Panama and Costa Rica. Venezuela to (disjunct in parts of central America) northwestern Arizona, southern Saskatchewan, south central Quebec (Canada), Michigan, Massa-chusetts and Florida (USA). Maria Madre Mexico). Island, Magdalena Islands, Nayarit, Sierra Madre Sur, central Guerrero (Mexico). Known only from the type locality, San Jose Island, Gulf of California. Intermountain area of North America from southern British Columbia to southern Saskatchewan, south to eastern California, northwestern Nevada, central Arizona, and northwestern New Mexico. Florida to southern Virginia (USA) on the coastal plain. Southern Maine to northern Alabama (USA). 

Status 

Locally common. Locally common. Very common. Potentially endangered. Restricted. Unknown. Locally common. Very common. Locally common. S. p. 

endangered Locally common declining and of special concern in some States Section Accounts of Genera and Species Chapter 3: The Pikas 

# Andrew T. Smith, Nikolai A. Formozov, Robert S. Hoffmann, Zheng Changlin, Margarita A. Erbajeva 

# Introduction 

Pikas (genus Ochotona) form a notable and important com-ponent of the fauna wherever they now occur in the Northern Hemisphere. Systematically the pikas are a novel group. Liv-ing representatives of Ochotona form a monotypic genus within the family Ochotonidae, which was clearly differenti-ated from the other lagomorphs as early as the Oligocene (Wilson 1960, Dawson 1967). Wherever pikas occur they are a phylogenetically independent assay of the forces of natural selection, hence they can provide biologists with an important source of information for comparative analyses. Pikas also represent a robust group for comparisons among 

(Formozov 1981, Smith 1988). Comparisons among most species of Ochotona appear not to be constrained byproblems of homology; two separate treatments using different tech-niques indicate that the major adaptive themes within the genus (species occupying distinctively different habitats) have evolved several times (Vorontsov and Ivanitskaya 1973, Weston 1982). In addition, all species of Ochotona are re-markably homogeneous in general morphology and body mass, so that constraints imposed on comparative data by allometric relationships are reduced (Formozov 1981, Smith 1988). Pikas are also a very poorly known group of mammals. The morphological similarities among species which make them ideal for comparative studies have presented major obstacles to systematists. In addition, most species of pika occur almost exclusively in remote settings, thus biological data needed to support early attempts to classify the genus have generally been lacking. The result has been lack of agreement among all the principal revisers of Ochotona (Bonhote 1904, Allen 1938, Ognev 1940, Vinogradov and Argyropulo 1941, Argyropulo 

1948, Gureev 1964, Corbet 1978, Honacki, and Koeppl 1982, Weston 1982, Feng and Zheng 1985, Erbajeva 1988). This report is the first international attempt to analyze the status of Ochotona. The goals are:  

> 

to present a parsimonious systematic treatment of pikas that will prove useful for their conservation and management;  

> 

to summarize the important elements of the biology of each species; 

to define clearly the conservation and management issues concerning pikas. 

# Pika 

It would be convenient to address the conservation and man-agement issues facing pikas without a detailed consideration of their systematics. However, the confusion which has sur-rounded most attempts to classify the genus dictates that it is first made clear which forms are included in each species. Comments under the heading “Taxonomy” presented for each species demonstrate that some forms have been com-monly included in several species; one form, has been treated as an independent species and placed in three sepa-rate species. In addition, the placement of forms (generally subspecies) impinges greatly on the range maps presented for each species. Some problems in the systematics of pikas are connected with their significant variability in color. Melanistic forms are quite common in talus-dwelling species, especially those that occupy isolated talus patches: alpine pika 0. northern pika 0. hyperborea, large-eared pika 0. macrotis and Ameri-can pika Probably the insular structure of the rock habitat and the concomitant limited population size of pikas found there yield aberrations in color. In contrast with 

dwelling species, we know of only a few color aberrations of steppe-dwelling species. There is also partial melanism among pikas, and this condition has also led to systematic confusion among many forms. The classification of Ochotona presented here is unique among published treatments to date, and we are still uncertain of the alignment of many of the species and subspecies. The prevailing philosophy has been to separate forms (split) un-less compelling data suggested that they should be 

onymised. The rationale for this approach is that for purposes of management it will be easier to combine forms at some later date than to divide them. One of the primary approaches in conservation biology is to define genetically and ecologi-cally distinct units, and this has served as our goal. Finally, most of the decisions upon which this classification are based hinge on traditional systematic analyses, generally using a restricted number of characters. Only Weston (1982) has used a numerical approach and large numbers of charac-ters in her revision of the genus, but it was a analysis, 

14 and thus not useful for inferring phylogenetic relationships. The final word on the classification of Ochotona should await the use of molecular techniques and cladistic analysis. 

# Biology and Ecology of Pikas 

Several recent reviews have emphasized that most pikas oc-cupy one or another of two discretely different habitat types: 1) non-burrowing talus-dwelling species; and 2) burrowing steppe-, forest- and shrub-dwelling species. A few are inter-mediate species (those burrowing species which sometimes occupy talus or rock habitat but which also may occur in vegetated habitat devoid of rocks) (Kawamichi 

Formozov 1981, Smith 1988). The only distinctive morphological differences between representatives of these two groups appears to be that vibrissae are longer in talus-dwelling pikas, and claws (used for digging) are more power-ful and straight in burrowing pikas (Fedosenko 1974, Formozov 1981). On the other hand, as shown by Smith 1988) and in this report, demographic parameters are substantially differ-ent between species of talus-dwelling and burrowing 

Litter size and number of litters per year are approxi-mately twice as large in burrowing as in talus-dwelling species of pika. In addition, juvenile pikas in burrowing species may mature and breed in their summer of birth, whereas young first breed as yearlings in talus-dwelling species. Overall, juvenile production by females of burrowing pikas is about one order of magnitude greater than that of talus-dwelling females (Smith 1988). There are also consistent differences in population density and annual variation in density between talus-dwelling and burrowing species of Ochotona. Talus-dwelling pikas live at relatively low densities (generally fewer than ten animals/ha), and their densities do not vary greatly with time. In contrast, population densities of burrowing pikas may be high and fluctuate dramatically (reviewed in Smith 1988). In most talus-dwelling species average mortality is low and many individuals live to relatively old ages compared with most small mammals. In burrowing species this trend is reversed: annual mortality is high, few animals live more than two years, and the percentage of yearlings in a population at the begin-ning of a breeding season is large (Smith 1988). There are also stark contrasts in the degree of social behavior expressed among species of pika inhabiting these two contrasting habitat types. Pikas living in talus tend to be relatively asocial, whereas expression of social behavior is frequent among pikas which inhabit family-controlled burrow systems. There is one further interesting contrast: adult talus-dwelling pikas in North America (American pika 0. 

and collared pika 0. are individually territorial, whereas Asian talus-dwelling pikas live in pairs on their territories and make communal (Smith 1988). This brief comparison of species of Ochotona indicates that there are two predominant suites of life-history traits. Talus-dwelling pikas are relatively asocial, comparatively long-lived and have relatively stable low population densities and fecundity rates. In contrast, burrowing pikas normally are highly social, short-lived, may have high but fluctuating popu-lation densities, and have high fecundity rates. Preliminary attempts to analyze these dramatic differences among species living in contrasting habitat types have focused on the effects of interspecific competition, habitat productivity, and the degree of protection the habitats may proffer from extreme environmental temperatures (Smith 1988). These comparisons only highlight the effect that habitat may have upon the evolution of pikas. There are many species for which we have few ecological, behavioral or life-history data, and there are some species which do not cleanly into the dichotomy presented above. For example, we can learn much from those intermediate species (such as Afghan pika 0. rufescens and pika 0. which can occupy talus or steppe environments. Also, burrowing species living in rhododendron or Dasiphora thickets must have selective pressures which differ significantly from those that burrow in high alpine meadows or desert-like environ-ments. Talus-dwelling pikas can also be subject to different selective pressures, due to contrasting depth of snowpack (Kawamichi Millar 1972, Smith 1978, Smith and Ivins 1983a). Perhaps this is why some species are comparatively silent (the large-eared 0. macrotis, Afghan 0. and Turkestan red 0. pikas) or do not store large amounts of vegetation (large-eared), as do most pikas. Most of the pikas are restricted to Asia, where there are 23 species. Only two species occur in North America. Among the continents, Asia is unique in having more species of pika than of rabbits and hares. Because of the lack of pika species richness, their role in community dynamics should be evalu-ated in relation to other (especially rodents and other obligate grazing herbivores). We know of few investigations on this subject. Due to their differences in body mass and corresponding life history traits, it is unlikely that pikas com-pete directly with sympatric species of rabbits or hares. How-ever, diffuse competition for forage may occur between them because of their reliance on similar vegetation. This subject is unstudied. Most species within Ochotona do not overlap in range. When two species of Ochotona are found in the same area, they normally occupy different habitats (rock, meadow, or shrub), thus reducing opportunity for ecological overlap. Schaller (personal communication) has seen talus-dwelling large-eared 0. macrotis and steppe-dwelling black-lipped 0. 

pikas feeding from the same meadow, and in north-ern Qinghai black-lipped and Gansu 0. pikas may occur together (Smith and Wang X., unpublished data; Jiang Y. and Wang unpublished data). The presence of pikas in the ecosystems of Asia is impor-tant in terms of generating and maintaining biodiversity due to their role in the food-web. Middle-sized generalist herbivores such as pikas form an important prey base to many carnivo-rous birds and mammals, either as preferred food or as buffer 15 species Most rodents on the Siberian steppe hibernate during winter (Formozov the non-hibernating 

gomorphs as available prey to middle-sized mustelid, felid, or 

carnivores. The steppe-dwelling black-lipped and Daurian 0. daurica pikas are similar in many respects to the prairie dogs of North America in biology, and it is possible that the polecat Mustela eversmanni, like its counter-part in North America (the black-footed ferret M. is tied in some way to the dynamics of pika populations 

lov 1954). The populations of all steppe-dwelling pikas may be high in certain years. In those years, pikas are the most important element in the diet of steppe predators. For ex-ample, Daurian pikas may comprise the following percent-ages of the diet of avian predators: steppe eagle 

62%; upland buzzard Buteo hemilasius, 17%; eagle owl Bubo bubo, 73%; and saker falcon 22% 

(Peshkov Similarly, alpine 0. and northern 

0. hyperborea pikas are the most important prey for some Mustelidae (weasels Mustela sables Martes 

Khlebnikov 1977). In the Altai Mountains, Kazakh SSR, al-pine pikas comprise up to 60% of the diet of sables (Sludski et al. 1980). In the western Mountains, Tuva ASSR, 87% of the contents of sable scats are of pikas (Sokolov 1965). Roberts (1977) reported that Afghan pikas were the primary prey of the stone marten Martes foina and booted eagle 

Hieraaetus pennatus in Pakistan, whereas in southwestern Turkmenia the levantine viper appears de-pendent upon this pika (Danov 1985, Sapargeldyev 1987). Royle’s pikas 0. are a vital food source for stone martens, stoats Mustela and Altai weasels M. altaica 

in northern Pakistan (Roberts 1977). Even brown be 

such as wolves larger predator ars arctos 

lupus and 

as small as the can prey on anim black-lipped pika (Schaller, personal communication). In fact, pikas form such an important part of the diet of arctos 

living in Tibet, that when Przewalski (1883) secon-darily defined this form, he called it or “bear pika-eater.” Kozlov (1899) wrote that there were 25 pikas in the stomach of one bear. The typical caching behavior of pikas also may influence directly the population dynamics of other herbivores that live sympatrically with pikas. Many pika species store large amounts of vegetation in their (see species accounts later in this chapter). Travina (1984) calculated that even at a modest density of ten to twelve pikas per ha, storage of vegetation by pikas may amount up to The stores of Afghan pika may contain up to 58 species of plants and weigh 

(Sapargeldyev 1987); near these stores almost all 

isia and Ephedra plants appear damaged. Loukashkin (1940) stated that in winter, when snow covered the steppe, 

lian preferentially graze their livestock in areas of high density Daurian pika populations; the tops of the 

remain exposed above the surface of the snow and provide food. Melnikov (1974) also noted that domestic cows and horses fed from pika stores in winter. Similarly many native ungulates alter their local distribution in response to pika haypiles. Siberian wapiti sibiricus and reindeer 

tend to accumulate in the habitat of alpine pika in years of heavy snows. Reindeer and snow sheep Ovis 

feed on herbivores also the stores of northern pika in winter. focus on pika haypiles: hares 

Smaller 

and L. capensis; marmots camtschatica; and voles 

spp. Shrews spp. may hunt for inverte-brates in haypiles. The density of voles and shrews is four times higher in the vicinity of of alpine pikas than in the surrounding forest (Naumov 1974). a competitive relationship herbivores as well. There is between pikas an inverse 

and pikas in an is a particularly There and other 

be 

grazi tionship between the density of small rodents area near the middle Lena R where there dense population of northern pika. Nevertheless, during win-ter at this site voles are often caught on the of pikas (Safronov and Akhremenko 1982). Pika burrows are often shared with other species of birds and small mammals. The burrows of Afghan pikas are shared with rock-dwelling Persian jird Merionespersicus, Libyan jird 

M. great gerbil Rhombomys mouse-like hamster Calomyscus gray hamster 

and white-toothed shrews Crocidura spp. (Sapargeldyev 1987). In the Mongolian Altai, ground squirrels 

gerbils and three species of 

boa, as well as hamsters and voles, live in or visit the burrows of pika 0. Burrows of the black-lipped pika are the main nesting habitat of several species of birds on the Tibetan plateau: white-rumped snow finch 

taczanowskii, rufous-necked snow finch M. and Hume’s ground jay Pseudopedoces (Smith, unpub-lished data). Similarly, Pere David’s snow finches 

davidiana and isabelline wheatears Oenanthe regu-larly nest in the holes of Daurian pikas (Ivanitski, personal communication). The burrowing pikas also contribute positively to ecosys-tem-level dynamics by recycling soil. Fossorial animals in North America increase local primary plant productivity, increase plant species richness, aid in the formation, aeration and mixing of soil, and enhance infiltration of water into the soil 1946, Grant, French, and Folse 1980, 

1923, Tilman 1983). Burrowing mammals do not increase levels of erosion: rather erosion in most cases is caused by overgrazing of vegetation by domestic livestock 

1946). Few studies have looked at the ecosystem-level effects of pika burrowing in Asia, but some data indicate that the dynamics are similar to the North American studies (investi-gations on brandti, 

and Daurian pika, Tsendzhav b, 1985, 

b). Jiang and Xia (1985, 1987) determined that the foraging of low and moderate populations of black-lipped pikas on the Qinghai/Xizang steppes is selective and may play an important role in the stabilization of the alpine meadow vegetational community. Local floral diversity is enhanced due to the burrowing of Daurian pikas (Dmitriev 1985, Tsendzhav 1985). Their digging activity loosens and improves the soil, and the accumulation of their excrement and leftover stores in the burrow system yields high levels of organic 16 materials. Soil temperatures and humidity are higher, and concentrations of nitrogen, calcium and phosphorus are greater near burrow systems than in nearby areas without burrows (Tsendzhav 1985). The result of these interactions is a greater biomass of roots, taller plants, and increased density of plant cover near the burrow system than elsewhere; the overall biomass of plants is almost five times greater when growing over the burrow system than in the surrounding steppe (Tsendzhav 1985). In addition, in spring the phenology of plants growing over burrow systems is ten to fifteen days advanced over plants growing on the nearby steppe. More long-term investigations comparing natural ecosystems with those in which pikas have been controlled (see below) are necessary to evaluate the role of pikas in Asian ecosystems. The habit of storing food in caches, or haypiles, of 

dwelling pikas also may influence local vegetative dynamics. The organic remains of pika stored on talus may facilitate plant colonization on this habitat, and the large accumulation of pika pellets under their shelters gives rise to spots of nitrophylic vegetation (Travina 1984). Certain plants 

(Euphorbia Artemesia, and some grow only on the burrows of pikas 0. (Kholodova 1975, Formozov, unpublished data). On the other hand, the heavy grazing by pikas in the meadows at the edge of the talus may profoundly alter the composition and diversity of plant communities found there (Khlebnikova 1978, Huntly, Smith and Ivins 1986, Huntly 1987). Foraging by alpine pikas decreases the percentage of flowering plants, decreases the store of seeds in the soil, and slows down succession of the plant community by eating young trees (including sibiricus, the most important element in the Siberian taiga ecosystem) (Khlebnikov and Shtilmark 1965, Loskutov 1966). The American pika, a North American talus-dwelling pika, travels significantly farther into the meadow from the talus border to collect hay than when feeding. Higher proportions of forbs and tall grasses are hayed than eaten directly; the most common plant type eaten is short alpine grasses (Huntly, Smith and Ivins 1986). The result of this selectivity and the differential in distance from talus between haying and feeding is a gradient of plant abun-dance and species richness that increases with distance from the talus. Unlike most forbs, cushion plants are characteristi-cally maintained close to the talus-meadow interface where it is believed they form an important food for pikas foraging during winter from snow tunnels (Huntly, Smith and Ivins 1986, Huntly 1987). 

# Economic Importance of Pikas 

Pikas have been important, to some extent, for their fur. In the Soviet Union prior to World War II, pika fur was used to produce high quality felt. Now the collection of pika skins for this purpose has ceased because of the nominal return to trappers. In Yakutia, the trapping of northern pika 

continued until 1953. In some years as many as 14,000 specimens were caught (Tavrovski et al. 1971). In Kazakh SSR, Ochotona was also trapped until the 1950s. All pika species and some gerbils Rhombomys opimus, 

tamariscinus have the same common name in Russian (“pishchukha”). In some years in the Karaganda region (where steppe pika 0. and pika 0. are very common) a few thousand pishchukhas were trapped, but of this total, were really Ochotona. These figures indicate that few pikas were trapped throughout Kazakhstan. This hunting has no noticeable influence on the pika popula-tions (Sludski et al. 1980). Lagomorphs also may compete with man for resources, and in these cases populations may be considered as “pests” and subject to control efforts. Four species of Ochotona have been designated as pests, Afghan pika 0. for the inclusion in their diet of wheat and other agricultural crops and their tendency to kill or damage apple, walnut and other economically important trees in Baluchistan (Lay 1967, Khokhar and Fulk 1976, Roberts 1977, Khan and Smythe 1980, Khan 1981, Mian 1986, Hussain and Brooks 1987, Mian, and 1987, Mian, and 1988, Mian, 

et al. and black-lipped, Daurian and pikas for their potential competition with domestic livestock on open rangelands (Shi et al. 1984, Schaller 1985, Fan et al. 1986). Control efforts have also been directed at pika be-cause it may serve as a vector for plague in select areas of its distributional range in the Soviet Union (Krylova 1976, Shilova et al. 1977). Minor control efforts have been expended on Daurian pika in the southwestern Transbaikalia, USSR. To understand better the role of these pikas in ecosystems dy-namics and their conservation biology, each of these control situations is elaborated below. The Afghan pika is considered a serious pest of apple trees and juniper nurseries in the Ziarat Valley of Baluchistan, Pakistan (Khokhar and Fulk 1976, Khan and Smythe 1980, Khan 1981, Mian 1986, Hussain and Brooks 1987). Normally, in the higher plateau country in central 

tan, this species lives in crevices in cliffs and occasionally in burrows under junipers and Artemesia. On some of these lands, especially narrow mountain valleys, subsistence crops like barley, wheat, potatoes and animal fodder are now grown. In higher valleys orchards of apples have increased in acreage every year. Pikas are a minor pest of the young green wheat, fodder and vegetable crops grown near their native habitat, and they damage orchard trees seriously (including walnuts and cherries) in winter when green plants are not available. Afghan pikas sometimes completely remove the bark from trees at 25 to 4Ocm above the ground. The damage varies with the severity of the winter from as little as 0.15% to as much as 5.1% of trees killed and 1.5% to 47.1% damaged per year. Because the losses can amount to hundreds of thousands of dollars (US$; Hussain and Brooks the Afghan pika is controlled in these areas. The subspecies of pika 0. has been considered a pest in the south of Gorno-Altai Autonomous Oblast and Tuva ASSR, Soviet Union, because it is considered a focus for plague 1976, Shilova et al. 1977). 

plague stations in Tashanta, Tuva, Kyakhta and Borzya were 17 established to exterminate both native rodents and 

phs. In the Chuiskaya steppe in the southeastern Altai Moun-tains, several thousand ha were poisoned in the early 1970s (Derevshchikov 1975). Limited experiments with the poison “sevin” in southwestern Tuva showed that this poison steril-ized animals and was very harmful to the entire ecosystem, so use of sevin was discontinued. Control of pika in this region has now ceased (Erbajeva, personal communication). The most serious ecosystem-level problem concerning the control of lagomorphs involves black-lipped, Daurian and 

pikas in China. All three species may attain high population densities in meadow-steppe environments (Smith 1988, and this volume). Control began in 1958 with tests on black-lipped pika; large-scale control initiated in 1962 reached a peak between 1963 and 1965 and continues on a reduced scale. No specific data are available on the extent of control of this species, however, it has been estimated that over ha mu) were controlled in 

and Gansu Provinces in 1962, prior to the initiation of the largest scale efforts (Fan, personal communication). The heaviest control of Daurian pika occurred later than that of the black-lipped pika. In Qinghai, Gansu and Inner Mongolia about ha of Daurian pika habitat was controlled in the early years (Fan, personal communication). Most control of pika took place in Xinjiang, along the border with Inner Mongolia (330,000 ha; Fan, personal communication). We do not know the total area that has been poisoned for each species or the distribution of effort by year since control was initiated. The continuous emphasis on control programs from the highest levels of government in China, taken together with the estimates of affected area given above, indicated that ex-tremely large tracts of pastureland in China have been poi-soned to kill pikas. Other species, including other non-target pikas (alpine pika 0. alpina Gansu pika 

sorella, Kozlov’s pika 0. koslowi, Thomas’s pika 0. thomasi), 

may have been affected by these control efforts. Chemicals to kill pikas are applied in early spring (before the meadows turn green) or in early winter (after the mead-ows have dried up). At these times pikas, and other grazing herbivores, are more attracted to poison baits, because food is scarce. In the early years (when much of the control occurred) the main chemicals used were Compound 1080 and ap-plied from hand spreaders, tractors, and often broadcast spreading from airplanes. Application of Fuss01 was discon-tinued because of expense and environmental contamination from poisonous secondary derivatives. Use of 1080 continued until 1978 when it was determined that it also killed carnivores that ate pikas (Fan, personal communication). Because of the importance given to pest control in China, research on poisons has been well-funded, and almost all rodenticides have been tried. In pastureland the primary poisons are now Gophacide and Zinophos. A major emphasis is on the future use of anti-coagulants to avoid secondary byproducts and damage to the environment. There are, never-theless, some problems with anti-coagulants: they are expen-sive and must be distributed in large quantity many times to be effective. Currently the use of anti-coagulants is largely con-fined to agricultural areas and cities. Recent research has addressed the ecosystem-level rela-tionships of the three “pest” species of Ochotona. Jiang and Xia determined that at low and moderate densi-ties, the foraging of black-lipped pikas was selective. Daurian pikas are also selective foragers (Loukashkin 1940, Ognev 1940, Nikolski, Guricheva and Dmitriev 1984). Certain steppe shrubs grow only where Daurian pika burrows are found (Dmitriev 1985). Thus these pika species may play an impor-tant role in the stabilization of their respective vegetational communities and contribute to the determination of local floral diversity. Research has focused on those situations when the 

lipped pika is found at high densities. At these times its diet may overlap extensively with that of domestic animals (Jiang and Xia This condition normally occurs at the end of the summer when the pika’s reproduction has yielded its highest population density and the meadow vegetation has begun to dry up. There is also an apparent relationship between grazing of domestic animals and pika population density. When the combined grazing of yaks, horses and sheep lower the degree of cover and the height of vegetation, the black-lipped pika may be found at greater densities than on natural meadows (Shi 1983). Similarly, Daurian pikas are more likely to contribute to the deterioration of rangelands that are already overgrazed Zhou and Sun 1985). Apparently under conditions initiated by overgrazing, pikas are in a position to do greater harm to the meadow environ-ment. Shi (1983) concluded that the most effective way to control damage by black-lipped pikas is to improve the condi-tion of the range, which would presumably mean control of the intensity of grazing by domestic animals. The extensive burrowing by black-lipped and Daurian pikas, particularly when they are at high density, has also been implicated as causing destruction of the grasslands (Jiang and Xia 1985). Apparently no controlled experiments have been conducted to test whether the burrowing activity of pikas may play an important role in soil aeration and nutrient cycling, as has been demonstrated for burrowing mammals in other ecosystems 1946, Grant, French and Folse 1980, 

1923, Tilman 1983, b). In summary, there has been wide-scale defaunation of ver-tebrates in Asia as the result of control measures directed at burrowing species of Ochotona. This poisoning has drastically altered the natural communities and ecosystems of vast areas of central Asia, and many species of pikas and of other vertebrates have probably been negatively affected. These control measures are continuing. More data are needed on the extent and effect of these control programs. Ultimately it is believed that a goal of restoring natural grazing ecosystems and preserving fauna1 diversity should be enacted. 18 Conservation and Management of Pikas 

It is unfortunate that the least information is available on the sensitive issue of conservation and management of pikas. Currently no species or forms of Ochotona are treated on any national list of endangered or threatened wildlife; however Kozlov’s pika is scheduled to be listed as endangered in the forthcoming Red Book for the People’s Republic of China. Some European populations of the steppe pika subspecies 0. 

are listed as rare in the Red Book of the Bashkir Autonomous Republic, Soviet Union (Kucherov 1987). Many species live in such remote and inaccessible areas that their status is unlikely to have been influenced by human activities. In addition to the problems caused by the wide-scale 

tion programs aimed primarily at some pika species (outlined above), this review has uncovered two additional aspects of the conservation and management of pikas which merit de-tailed consideration: the effects of deforestation; and the results of isolation and small population size found in many forms. 

Deforestation 

Population pressures throughout Asia have led to the severe alteration of many natural wildlife habitats. Here those in-stances are summarised where there is a perceived or real threat to populations of lagomorphs in Asia resulting from these changes. There are, in reality, two major classes of habitat alteration affecting lagomorphs. The first is structural changes, such as deforestation or clearing of natural habitats for agriculture. The second, and often related change, is increased insularisation of populations that may lead to their increased vulnerability. Several species of pika (Gansu, northern 0. hyperborea, 

nubra 0. nubrica, steppe, Moupin 0. thibetana, and Tho-mas’s) occur in forested or habitat types. Deforesta-tion has been reported widely across Asia, and has been directly implicated in the potential endangerment of Moupin pika subspecies 0. thibetana in its restricted range in the Himalayan (R.K. Ghose, personal communication; see that account). At Sikkim, India (the type locality), human settlement, terraced cultivation, firewood collection, road construction, etc. have resulted in an almost complete eradication of the thickets of rhododendron that were the preferred habitat of the Moupin pika in this region. The disappearance of steppe pika subspecies 0 .

is considered by some scientists to be due to the global change in climate, although others attribute its demise to the destruction of steppe shrubs. It is likely that other populations, as yet may be similarly affected (such as 0. 

sorella, 0. morosa, 0. thomasi). 

Isolation and Small Population Sizes 

Several species, subspecies and populations of Ochotona are isolated and of small population size. In several cases these isolated forms are poorly known and could be considered endangered if the population history and causes leading to the dangerously small population size were known for certain. Currently Kozlov’s pika is scheduled to be listed as endan-gered in China, but other forms may similarly be affected: alpine pikas 0. alpina 0. alpina 0. alpina ssp. nov. (Bajan Ulan Mountains, Mongolia), Gansu pikas 

sorella, 0. morosa, Forrest’s pika 0. 

Gaoligong pika 0. gaoligongensis, Himalayan pika 0. 

Ili pika 0. Muli pika 0. 

pikas 0. 0. (Choyr Mountains, Mongolia), 0. sunidica, American pika 0. princeps goldmani, 0. princeps nevadensis, 0. princeps obscura, 0. princeps Turkestan red pika 0. (throughout its range), Afghan pika 0. shukurovi, Moupin pikas 0. 

thibetana 0. thibetana huangensis, and Thomas’ pika 0. 

There are several biological reasons for the isolation and small sizes of population found in Ochotona. First, most species of pikas are found at high elevations and are adapted to cool alpine/boreal climates. In many places they occur on isolated mountain or individual peaks (“montane islands”) surrounded by warmer environments. As climates have become warmer since the Pleistocene the zone which could be occupied on some of these peaks by pikas has become smaller in area, thus leading to smaller population sizes and increased probability of extinction. Detailed analy-ses of this currently process in the American pika have shown that pikas exist on only five of nineteen montane islands that they once occupied in the Great Basin of the United States (Brown The subspecies 

princeps which lives in ice caves in the lava beds of the Snake River Desert, Idaho, and obscura from moun-tains in the Big Horn Basin, Wyoming, are similarly isolated. Pikas from the type locality of 0. p. in Nevada, have apparently disappeared recently due to a drought in that area (D. J. Hafner and R.M. Sullivan, personal communication). Smith 1974b) gives a detailed account on how the interaction of temperature regulation, dispersal, extinction rate of small populations and the availability of suitable 

tat may determine the lower limit of the geographical range of the American pika. In the region of Asia, Kniazev, Savinetski and Sokolovskaya (1986) and Kniazev and 

inetski (1988) have shown that an isolated population of 

pika has gradually decreased in size over time, pre-sumably due to climatic change. Compounding the effect of temperature on the degree of isolation of pika populations is that many species occupy only talus, a naturally disjunct habitat Many of the spe 

accounts given by and below document the sporadic distribution of pikas on talus throughout their range. The dynamics of the spatial isolation of pikas on patches of talus has been explored for large-eared, Turkestan red, and American pikas. (Bernstein 1963, 1964, 1980, 1987). Near the lower altitudinal distribution of American pikas, Smith 1980, 1987) found that populations on 19 isolated patches of talus represented dynamic equilibria be-tween extinction (which was inversely related to talus patch size) and recolonization (which was inversely related to 

patch distance). These isolated populations were often sepa-rated by distances of only Regional saturation of habitat decreases when distances between habitat patches increase. Due to this relationship, many pika populations at low elevations may be at risk of local extirpation. The interplay of the mating system, social structure and dispersal patterns of most species of pikas further ensures that populations remain small and isolated. In general, pikas ap-pear to be monogamous (Smith and Ivins 1984, Formozov 1985, Smith et al. Smith 1988, and species accounts in this review). In addition, dispersal is restricted in most species which have been investigated (including both talus, American pika, and steppe-dwelling, black-lipped pika forms). Pikas primarily exhibit a philopatric settlement pat-tern (Smith and Ivins 1983b; A.T. Smith and Wang X.G., unpublished data). Animals which venture away from their natal site encounter frequent hostility, and their likelihood of successful colonization is low unless they can find unoccupied habitat. There are two important consequences of these     

> 0. alpina 0. macrotis
> Figure 3.1 Distribution of alpine pika
> pika in Central Asia large-eared

terns. First, unoccupied habitats which may even be close to occupied ones may remain vacant for long periods of time because of the low of pikas. This behavioral effect compounds the isolation of habitat patches. Second, it may be that most pikas are highly inbred. Electrophoretic data on the American pika demonstrate that within-population genetic variability may be low (Glover et al. 1977, et al. 1985). Hafner and Sullivan (personal communication) have noted that the isolated population of 0. nevadensis in the Ruby Mountains, Nevada, United States, are monomorphic for alarge suite of proteins monitored using electrophoresis. These aspects of the biology of pikas (elaborated in the species accounts which follow) indicate that populations of talus-dwelling pikas may represent a model system to investi-gate the effects of 1) genetic population structure, particularly the issue of inbreeding; and 2) small populations and their occupancy of patches of habitat in the testing of extinction theory. Both of these issues are topical in the field of conser-vation biology, and more empirical data are needed from speciose taxonomic lineages, such as Ochotona, to understand fully and predict population-level responses so that correct management decisions on of all kinds can be executed. 

# Species Accounts 

The following accounts outline the systematic and biological data necessary to understand the conservation and manage-ment status of each species. Subspecies names have been listed in alphabetical rather than chronological order. This document highlights the lapses in our knowledge as well as our current understanding of the biology and conservation of pikas. We collectively encourage further research on this fascinating group of mammals. 

Alpine or Altai Pika 

Ochotona 1773) Subspecies: Ochotona alpina 1773) (includes 

Lagomys Ochotona alpina Howell 1928; 

alpina changaica Ognev 1940; Ochotona alpina 

(Schrenck 1858); Ochotona alpina Hollister 

Ochotona alpina scorodumovi Skalon 1935; Ochotona alpina sushkini Thomas 1924 

Taxonomy 

The alpine pika has been considered to include northern pika 

0. hyperborea (Vinogradov and Argyropulo 1941, Argyropulo 1948, Gureev 1964, Corbet 1978, Honacki, and Koeppl 1982, Weston 1982, Feng and Zheng 1985) and the North American forms, American 0. and collared 0. 

pikas (Argyropulo 1948, Gureev 1964, Corbet 1978). Here these four forms are treated as separate species (see Corbet and Hill 1986). Weston (1981) determined that the North American forms are significantly different 

20 from the Asian forms. Authorities who have had the opportunity to investigate alpine and northern pikas closely comment on their noticeable differences throughout their zone of sympatry (Ognev 1940, Sokolov and Orlov 1980). In addition, diploid chromosome number differs between the two species = 42 in the alpine and in the northern pika) (Vorontsov and Ivanitskaya 1973). The assignment of subspecies to the alpine pika followed here was based on the form having been included in 0. alpina 

by one or more of those authorities who distinguished between 0. alpina and 0. hyperborea: Ognev 

Bobrinski, Kuznetzov and Kuzyakin Ellerman and Morrison-Scott (1951). In addition, one of us (RSH) has examined specimens representing all named subspecies (and most holotypes) in order to confirm published accounts. Formozov and Nikolski (1979) argued that the form 

toshi, often placed in alpina, should be transferred to the northern pika 0. hyperborea. Not only svatoshi, but also 

and scorodumovi are problematical. These pikas live between the Shilka and Argun rivers. They are close to the alpine pika in their morphology and short call characteristics, but other features of their vocal repertoire differ from typical 

(Formozov and Yakhontov 1988). It is likely that individual specimens from the zone of sympatry have been misidentified in museum collections and caution should be used. At present, we accept the assignment of svatoshi to 0. 

hyperborea, but provisionally retain cinereofusca and 

dumovi in 0. alpina. 

Another form, 0. sushkini, was originally described by Thomas (1924) as being most nearly allied to 0. [ = 0. 

Subsequently authors have considered sushkini asubspecies of pika 0. pallasi. However, our compari-son of the type series of sushkini in the British Museum (Natural History) (BMNH) with a series of typical and 

yields the following distinctions. While the skulls are difficult to distinguish (as pointed out by Ellerman and Mor-rison-Scott the interorbital width is less than in alpina nd the pelage and soles of the feet are pale in 

but dark gray to brownish (varying seasonally) in 

alpina. Additionally, the type locality of sushkini lies outside of the range of 0. in the Altai Mountains (Yudin, Galkina and Potapkina 1979). The holotype of sushkini is assignable to 

alpina; sushkini was also placed in 0. alpina by Pavlinov and Rossolimo (1987) and Erbajeva (1988). 

Status and Summary 

The subspecies Ochotona alpina (known only from the type locality in the Helan Shan near the border of Ningxia, Hexizoulang and Gansu provinces, China) is known from only a few specimens and has not been collected for over half a century, it has, however, recently been seen (Wulsin, unpubl. field notes, NMNH). It was found in montane steppe and forest, living among “stones in mt. [montane] (ibid.). 

Although its status is uncertain, it is likely that it is severely endangered. Control of vertebrate pests in its reported range could be responsible for its rarity. 0. a. is similarly 21 isolated and may be at risk, pending surveys of its population size and range. A distinct form of alpine pika (as yet unnamed) has been found in the Bajan Ulan Mountains on the shore of the Kerulin River in the Mongolian People’s Re-public (N. A. Formozov, unpublished data). Its status is un-known. Other isolated populations of alpine pika occur on separate mountains in the Desert (e.g. Ikhe Ula, 

Adj Ula, They are vulnerable but currently not endangered. Other subspecies of the alpine pika appear to be common throughout the geographic range of the species. 

Description 

This is generally a large pika, although some of the subspecies are relatively small. The summer fur varies significantly in different subspecies. The general color of the back is dull, yellowish, ochre-gray darkened by black or dark brown hair tips. The flanks have a rust-red tinge and the ventral surface is pale yellowish ochre. In winter the alpine pika tends toward a graypelage with a yellowish tinge. The skull is stoutly built, but long and narrow. The incisive foramina are small and rounded; the anterior palatal foramina are completely sepa-rate from the incisive. No fenestrae are present in the frontals. In comparison with the northern pika the skull of the alpine pika is longer and less rounded, the orbits are more elongate and the rostrum is markedly longer (Ognev 1940). In addition, the bullae of the alpine pika are relatively narrower and deeper and the rear of the cranium is more strongly flexed downward. In the zone of sympatry, adult alpine pikas are consistently larger in a number of measurements than are northern pikas and are usually less brightly colored, although there is much seasonal and geographic variation. 

Distribution 

In mountainous areas bordering the Desert on the north (Altai, Khangai, etc.) and from the south and east of Lake Baikal eastward to the upper Amur River drainage (Kazakh SSR, RSFSR, Soviet Union; Mongolian People’s Republic; northern Xinjiang, China). An isolated population occurs in the Helan Shan (northwest 

Gansu border, China). (See Fig. 3.1). 

Habitat 

The preferred habitat is rock and talus (Ognev 1940, 

levskaya 1961, Naumov 1974, Wang and Yang 1983, Ma et al. 

1987). It may occur in old moss-covered or in burrows under tree roots (Ognev 1940, Khmelevskaya 1961). Naumov (1974) reported that alpine pikas are not found in extensive talus devoid of vegetation or in swampy montane tundra. Alpine and northern pikas partially segregate altitudinally or by microhabitat in their zone of sympatry. Due to 

tion for shelter, the alpine pika tends to occupy t with larger stones. In the Khangai Mountains, it lives both above and below northern pikas; in Tuva the latter live at higher ele-vations than does the alpine pika. The subspecies 0. occupies rocky areas in steppe and forest-steppe zones in the Helan Shan mountains; in this region it does not extend up into the alpine zone (Ma 

personal communication). 

Ecology 

Average annual mortality rates determined by Orlov and Makushin (1984) differed between populations living in for-ests (53%) and in the alpine zone (41%); most animals were one to three years of age. In most populations the magnitude of annual fluctuations in density is not significantly different. An unusual catastrophic drop in pika density occurred throughout the western Mountains in the early 1970’s. Throughout much of this area (extending from to 

E) density declined by more than an order of magni-tude (Khlebnikova 1978; R. L. Naumov, personal communica-tion). The reasons for such a significant drop in the number of pikas are not clear. Khlebnikov (1977) suggested that an epidemic was responsible, but it is difficult to understand how such a factor could have affected a vast territory simultane-ously. A contributing factor to the reduction in pika density was that when the numbers became low, the remaining popu-lation was preyed on heavily by sables 

(Khlebnikov 1977). As of some localities which had high densities 16 to 17 years earlier were now devoid of pikas (Khlebnikova and Khlebnikov, in press) Apparently the low reproductive rate and insular structure of the habitat of alpine pikas account for this phenomenon. Alpine pikas, along with northern pikas, can play a very important role in the ecosystem as basic food for sables (Khlebnikov 1977). In the western Mountains pikas comprise up to 87% of the contents of sable scats (Sokolov 1965). The density of sables is ten times higher in areas with pikas (Khlebnikov 1977). In the Altai Mountains in Kazakh SSR, alpine pikas comprise up to 60% of the diet of sables (Sludski et al. whereas in the central Altai Mountains sables rarely eat pikas, concentrating instead on the constant harvests of pine nuts from sibiricus. 

Alpine pikas follow the typical pika behavior of storing food in large caches (Ognev 1940, Khmelevskaya 1961, 

1984). Travina (1984) estimated that up to of vegetation are stored by pikas when their density approxi-mates ten to twelve individuals per ha. Several ungulate species alter their local distribution in response to these pika stores. In winters with especially heavy snows, Siberian wapiti 

sibiricus tend to group in pika habitats. They move through the deep snow from one to another eating the hay. During snowstorms reindeer tarandus 

go down from their alpine habitats into the forest to eat the stores of pikas. Domestic cows and horses may feed on pika stores in winter (Melnikov 1974). The density of voles 

onomys and shrews is four times higher in areas of pika 

than in the surrounding forest (Naumov 1974). Khlebnikova (1978) documented that the alpine pika sig-nificantly influences the composition and diversity of the plant community where it occurs. Presence of pikas decreases the proportion of flowering plants, decreases the store of seeds in the soil and slows down succession of the plant community by eating young trees (including sibiricus, the most impor-tant element in the Siberian taiga ecosystem) (Khlebnikov and Shtilmark 1965, Loskutov 1966). On the other hand, the organic remains of pika stored on talus may facilitate plant colonization on this habitat and the large accumulation of pika pellets under pika shelters gives rise to spots of nitrophilic vegetation (Travina 1984). 

> Behavior

Alpine pikas live in families composed of an adult pair and their young, depending on season (Khmelevskaya 1961, Khlebnikova 1978). Adult partners share mutual shelters and 

within the family feeding territories. The borders of the family feeding territories do not overlap and are relatively stable from one year to the next (Khlebnikova although home ranges of family groups are more extensive than feeding territories and do overlap. Like all Eurasian species, and in contrast with North American pikas, the alpine pika has a gland located on its neck, but no cheek (apocrine) gland. Males and females mark corners of stones located primarily near the center of their mutual home range by rubbing with their neck glands. This marking has been observed from April to December, but the best developed glands have been found in males in spring (Sludski et al. 1980, Orlov 1983). Another specific gland of the alpine pika is the anal gland 

1940). The mass of these glands is greater in males than in females and it is also larger during August when 

are being constructed than in spring (Sludski et 

1980). The long call or “song” of the male is the most complicated and ritualized demonstration of alpine pika vocalizations. It consists of three series of different calls given one after the other. Males respond to playbacks of this song with the same song. This type of long call is characteristic of the subspecies 

0. a. 0. a. and 0. a. changaica, but has not been heard from 0. a. and 0. a. scorodumovi (N. A. Formozov, unpublished data; V. M. Smirin, personal commu-nication). The short call (except for 0. a. from the Bajan Ulan Mountains) is a strident sharp whistle that is easily distinguished from the very short and high-pitched whistle of the sympatric northern pika (Formozov and Nikolski 1979, Nikolski 1983, Formozov and Yakhontov 1988). Alpine pikas also vocalize during chases with conspecifics. Alarm calls are uttered immediately upon perception of any cause for alarm (predators, approach of persons, etc.). They perceive danger and respond with alarm calls over a greater distance than most pika species (Oko and Formozov 1980). This pika adapts very easily to life in captivity (V. M. Smirin, personal communication). 

Reproduction 

Fecundity is low and characteristic of other talus-dwelling pikas. Litter size varies seasonally and number of litters per season decreases with increasing elevation (Smirnov 1967). In the western Altai, the alpine pika has two litters: the first, =

22 3.0 = 12); the second, = 4.4 (3-6; N = (Sludski et 

1980). Potapkina (1975) also recorded a seasonal increase in litter size: April, = 2.5; May, = 3.2; June, = 3.6. In the northwestern the alpine pika has no fewer than two litters with a mean size of 2.7 (l-5; N = 23) (Khmelevskaya 1960). In the western Mountains mean litter size is 2.7 (1-4; N = 55). Here 10% of females were observed to conceive a third litter (Naumov 1974). Naumov’s (1974) observation that some yearling females may breed has not been confirmed by any subsequent investigations. 

Gansu or Gray Pika  

> Ochotona

Lyon 1907 Subspecies: Ochotona Lyon 1907; Ochotona 

morosa Thomas Ochotona sorella Tho-mas Ochotona Osgood 1932 

Taxonomy 

(1890) originally included the Gansu pika 0. 

in Royle’s pika 0. but it is quite unlike that species. It frequently has been included in 0. thibetana (Allen 1938, Argyropulo 1948, Ellerman and Morrison-Scott 1951, Gureev       

> 0.
> 0.
> 0 . r u f e s c e n s
> Figure 3.2 Distribution of Gansu pika Ochotona Forrest% pika
> Ochotona and Afghan Ochotona in Asia

1964, Corbet 1978, Honacki, and Koeppl 1982, Weston 1982). Although morphologically similar to Moupin pika 0. thibetana, the Gansu pika is here considered an independent species on the basis of its skull characteristics and the observation that intermediate forms are not found in the extensive zone of sympatry between the two species (Feng and Kao 1974, Feng and Zheng 1985). Compared with the Moupin pika, the Gansu pika has a shorter skull, narrower zygomatic arch and narrower interorbital width. Although Weston (1982) included 0. in thibetana, her 

analysis clearly shows the distinctiveness of the two forms. Allen (1938) and Feng and Kao (1974) considered the form morosa to be a synonym of 0. thibetana huangensis, with which it is sympatric in the Tsing Ling Shan of Shaanxi Province, China. However, the describer of morosa placed it as a subspecies of the Gansu pika (Thomas as did Osgood (1932). The holotype of morosa (BMNH) and a series of three additional specimens (American Museum of Natural History, New York: AMNH) from the type locality all display the smaller size, narrower zygomatic and interorbital width, and pelage color typical of Feng and Kao (1974) also assigned to 0. c. the race which we believe belongs in Moupin pika 0. thibetana, as did Osgood (1932) (see that account). The last subspecies of to be named was stevensi, by Osgood (1932). Examination of the holotype and a large type series (Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago: FMNH) indicates that they are all correctly placed in the Gansu pika 0. Specimens of 0. c. are also known from the same places that the Moupin pika occurs (Minya Konka, Sichuan, China). The most isolated form geographically of the Gansu pika is 

sorella, which is restricted to the Yunzhong Shan in Shanxi Province between the cities of Ningwu and Taiyuan, China. It was originally described as a species “allied to 0. by 

and was considered a synonym of by Feng and Kao (1974). However, doubt was raised by Allen 

who questioned the assertion by Thomas that it was a “very small species,” and subsequently assigned it as a subspe-cies of the Moupin pika 0. thibetana. One of us (RSH) has examined the holotype (BMNH) and the only other known specimen of sorella, and determined that its cranial measure-ments supports its assignment to 0. 

Status and Summary 

Most populations of alpine pika are fairly abundant and occupy an ecological zone which does not overlap with the activities of domestic herbivores or humans, thus they are not considered a sensitive species. The form sorella (range: Ningwu, Shanxi, China), however, is known from only a few specimens and there have been no records for over a half a century. The status of this subspecies may have been affected by the wide-scale and general application of chemicals to control putative pest vertebrates throughout its geographic range. Details of the magnitude, effect and ramifications of these control measures are presented above, 

> 23

Ecology, Behavior and Reproduction 

Unknown. 

Gaoligong Pika 

Wang, Gong and Duan 1988 Taxonomy 

This monotypic species was recently described and has not been included in any prior revisions of the genus. It is 

with Forrest’s pika 0. and Moupin pika 0. 

betana on Mount Gaoligong, Yunnan Province, PRC. Wang, Gong and Duan (1988) claim that it is distinctly different from these forms, although they have not compared it with any of the type material. The original description suggests that it should be compared with additional material of 0. 

Status and Summary 

Status is unknown, although Gaoligong pikas may be consid-ered rare on the basis of preliminary investigations. The cause of rareness is unlikely to be due to human influence because of the inaccessible habitat occupied. 

Description 

The Gaoligong pika is similar to Forrest’s pika in size and main characters of the skull. It is distinguished from the latter chiefly by coloration (its head and neck are a brilliant 

brown and its back a dull rufous-black), by its flattened skull profile, by nasal bones that are longer and with a broader posterior, and by broader condylar processes of the man-dibles. 

Distribution 

Mount Gaoligong, northwest Yunnan Province, China. (See Fig. 3.4). 

Habitat 

Talus and rocky habitat in forested areas at about 

elevation. 

Ecology, Behavior and Reproduction 

Unknown. 

Glover’s Pika 

Ochotona Thomas 1922 Subspecies: Ochotona gloveri brookei Allen 1937 (includes 

kamensis); Ochotona gloveri calloceps Pen et al. 1962; 

Thomas 1922 Honacki, and Koeppl 1982, Weston 1982) and this association has, in part, been responsible for its listing with 

The separation of Glover’s and red-eared pikas from the Turkestan red pika 0. has been on the basis of pelage color, skull morphology and zoogeography (see ac-counts of those species) (Gureev 1964, Weston 1982, Feng and Zheng 1985, Feng, Cai and Zheng 1986). Glover’s pika is probably closely related to the red-eared pika, a point made by even those authors who have separated the forms (Thomas 1922, Allen 1938, Argyropulo 1948, Feng and Zheng 1985, Feng, Cai and Zheng 1986). Distinguishing features are summer pelage does not possess the reddish mantle of erythrotis) and skull morphology has smaller auditory bullae, more elongate nasals and a more slender rostrum than erythrotis) (Thomas 1922, Allen 1938, Argyropulo 1948, Feng and Zheng 1985). The species described as 0. kamensis (Argyropulo 1948, see also Gureev 1964, Corbet 1978, Honacki, and Koeppl1982, Weston 1982) was synonymised with 0. 

gloveri by Feng and Zheng (1985). Erbajeva (1988) synonymised kamensis with 0. gloveri brookei, although she did not use the rule of priority and retained the name 

sis. In his original description, Argyropulo (1948) comments that kamensis is the “largest and most differentiated species in    

> 0. gloveri 0. pallasi 0. ladacensis

Taxonomy 

The forms and brookei were included in the Turkestan red pika 0. (along with the red-eared pika 0. erythrotis) 

by Ellerman and Morrison-Scott (1951). Glover’s pika has Figure 3.6 Distribution of Glover’s pika Ochotona pika 

also been placed in 0. erythrotis (Gureev 1964, Corbet 1978, 0. and Ladak pika 0. in Central Asia 

32 this group [viz. kamensis, eythrotis and Feng and Zheng however, noted close similarities between 

and kamensis in coat color and skull structure, and we agree. In addition, the known range of kamensis falls within that (Corbet 1978, Feng and Zheng 1985, Feng, Cai and Zheng 1986). We believe that kamensis should be placed in synonymy with 0. brookei based on the close proxim-ity of the two type localities (kamensis: 

Kozlov 1947; brookei: 

Pen et al. (1962) described a new form as 0. 

muliensis, but now this form is considered a distinct species (Feng and Zheng 1985) on the basis of skull morphology (see 

0. muliensis, the Muli pika). 

Status and Summary 

Insufficient data are available to determine the status of Glover’s pika. As it is found in remote areas and does not occur on agricultural or grazing habitat, populations are un-likely to have been influenced negatively by human activities. 

Description 

Allen (1938) calls Glover’s pika “a smaller darker edition of [the red-eared pika] 0. eythrotis.” The dorsal coloration in summer is a brownish gray. The ears are brilliant rust or chestnut colored on the back and sparsely clothed with short ferruginous hairs on the inner side. The muzzle and forehead are tinged with dull fulvous, but the cheek area is gray. The ventral coloration is nearly uniform dull whitish. Winter 

age is similar to that found in summer. Important aspects of the skull structure are given above. 

Distribution 

Occurs at high elevations in southwest Qinghai, northeast Xizang, northwest Yunnan and western Sichuan, China. (See Fig. 3.6). 

Habitat 

Glover’s pika lives in talus, which throughout most of its geographic range is bordered by forest (Feng, Cai and Zheng 1986, Zheng 1989). 

Ecology, Behavior and Reproduction 

Unknown. 

Himalayan Pika 

Ochotona Feng 

Taxonomy 

The Himalayan pika 0. himalayana was synonymised with Royle’s pika 0. roylei by Corbet Honacki, 

and Koeppl (1982) and Weston but is treated as an independent species here following its original description and the analyses of Feng and Zheng (1985) and Feng, Cai and Zheng (1986). However, its range is within that of 0. roylei 

and additional specimens and field studies are          

> 0.
> 0.
> 0. roylei
> 0 . h i m a l a y a n a
> Figure 3.7 Distribution of steppe pika Thomas’s pika 0. and Royle’s pika 0. roylei and Himalayan pika 0. in Central Asia

necessary to confirm its specific distinctness, or to place it within Royle’s pika 0. roylei, which it most closely resembles. Most importantly, attention should be given to the main character used to separate and roylei: the lack of foraminae on the frontals. This characteristic is quite variable in most the presence of these foraminae varies among individuals of the large-eared pika 0. macrotis and Royle’s pika (Zimina 1962, Gruber 1969, Mitchell 1978). The 

tan red pika 0. is extremely variable for this character throughout Kirgizia (Yanushevich et al. 1972) and Tadzhiki-stan (E. Eu. Ivanitskaya, personal communication). Thus although we provisionally keep the species status of the Hima-layan pika 0. himalayana, we note at the same time that 0. 

and 0. angdawai are listed as synonyms for Royle’s pika, but these two have two pairs of frontal foraminae, unlike typical roylei. 

Status and Summary 

The status of the Himalayan pika is unknown. 

Description 

The Himalayan pika is a fairly large species and the distinctive elements of its coloration include the rufous or brownish tint 33 to the head and shoulders. The dorsal surface is a dull grayish brown. The palatal and incisive foramina are completely confluent and there are no foramina on the anterior end of the frontal. 

> Distribution

Mount Jolmolungma (Everest) area, southern Xizang, China. (See Fig. 3.7). 

> Habitat

Rocky habitats (such as cracks in walls, precipices, talus and highway bordered by evergreen or broadleaf forests. Elevational range from 2,400 to (Feng, Cai and Zheng 1986). 

> Ecology

Unknown. 

> Behavior

There are two activity periods: in the morning from 08.00 to 09.00 and at dusk. 

> Reproduction

Litter size ranges from three to four (Feng, Cai and Zheng 1986). 

> Northern or Siberian Pika

Ochotona 3.8 Distribution of northern pika hyperborea, Ili pika     

> Subspecies: Ochotona hyperborea cinereoflava

(Schrenck 0. pika 0. and Moupin pika 0. 

> in Asia

1858); Ochotona hyperborea coreana Allen and  

> 1913; Ochotona hyperborea femginea

(Schrenck 1858) (includes kamtschaticus); Ochotona hyperborea kolymensis Allen 1903; Ochotona hyperborea hyperborea 

1811) (includes Ochotona hyperborea 

Thomas 1909; Ochotona hyperborea svatoshi 

Turov 1924; Ochotona hyperborea turuchanensis Naumov  

> 1934; Ochotona hyperborea uralensis

Flerov 1927; Ochotona hyperborea yesoensis Kishida 1930; Ochotona hyperborea yoshikurai Kishida 1932 

> Taxonomy

The northern pika 0. hyperborea has been included in the alpine pika 0. alpina by several authorities (Vinogradov and Argyropulo 1941, Argyropulo 1948, Gureev 1964, Corbet 1978, Honacki, and Koeppl1982, Weston 1982, Feng and Zheng 1985). Argyropulo Gureev (1964) and Corbet (1978) also include the North American forms, the American 0. and collared 0. pikas with  

> hyperborea

in the alpine pika 0. alpina. Here these four forms are treated as separate species. Weston (1981) determined that the North American forms are significantly different morphologically from the Asian forms. Authorities who have had the opportunity to investigate closely northern and alpine pikas comment on their noticeable differences throughout their zone of sympatry (Ognev 1940, Sokolov and Orlov 1980). In addition, the diploid chromosome number is 40 in 0.  

> hyperborea

and 42 in 0. alpina (Vorontsov and Ivanitskaya 1973). Corbet and Hill (1986) separated the four species. The assignment of subspecies to the northern pika 0.  

> hyperborea

followed here was based on the form having been included in hyperborea by one or more of those authorities who distinguished between the northern and alpine pika spe-cies: Ognev Bobrinski, Kuznetzov and Kuzyakin 

Ellerman and Morrison-Scott (1951). In addition, one of us (RSH) has examined specimens of all named subspecies except cinereoflava, uralensis and yoshikurai. Formozov and Nikolski (1979) argued that the form svatoshi should be transferred to 0. hyperborea, and we agree. The forms  

> kolymensis

and turuchanensis were included as subspecies following the recent revisions by Cherniavski (1984) and Yakhontov (1987). 0. h. turuchanensis was artificially united with 0. h. femginea by Ognev (1940). These two forms have separate ranges far removed from one another. In addition,  

> turuchanensis

is considerably larger than  

> 0. hyperborea

is usually listed as a synonym of 0.  

> hyperborea hyperborea

and Morrison-Scott 1951). 

> 34

In fact, it was described by Schrenck (1858) on the basis of one specimen from the “Khalazansk Mountains” (inner parts of south Kamchatka), the same place where the two syntypes of 0. were found. All three specimens were col-lected by I. G. Voznesenski at the same time. Based on the drawing of the specimen, was a molting into adult fur (Schrenck 1858). There are descriptions of 

on the same page, but is mentioned first. Formally, pikas from Kamchatka might be called 0. 

hyperborea but for reasons of stability of nomencla-ture we keep the for Kamchatka pikas. Overall, the northern pika is a very polymorphic species, and its variability has not been adequately studied. Some sys-tematic refinements might be made on the basis of the vari-ation in alarm vocalizations of these pikas. Four dialects have been found (Formozov and Nikolski 1979, Nikolski 1983, Formozov and Yakhontov 1988). Some subspecies, for example 0. h. probably are composite as they include three different dialect forms. Also, 0. hyperborea 

from the Soviet Far East are usually placed in yet these animals have calls identical to those ofyesoensis from Hokkaido Island, Japan (Kawamichi 1981, Formozov and Yakhontov 1988). The systematic status of these dialect forms of the north-ern pika is not clear. For example, there is a variable popula-tion in the Putorana Mountains south of the Taimyr Peninsula 

Cluster analysis of 12 cranial measure-ments indicates three separate groups in the area: two differ-ent forms of 0. hyperborea and intergrades between them. Analysis of the dialects of these forms confirms that there is a secondary contact zone with limited hybridization between the two primary forms (N.A. Formozov and E.L. Yakhontov, unpublished data). However, in the Yana Basin 

all calls are intermediate between the same two dialect forms. This population could be interpreted as being secondarily stabilized after complete introgression (Formozov and Emelianova, in press). Another aspect of the geographical variability of this spe-cies is the character displacement of its size where it is sympatric with 0. The northern pika becomes smaller the closer it is to that part of its range where it is sympatric with the alpine pika. For example, northern pikas in the Bulnai Nuro Mountains, MPR where there are no alpine pikas, are larger than where found in sympatry with alpine pikas both to the north and south. 

Status and Summary 

The northern pika appears common throughout its wide geographic range; there is no apparent threat to this form. The subspecies 0. h. yesoensis has been considered a forest pest and controlled on the island of Hokkaido (Inukai and Shimakura 1930). Prior to World War II, the fur of northern pika was used to produce high quality felt. In Yakutia, the trapping of this species continued until 1953, and in some years as many as 14,000 specimens were caught (Tavrovski et al. 1971). Now this activity has largely ceased. 

Description 

The northern pika is in general smaller than the alpine pika, although the southern coreana 

sis, living in areas where the alpine pika does not occur, are larger than average for the species. Color of the fur varies greatly among subspecies. In general, during summer the back is a light brownish-rufous, becoming a more pure rufous along the sides. The underparts are a uniform rufous-white coloration. Winter fur is significantly grayer with a brownish tinge. In comparison with the alpine pika, the skull of the northern pika is shorter and more rounded, the orbits are not as elongate and the rostrum is markedly shorter (Ognev 1940). No fenestrae are present in the frontals. The incisive foramina are completely separated from the anterior palative foramina, as in the alpine pika. The auditory bullae are relatively wider but flatter than those of and the cra-nium is less flexed posteriorly. In the zone of sympatry, adult alpine pikas are consistently larger in a number of measure-ments than are northern pikas and usually less brightly col-ored, although there is much seasonal and geographical vari-ation. 

Distribution 

Widely distributed, mainly in the montane taiga of boreal Asia. Its northern boundary penetrates the tundra, but in the south it may be found in more situations. It is found in the Soviet Union in the Ural Mountains and from the east bank of the lower and middle Lena River eastward through-out the Chukotsk and Koryak peninsulas, in the Kamchatka Peninsula and on Sakhalin Island, through the upper Lena drainage, Transbaikaliya and the Amur region to the northern mountains of the Mongolian People’s Republic, the northeas-tern provinces of the People’s Republic of China (Nei Mon-gol, Liaoning, Jilin, Heilongjiang), northern Korea and north-ern Japan (Hokkaido). The northern pika lives on some islands in the Bering Strait (Arakamchechen Island) and the Sea of Okhotsk (Ol’ski Island in the Tauyskaya Guba, Ognev 1940; Great Shantar Island, Krivosheyev 1984). Northern and alpine pikas have parapatric ranges in the western 

Mountains. (See Fig. 3.8). 

Habitat 

Characteristically a rock-dwelling species (Inukai 1931, Allen 1938, Ognev 1940, 1960, Kim 1962, Belyaev 1968, 

michi 1969, Zevegmid 1975). The northern pika is more labile in its choice of habitats than the closely related alpine pika. In the northern tundra region, it occupies huge open rock fields and in northern Yakutia, polygonal clefts that appear in the permafrost (Tavrovski et al. 1971). Throughout much of its range it occupies rocky terrain in dark coniferous forests laced with mossy banks (Inukai and Shimakura 1930, Ognev 1940, Kim 1962, Kawamichi 1969). It may also burrow under or around tree stumps or fallen logs (Naumov 1934, Loukashkin 1940, 1960, Voronov 1964, Kishchinski 1969, Safronov and Akhremenko 1982). In zones of sympatry where northern and alpine pikas 

35 compete for shelters, the northern pika’s range of habitats is more restricted. On the Tanu-Ola Ridge, Tuva ASSR, it occupies talus composed of small stones higher in the alpine zone than the habitat occupied by the alpine pika. In areas outside of the zone of sympatry, for example the and Tarbagatay ridges, Mongolia, the northern pika lives mostly in forested taluses in the forest zone (Formozov and Yakhontov, in preparation). 

Ecology 

The density of these pikas apparently varies with locality and populations remain relatively constant over time (Kawamichi 1970). Density estimates include on the lower Lena River (Kapitonov in the Kolyma Highlands (Kishchinski on the Sokhondo Mountain (AA. Nikolski, N.A. Formozov and E.B. Srebrodolskaya, unpub-lished data) and as low as in Japan (Kawamichi 1969, 1970). The usual density appears to be approximately 

the high estimates above were either from extremely optimal habitat (AA. Nikolski, E.B. Srebrodolskaya and N.A. Formozov, unpublished data) or from small patches of talus. Usually there is a higher density on smaller patches of talus. Northern pikas live mostly on the peripheries of larger talus not far from their feeding territories. Thus in estimations of density, it is necessary to consider not only the area of the talus, but also the length of its border. If one does not do this, density estimates may be inflated. Such is the case in reports of 

1968) and (Safronov and Akhremenko 1982). In each of these cases the pikas occupied long narrow ramparts of logs wide). The sex-ratio in northern pika populations is (Gashev 

although in the abnormally dense population studied by Safronov and Akhremenko males comprised 60% of the population. In mid-winter Safronov and Akhremenko reported that yearlings made up 62% of the population, whereas 28% were one-year-old animals and 8% 

olds. Belyaev (1968) observed a population that remained constant in size during three years of study and noted that 

75% of the population was renewed annually. and Chotolchu (1971) determined that the generation turnover was two years; 67% of the population they sampled were young. Gashev (1966) reported that 20% of his sampled population was two to three years old and he has concluded that it is rare for an animal to survive three winters (Gashev 1971). (1968) found that in September yearlings com-prised 50% of the population. Adult one-year-old animals made up and adults two years old and older only 9.5% of the population. Northern pikas store large amounts of vegetation in their 

(Inukai 1931, Loukashkin 1940, Ognev 1940, 

1960, Kawamichi 1969). Reindeer tarandus, snow sheep Ovis domestic horses and white hares 

feed on the stores of northern pikas. In early spring 

camtschatica also may eat the pika’s hay (Kapitonov 1961). In an area of dense population on the middle Lena River, there was an’inverse relationship between the density of pikas and that of small rodents; nevertheless, during winter voles were often caught on pika (Safronov and Akhremenko 1982). 

Behavior 

Male and female adults live in a joint territory in which they are highly sedentary (Kawamichi Each individual tends to stay in this area for life, resulting in a “lasting spatial mosaic” (Kawamichi 1971b). Even following death of territory occupants and resettlement by other individuals, the territory boundaries tend to remain the same. Males are more likely than females to cross territorial boundaries into areas occupied by neighboring conspecifics. Females ignore each other and do not respond to each other’s vocal signals. The male and female exchange calls most of the year and most probably recognize each other’s calls, because they do not respond to the calls of other conspecifics. In fall they store hay together in the same places. Body contact between male and female partners is rare; they do not “snuggle” with each other as do Daurian 0. daurica and black-lipped pikas 0. 

Some variability in the paired social organisation has been observed. In some cases there may be unpaired males or females, or threesomes with one male associated with two females. Threesomes are found only in areas of high density. In the southern part of the range of northern pikas, young disperse and form couples in the summer of their birth year (Nikolski, Srebrodolskaya and Formozov 1988). In the north-ern part of their range, in contrast, young from late litters spend the winter with their parents (Kapitonov 1961). In the Ural Mountains, the young not only wintered with their par-ents, but also constructed mutual stores with them (Gashev 1971). A crucial point is that the social organization (whether of couples or threesomes) is not associated with the structure of sexual relations. During the breeding season, all males visit no fewer than three females; and each female is visited by several males, sometimes simultaneously. Some males living in couples travel long distances (over 200m) to visit other fe-males. Vocalizations produced by northern pikas are very loud and sharp (Loukashkin 1940, 1960, Kawamichi 1981, Nikolski, Srebrodolskaya and Formozov 1988). Males utter a long call, whereas all individuals irrespective of age and sex produce a short call and a trill (Kawamichi 1981, Nikolski, Srebrodolskaya and Formozov 1988). The long call consists of a chattering sound followed by a sequence of loud sharp whistles. The dynamic spectrum of these calls is individually specific (Nikolski, Srebrodolskaya and Formozov 1988). As indicated above, the short call is used for communica-tion between paired males and females. In spring it is used only by females, whereas in fall it is given by both sexes. When the short call is used in alarm situations, the series of calls is fewer than in the alpine pika. The spectrum of short calls in northern pikas is very broad and varies geographically (Formozov and Nikolski 1979, Formozov and Yakhontov 1988). 

36 The northern pika marks its home range by rubbing its neck gland on the corners of stones or by leaving urine in other specific places (Gashev 1971, N.A. Formozov, unpublished data). They mark with their neck gland more actively in spring than in fall. In fall, the visit of an intruder into the core of an animals’s home range stimulated marking by the host. There is cleptoparasitism in this species. Males have been observed stealing hay from as many as five conspecifics (AA. Nikolski, N.A. Formozov and E.B. Srebrodolskaya, unpub-lished data). Like alpine pikas, the northern pika adapts easily to hu-mans and can be made a pet (Yu. L. Vigorov, personal com-munication). 

> Reproduction

The fecundity rate is low. Most parameters associated with fecundity vary seasonally, annually and geographically. Length of pregnancy is 28 days (Gashev 1971). Females begin to breed in spring at different times over the course of a month 

1968). This asynchrony makes it difficult to determine the number of litters per year and the percent of breeding females. There is a tendency, in the northern part of the geographic range, for northern pikas to have one large litter, and in the southern part of the range to have two litters of smaller size but there are many exceptions.  

> Some

sources indicate that young first breed as yearlings (Ognev 1940, Kapitonov 1961, Kawamichi 1971, Tavrovski et  

> al.

1971, Zevegmid although others have stated that yearling females are incapable of breeding (Cherniavski 

> 1984).

Litter size ranges from one to nine. In Japan Kawamichi 

found the average litter size to be 3.1 (range l-5). In the lower Lena River area there is probably one litter with 2-6 young = 4.8; Kapitonov 1961). The single litter born in the Polar Ural Mountains averages 3.6 in good years but only 2.0 in unfavorable ones. Percentage resorbtion of embryos varies similarly from 5.5% in good years to 25% in bad years (Gashev 1971). Safronov and Akhremenko (1982) found that the first litter averaged 3.8 (3-6) whereas the second litter was larger = 5.6; 2-9). All females initiated first litters, whereas only half of the females had second litters. Other reported litter sizes are: = 4.2 (2-6); = 4.8 (3-8) (Cherniavski 1984); 

= 4.7 (2-7) (R evin et al. 1988); = 2.2 1968); = 2.1 (l-3) (Voronov 1964); and = 4.2 (2-7) (Sokolov, Shvetsov and Litvinov 1985). 

> Ili Pika

Ochotona iliensis and Ma 1986 Taxonomy 

This monotypic species was recently described and has not been included in any previous revisions of the genus. Its relationship with other species of Ochotona requires addi-tional study; because of its reddish color, it should be com-pared with the red-eared pika 0. erythrotis and Turkestan red pika 0. 

> Status and Summary

The population status of Ili pikas in China is unknown, al-though they may be considered rare on the basis of prelimi-nary investigations. The cause of rareness is unlikely to be due to human influence because of the inaccessible habitat they occupy. There are reports of a pika being found (but not collected) approximately fifty years ago in the Dzungarski Alatau Mountains (Shnitnikov 1936). It has not been found since that time, although several Soviet scientists have worked extensively in that area (A. K. Fedosenko, Ivanitskaya, N.A. Formozov). The pika was probably iliensis, and its de-mise could be linked to the gradual climatic warming in the area over the last 200 years. 

> Description

A fairly large pika, with large ears and hind feet. The general color is relatively bright with large rusty-red spots on the forehead and crown, as well as on the side of the neck. 

> Distribution

The Borohoro Shan, Xinjiang, China. (See Fig. 3.8). 

> Habitat

Talus areas on high cliff faces at 2,800 to in elevation (Li et al. 1988). 

> Ecology, Behavior and Reproduction

Unknown.  

> Kozlov’s Pika

Ochotona (Biichner 1894) Taxonomy 

This monotypic species is one of the few Ochotona which has generated no confusion (Ellerman and Morrison-Scott 1951, Gureev 1964, Corbet 1978, Honacki, and Koeppl 1982, Weston 1982, Feng and Zheng 1985); it appears to be thoroughly distinctive (so much so that Argyropulo 

proposed the subgenus for this species alone). Its closest relative may be the Ladak pika 0. Zadacensis, with which it shares a derived shape of the confluent incisive and palatal foramina. 

> Status and Summary

The original specimens of Kozlov’s pika were collected by Przewalski in 1884. Approximately one hundred years elapsed before they were seen again (Zheng 1986). Due to their limited distribution and apparent rarity, this should be consid-ered a potentially threatened species. It is the only Ochotona 

species scheduled for listing in the forthcoming People’s Republic of China “Red Book of Endangered Species.” In addition, it is possible that vertebrate control campaigns di-rected at other species within its range may be exerting an adverse affect on populations of Kozlov’s pika. 37 Description 

This large species is uniformly pale whitish buff tinged with vinaceous coloration dorsally, with thickly furred white under-parts. The thickness and density of the fur are greater than any other pika. The ears are yellow with white tips. The skull is large and strongly arched, the interorbital region is very narrow and the are relatively long. The general shape of the skull is unlike that of other pikas, but is an extreme culmination of the tendency for the skull to become highly arched as in black-lipped pika 0. curzoniae and Ladak pika. There are no fenestrae in the frontals. 

> Distribution

Known only from the Arkatag Range, a spur of the Kunlun Mountains, west of the junction of Xinjiang, Xizang and Qinghai, PRC. They were recently found near Aqqikkol Lake 

above sea level; Zheng not far south of the type locality. The type locality is usually given as Guldsha Valley or “Dolina vetrov” (Valley of the Winds) in the original description, but this is inexact. Buchner (1894) noted that Kozlov’s pika was not found in the Guldsha Valley itself (which was occupied by two other species, the black-lipped pika and Ladak pika). Instead, it was found only on the pass above Guldsha Valley and to the west of the pass in the valley of the Dimnalyk River, a tributary of the Cherchen River. The species was also found by members of 

ski’s expeditions at two other places: “Kuzyuk-Kakty Pass” and the vicinity of the village of Arkatag 

Another possible locality, Ikhe-Tsaidemin Nur ( = Lake) 

needs confirmation. (See Fig. 3.8). 

> Habitat

Occupies alpine meadow tundra and digs holes in the swelling mounds of saline loess on the Guldsha Pass (Buchner 1894). 

> Ecology

Unknown. 

> Behavior

Lives in groups and is diurnally active. 

> Reproduction

One litter is produced per year (Zheng 1989).  

> Ladak Pika

Ochotona 1875) Taxonomy 

The original description of this monotypic species was based on specimens originally assigned to the black-lipped pika 0.  

> curzoniae.

All modern authors consider it to be a distinct species (Argyropulo 1948, Ellerman and Morrison-Scott 1951, Gureev 1964, Corbet 1978, Honacki, and Koeppl1982, Weston 1982, Feng and Zheng 1985, Feng, Cai and Zheng 1986). It most closely resembles pika 0. 

being a large pale pika with a very narrow interorbital region; however, the two species are completely allopatric in distribution. The Ladak pika differs from pika in having a relatively small tympanic and more highly arched cranium. It often has the incisive and anterior palatal foramina completely separate, but with a strong constriction demarking them, as does Kozlov’s pika 0. koslowi. A similar condition is also seen in the Turkestan red pika, 0. 

eared pika 0. and Glover’s pika 0. 

The Ladak pika is broadly sympatric on the Qinghai-Xizang (Tibetan) Plateau with the black-lipped pika 0.  

> curzoniae.

They may be distinguished by the much smaller size of the latter and the wide confluence between incisive and anterior palatal foramina. 

> Status and Summary

Poorly known. 

> Description

Pelage in summer is light brownish-gray dorsally with yel-lowish white underparts. Exterior sides of the ear are distinc-tively rust-colored. As noted above, the skull is large and arched, the confluent incisive and palatine foramina are nar-rowly constricted anteriorly and the tympanic bullae are rela-tively small. 

> Distribution

Found at high elevations in the mountains of Kashmir, India; Qinghai, Xizang and Xinjiang, China. (See Fig. 3.6). 

> Habitat

Lives at approximately elevation in extremely barren places (Biichner 1894; Zheng 1989). The only vegeta-tion in some localities occupied by the Ladak pika are widely dispersed clumps of cushion plants Primula (Buchner 1894) or  

> moorcroftii

and (Feng, Cai and Zheng 1986, Zheng 1989). 

> Ecology

The Ladak pika digs huge holes. It is sympatric with the black-lipped pika in the Guldsha Valley (due east from the Guldsha Pass) and at least parapatric with Kozov’s pika (Buchner 1894). Based on specimens collected by Pevtsov and currently housed in the Zoological Institute (Leningrad), the Ladak pika and Kozlov’s pika may be sympatric near the northern edge of the Arkatag Range. In the Guldsha Valley Ladak pikas feed only on the roots of Primula in winter (Buchner 1894). Erbajeva (1988) claims that the long incisors of this species are adapted for this type of feeding. 

> Behavior

Upon being startled by man or a predator, these pikas retreat into their burrow while emitting a high abrupt squeak (Buchner 1894). 

> 38

Reproduction 

The reproductive season is in late June and early July (Zheng 1989). 

Large-eared Pika 

1875) Subspecies: Ochotona macrotis baltina Thomas 1922; 

macrotis chinensis Thomas Ochotona macrotis macrotis (Gunther 1875); Ochotona macrotis sacana Thomas 

1914; Ochotona macrotis wollastoni Thomas and 1922 

Taxonomy 

The large-eared pika 0. macrotis has been considered 

specific with Royle’s pika 0. by Argyropulo 

Gureev (1964) and Corbet (1978). Here it is considered distinct based on the analyses of Thomas and 

Ellerman and Morrison-Scott Honacki, and 

Weston Feng and Zheng (1985) and Feng, Cai and Zheng (1986) and our own study, as well as the ecological investigations of Abe Kawamichi (1971a) and Mitchell (1978, 1981) who observed the two species in their area of sympatry. Examination of the holotypes of 

baltina, chinensis, sacana and wollastoni from the BMNH makes it evident that all of these named subspecies are conspecific. All share the characteristics of macrotis; in com-parison with Royle’s pika 0. they average larger in size, with paler coloration, larger, broader ears with long, dense hairs inside, frontal foramina usually well-developed and symmetrical, somewhat larger bullae and wider, more highly arched skulls. The diploid chromosome number = 62 

rontsov and Ivanitskaya 1973). 

Status and Summary 

There are currently no known threats to the distribution or abundance of this species throughout its range. 

Description 

Of moderate size, but averages larger than most Royle’s pikas. The general color above is pale brownish gray with an ochre tinge. Along the sides of the face, across the shoulders and from the nose over the occiput, the general grayish color is tinged with rufous, which is more marked during summer. In winter the dorsal color changes to a dense fluffy pale gray with a tinge of straw-yellow. The belly ranges from white to 

white in summer and winter. There are usually two small (3 by 

oval foramina above and in front of the orbit at the anterior end of the frontal bones. As can be surmised by the apparent close taxonomic rela-tionship between the large-eared and Royle’s pikas, the ap-pearance of these two species is superficially similar. The large-eared can be distinguished from Royle’s pika using the following characteristics:  

> 

the inside of the ears is thickly clad with longer hairs in the large-eared pika; 

the head and front are washed with a pale russet color instead of the brilliant rufous brown in Royle’s pika; and 

on average the ears are broader in the large-eared pika (Feng and Zheng 1985). 

Distribution 

Found in the Pamir Mountains and western Tien Shan (Tadzhik SSR, SSR and southeast Kazakh SSR, Soviet Union); the Hindu Kush (northeastern Afghanistan); 

akoram Range (Pakistan); Himalayan Mountains (northern India; northern Nepal; Bhutan; adjacent Xizang, China); and the Kunlun and associated ranges across central western China (Xizang, Xinjiang, Qinghai) and westward into the high mountains of Sichuan and Yunnan Provinces, China. (See Fig. 

. .

Habitat 

A high altitude rock-dwelling pika (Ognev 1940, 

yamov 1962, Bernstein 1970, Kawamichi Mitchell 1978, 1981, Sludski et al. 1980, Feng, Cai and Zheng 1986, Zheng 1989). It inhabits stationary rock in open alpine areas as well as within spruce forests. The alpine desert in the Pamir, Tien Shan, Kunlun and other ranges inhabited by large-eared pikas is apparently lacking in snow cover most of the year (Ognev 1940). Its altitudinal range may extend from 

to as high as (Thomas and 1922). When found in the same mountain range, the distribution of large-eared pikas is higher than that of Royle’s pikas 

michi 1971a). 

Ecology 

Populations remain relatively constant in size over time, al-though densities at different locations may range from six to eighteen animals per ha (Bernstein 1970). However, at Chong-Kyzyl-Su Valley, the place that Bernstein conducted her investigations, no pikas could be located in 1977 

Formozov, unpublished data). Bernstein and Klevezal(l965) determined that yearlings comprised 58% of their study popu-lation and that some individuals lived to be three years old. At least some populations of the large-eared pika do not cache food in for the winter, as do most other species of pikas (Ognev 1940, Bernstein 1970, Kawamichi 1971a). The lack of snow found in their habitat apparently allows for 

round foraging. 

Behavior 

The large-eared pika apparently lives in family group territo-ries controlled by a pair of breeding adults (Abdusalyamov 1962, Kawamichi 1971a). Bernstein (1970) supposes that this species does not form a stable couple as does the Turkestan red pika 0. She came to this conclusion because she caught four males in close proximity to a single female. However, many males may visit a single female in the north-ern pika 0. hyperborea, a species that does form couples. Bernstein (1970) did comment that it was difficult to keep track of the animals she was observing because they were not 39 individually marked. In his behavioral study Kawamichi (1971a) witnessed no overlap between adult females. Al-though infrequent, all territorial invasions were by males. The development of calling behavior in this species is weak compared to most other pikas (Ognev 1940, Kawamichi 

In the event of alarm, the large-eared pika quickly escapes while uttering three to four syllable calls similar to those of the Turkestan red pika. In the fall, in dense popula-tions, these pikas utter occasional sharp whistles. Sometimes conspecifics answer this call with one of the same structure (Bernstein 1970). Kawamichi (1971a) stated that the lack of vocalizations in the large-eared pika is related to not having a to defend. This comment does not correspond with data from other species. The Turkestan red pika stores large quantities of hay, but is more silent than the large-eared pika. The Afghan pika 0. is one of the most silent of the pikas and stores hay twice a year (see those accounts). 

Reproduction 

Litter sizes are small, like those of other talus-dwelling pikas, with two to three young (Abdusalyamov 1962); = 5, range 3-7 (Zimina 1962); and l-4 (Mitchell Usually two litters are conceived per year (Abdusalyamov 1962, Zimina 1962, Mitchell and, in most populations, individu-als breed as yearlings (Zimina 1962). Bernstein (1970) has conducted the most thorough investigation of reproduc-tion in the large-eared pika and found that litter size varied throughout the range, being higher in populations with in-creased mortality and less constant population size. Also associated with these variables is an increase in dispersal. Females in one population (0. m. sacana from talus near a spruce forest in the Terskey-Alatau Range) had three litters per year with two to six young = 4.0). Mean litter size increased from the first = 2.8) to the last = 5.0). Yearlings did not breed. Adult females in another population (0. wt. macrotis from the Tien Shan uplands) had no fewer than three litters per year, and some probably four. Average litter size was 5.8 (range 4-8). Litter size decreased from June 

= 6.2) to August = 4.9). All young females from the first litters also bred and some of them had two litters with three to five young = 4.5). 

Muli Pika 

Ochotona Pen et al. 1962 Taxonomy 

This form, when it was originally described, was assigned to Glover’s pika 0. but now it is considered to be distinct (Feng and Zheng 1985). However, more study is needed to confirm its independent status. As in the case of the 

pika 0. the Muli pika is differentiated from Glover’s pika largely on the basis of its lack of foraminae on the frontals. This variable character may not be sufficient to ensure its independent status. 

Status and Summary 

This species is rare, only several specimens exist and it has not been recorded for over 25 years. It may be that chemical control directed at other vertebrate species has threatened its existence. 

Description 

The head is very faintly tinged with rusty-buff hair and the back of the ears is chestnut or yellow-orange in color. The Muli pika differs from Glover’s pika in that it lacks the small oval at the anterior dorsal surface of each frontal bone, has relatively shorter nasals and a broader rostrum (Feng and Zheng 1985). 

Distribution 

Western Sichuan, China. (See Fig. 3.5). 

Habitat 

Inhabits thicket and steppe habitat. In this respect it appears to differ from Glover’s pika, which occupies talus and other rocky habitats. 

Ecology, Behavior 

Unknown. 

Reproduction Nubra Pika 

Ochotona nubrica Thomas 1922 Subspecies: Ochotona lhasaensis Feng and Kao 1974 (includes Ochotona nubrica nubrica Thomas 1922 (includes aliensis). 

Taxonomy 

Although in his original description Thomas (1922) referred to nubrica as a “small species in the group,” he then went on to point out a number of significant ways in which it differed from Royle’s pika 0. Corbet (1978) tentatively assigned (Mitchell and Punzo 1975) to Royle’s pika 0. 

and to the Moupin pika 0. thibetana, whereas Ellerman and Morrison-Scott (1951) placed nubrica in the steppe pika 0. 0. Mitchell and Punzo 1975 and 

0. thibetana Zheng 1979 were then combined as 0. 

thibetana by Feng, Cai and Zheng (1986). Mitchell (1978) had compared with five other species from Nepal, but not to thibetana or nubrica. 

In addition to the original type series of nubrica (four specimens), there are four additional specimens in the BMNH, one in the FMNH and two in the NMNH, all from Kashmir; four additional specimens from the Kashmir border region are in the AMNH. The holotype and two additional specimens of are in the Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto (ROM). One specimen identifiable as 0. 

ihasaensis ( = from Nepal, is also in the FMNH. Finally, three specimens of Zhasaensis from the type locality have been examined. All of these specimens agree in size, 

40 pelage color and skull characters, being much paler than the Moupin pika 0. thibetana and more nearly resembling the black-lipped pika 0. in winter pelage. Degree of saturation of pelage color appears (in the few specimens available) to vary clinally from west to east. Specimens from Kashmir (0. n. nubrica) are palest, while those from northern Nepal and the vicinity of Lhasa (0. n. Zhasaensis) have a somewhat darker, richer sandy dorsal pelage, with more black guard hairs intermixed. The nearest populations of the Moupin pika 0. thibetana are 0. t. on the more temperate moist southern slope of the Himalayas and 0. 

nangqenica from the forested headwaters of the great rivers (Mekong, etc.) that originate on the southeast corner of the Tibetan Plateau. The nubra pika 0. differs from the Moupin pika thibetana (as Feng and Kao 1974 recognized in their description of lhasaensis) “in being sandy brownish above and paler gray below, with a distinct color extend-ing down along the midline of the belly,” whereas subspecies of thibetana are “dull brown or rufous brown” dorsally. The feet of nubrica are brownish gray instead of dull brown (Feng and Kao 1974). In addition, has a distinct light patch on the outer surface of the ear that is lacking in thibetana and external and cranial measurements average larger than adja-cent populations of thibetana. 

Given the scarcity of available specimens, it is possible that further collecting will demonstrate an intergradation between 

0. lhasaensis and 0. t. nangqenica. However, based on existing data, we recognize them as distinct species. 

Status and Summary 

Unknown. 

Description 

The skull is fairly flat, larger than the Moupin pika but smaller than Royle’s pika, relatively narrow, but with a fairly broad interorbital and short rostrum. Palatal foramina are widely expanded posteriorly, whereas the bullae are relatively small and narrow. 

Distribution 

From the limited data available, the nubra pika seems to be a trans-Himalayan species with a narrow range stretching along the Qinghai-Xizang (Tibetan) Plateau from Ladak on the west to eastern Xizang on the east. (See Fig. 3.5). 

Habitat 

According to the collectors of the type series, the nubra pika inhabits “thick jungle or scrub,” by which they presumably mean subalpine or alpine shrubs, implying that this is a burrowing, rather than a talus-dwelling species. The 

eared pika 0. macrotis, a talus inhabitant, was also reported to occur in the same area. In Nepal, the subspecies 0. nubrica Zhasaensis lives in alpine steppe habitat and also seems to be a burrowing form (Mitchell 1978). 

Ecology, Behavior 

Unknown. 

and Reproduction 

Pika 

(Gray 1867) Subspecies: Ochotona pallasi Thomas 1912b; 

pallasi pallasi (Gray 1867) (includes opaca); Ochotona pallasi Thomas Ochotona pallasi sunidica Ma, Lin and Li 1980 

Taxonomy 

This is a generally accepted called in much of the older literature (Ognev 1940, Vinogradov and Argyropulo 1941, Argyropulo 1948, Gureev 1964). Recent treatments now use the senior being the junior synonym of the species epithet, but a valid subspecies name (Corbet 1978, Honacki, and Koeppl 1980, Sludski et al. 1980, Sokolov and Orlov 1980, Weston 1982, Feng and Zheng 1985). Three subspecies are currently widely recognized: 0. p. pallasi in northeastern Kazakhstan, Soviet Union; 0. p. 

in Mongolia, southwestern Tuva ASSR, Soviet Union and Xinjiang, China, along the Mongolian border; and 0. p. 

in the Karlik Shan north of Xinjiang, China and perhaps southern Mongolia. The subspecies sunidica has only recently been described and is poorly known. The form 

sushkini, formerly placed in pika 0. pallasi, is here referred to the pika 0. (see that account). The 

t biological d in ecology and behavior be-tween the forms pallasi and (see below) suggest the possibility that they may be specifically distinct. 

Status and Summary 

0. p. is poorly known and only the type series (six specimens) is known to exist. There have been no records from its Karlik Shan locality (Xinjiang, China) for over half a century. The range of the subspecies in the Tsagaan Bogd Uul (Mountains) (Mongolian People’s Republic) is enigmatic. Its population there has steadily declined over the past 4,500 years (Kniazev, Savinetski and Sokolovskaya 1986, Kniazev and Savinetski 1988). The percentage of pika bones to that of all small mammals was 23.6% between 3,000 and 4,500 years ago, 7.8% between 2,000 and 3,000 years ago, 7.3% between 1,500 and 2,000 years ago, and only 0.4% for the period encompassing the past 200 years. Kniazev, Savinetski and Sokolovskaya (1986) and Kniazev and Savinetski (1988) feel that global drying of climate in the southern over the past 200 years may be responsible for this downward trend in the representation of pikas in the fauna. has not been collected in the Tsagaan Bogd Uul in historical time, although in 1979 K.A. Rogovin (personal communication) heard pikas and located fresh scats there. 0. p. also may be found currently in the Bogd Uul (MPR). 

nikov (1951) apparently caught one animal there in 1943 and his personal diary (Anna Bannikova, personal 

tion) states that there was a reasonable population at the top of the mountains. In summer 1988 Kh. Suhbat (personal communication) visited this place, but did not find any pikas. Scientists who work at the Great Biosphere Reserve have never recorded pikas in either the Bogd Uul or in 

41 the Tsagaan Bogd Uul throughout their work. In summary, 

lives in isolated mountains in the Desert and, due to changes in climate, small population size, isolation and potential habitat degradation, should be considered as seri-ously endangered. 

0. p. sunidica is similarly isolated from the main distribu-tion of the species and may also be at risk. A status survey is needed to evaluate this. The isolated population of 0. p. from the Choyr Mountains (southeast of Ulaanbaatar, MPR; 

is currently very depressed and should be considered threat-ened. Similarly, other populations have declined over the centuries, especially those near its southern distributional boundary et. al. 1989). On the Dzhinst-Ula Ridge pikas comprised 38% of the bones of the prey of owls eleven centuries ago. This figure declined to 28% ten centuries ago and 21% six centuries ago. Only one migrating juvenile was seen at this site in 1980 (K. A. Rogovin, personal communica-tion) and none live there now (Denisman et. al. 1989). The range of pallasi also seems to have decreased. This form has disappeared from the Dzhambul Mountains and only isolated populations now exist in the Kyzkach Mountains and in the hills east of the Aktogai railroad station. These isolated populations are very small and vulnerable (Sludski et al. 1980). On the other hand, 0. p. has been considered a pest species in southwestern Tuva ASSR, USSR, because it is considered a focus for plague (Krylova 1976, Shilova et 

1977). Control of 0. p. in this region has now ceased (MA. Erbajeva, personal communication). 0. p. is heavily controlled in China near the border of Mongolia (Fan, personal communication). 

was also trapped for the fur industry in Kazakh SSR. All pika species and some gerbils Rhombomys opimus, Meriones tamareiscinus have the same common name in Russian (“pishchukha”), thus it is difficult to examine closely the numbers of Ochotona trapped. In some years a few thousand small pishchukhas were trapped in the Karaganda region (where 0. pallasi and 0. are common), but only 300-350 were actually pikas (Sludski et al. 1980). 

Description 

This is a fairly large pika, similar in size to the alpine pika. In summer the dorsal pelage of pika is uniformly sandy buff in color; the ventral surface is marked by only the faintest suggestion of a wash. In winter the head and body are pale gray, while the hindquarters are slightly brighter with a buffy tint. The alpine pika is darker in both summer and winter pelage. The toe pads are bare and black in stark contrast to the heavily furred feet of the sympatric Daurian pika 0. daurica. The skull is moderately large and somewhat arched. The interorbital width is less than in the alpine pika and the tympanic bullae are comparatively large. There are no fenestrae present in the frontals and the incisive and anterior palatine foramina are completely separated. The diploid chromosome number is 38, compared to 40 in northern pika and 42 in alpine pika (Vorontsov and Ivanitskaya 1973). 

Distribution 

Distributed discontinuously throughout the Desert re-gion from Kazakh SSR, Tuva ASSR, Soviet Union; Mongo-lian People’s Republic; western Xinjiang, Nei Monggol, China. The range of pika is broken by more disjunc-tions than are seen in other species of burrowing pikas. (See Fig. 3.6). 

Habitat 

Habitat preference is intermediate between burrowing and talus-dwelling pikas; it may inhabit either open desert or rocky areas. pikas typically burrow in steep cliff faces (Formozov 1929, Allen 1938, Ognev 1940, Vinogradov and Argyropulo 1941, Smirnov 1986, Zevegmid 1975, Eshchelkin 1978, Sludski et al. 1980, Wang and Yang 1983, Ma 

et al. 1987). There are distinct habitat differences between the various subspecies: almost all populations of 0. p. live in rocky situations, whereas 0. p. usually occupies arid steppe environments where it may either burrow or live in rocks (Formozov 1985). 0. p. sunidica dwells in cracks of rocks (Ma, Lin and Li 1980). 

Ecology 

Population densities of 0. p. pallasi may vary greatly and reach levels as high as (Smirnov 19’74). Zevegmid 

commenting on the number of families of 0. 

found per ha, also concluded that this subspecies may attain high densities. Zevegmid (1975) related an instance in which a population high of ground squirrels 

cus so overgrazed an area that 0. p. numbers were significantly reduced. In addition, throughout its range popu-lations of pika are frequently isolated from one an-other, even when separated by suitable habitat. In these instances local populations are subject to frequent extinction; these areas are rarely due to their poor vagility (Ognev 1940). 

pikas appear to be relatively long-lived. Krylova (1973) determined that natural mortality in 0. p. was about 50% per year and that maximum longevity was four years. Two-year-old animals comprised 20% of the summer population. Shubin (1966) stated that young 0. p. pallasi are more numerous than those in steppe pika 0. popula-tions. Smirnov (1986) determined that when pikas lives in close proximity to steppe pikas 0. or Daurian pikas (with little overlap, hence competition for resources, occurs because of the difference in habitats selected by these species. 

0. p. make relatively large 

high) on the ground over burrow entrances (Smirnov 1974). Typically the caches of 0. p. pallasi are stored under rocks, however. Wang and Yang (1983) indicate that 0. p. also constructs a large 

constructs burrows with many entrances; in one locality the average number of entrances was 28, with a maximum of 80 (Kholodova 1975). Many of these holes are 42 associated with the abandoned burrows of sibirica 

(Demin 1962). In southwestern Tuva, certain plants  

> bia

and some reach high abundance and flower only above pika burrows. grows only above the burrows of pikas (Kholodova 1975). 

> Behavior

There are significant differences in the behavior of 0. p.  

> pallasi

and 0. The home of males of  

> pallasi

includes the home ranges of up to six females during the summer. The size of the home range of males =

is six times larger than that of females =

(Proskurina, Formozov and Derviz 1985). The social organi-zation of 0. that of 0. p. p. during the breeding season is similar to  

> pallasi

(Rylnikov, personal communication) and the mating system appears to be primarily polygynous (Formozov 1985). Most individuals remain close to their burrows (Smirnov 1974). Males may demonstrate high levels of intrasexual aggression, even though their burrows can be separated by only three to four metres (Smirnov 1974; Sludski  

> et al.

1980; Proskurina, Formozov and Derviz 1985). When individuals trespass onto the territories of neighbors they may be killed by bites inflicted by the occupant. Typical aggressive interactions involve chases and boxing. Boxing occurs for as long as three to fifteen seconds per bout (Okunev and Zonov 1980). In contrast, the duration of bouts of boxing in other forms (0. p. pallasi, Daurian pika, steppe pika, northern pika) is often approximately one second (just a short push). Aggres-sive relationships are ten times more frequent in 0. p. 

than in 0. p. pallasi (Formozov and Proskurina 1980). Males and females that share home ranges rarely exhibit aggression and juveniles are tolerated in the burrows of adults even if there is another brood (0. p. pallasi; Smirnov 1974). Young may be chased out of their natal burrow system when they become sexually mature. This behavior is coincident with 

> 43

the division into separate territories of males and females following the breeding season (0. p. For example, mean area of territories in August is In January, the territory size varies from (when the snow cover is from 

deep) to (when the snow is from deep) (Okunev and Zonov 1980). Home ranges of 0. p. 

decrease when population density increases (Okunev and Zonov 1980). A male 0. p. pallasi regularly cruises throughout its home range. In meetings with females, they utter soft quiet trills. Males and females avoid direct contact. The male and female have separate core areas of their respective home ranges and separate stores of food. The male protects its core area from females, but that of females may be visited by males, and males frequently steal from the stores of females (Formozov and Proskurina 1980). The vocalizations of 0. p. pallasi and 0. p. differ greatly. The most important difference is that pallasi has  

> a

song or long call but 0. does not. This long call is a fast trill uttered by both males and females. Alarm calls of these subspecies also vary in their dynamic spectrum of 

(Formozov and Proskurina 1980). Both subspecies mark home ranges by rubbing the neck gland on the corners of stones and urinating on piles of their hard pellets. 0. p. constructs little pyramids from sticky fecal pellets near the lateral entrance to their burrows, their territory borders and places of frequent conflict. 0. pallasi 

marks its entire home range. In late summer and fall, collects stones and puts them in piles. The mean weight of the stones is 45g 

Pikas close more of their burrow entrances with these stones before the onset of winter (Okunev and Zonov 1980). 

> Reproduction

The fecundity rate of pikas is high. Adult litter size in 0. p. ranges from 1-12 (Lazarev to l-10 = 6.5; Krylova 1974). In 0. p. pallasi, litter size ranges from = 7.5 (Shubin to = 8 (range 2-13; Sludski et al. 1980). 

Several litters are produced per year with a post-partum estrus (both subspecies; Ognev 1940, Krylova 1974, Sludski et  

> 1980).

In pallasi, all adult females breed at least twice, but the occurrence of third litters is variable (Sludski et al. 

1980). At least some juveniles born in first litters become sexually mature and reproduce in their summer of birth, however their litters are smaller than those of adults (range 3-7, = 5) (Shubin Krylova 1974; Sludski et al. 1980). 

Gestation is approximately 25 days (Smirnov 1972, Wang and Yang 1983). The breeding season may last from April to August (Ma et al. 1987). 0. p. breed from early April until May or June (Sludski et al. 1980).     

> American Pika
> (Richardson 1828) Subspecies: Ochotona princeps albata 1912a;
> princeps

Durrant and Lee 1955; Ochotona 

Howell 1924; Ochotona princeps brunnescens 

Howell 1919; Ochotona princeps cinnamomea Allen 1905;  

> Ochotonaprinceps clamosa

Hall and 1938; Ochotona princeps Bangs 1899; Ochotona princeps 

Osgood 1913; Ochotona princeps Allen 1912;  

> princeps

Howell 1919; Ochotona princeps  

> pes

Howell 1919; Ochotona princeps Howell 1924;  

> Ochotona princeps

Bore11 1931; Ochotona princeps incana Howell 1919; Ochotona jewetti Howell 1919;  

> Ochotona princeps lasalensis

Durrant and Lee 1955;  

> lemhi

Howell 1919; Ochotona littoralis  

> 1955; Ochotona princeps lutenscens

Howell 1919;  

> Ochotona princeps

Gardner 1950; Ochotona princeps 

and Storer 1916; nevadensis 

Howell 1919; Ochotona princeps Bailey 1913;  

> Ochotona princeps

Long 1965; Ochotona princeps princeps (Richardson 1828); Ochotona princeps  

> 1955; Ochotona princeps

Bangs 1899;  

> princeps schisticeps

(Merriam 1889); Ochotona princeps  

> septentrionalis

and 1946; Ochotona princeps Habitat of American pika on mine at Bodie, California (Photo by Andrew Smith) 

and the nasals are widest anteriorly. 

Distribution tailings 

The American pika is distributed discontinuously in moun-tainous areas throughout western North America (British Columbia, Alberta, Canada; Washington, Oregon, Nevada, California, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, Utah, Colorado, New Mexico, United States). In the northern part of its range this species is found at elevations ranging from sea level to 

however to the south the lower elevational limit becomes progressively higher. Near the southern limits of its distribu-tional range it is uncommon to find pikas at elevations lower than (Grinnell 1917, Smith 1974a). (See Fig. 3.3). 

Habitat 

Throughout its range the American pika is habitat specific to talus or piles of broken rock fringed by suitable vegetation. The talus habitat occupied by pikas is often distributed patchily, leading to an island-like population structure (Smith 

1980). 

Ecology 

Adults are individually territorial and the sex-ratio of adults is near unity in all studies of fully marked populations (Smith 1981b). Average territory sizes of males and females are similar. Territory size varies seasonally, being significantly larger in early than in late summer (Smith and Ivins 1984). Size of territories averages about 55% of home range size (Smith and Ivins 19861987). In most studies density approxi-mates six to ten animals per ha. Spacing of males and females on talus is non-random. Adjacent home ranges tend to be occupied by individuals of the opposite sex and these home ranges are usually occupied sequentially by an animal of the same sex as the previous occupant. Overlap of home ranges is greater and nearest-neighbor distances are less between paired adults than between nearest-neighbors of the opposite sex (Smith and Ivins 1984). Population size is remarkably stable from year to year (A.T. Smith 1978, Southwick et al. 

1986). Survivorship is relatively high for a small mammal. Individuals may live to an age of seven years and average annual mortality rate is 3746% (Millar and Zwickel 

A.T. Smith 1978). Extinction of small populations of pikas on isolated patches of habitat is inversely related to patch size. Coloniza-tion of vacant patches is not impeded by the vagility of pikas at high elevations where daytime the time of dispersal. However, temperatures are at sites near the 

tional limits of the geographic range of pikas influenced by warm temperatures, resulting low during 

vagili ty in relati may be vely re-stricted colonization success. Ultimately, as probability of colonization decreases at low elevations, colonization is un-able to offset extinction and the distributional limit of the range of the American pika is stabilized (Smith 

1980). The American pika is a generalized herbivore and many studies throughout the geographic range of the species indi-cate the following patterns: differences in species corn of plants harvested are frequent and reflect local variation in the composition of plant communities; 

> Habitat of the American pika, Sierra Nevada, (Photo by Andrew Smith) California

45 at any one locality some plants are preferred over others and some are not harvested at all; preferred plants are commonly harvested in a definite se-quence that normally corresponds to their seasonal 

(Broadbooks 1965, Millar and Zwickel 

Smith Conner Huntly, Smith and Ivins 1986, Huntly 1987). Preferred plants have a significantly higher caloric, pro-tein, lipid and water content than non-preferred plants. Some plants may be ignored due to presence of toxic chemicals (Millar and Smith West 1981). Ameri-can pikas store caches of food during summer in that can serve as a source of food overwinter. The amount of vegetation stored in may vary with sex (males store more than females), age (adults more than juveniles), the amount of forage available on nearby meadows (more luxuri-ant meadows yield larger haypiles) and with the distance vegetation has to be transported (the greater the distance, the smaller the haypile). Most are constructed near the talus-meadow interface and these sites appear to be tradi-tional (Millar and Zwickel Smith 1974a). 

Behavior 

The primary mechanism with which American pikas defend their territories is aggression (chases and fights between conspecifics) (Kawamichi 1976, Svendson 1979, Smith 

Smith and Ivins 1984). Aggressive acts occur rarely (generally less than one act for every ten hours) and normally occur between animals of the same sex. The highest frequency of aggressive acts occurs when unfamiliar animals, for example a resident and an immigrant, come into contact. Individuals frequently intrude on the territories of neighbors, but they usually do so when the resident is inactive (Smith and Ivins 1986). Social cohesion among nearest-neighbor pikas of the opposite sex is maintained by exhibiting social tolerance and engaging in vocal duets of short calls. The paired spatial con-figuration, its persistence in time and the interplay of aggres-sion and social tolerance leads to the classification of the mating system of the American pika as being facultatively monogamous (Smith and Ivins 1984). Juveniles are born into the relatively permanent and static social organization of territory holders. The probability of a juvenile living to adult age is directly contingent on its finding a vacant territory to occupy; the appearance of a vacancy is infrequent and unpredictable in time and space. Juveniles face high rates of aggression by unfamiliar adults should they disperse. Also, the likelihood of successful dispersal across non-talus habitat is low. As a result, most young are 

There is no sex bias to dispersal (Smith 1987, Smith and Ivins 1983b). One apparent result of this philopatric settle-ment pattern is a highly inbred population structure and very low levels of genetic heterozygosity within populations (Glover et al, 1977, Tolliver et al. 1985). The American pika has two frequently used and character-istic vocalizations: the short call and the long call or song (Smith and Ivins 1984, Conner 1985a). The short call varies geographically, but is uniform within populations (although individuals may be recognized on the basis of their distinctive calls) (Somers 1973, Conner 1982, Short calls are given in two contexts: as an alarm call to potential preda-tors and to discourage conspecifics from intruding on one’s territory. Alarm calls are generally repetitive short calls. Short calls are given by both sexes and all ages, whereas long calls are uttered by adult males primarily during the breeding season (Conner Ivins and Smith 1983). They also communicate by depositing scent marks onto rocks from the enlarged apocrine gland complex found on their cheeks. Pikas are able to discriminate among individuals by the odors emitted from these scent marks. There appears to be a dual function to this behavior: territory maintenance and/or advertisement; 

sexual advertisement leading to mating (Svendson 1979, Meaney 

Reproduction 

Each resident adult female is reproductively equivalent to all others. In the American pika females first reproduce as year-lings and all females initiate two litters per year. Generally only the first litter is successfully weaned, although if it fails the second breeding attempt may be successful. Litter size does not vary with age, habitat productivity, or between first and second litters. There is only slight variability in litter size within a locality. Average litter size among sites also varies little = 2.3-3.7) and may be explained on the basis of spatial and temporal age-specific mortality. Both gestation and time to weaning are approximately 30 days. Males are considered reproductively active when their testes length is greater than 

(Millar 1974; Smith 1978, Smith and Ivins 

Steppe or Little Pika 

Ochotona pusilla 

Subspecies: Ochotona pusilla Argyropulo 1932; 

Ochotona pusilla pusilla 1768) 

Taxonomy 

This species has generated relatively little systematic confu-sion (Argyropulo 1948, Gureev 1964, Corbet 1978, Honacki, 

and Koeppl1982, Weston 1982). Ellerman and Mor-rison-Scott (1951) included the forms nubrica, and 

in 0. pusilla. Here and are treated as independent species and as a subspecies of 0. 

betana (see those accounts). 

Status and Summary 

The range of the steppe pika has contracted significantly in historical times and it it likely that this pattern has resulted from modification of its preferred steppe-shrub habitat. 

46 Ognev (1940) mentioned that “various d indicate that this species becomes constantly rarer in the Trans-Volga and in western Siberia.” Recently some European populations of 0. 

pusilla were listed as “rare” in the Red Book of the Bashkir Autonomous Republic, Soviet Union (Kucherov 1987). Steppe pikas have been trapped for the fur trade, largely to make high quality felt. This activity apparently had no notice-able influence on their populations and has now ceased (Sludski et al. 1980). 

Description 

This is a small pika. In summer the dorsal pelage is a dark grayish brown with a touch of straw speckling on the back and flanks. The ventral coloration is a dull whitish gray. The winter coat is slightly paler in color compared to summer pelage. The small skull has a relatively flat profile. There are no fenestrae in the frontals and the tympanic bullae are proportionally large. The diploid chromosome number = 68 (Vorontsov and Ivanitskaya 1973). 

Distribution 

Steppe regions from the upper Volga River and southern Ural Mountains south and east to the border of China, RSFSR and Kazakh SSR, Soviet Union. Although the steppe pika has not been recorded in Xinjiang, China, by any Chinese zoologists (Wang and Yang 1983, Ma et al. Sludski et al. (1980) 

suggested that the species dwells on the south slope of Tarbagatai mountains in China. In the Quaternary and H 

Periods this species lived in the Crimea, the Ukraine western Europe (Ognev 1940, Argyropulo 1948). (See 

. .

the 

and Fig. 

Habitat 

This is a characteristic burrowing steppe-dwelling pika (Ognev 1940, Vinogradov and Argyropulo 1941, Dubrovsky 1963, Gureev 1964, Pakizh 1969, Smirnov 1974, Sludski et al. 

1980). The steppe pika is found primarily in moist soil which is verdant with thick grass and bushes; where it occurs in arid or desert steppes it is generally found in wet situations (Ognev 1940, Dubrovsky 1963, Smirnov 1974). 

Ecology 

In general the steppe pika appears to live socially in burrows and to tolerate high densities if conditions permit (Smirnov 1974). Smirnov (1974) determined that the minimum distance between burrows was as little as two to four metres. Various authors note that there are major spatial and temporal changes in population density of the steppe pika. Shubin (1966) determined that the density of pikas in one area ranged from in April to in June of one year, but crashed to in April and in June of the following year. Density may vary with habitat quality, with high densities of up to (Dubrovsky 1963; Pakizh 1969). Smirnov (1986) determined that the steppe pika did not overlap or compete with pika 0. in areas in which they both occurred, due to differences in their preferred habitats. Steppe pikas construct (Ognev 1940). 

Behavior 

This is an unusual pika in that it is frequently nocturnal. Its vocalizations are usually heard at late dusk and through the night. The social organization of the steppe pika has been very poorly studied. Its nocturnal activity and reliance on 

habitat make direct observation, such as is possible with diurnal pikas in more open habitats, difficult. Apparently these pikas live in family groups composed of an adult pair and their young (Smirnov 1974, Dubrovsky although Vinogradov and Argyropulo (1941) and Shubin (1965) state that they live singly. Shubin (1965) relates that in spring the males live as nomads, very often singing from groups of bushes where holes or other signs of the presence of pikas can not be detected. In his study, females living separately as far as 800m from the next nearest pika became pregnant. Shubin (1965) supposes that the mating system is promiscuous (see also Sludski et al. 1980). This is a very vocal pika (Ognev 1940, Vinogradov and 

gyropulo 1941, Dubrovsky 1963). The long call or song is uttered by both males and females. The male’s song is a series of long trills of rich low sounds. It can be heard from a distance of two kilometers (Sludski et al. 1980). In captivity females utter songs in the absence of males. Females will often sing in response to the song of a conspecific female. In these cases the female that initiated singing will often chase the responding female (Smirin and Formozov, unpublished data). The song of females acts to attract males in the field (Smirnov, Snarski and Chetverikova 1987). 

Reproduction 

Litter size ranges from one to thirteen (6-12, = 8.7, Ognev 1940; 3-13, = 8.5, Shubin 1965; 3-13, = 8.9, Sludski et al. 

1980; l-11, = 5.8, Smirnov 1982). Shubin (1965) indicates that litter size also varies with age (young of the year have smaller litters than adults) and season of reproduction. Adults produce three to five litters per season, whereas young of the year have one to three (Shubin 1965, Smirnov 1982). Matura-tion of juvenile females takes four to five weeks, while males mature as yearlings (Shubin 1965). 

Royle’s Pika 

Ochotona (Ogilby 1839) Subspecies: Ochotona nepalensis Hodgson 1841; 

roylei roylei (Ogilby 1839) (includes angdawai, mitchelli); Ochotona roylei Bonhote 1904 

Taxonomy 

Several authors include the large-eared pika 0. macrotis in Royle’s pika 0. roylei (Argyropulo 1948, Gureev 1964, Corbet 1978). Here these forms are considered separate based on the analyses of Thomas and Ellerman and 

47 son-Scott Honacki, and Koeppl 

Weston Feng and Zheng Feng, Cai and Zheng 

our own studies, as well as the ecological investiga-tions of Abe Kawamichi (1971a) and Mitchell (1978, 1981) who observed the two species in their area of sympatry. In addition, there has been considerable confusion as to which subspecific forms to include in 0. roylei. The form 

was included in 0. thibetana by Corbet (1978). We consider nubrica a distinct species on the basis of extensive comparisons of museum specimens and on zoogeographic grounds (see that account). Corbet (1978) placed the form 

in 0. roylei, but here it is assigned to its own species based on the analyses of Feng and Zheng Feng, Cai and Zheng (1986) and our own study. The form 0. 

Mitchell and Punzo 1975 was also assigned to 0. roylei by Corbet but we have accorded this form subspecific status (as a synonym of Zhasaensis) under 0. nubrica. 

The species described as 0. angdawai (Biswas and 

ria 1955) and 0. (Agrawal and Chakraborty 1971) were synonymised with Royle’s pika 0. roylei by Corbet (1978). In addition, Mitchell (1981) stated that angdawai and 

“are little more than color phases of 0. roylei;” 

differs slightly in coloration from typical roylei in that its fur is more slaty. Here we include both names as synonyms of 0. roylei. Another recently described species, the Hima-layan pika 0. (Feng was also synonymised with 0. roylei by Corbet Honacki, and Koeppl (1978) and Weston (1982). However here it is treated sepa-rately following its original description (Feng and Zheng 1985 and Feng, Cai and Zheng 1986; see that account). The named forms and chinensis have sometimes been assigned to 

roylei, but on the basis of study of both holotypes, we conclude that they belong within the large-eared pika 0. macrotis (see 

account of macrotis). On the other hand, and 

are clearly races of Royle’s pika 0. Gureev (1964) gave 

full species status and listed angdawai as a syno-nym. 

Status and Summary 

There are currently no threats to the distribution or abun-dance of Royle’s pika throughout its range. 

Description 

During summer the head, shoulders and fore part of the body are bright chestnut colored, becoming more vinaceous on the throat. The remainder of the dorsal surface is dark grayish rufous. Ventrally, the coloration ranges from white to 

white to dark gray. The winter coat is similar, but may show only traces of, or lack, rufous coloration. In the field the pelage of Royle’s pika is very similar to that of the Afghan pika 0. 

(A. Simonetta, personal communication). There may be considerable variability among the various forms. 0. 

is generally dark. Ears are moderate in size and are sparsely haired. The skull is of moderate size and only slightly arched, less so than in the large-eared pika. The rostrum is short and are relatively small. Frontal fenestrae are present in juveniles, but this condition tends to disappear in adults, in contrast to the large-eared pika. Royle’s pikas have two pairs of mammae (Mitchell 1978). Distinguishing characteristics between Royle’s pikas and large-eared pikas are given in the account on the latter. 

Distribution 

Along the Himalayan from Pakistan, through Kashmir, northwestern India, Nepal and adjacent Xizang, China. Its occurrence in the mountains of western China is problemati-cal; records from there probably refer to 0. macrotis 

sis. (See Fig. 3.7). 

Habitat 

Royle’s pikas are characteristically associated with broken slopes or talus (Kawamichi 1968, Abe 1971, Roberts 1977, Mitchell 1978, 1981, Feng, Cai and Zheng 1986). This species generally lives at lower elevations than the large-eared pika, thus occurring in more situations such as rhodo-dendron, deodar or spruce forests. Royle’s pika may inhabit the rock wall huts of local people throughout its range 

michi 1968, Abe 1971, Mitchell 1978). 

Ecology 

Densities reached in Royle’s pika populations are low and characteristic of other talus-dwelling pikas. They may attain densities of (recalculated from Kawamichi 1968). The caching of food is weakly developed in this species, although they apparently are more likely to construct 

than the large-eared pika (Kawamichi Roberts 1977, Mitchell 1978, 1981). 

Behavior 

Royle’s pikas appears to live in family groups composed of an adult male and female and their offspring (Kawamichi 

Mitchell 1981). During winter, in their area of sympatry, this species tends to be crepuscular whereas the large-eared pika is diurnally active (Kawamichi 1971a). In addition, Kawamichi (1971a) noted that during winter Royle’s pika was infrequently sur-face-active even during hours of dawn and dusk. Royle’s pikas vocalize frequently, but these calls may be so faint that they are almost impossible to hear more than a few meters from the caller (Abe 1971, Kawamichi 1971a). On the other hand, Roberts (1977) and Mitchell (1978) describe the call of this species as being a high-pitched piercing whistle, which is louder than the vocalizations of the Afghan pika. A variety of call types may be uttered by Royle’s pikas, but their function has not been analyzed (Abe 1971, Kawamichi 

Reproduction 

The fecundity rate is low. Litter size averages three (range 

5) (Abe 1971, Mitchell The breeding season may extend from late spring until late summer and one or two litters may be produced during this time (Roberts 1977, Mitchell 1978, 1981). Apparently animals first become repro-ductively active as yearlings. 48 Afghan Pika 

Ochotona mfescens (Gray 1842) Subspecies: Ochotona Thomas 1911a; 

mfescens mfescens (Gray 1842) (includes seiana); 

shukurovi Heptner 1961; Ochotona rufescens vizier Thomas 1911a; Ochotona rufescens vultuma Thomas 1920 

Taxonomy 

The only controversies concerning the Afghan pika 0. 

are whether or not the form (from Baluchistan) is a valid subspecies, and whether the form seiana (Thomas 1922) should be assigned to this species (see account of the black-lipped pika 0. cunoniae). The incisive and palatal 

ramina in the holotype of are distinct from each other, whereas these foramina are usually confluent in the other subspecies (Ellerman and Morrison-Scott 1951). There is, however, considerable variation in the shape of the margins of the confluent foramina in rufescens. The single specimen from which was described appears to be an aberrant individual and the name should probably be considered asynonym of rufescens, as is seiana. Twelve other specimens from Baluchistan (but not the type locality) are typical of the Afghan pika 0. rufescens in their confluent foramina. Of the several subspecies of 0. rufescens, the most distinc-tive is 0. r. regina of the Kopet Dagh Mountains along the border between Turkmenia (USSR) and Iran, which averages considerably larger than other populations. 

Status and Summary 

In parts of its range the Afghan pika is considered a pest species because of the serious damage it inflicts on apple and walnut trees, wheat and other agricultural crops (Lay 1967, Khokhar and Fulk 1976, Roberts 1977, Khan and Smythe 1980, Khan 1981, Mian 1986, Hussain and Brooks 1987, Mian, and 1987, Mian, and 1988, Mian 

et al. 1988). In high plateau country in central Baluchistan, many narrow mountain valleys have been converted into farming areas. In higher valleys, apple orchards have in-creased in popularity as a cash crop and acreage has increased yearly. During winter months, when native vegetation is lack-ing, pikas forage on the trunks and branches of apple trees, sometimes debarking trees from above the ground. The amount of damage varies depending on the severity of the winter, but ranges from as little as 0.15% to 5.1% of trees killed. The proportion of trees partially damaged varies from 

1.5% to 47.1% Hussain and Brooks 1987). Because of these activities, the Afghan pika has been subject to control measures in Baluchistan. This species has also been used to some extent in the fur industry (Vinogradov and Argyropulo 1941). The race shukurovi, although isolated in the Great 

Mountains, appears not to be threatened; its density varies between years, but in some years it can be found everywhere in these mountains (Sapargeldyev 1987). How-ever, Sapargeldyev (1987) found a small isolated population of Afghan pikas on the Small Balkan Ridge, and it may well be endangered. The taxonomic status of this population is un-clear because it lies between the ranges of two races: 

shukurovi and 

The Afghan pika is the only pika which has been “domes-ticated” as a laboratory animal, in France by Puget (1973, 1976) and in Japan (various investigators). 

Description 

During summer the Afghan pika has a distinct cream-colored collar which is outlined anteriorly and posteriorly with russet. The surface of the back and sides is gray-brown. The flanks and underparts are gray to dirty gray-white, commonly with a yellowish tinge. In winter the pelage is thick and uniformly brown; at this time the collar is only faintly noticeable, if at all. There are four pairs of mammae. The skull is large and usually moderately arched, but the degree of arching is variable. The interorbital region is relatively narrow with well-developed lateral crests present on both sides of the interorbital area in adults. The tympanic bullae are moderately large. There are no fenestrae present in the frontals. The diploid chromosome number = 60 (Vorontsov and Ivanitskaya 1973, Kimura, Nakatsu and Kikuchi 1984). 

Distribution 

The Afghan pika has a relatively patchy distribution in the mountains of southern SSR, Soviet Union; Iran; Afghanistan; and Baluchistan, Pakistan. (See Fig. 3.2). 

Habitat 

The Afghan pika, like pika 0. can best be considered to occupy an intermediate habitat type between that of the obligatory talus-dwelling and steppe-dwelling pikas. It is most often found in rocky desert situations, al-though it may make extensive burrow systems in fields devoid of stones (Ognev 1940, Vinogradov and Argyropulo 1941, Lay 1967, Hassinger 1973, Puget 1973, 1976, Roberts 1977, Fulk and Khokhar 1980, Sapargeldyev 1987). The Afghan pika may also be found in juniper forests (Roberts 1977). It frequently constructs burrows in adobe houses and walls such that they appear “completely perforated . . . like sponges” (Ognev 1940). Sapargeldyev (1987) determined that this species occupied habitats where the plant cover was no more than they do not occur in areas of higher percentage cover by plants. 

E c o l o g y 

Population densities reached by the Afghan pika may be as high as 70 animals per ha. Density may change markedly from year to year depending on weather conditions (Puget 1973, Fulk and Khokhar 1980, Sapargeldyev 1987). In addition to eating a wide variety of commercial crops, Afghan pikas can subsist on a diversity of native plants such as thistles (Cousinia), Ephedra and Artemisia (Ognev 

1940, Lay 1967). Sapargeldyev (1987) lists 58 species of plants stored by this pika; the resulting weighed as much as 

49 five kilogrammes. They collect stores of food twice per year: in spring before the rich vegetation becomes desiccated; and in autumn when the vegetation is again revived by rain (Ognev 

1940, Roberts 1977). The most important predator of the Afghan pika in south-western Turkmenia is the levantine viper The density of the viper appears dependent on that of the pika (Danov 1985). 

Behavior 

The Afghan pika is diurnally active. Unlike other diurnal pika species that have two peaks of activity (in the morning and in the evening during summer), there is only one morning peak of activity, presumably because the afternoon/evening tem-peratures throughout its range are very high. The social organization of this pika is very labile and probably depends on when the annual summer drought oc-curs in any particular part of its range. In spring males live singly and their home ranges include those of several females (Ognev 1940, Sapargeldyev 1987). The first litter sometimes stays in the mother’s shelter along with the second litter (Ognev 1940, Fulk and Khokhar 1980, Ivanitski, personal communication). Adult females and their offspring confine most of their activities to an area about 30m in diameter. Within this area the usual dispersion is of individual juvenile home ranges that significantly overlap each other and those of their parents. With the coming of the drought, however, the situation changes radically. At that time every pika protects its own small territory centered on its burrow. Fulk and Khokhar (1980) reported that little to no aggres-sion is expressed among residents of a family burrow system. Roberts (1977) noted that when animals were housed in captivity, they preferred to huddle together and showed no intraspecific aggression. On the other hand, N.A. Formozov (unpublished data) has observed that play behavior is a basic element of juvenile activity. Juveniles frequently box with one another and the duration of these bouts of activity are similar to those of pika 0. 

Vocal communication is not well developed in the Afghan pika and its repertoire is very different from that of other species (Kawamichi 1981, Formozov, unpublished data). The Afghan pika has no song (long call). It utters only a very weak melodious squeak and a peculiar prolonged cry (whistle) when alarmed. These vocalizations can only be heard for a very short distance (Ognev 1940, Roberts 1977). It is extremely rare for this species to use the alarm call in response to a terrestrial predator, although they do utter it regularly when avian predators or other large birds are de-tected (N.A. Formozov, unpublished data). Afghan pikas also can signify danger by drumming rapidly on the ground with their hind feet (Roberts 1977). Neck glands are used to mark their territory by rubbing it against sticks and corners of stones. Two animals may do this simultaneously when they are in close proximity 

Formozov, unpublished data). 

Reproduction 

The reproductive rate is high. Average litter size ranges from 5.2 (Fulk and Khokhar 1980) to 6.0 (Puget 1973 [captive animals], Roberts 1977) to 7.1 (Sapargeldyev 1987). Litters as large as ten or eleven have been reported (Fulk and Khokhar 1980, Sapargeldyev 1987). The breeding season may extend from mid-March to late September in some areas; individual females may produce as many as five litters during this time. In addition, young mature and breed in their summer of birth (Puget 1973, Fulk and Khokhar 1980). 

Turkestan Red Pika 

Ochotona (Severtzov 1873) Taxonomy 

This monotypic species has generated little taxonomic confu-sion (Gureev 1964, Corbet 1978, Honacki, and Koeppl 1982, Weston 1982). Ellerman and Morrison-Scott (1951) included the forms eythrotis, and 

brookei in the Turkestan red pika 0. Here these forms are treated separately from as 0. eythrotis (including 

and 0. (including brookei), on the basis of coloration, skull morphology and zoogeography (Ognev 

Gureev 1964, Weston 1982, Feng and Zheng 1985, Feng, Cai and Zheng 1986). 

Status and Summary 

This species is fairly rare in collections. However, there are currently no known threats to the distribution or abundance of the Turkestan red pika throughout its range. 

Description 

The summer pelage of the Turkestan red pika is rich 

reddish dorsally with a more yellow cinnamon-buff tinge on the flanks. There is a broad yellowish white collar behind the ears and a dull rust-red transverse stripe on the chest. The ventral surface is whitish with a rusty tinge. In winter the coat is ash-gray with blackish-brown speckling. The skull is large and moderately arched with a broad and rather flat interorbi-tal space. Fenestrae are not usually present in the frontals, except in Kirgizia and Tadzhikistan. The diploid chromosome number is 62 (Vorontsov and Ivanitskaya 1973). 

Distribution 

Ranges of the Tien Shan, Pamir, Kirgiz (= Alexander the Great), Gissar and other systems in Uzbek SSR, Tadzhik SSR, Kirgiz SSR and Kazakh SSR, Soviet Union; perhaps northern Afghanistan and eastern Xinjiang, China. Although Erbajeva (1988) stated that the Turkestan red pika is not known outside the USSR, both (1890) and Gureev (1964) specified that red pikas occurred in the western Kunlun and Nan Shan Mountains, where the red-eared pika 0. 

eythrotis is known. However, according to modern records, the range of this species is completely allopatric to that of the 

50 Talus habitat of Turkestan red pika in the Mountains, Tadzhikistan (Photo by Andrew Smith) Pamir 

red-eared pika. One of the most important characteristics of the distribution of the Turkestan red pika is its extremely sporadic occurrence throughout its range. Within the Soviet Union it is only common in the vicinity of Great 

Lake, Kazakh SSR and Iskander-Ku1 Lake, Tadzhik SSR. (See Fig. 3.5). 

Habitat 

Occupies and talus at moderate elevations in the moun-tains of Turkestan; these pikas normally do not occur at elevations higher than even when talus habitat is available (Ognev 1940, Bernstein 1963, Sludski et al. 1980). 

The preferred talus habitat of the Turkestan red pika is very large stones; it chooses only the largest of these rocks for its shelter. 

Ecology 

The Turkestan red pika lives in family territories normally composed of an adult pair and, during the reproductive sea-son, their offspring. Population density is low, normally 12-20 animals per ha families/ha) (Bernstein 1963, Sludski et al. 1980). The distance separating centers of family territo-ries is normally although they may be as close as  

> 30m

(Bernstein 1963). Population turnover, as determined by the percentage of yearlings in the population, was 65% per annum and longevity was three years (Bernstein and Klevezal 1965). Population levels tend to remain constant from year to year (Bernstein 1963). This species caches food in the talus in a manner similar to most other pikas. Unlike most other talus-dwelling pika spe-cies, the Turkestan red pika does not forage in the open meadow any farther than two metres from the talus edge (Paskhina and Formozov, unpublished data). They mainly feed on little bits of turf between the stones. As the distribu-tion of this vegetation on the talus is widely dispersed, home ranges are correspondingly large so that the pikas can find sufficient food. During winter, voles Clethrionomys frater and 

concentrate near and consume the food stores of pikas (Sludski et al. 1980). An important predator of the red pika is 19% of the scats of this species were found to contain fur of Turkestan red pikas (Sludski et al. 

> 1980).

Behavior 

Most social interactions are affiliative and occur within fami-lies. Young remain on their natal territory throughout much of the summer of their birth and feed on vegetation stored by their parents. Some, but apparently not all, juveniles 

winter with their parents (Bernstein 1963). Interactions be-tween partners are normally expressed as long boxing ses-sions. During autumn the male and female partners are rarely seen together, although they maintain their mutual home range. Although they are diurnal, activity is concentrated at dawn and dusk. The Turkestan red pika is very quiet, in contrast to most pika species; it is commonly called the “silent” pika (Bernstein 1963, Formozov and Paskhina, unpublished data). It has no 

no typical pika alarm call and couples with loud signals. In alarm situations, this do not species interact escapes under rocks and makes a chattering call similar to that of the northern pika 0. hyperborea and two subspecies of alpine pika 

0. scorodumovi and 0. a. Conspecifics react to this signal by becoming alert. When members of a pair meet, they make long chirping sounds (Formozov and 

hina, unpublished data). 

Reproduction 

The fecundity rate is low. Normally two litters averaging 4.2 young (range 2-6) are born during the spring to summer reproductive season. Young do not become reproductively active in their summer of birth (Bernstein 1964, Sludski et al. 

> 1980). 51

Moupin Pika 

Ochotona thibetana (Milne-Edwards 1871) Subspecies: Ochotona thibetana huangensis (Matschie 1908) (includes syrinx); Ochotona thibetana nangqenica Zheng, Liu and Pi 1980; Ochotona thibetana Anthony 1941; 

Ochotona thibetana sacraria Thomas 1923; Ochotona 

betana sikimatia Thomas 1922; Ochotona thibetana thibetana 

(Milne-Edwards 1871) (includes hodgsoni, zappeyi); 

thibetana xunhuaensis Shou and Feng 1984 

Taxonomy 

In many treatments the Moupin pika 0. thibetana has in-cluded the forms here assigned to the Gansu pika 0. 

(Allen 1938, Argyropulo 1948, Ellerman and Morrison-Scott 

1951, Gureev 1964, Corbet 1978; Honacki, and Koeppl 1982, Weston 1982). Although quite similar to 0. 

here thibetana is separated on the basis of its skull characteristics and the observation that intermediate forms are not found in the extensive zone of sympatry between the two species (Feng and Kao 1974, Feng and Zheng 1985). Compared with 0. thibetana has a longer skull and a wider zygomatic and interorbital width. Although Weston (1982) included 0. in thibetana, her morphometric analysis clearly shows the distinctiveness of the two forms. The forms described as 0. Mitchell and Punzo 1975 and 0. t. Zheng 1979 were combined as 0. t. by Feng, Cai and Zheng (1986). Here (sensu Feng, Cai and Zheng along with Zhasaensis, is combined with the nubra pika 0. nubrica (see that account). 0. Anthony was listed as a subspecies of the steppe pika 0. by Ellerman and Morrison-Scott 

but was included in the Moupin pika 0. thibetana by Corbet (1978) and Weston (1982). (It was not considered by Feng and Kao 1974.) Weston’s morphometric analysis dem-onstrates its close similarity to 0. thibetana. Follow-ing examination of the holotype (AMNH) and three addi-tional specimens from near the type locality in Burma, we agree they are assignable to the Moupin pika 0. thibetana. 

Forrest’s pika 0. Thomas 1923 was included in 0. 

thibetana by Gureev Feng and Kao Honacki, 

and Koeppl (1982) and Weston (1982). Here it is considered an independent species based on Feng and Zheng (1985) and our own study of the holotype (BMNH) and 16 additional specimens from Yunnan, Xizang, Burma, Assam, Bhutan and Sikkim. Most authorities synonymise 0. hodgsoni Bonhote 1904 and 0. zappeyi Thomas 1922 with 0. t. thibetana (Allen 1938, Ellerman and Morrison-Scott 1951, Weston 1982) and this listing is followed here. 0. Thomas was synonymised with 0. t. huangensis by Allen (1938) and fol-lowed by Ellerman and Morrison-Scott Gureev (1964) and Weston (1982). However, Gureev (1964) also listed 

angensis as a synonym of daurica (apparently a 

and this allocation was followed without comment by Gromov and Baranova (1981). We have examined the holotype of 0. 

(BMNH) and it is typical of 0. thibetana, as are ten other specimens from the type locality. They may represent a population isolated in the Tsing Ling Shan, where they are sympatric with 0. morosa. 0. t. was 

onymised with 0. t. thibetana by Allen Ellerman and Morrison-Scott (1951) and Weston but was listed as a separate subspecies by Feng and Kao (1974) and Feng and Zheng (1985). Our examination of the holotype from Emei Shan, Sichuan, China (BMNH), as well as a series of 13 

specimens from various localities in Yunnan assigned to this subspecies, leads us to agree that sacraria is correctly assigned to 0. thibetana and we provisionally retain the subspecies. Feng and Kao followed by Feng and Zheng 

placed sikimatia as a subspecies of the Gansu pika 0. 

apparently because Thomas (1922) in his original description, compared sikimatia to a subspecies of They did not themselves examine any specimens of We have examined the holotype (BMNH) and a series of 

additional specimens from Sikkim; all possessed the longer skull and wider zygomatic arch and interorbital region charac-teristic of the Moupin pika 0. thibetana rather than 0. 

We therefore assign sikimatia to the former species. Throughout a broad area of southern Qinghai and north-ern Sichuan, the Moupin pika 0. thibetana occurs in geo-graphic sympatry with the Gansu pika 0. 

Status and Summary 

The subspecies 0. t. may be endangered. R. K. Ghose (personal communication) has reported that there has been serious deterioration of its habitat in Sikkim, India. At the type locality human settlement, terraced cultiva-tion, firewood collection and road construction etc. has re-sulted in an almost complete eradication of the thickets of rhododendron which were the preferred habitat of sikimatia 

in this region. Other affected endangered species in this area are the Himalayan langur Presbytes schistaceus and red panda The subspecies 0. thibetana 

angensis may also be isolated in the Tsing Ling Shan, Shaanxi, China, and at risk due to habitat destruction. This is a fairly common pika throughout most of its geo-graphic range and other forms do not appear to be threat-ened; however we do not have accurate measurements on the consequences of deforestation throughout most of the range of the Moupin pika in southern China. 

Description 

The summer pelage is an overall dark russet-brown with some light speckling. The entire undersurface is tinged with ochraceous buff in most populations, but grayish in 0. 

huangensis, and the throat collar is nearly russet. The general effect of the dorsal surface of the winter coat is to dull brown. Distinguishing characteristics of the skull are given above. Although larger than this is also a fairly small pika (averaging a little more than 

Distribution 

## Southeastern Qinghai, southern Gansu, southern Shaanxi, western Sichuan, western Hubei, western Yunnan, southern 

52 Xizang, China; northern Burma; Bhutan; Sikkim, India. (See Fig. 3.8). 

Habitat 

A characteristic burrowing pika which occupies bam-boo and rhododendron forests at moderate elevations (as low as (Allen 1938) to high elevation subalpine forests. Zheng (1989) reported that the Moupin pika also occupies rocky areas under forest canopies at an elevation of 

Ecology and Behavior 

Unknown. 

Reproduction 

Litter size is from one to five (N = 7) (Feng and Kao 1974). A single specimen from Yulunshan Mountain (Yunnan Prov-ince, China) had two large embryos (Voronov 1963). Repro-duction continues from at least April to July (Feng and Kao 1974). 

Thomas’ Pika 

Ochotona Argyropulo 1948 Taxonomy 

This monotypic species differs from all other known 

and has not generated any systematic confusion 

pulo 1948, Gureev 1964, Corbet 1978, Honacki, and Koeppl1982, Weston 1982, Feng and Zheng 1985). Thomas’ pika 0. is best regarded as expressing in extreme form the narrowing of the skull that is seen in the Gansu pika 0. although the greatest skull length of the two species is similar the zygomatic width does not overlap 

masi, (Feng and Kao 1974). 0. is known to occur mainly in Qinghai and Gansu (one published record in northern Sichuan) where in many places it is 

with 0. in contrast, it is not known to occur with the Moupin pika 0. thibetana, although thibetana and 

themselves are broadly sympatric (see accounts of those spe-

The form described as 0. thibetana Bannikov 1960 was synonymised with 0. by Feng and Kao (1974); we have retained this assignment here. 

Status and Summary 

This is a rare species which has only been recorded from isolated mountains throughout its range. Its current popula-tion is unknown. The species may be in danger due to wide-spread control of other species considered to be “pest” verte-brates which occur throughout its range. 

Description 

The winter pelage of Thomas’ pika is mouse-gray. The skull is very narrow and the profile of the braincase is elliptical in shape (Argyropulo 1948, Gureev 1964, Feng and Zheng 1985). 

Distribution 

Isolated mountain ranges from Gansu, Qinghai and Sichuan, China (See Fig. 3.7). 

Habitat 

This is a burrowing pika and is found in meadow thickets and rhododendron, spp., Caragana jubata and Dasiphora (= 

scrub (Zheng 1989). It lives primarily between 3,400 and in elevation (Feng and Kao 1974). 

Ecology 

The ecology of Thomas’ pika is essentially unknown. It may live in small widely spaced family groups. It is a diurnally active species (Zheng 1989). 

Behavior and Reproduction 

Unknown. 

# Acknowledgement  

> We thank Joanne for her assistance in the translation of Russian and English materials.

References                                   

> Abdusalyamov, I.A. 1962. [Some data on the ecology and morphol-ogy of the large-eared cony, Ochotona Gray, in the Pamirs.] Izv. Akad. Nauk Tadzh. SSR Otd. Biol. Nauk
> Abe, H. 1971. Small mammals of central Nepal.
> Hokkaido Univ.,
> Agrawal, V.C. and Chakraborty, S. 1971. Notes on a collection of small mammals from Nepal, with the description of a new
> hare (Lagomorpha: Ochotonidae). Calcutta
> E., Hussain, I. and Brooks, J.E. 1987. Vertebrate pests of Pakistan. In: Inayatullah, C. (Ed.), Integrated pest management.
> Pakistan Agricultural Council, Islamabad. Pp. 332-348. Allen. G.M. 1937. Second preliminary report on the results of the second Dolan expedition to west China and Tibet: a new race of
> Ochotona. Nat. Sci. Phil.
> Allen, G.M. 1938. Themammals of China Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., New York. Allen, J.A. 1903. Report on the mammals collected in northeastern Siberia by the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, with itinerary and field notes, by N. G. Buxton. Bull. Mus. Nat. Hist. 19:101-184. Allen, J.A. 1905. Mammals from Beaver County, Utah.
> Brooklyn Inst. and Sci., Sci.
> Allen, J.A. 1912. A new pika from Colorado. Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist. 31: 103-104.
> Allen, J.A. and Andrews, R.C. 1913. Mammals collected in Korea.
> Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist.
> Anthony, H.E. 1941. Mammals collected by the Vemay-Cutting Burma Expedition. Field Nat. Hist. Series)

Argyropulo, A.I. 1932. [Data on the rodent fauna of central Asia. II. Pikas (Ochotona Link) of central Asia and Kazakhstan.] Trudy 

53 Zool. Inst. Akad. Nauk USSR, Leningrad 

Argyropulo, A.I. 1948. [A review of Recent species of the family Lagomyidae Lilljeb., 1886 (Lagomorpha, Mammalia).] Trudy 

Inst. Akad. Nauk USSR, Leningrad 

Bailey, V. 1913. Ten new mammals from New Mexico. 

Washington 26: 129-134. Bangs, 0.1899. Descriptions of two new pikas from western North America. New England Club 

Bannikov, A.G. 1951. [Hares and pikas of Mongolia.] Uch. Zap. Mosk. Gos. Ped. Inst. 

Bannikov, A.G. 1960. [Notes on the mammals in Nien-shan and south area (China).] Byull. Mosk. Obshch. Ispytat. Prirody, Otd. Biol. 

Belyaev, V.G. 1968. [Ochotona in Magadan Oblast.] Izv. Irkutsk. Nauchno-Issled. Protivochumnogo Ins. Sib. Dal’nego Vost. 

Bernstein, A.D. 1963. [Data on the ecology of red pika (Ochotona 

Sev.) in Zailisk Alatau Shan). Way of life and feeding.] Mosk. Obshch. Ispytat. Prirody, Otd. Biol. 68:24-

36. Bernstein, A.D. 1964. [The reproduction by red pika (Ochotona 

Sev.) in the Zailisk Alatau.] Byull. Mosk. Obshch. Ispytat. Prirody, Otd. Biol. 

Bernstein, A.D. 1970. ecology of the big-eared pika in the Tien Shan.] Fauna Ecol. Rodents (Moscow) 

Bernstein, A.D. and Klevezal, G.A. 1965. [Age determination of 

Ochotona and Ochotona macrotis.] Zh. 

Biswas, B. and Khajuria, H. 1955. Zoological results of the “Daily Mail” Himalayan expedition 1954. Four new mammals from Khumbu, eastern Nepal. Calcutta 

Bobrinski, N., B. and Kuzyakin, A. 1944. [Mammals of USSR.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. Bonhote, J.L. 1904. On the mouse-hares of the genus Ochotona. 

London. 

Borell, A.E. 1931. A new pika from Idaho. J. Mamm. 

Broadbooks, H.E. 1965. Ecology and distribution of the pikas of Washington and Alaska. Midl. Nat. 

Brown, J.H. 1971. Mammals on mountaintops: nonequilibrium insu-lar biogeography. Am. Nat. 

Brown, J.H. 1978. The theory of insular biogeography and the distribution of boreal birds and mammals. Nat. Mem. 

E. 1890. Wissenschaftliche Resultate der von N. M. Preze-walski central-Asien unternommenen Reisen. 

Saugethiere 

E. 1894. Wissenschaftliche Resultate der von N. M. Preze-walski central-Asien untemommenen Reisen. Theil 

Saugethiere V: 185-232. Chang G. 1983. [Rodents in the Hainan district of Qinghai province.] 

3: 195-l 96. Cherniavski, F.B. 1984. [Mammals of Siberia’s far 

“Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. 

Conner, DA. 1982. Geographic variation in short calls of pikas 

(Ochotona J. Mamm. 

Conner, DA. 1983a. Seasonal changes in activity patterns and the adaptive value of haying in pikas (Ochotona Canadian 

Conner, D.A. 1983b. Response of pikas to playback of geographic variations of the short call. 

Conner, DA. 1984. role of an acoustic display in territorial maintenance in the pika. Canadian 

Conner, D.A. 1985a. Analysis of the vocal repertoire of adult pikas: ecological and evolutionary perspectives. Anim. Behav. 33: 124-

134. 

Conner, D.A. 1985b. The function of the pika short call in individual recognition. Z. 

Corbet, G.B. 1978. The mammals of the region: a 

review. British Museum (Natural History), London. Corbet, G.B. and Hill, J.E. 1986. A list of mammalian species. 

British Museum (Natural History), London. 

I.M. 1955. The distribution of pikas (Ochotona) in British Columbia and Alberta. 

I.M., and K. 1946. A new pika (genus Ochotona) from British Columbia. Canadian Field-Nat. 

Danov, R.A. 1985. [Influence of factors of weather on the density and age structure of the Levantine viper population in the south-western Kopet-Dagh.]. In: [Questions of herpetology, sixth 

Union Herpetological Conference.] “Nauka,” 

grad. Pp. 68-69. Dawson, M.R. 1967. Lagomorph history and the stratigraphic record. In: Teichert, C. and Yochelson, E. L. (Eds), Essays in paleontol-ogy and (R. C. Moore commemorative volume). Dept. Geol., Univ. Kansas Special Publ. 2:1-626. Pp. 287-316. Demin, E.P. 1962. [On the biology of the Mongolian pika.] 

Irkutsk. Nauchno-Issled. Protivochumnogo Ins. Sib. Dal’nego Vost. 

Denisman, L.G., Kiseleva, N.K. and Kniazev, A.V. 1989. [The history of ecosystems of the Mongolian People’s Republic. Biological 

and natural conditions of the Mongolian People’s Re-public, vol. “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. 

Derevshchikov, A.G. 1975. [Late additions to the bait method of extermination of the Mongolian pika in the Altai Mountains.]. In: [International and national aspects of epidemiological observ-ing Irkutsk. Pp. 45-47. Dmitriev, P.P. 1985. [The relationship between some shrubs of the Mongolian steppes and colonies of mammals.] Zh. Obshch. 

Yu. A. 1963. [Distribution of the steppe pika and some features of its ecology in west Kazakhstan.] Mosk. Obshch. Ispytat. Prirody, Otd. 

Durrant, S.D., and Lee, M.R. 1955. Three new pikas (genus 

from Utah. Washington 

Ellerman, J.R. and Morrison-Scott, T.C.S. 1951. Checklist 

tic and Indian mammals 1758-1946. British Museum (Natural History), London. 

L. 1946. The pocket gopher in relation to soil erosion on mountain range. 

Erbajeva, M.A. 1988. of the Cenozoic age.] “Nauka,” 

Leningrad. 

Eshchelkin, E.E. 1978. [Nest interrelationships of the flat-skulled vole (Alticola and the pika (Ochotona in the Gomo-Altai Autonomous Oblast, USSR plague focus.] 

Zh. 

Eshchelkin, E.E., Lazarev, B.V. and Prutov, S.M. 1968. [Information on the reproduction of rodent plague carriers in the Altain Mountains.] Irkutsk. Nauchno-Issled. Protivochumnogo Ins. Sib. Dal’nego Vost. 

Fan, N., Jing, Z., Wang, Q. and Zhou, W. 1986. [Studies on 

olone against the pika and the zokor.] 6:211-217. Fedosenko, A.K. 1974. [Some morphological characteristics of 

Ochotona.] Feng, Z. 1973. [A new species of Ochotona (Ochotonidae, 

from the Mount area.] 

Feng, Z., Cai, G. and Zheng, C. 1986. [The mammals of 

Science Press, Beijing. Feng, Z. and Kao, Y. 1974. notes on the Tibetan pika and allied species -- including a new subspecies.] 

Sinica 

Feng, Z. and Zheng, C. 1985. [Studies on thepikas (genus Ochotona) 

of China -- taxonomic notes and distribution.] 

Sinica 

Flerov, K. 1927. northern Ural pika.] Ann. Akad. Nauk, Leningrad 28: 138-144. 

Formozov, A.N. 1929. mammals of northern Mongolia according to collections gathered on expeditions in 1926.1. In [Preliminary report on Zoological in Northern Mongolia for 1926. Materials from the Research Commission of the Mongolian and Tannu-Tuvinian People’s Republic and the 

ASSR, volume “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. Pp. 1-144. Formozov, A.N. 1966. Adaptive modifications of behavior in mam-mals of the Eurasian steppes. Mamm. 

Formozov, N.A. 1981. [Behavioral adaptations of pikas living in rocky biotopes.]. In: Naumov, N.P. (Ed.), [Ecology, population structure, and communication processes in mammals.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. Pp. 245-263. Formozov, N.A. 1985. Social organization in Eurasian pikas 

Abstract. Fourth International Theriological Congress, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. Formozov, N.A. and Emelianova, L.E. (in press). [Variability of the alarm call of the northern pika in Yakutia.] Formozov, N.A. and Nikolski, A.A. 1979. [Status of the Ural pikas in the “alpina” group (a bioacoustical analysis).]. In: [Mammals of the Ural Mountains.] Akad. Nauk CCCP, Ural Science Center, Sverdlovsk. Pp. 80-82. Formozov, N.A. and Proskurina, N.S. 1980. [Spatial structure of the settlements, and elements of the behavior of closely related forms of pikas.]. In: [Rodents. Materials of the fifth All-Union meeting.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. Pp. 293-294. Formozov, N.A. and Yakhontov, E.L. 1988. [Population variability of short calls, divergence and history of ranges of complex of forms (Ochotona alpina 0. hyperborea).]. In: [Communicative mechanisms of regulation of population structure in mammals 

(All-Union meeting).] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. Pp. 178-181. Formozov, N.A. and Yakhontov, E.L. (in prep.). [Secondary contact zones and character displacement in Ochotona alpina and 0. 

hyperborea 

Fulk, G.W., and Khokhar, A.R. 1980. Observations on the natural history of a pika (Ochotona from Pakistan. Mammalia 

Gardner, M.C. 1950. An undescribed pika from Utah. Washington 

Sci. 

Gashev, N.S. 1966. [On age determination for the pika Ochotona hyperborea Flerov.] Mosk. Obshch. Ispytat. Otd. Biol. 

Gashev, N.S. 1971. [Northern pika (Ochotona hyperborea 

In: [Mammals of and Polar Ural.] Volume 1, Trudy Inst. Ekol. rasteni i zhivotnykh, 80. Sverdlovsk. Pp. 4-74. Glover, D.G., Smith, M.H., Ames, L., Joule, J. and Dubach, J.M. 1977. Genetic variation in pika populations. Can. J. Zool. 

Grant, W., French, N. and Folse, L. 1980. Effects of pocket gopher mounts on plant production in shortgrass prairie ecosystems. 

Southwestern Nat. 

Gray, J.E. 1842. Descriptions of some new Genera and fifty unre-corded species of Mammalia. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., series 1, 

Gray, J.E. 1867. Notes on the skulls of hares and picas 

(Lagomyidae) in the British Mag. Nat. Hist., series 

D.K. 1977. On the Holocene history of some Great Basin lagomorphs. J. Mamm. 

D.K. 1987. The biogeographic history of small mammals in the Great Basin: observations on the last 20,000 Mamm. 

Grinnell, J. 1912a. A new cony from the vicinity of Mount Whitney. 

Univ. California Zool. 

Grinnell, J. 1912b. The Warner Mountain cony. Biol. 

Washington 25: 129-130. Grinnell, J. 1917. Field tests of theories concerning distributional control. Am. Nat. 

Grinnell, J. 1918. Six new mammals from the Mojave Desert and Inyo regions of California. Univ. California Zool. 

Grinnell, J. 1923. The burrowing rodents of California as agents in soil formation. Mammal 

Grinnell, J. and Storer, T.I. 1916. Diagnoses of seven new mammals from east-central California. Univ. California Zool. 

Gromov, I.M. and Baranova, G.I. 1981. [Catalogue of the mammals of the USSR.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. Gruber, U. 1969. Tiergeographische okologische und bionomische Untersuchungen an Saugetieren in Ost-Nepal. 

Himalaya. Innsbruck-Munchen 3: 197-3 12. Gunther, A. 1875. Descriptions of some Leporine mammals from central Asia. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., series 4, 

Gureev, A.A. 1964. [Fauna of the USSR, mammals, vol. 3, part 10, Lagomorpha.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. 

R. 1960. Observations on the ecology of the Japanese pika. 

Hall, E.R. 1934. A new pika (mammalian genus Ochotona) from central Nevada. Biol. Washington 

Hall. E.R. 1981. The mammals of North America. Second Edn. John Wiley and Sons, New York. Hall, E.R. and H.L. 1938. A new pika (mammalian genus 

Ochotona) from south-eastern Idaho with notes on near-by species. Univ. California Zool. 

Hall, E.R. and Hayward, C.L. 1941. Three new mammals 

and Ochotona) from Utah. Great Basin Nat. 

Hassinger, J.D. 1973. A survey of the mammals of Afghanistan, resulting from the 1965 Street Expedition (excluding bats). 

Fieldiana: Zool. 60: 1-195. Heptner, V.G. 1961. [On geographic variability of pikas (Ochotona 

Link: Mammalia, Lagomorpha) inhabiting Turkmenia.] Zool. Zh. 

Hodgson, B.H. 1841. Of a new species of Lagomys inhabiting Nepal, (with plate) Lagomys nepalensis. J. Asiat. Bengal 

Hodgson, B.H. 1858. On a new Lagomys and a new Mustela inhabit-ing the north region of Sikkim and the proximate parts of Tibet. 

J. Asiat. Bengal 

Hollister, N. 1912a. New mammals from the highlands of Siberia. 

Smithsonian Misc. 60: l-6. Hollister, N. 1912b. Two new American pikas. Biol. 

Washington Honacki, J.H., K.E. and Koeppl, J.W. 1982. Mammal species of the a taxonomic and geographic reference. Allen Press Inc. and the Assoc. Syst. Lawrence, Kansas. Howell, A.B. 1928. New Asiatic mammals collected by F. R. Wulsin. 

Washington 

Howell, A.H. 1919. Descriptions of nine new North American pikas. 

Biol. Washington 

Howell, A.H. 1924. Revision of the American pikas. N. Amer. Fauna, 

47: l-57. Hsu, T.C. and Benirschke, K. 1971. An atlas of mammalian chromo-somes. Vol. 6, Folio 265. Springer-Verlag, New York. Huntly, N.J. 1987. Influence of refuging consumers (Pikas: Ochotona 

on subalpine meadow vegetation. 

Huntly, N.J., Smith, A.T. and Ivins, B.L. 1986. Foraging behavior of the pika (Ochotonaprinceps), with comparisons of grazing versus haying. J. Mamm. 

Inukai, T. 1931. A record of Ochotona from Sapporo Nat. Hist. 

Inukai, T. and Shimakura, K. 1930. On Ochotona, a new rodent unrecorded from Hokkaido. Trans. Sapporo Nat. Hist. 

Ivins, B.L. and Smith, A.T. 1983. Responses of pikas (Ochotona princeps, Lagomorpha) to naturally occurring terrestrial predators. Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 

Jiang, Z. and Xia, W. 1985. [Utilization of food resources by plateau pikas.] Sinica 

Jiang, Z. and Xia, W. 1987. [The niches of yaks, Tibetan sheep and plateau pikas in the alpine meadow ecosystem.] Pla-teau Sinica 

Kapitonov, V.I. 1961. [Ecological observations on Ochotona 

Pall. in the lower part of the Lena River.] Zh. 

933. Kawamichi, T. 1968. Winter behaviour of the Himalayan pika, 

Ochotona Sci. Hokkaido Univ., Japan. Ser. 

Kawamichi, T. 1969. Behaviour and daily activities of the Japanese pika, Ochotona yesoensis. J. Sci. Hokkaido Univ., Japan. Ser. 

Kawamichi, T. 1970. Social pattern of the Japanese pika, Ochotona 

yesoensis, preliminary report. Sci. Hokkaido Univ., Japan. Ser. VI, 

Kawamichi, T. 1971a. Daily activities and social pattern of two Himalayan pikas, Ochotona macrotis and 0. observed at Mt. Everest. J. Sci. Hokkaido Univ., Japan. 

Kawamichi, T. 1971b. Annual cycle of behavior and social pattern of the Japanese pika Ochotona hyperborea yesoensis. J. Sci. Hokkaido Univ., Japan. Ser. Zool. 

Kawamichi, T. 1976. Hay territory and dominance rank of pikas 

(Ochotona princeps). 57: 133-148. 

Kawamichi, T. 1981. Vocalizations of Ochotona as a taxonomic character. Pp. 324-339. In: K. Myers and C. D. (Eds). 

of the Conference. Guelph Univ. Press, Guelph, Ontario. Khan, A.A. 1981. Field trial of some rodenticides against the collared pika (Ochotona in apple orchards. Int. Pest 

Khan, AA. and Smythe, W.R. 1980. The problem of pika (Ochotona 

control in Baluchistan, Pakistan. Pest 

1980: 

Khlebnikov, A.I. 1977. [Ecology of the sable in the West 

Mountains.] Siberian Branch, “Nauka,” Novosibirsk. 

Khlebnikov, A.I. and Shtilmark, F.R. 1965. [The significance in forest farming of the northern pika in the West Mountains.]. In: 

[Fauna of Siberian pine forests in Siberia and its use.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. Pp. 91-102. Khlebnikova, I.P. 1978. [The northern pika in the mountain forests of Siberia.] Siberian Branch, “Nauka,” Novosibirsk. 

Khlebnikova, I.P. and Khlebnikov, A.I. (in press). [Number and counting method of Ochotona Pall. in the Western 

Mountains.] In: [Ecology and ofpikas of USSR fauna.] 

Khmelevskaya, N.V. 1960. in biology of the Altain pika.] Unpublished course work, Department of Vertebrate Zoology, Moscow State Univ., Moscow. Khmelevskaya, N.V. 1961. [On the biology of Ochotona 

Zool. Zh. 40: 1583-1585. Khokhar, A.R. and G.W. 1976. Damage to apple trees by the collared pika, Ochotona Pak. J. Zool. 

Kholodova, M.V. 1975. [Studies of the connections between the Mongolian pika (0. Thomas) and other vertebrates of Tuva’s stony mountain steppe.] Unpublished course work, De-partment of Vertebrate Zoology, Moscow State Univ., Moscow. 

Kim, T.A. 1962. [The ecology of the northern Ochotona in the 

mountains.] Problems in ecology. Vyssaya Shkola (Moscow). 

Kimura, Y., Nakatsu, T. and Kikuchi, Y. 1984. G-banding and 

banding patterns of chromosomes of Afghan pikas (Ochotona 

(Tokyo) 

Kishchinski, A.A. 1969. [The pika (Ochotona hyperborea Pall.) in the Kolyma Highlands.] Mosk. Obshch. Ispytat. 

Otd. Biol. 74: 134-143. Kishida, K. 1930. Diagnosis of a new piping hare from 

Lansania (Tokyo) 

Kishida, K. 1932. A new species of piping hares [sic] from Saghalien. 

Lansania 

Kniazev, A.V., Savinetski, A.B. and Sokolovskaya, V.T. 1986. [Popu-lation dynamics in phytophagous mammals in the Transaltai 

in the middle and late Holocene.] Zool. Zh. 

Kniazev, A.V. and Savinetski, A.B. 1988. [Changes of populations of small mammals of the ridge (Transaltai in the late Holocene.] Zool. Zh. 

Koslov, P.K. 1899. [Proceedings of the of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society in Central Asia 1893-1896 under the direction of Roborovski, volume 

Kozlov, P.K. 1947. [Mongolia and Three-year journey in Mongolia and Tibet Second edition. State Publ. House of Geographical Literature, Moscow. 

Krivosheyev, V.G. (Ed.) 1984. of the Soviet Far East.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. 

Krylova, T.V. 1973. [Age-related composition of the Mongolian 

Ochotona population.] Zool. Zh. 

Krylova, T.V. 1974. [Reproduction of the Mongolian pika in the southwestern part of the Tuva ASSR.] Biol. Nauk 

Krylova, T.V. 1976. [Changes in the spatial distribution of 

pika after treating the territory with a pesticide.] Vestn. 

12. Kucherov, E.V. (Ed.) 1987. [The Red Book of the Bashkir Autono-mous SSR.] Bashkir Publ. House, Ufa. 

Lay, D.M. 1967. A study of the mammals of Iran resulting from the Street Expedition of 1962-63. Fieldiana: Zool. 

Lazarev, 1968. [The ecology of pika in the Altai 

56 tains.] Izv. Irkutsk. Nauchno-Issled. Protivochumnogo Ins. Sib. Dal’nego Vost. 27: 17-22. 

Leont’ev, A.N. 1968. [Reproduction of the Daurian pika in relation to fluctuations in its population size.] Izv. Irkutsk. 

Protivochumnogo Ins. Sib. Dal’nego Vost. 

Li, W., Li, H., Xamaridan, H. and Ma, J. 1988. First report on ecological study of the Ili pika (Ochotona Abstract. Symposium of Asian Pacific Mammalogy, Beijing. Li, W. and Ma, Y. 1986. [A new species of Ochotona, Ochotonidae, Lagomorpha.] Sinica 

Liang J. 1981. [Family structure of the plateau pika (Ochotona 

Sinica 1: 159-165. Liu, J., Liang, J., Zhou, X. and Li, J. 1982. [The communities and density of rodents in the region of the Haibei Research Station of alpine meadow ecosystem.]. In: Xia W. (Ed.), [Alpine meadow ecosystem.] Gansu People’s Publ. House, Gansu. Pp. 34-43. Liu, J., Zhang, Y. and Xin, G. 1980. [Relationship between numbers and degree of harmfulness of the plateau pika.] Sinica 

Long, C.A. 1965. The mammals of Wyoming. Univ. Kansas Publ. Mus. Nat. Hist. 

Loskutov, R.I. 1966. [The northern pika: pest of the cultivated Siberian pine.] Zool. Zh. 451887. 

Loukashkin, A.S. 1940. On the pikas of North Manchuria. Mamm. 

Lyon, M.W. 1907. Notes on a collection of mammals from the province of Kan-su, China. Smithsonian Misc. 

Ma, Y., Lin, Y. and Li, S. 1980. [A new subspecies of 

from Inner Mongolia, China.] Zootaxonomica Sinica 5:212-

214. Ma, Y., Wang, F., Jin, S. and Li, S. 1987. (rodents and 

of northern Xinjiang and distri-bution Science Press, Beijing. MacDonald, S.O. and Jones, C. 1987. Ochotona Mammalian Species 

Matschie, P. 1908. to China and Tibet 1903-1905. 

Meaney, C. 1983. Rate and location of scent marking by pikas during the breeding season. In: Muller-Schwarze, D. and Siverstein, R.M. (Eds), Chemical signals in vertebrates 3. Plenum Press, New York. Pp. 329-332. Meaney, C. 1987. Cheek-gland odors in pikas (Ochotonaprinceps): 

discrimination of individual and sex differences. Mamm. 

Melnikov, V.K. 1974. [On the ecology of Ochotona alpina Pall. in the Western Mountains.] Byull. Mosk. Obshch. Ispytat. Prirody, Otd. Biol. 79: 141-142. Merriam, C.H. 1889. Descriptions of fourteen new species and one new genus of North American mammals. N. Amer. Fauna 2: l-52. 

Mian, A. 1986. The biology of collared pikas (Ochotona 

with reference to orchards of Baluchistan, Pakistan. J. Bombay Nat. Hist. 

Mian, A., M. and R. 1988. Damage to orchard plantations by small mammals in Baluchistan. Pakistan Res. 9:115-119. Mian, A., M. R. and S.B. 1988. Distribution of some mammalian pests of orchards in Baluchistan. Pakistan J. 

Res. 9: 125-130. Mian, A., S.B. R. 1987. Diet of some species of small mammals with reference to orchards of Baluchistan (Pakistan): stomach content analysis. Pakistan Res. 

Millar, J.S. 1972. Timing of breeding of pikas in southwestern Alberta. Canadian Zool. 

Millar, J.S. 1973. Evolution of litter-size in the pika, Ochotona 

(Richardson). Evolution 27: 134-143. Millar, J.S. 1974. Success of reproduction in pikas, Ochotonaprinceps 

(Richardson). J. 

Millar, J.S. and Zwickel, F.C. 1972a. Determination of age, age structure, and mortality of the Ochotona 

(Richardson). Canadian 

Millar, J.S. and Zwickel, F.C. 1972b. Characteristics and ecological significance of hay piles of pikas. Mammalia 

Miller, G.S. Jr. 1911. Four new Chinese mammals. Biol. 

Washington 

Milne-Edwards,A. 1871. In: David, Arch. Mus. Nat. Hist. Pan’s, Bull. 7: l-304. Mitchell, R.M. 1978. The Ochotona (Lagomorpha: Ochotonidae) of Nepal. Mitt. 

Mitchell, R.M. 1981. The Ochotona (Lagomorpha: Ochotonidae) of Asia. In: Liu, D. (Ed.), Geological and ecological studies of 

Qinghai-Xizangplateau. Science Press, Beijing. Pp. 1031-1038. Mitchell, R.M. and Punzo, F. 1975. Ochotona sp. n. 

pha: Ochotonidae). A new pika from the Tibetan highlands of Nepal. 

Naumov, R.L. 1934. of the Tungusski region.] In: [Pro-ceedings of the Polar Commission, number “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. Pp. 5-82. Naumov, R.L. 1974. [Ecology of Ochotona alpina in the west 

Zool. Zh. 

Nekipelov, N.V. 1954. [Changes in numbers of the Daurian pika in southwest Transbaikalia.] Izv. Irkutsk. Nauchno-Issled. 

ochumnogo Ins. Sib. Dal’nego Vost. 

Nekipelov, N.V. 1959. [The diet of the Daurian pika.] Izv. Irkutsk. Nauchno-Issled. Protivochumnogo Ins. Sib. Dal Vost. 

Nelson, E.W. 1893. Description of a new species of Lagomys from Alaska. Biol. Washington 

Nikolski, A.A. 1983. [Sound signals of mammals in the evolutionary process.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. 199pp. Nikolski, AA., Guricheva, N.P. and Dmitriev, P.P. 1984. [Winter reserves of the Daurian pika in steppe pastures.] Byull. Mosk. Obshch Ispyt. Otd. Biol. 

Nikolski, Srebrodolskaya, E.B., and Formozov, 1988. [Individual specificity of acoustical demonstrations of males of the northern pika in the breeding season.]. In: [Communicative mechanisms for-regulation of the population structure in mammals 

(All-Union Meeting).] Moscow. Pp. 108-111. Ogilby, W.M. 1839. Memoir on the mammalogy of the Himalayas. In: Royle, J.F. (Ed.), Illustrations of the botany and other branches of 

the natural history of the Himalayan Mountains, and of of 

Cashmere. Reprint Edition (1970) Today and Tomorrow’s Print-ers and Publ. New Delhi. Pp. lvi-lxxiv. 

S.I. 1940. of the USSR and adjacent countries 

(Mammals of eastern Europe and northern Asia). Vol. IV: Rodents. “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. Oko, R.A. and Formozov, N.A. 1980. [Ecological character of the alarm signals of pikas.]. In: [Rodents. Materials of the fifth 

Union Meeting.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. Pp. 247-248. Okunev, L.P. and Zonov, C.B. 1980. [Ecological adaptations of 

Ochotona to mountainous-steppe landscapes.] 

Ol’kova, 1954, [Family range of the Daurian 

57 Nauchno-Issled. Protivochumnogo Ins. Sib. Dal’nego Vost. 

Orlov, G.I. 1983. [The neck gland of pikas (Lagomorpha, 

tonidae) and the scent marking of Ochotona alpina related to its function.] Zh. 62: 1709-1717. Orlov, G.I. and Makushin, G.I. 1984. [Age-related structure of populations of the pika (Ochotona alpina).] Izv. Akad. Nauk SSR, ser. Biol. 

Osgood, W.H. 1909. Biological investigations in Alaska and Yukon Territory. N. Fauna 

Osgood, W.H. 1913. A new name for Ochotona minima. Biol. 

Washington 

Osgood, W.H. 1932. Mammals of the Kelly-Roosevelts and Delacour Asiatic expeditions. Field Mus. Nat. Hist (Zool. series) 18:193-339. Pakizh, V.I. 1969. [Some data on the ecology of Ochotonapusilla in 

northeast Kazakhstan in respect to change of its range.] Zool. Zh. 

P.S. 1768. [Description of Nov. Comm. Sci. 

P.S. 1773. Reise Provinzen des Russischen Reichs, St. Petersburg. Thei12. 

P.S. 1776. Reise Provinzen des Russischen Reichs, St. Petersburg. Thei13. 

P.S. 1811. Berichte uber die Zoographia Rosso-Asiatica von 

abgestattet an die Kaiserl. I. Akad. der 

St. Petersburg. 1: 152. Pavlinov, I. Ya and Rossolimo, O.L. 1987. [Systematics of mammals of the USSR.] Moscow Univ. Publ. House, Moscow. 

Pen, H., Kao, Y., Lu, C., Feng, T. and Chen, C. 1962. [Report on mammals from western Szechwan and northwestern Yunnan.] 

Zool. Sinica 14 (supplement) Peshkov, B.I. 1957. [Data on numbers and diet of feathered preda-tors of southeast Transbaikalia.] Izv. Nauchno-Issled. Protivochumnogo Ins. Sib. Dal’nego Vost. 

Peshkov, B.I. 1967. [On the biology of the upland buzzard.] 

Nauchno-Issled. Protivochumnogo Ins. Sib. Dal’nego Vost. 27: 167-174. Potapkina, A.F. 1975. [Distribution and biology of pikas 

tonidae) in the south of western Siberia.] In: [Systematics, fauna and zoogeography of mammals and theirparasites.] Novosibirsk. 

N.S., Formozov, N.A. and D.G. 1985. [A com-parative analysis of spatial structure of colonies in three forms of pikas: Ochotona 0. p. pallasi, 0. 

pha, Lagomyidae).] Zool. Zh. 

Proskurina, N.S. and Smirin, V.M. 1987. [Forms of intraspecies relations in the Daurian pika.] Bull. Moscow 92: 12-20. Przewalski, N.M. 1883. [F rom Zaisan Lake through the region of Tibet and the head of the Yellow River, second edition 

Moscow. Puget, A. 1973. Etude anatomique, physiologique et biochimique de 

afghan (Ochotona en vue de son 

comme animal de laboratoire. These S C. Toulouse. Puget, A. 1976. The Afghan pika: Ochotona 

(Mamm. Lagomorph). Bull. Zoologique de France 

R. 1962. Notes on the collared Ochotona 

(Nelson), in Alaska. 

Yu. V. 1968. [On the biology of the northern pika (Ochotona alpina on the Olekmo-Charskoye upland region.] Zool. 

Zh. 47: 1075-1082. 

Yu. V., Safronov, V.M., Volpert, Ya.L., and Popov, A.L. 1988. 

[Ecology and dy namics of the number of mammals in 

hoyaniye.] Siberian branch, “Nauka,” Novosibirsk. 

Richardson, J. 1828. Short characters of a few quadrupeds procured on Capt. Franklin’s late expedition. Zool. J. 

Roberts, T.J. 1977. The mammals of Pakistan. Ernest Benn Ltd., London. Safronov, V.M. and Akhremenko, A.K. 1982. [The northern 

(Ochotona alpina in areas under cultivation in the taiga on the middle Lena River.]. In: [Distribution and ecology of mammals of Yakutia.] Yakutian subsidiary, Siberian Branch, “Nauka,” Yakutsk. Pp. 19-38. Sapargeldyev, M. 1987. [Ecology of the Afghan pika in 

Ashkhabad. 

J. 1940. Die der mit besondere Beriicksich tigung ihres histologischen Aufbaues und 

uber die Munich, Urban und Schatrazenberg. Schaller, G.B. 1985. Wildlife in the middle kingdom. Defenders 60:10-15. 

J. 1987a. The effect of the vole brandti on the soil of the Mongolian steppes. Folia Zool. 

J. 1987b. Remarks on the construction of burrows of 

Ellobius talpinus, and Ochotona in Mongolia and their effect on the soil. Folia Zool. 

Schrenck, L. von. 1858. Reisen und forschungen im Amur-lande in den Jahren 1854-1856. Saugethiere des (St. Pe-tersburg) I: 1-213. Severtzov, N.A. 1873. [Vertical and horizontal distribution of 

estan animals.] Izv. Obsch. lyubitelei estestroznaniya, Moscow 

Shen, S., and Chen, Y. 1984. [Preliminary research on ecology of the plateau pika at the Dawu area, Qinghai province.] 

Sinica 

Shi, Y. 1983. [On the influence of rangeland vegetation to the density of plateau pikas (Ochotona Theriol. Sinica 

Shi, Y., Fan, N., Pan, J. and Li, J. 1984. [A preliminary study on Dushuling as a rodenticide.] Sinica 

Shilova, S.A., Korotyaev, B.A., Sedykh, E.L., Ivanitski, V.V., 

dov, S. V. and Ryl’nikov, V. A. 1977. [Biocenotic characteristics of mountain steppes on skeleton soils of the Tuva, ASSR, in relation to the problem of land use.] Ekologiya: 55-62. 

Shnitnikov, V.N. 1936. [Mammals of the Semirechye.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. 

Shou, Z. and Feng, Z. 1984. [A new subspecies of Tibetan pika from China.] Theriol. Sinica 

Shubin, I.G. 1965. [Reproduction of Ochotonapusilla Pall.] Zh. 

Shubin, I.G. 1966. [Dynamics of the age structure of the pika 

(Ochotona pusilla and Ochotona pallasi).] Byull. Mosk. Obshch. Ispytat. Otd. Biol. 

Skalon, V.N. 1935. [Some zoological discoveries in southeastern Transbaikalia.] Bull. Anti-plague E. Siberia 

Sludski, A.A., Bernstein, A.D., Shubin, I.G., Fadeev, V.A., Orlov, G.I., Bekenov, A., Karitonov, V.I., and Utinov, S.R. 1980. 

[Mammals of Kazakhstan. Vol. 2: Lagomorpha.] “Nauka,” Kazakh SSR, 

Sludski, A.A., Afanasiev, Bekenov, A., Grachev, 

Lobachev, Makhmutov, S., Strautman, E.I., Fedosenko, 

and Shubin, 1982. [Mammals of Kazakhstan. 3: Carnivora (Mustelidae, Felidae).] Kazakh SSR, 

Smimov, PK. 1967. [Number and distribution of the Altain pika 

Pall.) in the northwestern Altai Mountains.] In: [Nature of niduses of tick encephalitis.] Novosibirsk. Smimov, PK. 1972. [The experience of keeping and breeding Mon-golian pikas (Ochotona Thomas) in captivity.] Len-ingrad Univ., Biol. 

Smirnov, PK. 1974. distribution and territorial relation-ship of the steppe and pikas in the sympatric zone of their ranges.] Byull. Mosk. Obshch. Ispytat. Otd. Biol. 

Smimov, P.K. 1982. [Reproduction of the pika Ochotona pusilla 

under laboratory conditions.] Vestn. Leningrad. Univ., Biol. 

Smimov, P.K. 1985. [The habitat of the pika in the Kazakh Melkosopochnik USSR.] Vestn. Leningrad Univ., 1985: 

120. Smimov, P.K. 1986. [Habitat preference in sympatric species of 

Ochotona.] Vestn. Leningrad Univ., Biol. 

Smirnov, P.K., Snarski, S.I. and Chetverikova, T.D. 1987. [Functional significance of sounds uttered by pikas.] Vestn. Leningrad Univ., Biol. ser. 3, 

Smith, A.T. 1974a. The distribution and dispersal of pikas: influences of behavior and climate. Ecology 

Smith, A.T. 1974b. The distribution and dispersal of pikas: conse-quences of insular population structure. Ecology 

Smith, A.T. 1978. Comparative demography of pikas (Ochotona): 

effect of spatial and temporal age-specific mortality. Ecology 

Smith, A.T. 1980. Temporal changes in insular populations of the pika (Ochotona princeps). Ecology 

Smith, A.T. Population dynamics of pikas. In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), Proceedings of the World 

Conference. Guelph Univ. Press, Guelph, Ontario. Pp. 572-586. Smith, A.T. Territoriality and social behaviour of Ochotona princeps. In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), Proceedings of the World Conference. Guelph Univ. Press, Guelph, Ontario. Pp. 

Smith, A.T. 1987. Population structure of pikas: dispersal versus philopatry. In: Chepko-Sade, B.D. and Z.T. (Eds), 

Mammalian dispersal patterns: the effects of social on population genetics. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago. Pp. 128-142. Smith, A.T. 1988. Patterns of (genus Ochotona) life history variation. In: Boyce, M. (Ed.) Evolution of life histories of mam-mals: Theory and pattern. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven. Pp. 233-256. Smith, A.T. and Ivins, B.L. 1983a. Reproductive tactics of pikas: why have two litters? Can. J. 

Smith, A.T. and Ivins, B.L. 1983b. Colonization in a population: dispersal vs philopatry. Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 

Smith, A.T. and Ivins, B.L. 1984. Spatial relationships and social organization in adult pikas: a facultatively monogamous mammal. 

Smith, A.T. and Ivins, B.L. 1986. Territorial intrusions by pikas 

(Ochotona princeps) as a function of occupant activity. Anim. Behav. 

Smith, A.T. and Ivins, B.L. 1987. Temporal separation between philopatric juvenile pikas and their parents limits behavioural conflict. Anim. Behav. 

Smith, A.T., Smith, H.J., Wang, X., Yin, X. and Liang, J. 1986a. Social behavior of the steppe-dwelling black-lipped pika. Natl. Geo. Research 

Smith, A.T., Smith, H.J., Wang, X., Yin, X. and Liang, J. 1986b. Social behavior of the steppe-dwelling black-lipped pika 

curzoniae). Theriol. Sinica 6: 13-43. Smith,A.T. and Weston, M.L. 1990. Ochotonaprinceps. Mammalian Species 352: l-8. 

Smith, R. 1978. Thepika in Alaska. Wildlife Notebook Ser., Alaska Dept. Fish and Game. Looseleaf. Sokolov, V.E. 1965. [Influence of the storing of Siberian pine nuts by man on the feeding and number of sables and squirrels.] In: 

[Fauna of Siberian pine forests and its use.] “Nauka,” 

Leningrad. Sokolov, V.E. and Orlov, V.N. 1980. [Field guide to the mammals of the Mongolian People’s Republic.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. Sokolov, V.E., Shvetsov, and Litvinov, N.I. 1985. [Small mammals of forests of the Mongolian People’s Republic. 

Chiroptera, Rodentia.] “Nauka,” 

Leningrad. 

Somers, P. 1973. Dialects in southern Rocky Mountain pikas, 

princeps (Lagomorpha). Anim. Behav. 

Southwick, C.H., Golian, S.C., Whitworth, M.R., Halfpenny, J.C., and Brown, R. 1986. Population density and fluctuations of pikas 

(Ochotona princeps) in Colorado. 

M. and Chotolchu, N. 1971. [On the mammals of Mongolia 

Taiga pikas, Ochotona alpina from Chentej: Results of Mongolian-German biological expeditions since 1972 Mitt. Mus. Berlin 

Svendsen, G.E. 1979. Territoriality and behavior in a population of pikas (Ochotona princeps). 

Tan, P. and Bai, Q. 1987. [A study on the karyotype of the 

lipped pika (Ochotona curzoniae).] Theriol. Sinica 7:233-

235. Tavrovski, Yegorov, O.V., Krivosheyev, V.G., Popov, M.V., and Labutin, 1971. [Mammals of Yakutia.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. 659pp. Thomas, 0. Mammals collected in the provinces of Shan-si and Shen-si, Northern China. London 

Thomas, The Duke of Bedford’s zoological exploration in eastern Asia. -- XI. On mammals from the provinces of Shan-si and Shen-si, Northern China. London 1908:963-983. Thomas, 0. 1909. A collection of mammals from northern and central Manchuria. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., series 8, 

Thomas, 0. New mammals from central and western Asia, mostly collected by Mr. Douglas Carruthers. Ann. Nat. Hist., series 8, 

Thomas, 0. 1911b. New rodents from Sze-chwan, collected by Capt. F.M. Bailey. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., series 8, 

Thomas, 0. Mammals collected in southern Shen-si, central China. London 

Thomas, 0. The Duke of Bedford’s zoological exploration in eastern Asia. -- XIV. On mammals from southern Shen-si, central China. London 

Thomas, 0. 1912a. On mammals from central Asia, collected by Mr. Douglas Carruthers. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., series 8, 9: 391-408. Thomas, On a collection of small mammals from the 

Ling Mountains, central China, presented by Mr. G. 

Owen to the National Museum. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., series 8, Thomas, 0. 1914. On small mammals from Djarkent, central Asia. 

Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., series 8, 

Thomas, 0.1920. Some new mammals from Baluchistan and north-west India. Bombay Nat. Hist. 

Thomas, 0.1922. On some new forms of Ochotona. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., series 187-193. Thomas, 0.1923. On mammals from the Range, Yunnan, being a further collection obtained by Mr. George Forest. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., series 9, 

Thomas, 0. 1924. A new pika from the Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 

series 

Thomas, 0. and 1922. The mammals of the 1921 Mount Everest expedition. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., series 

186. Tilman, D. 1983. Plants succession and gopher disturbance along an experimental gradient. Oecologia 

Tolliver, D.K., Smith, M.H., Jones, P.E. and Smith, M.W. 1985. Low levels of genetic variability in pikas from Colorado. Can. .I. 

63: 

Travina, I.V. 1984. [Influence of pikas on the vegetation of southern Tuva.] Unpubl. Diploma Work, Department of Vertebrate Zoology, Moscow State Univ. 

Tsendzhav, D. 1976. [On the ecology of the Daurian pika.]. In: 

of Inst. Common and MPR Academy of Sciences, Ulan-Bator. Pp. 106-113. Tsendzhav, D. 1977. [Age composition of the Daurian pika popula-tion.]. In: of Inst. Common and Experimental Biol., 

MPR Academy of Sciences, Ulan-Bator. Pp. 73-79. Tsendzhav, D. role of the Daurian pika in improving pastures.]. In: of Inst. Common and Experimental Biol., 

MPR Academy of Sciences, Ulan-Bator. Pp. 

Tsendzhav, D. 1980b. [Species composition and weight change of grasses in of the Daurian pika.]. In: of Inst. 

Common and Experimental Biol., MPR Academy of Sci-ences, Ulan-Bator. Pp. 151-155. Tsendzhav, D. 1985. [The role of the Daurian pika (Ochotona 

1776) in the biogeocenosis of Eastern Khangai.] Abstract of Candidate degree thesis. Ulan-Bator. 

Turov, S. 1924. vertebrate fauna of the northeastern coast of Lake Baikal.] Dokl. Russian Akad. Sci., Leningrad: 109-112. Vinogradov, B.S., and Argyropulo, A.I. 1941. [Fauna of the USSR, mammals. Key to Rodents.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. Voronov, A.G. 1963. [Zoogeographical and ecological observations of the small mammals in Yunnan (China).] Byull. Mosk. Obshch. Ispytat. Otd. Biol. 

Voronov, A.G. 1964. [On the biology of the northern mouse-hare from the taiga of the upper Lena River territory.] Zh. 

Vorontsov, N.N., and Ivanitskaya, 1973. Comparative 

of north Palaearctic pikas (Ochotona, Ochotonidae, Lagomorpha). 

Wang, S. and Yang, G. 1983. [Rodent fauna of Xinjiang.] Xinjiang People’s Publ. House, Urumqi, PRC. 

Wang X. and Smith, A.T. 1988. [On the natural winter mortality of the plateau pika (Ochotona cunoniae).] Theriol. Sinica 

Wang X. and Smith, A.T. 1989. [Studies on the mating system in plateau pikas (Ochotona Theriol. Sinica 

215. Wang, Y., Gong, Z. and Duan, X. 1988. [A new species of Ochotona 

(Ochotonidae, Lagomorpha) from Mt. Gaoligong, northwest Yunnan.] Zoological 

West, E.W. 1981. Adaptive patterns in the behavior of the Sierran pika, Ochotonaprinceps. Unpubl. Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Cali-fornia, Davis. Weston, M.L. 1981. The Ochotona alpina complex: a statistical re-evaluation. In: Myers, K. and (Eds), C.D. Proceedings 

of the World Conference. Guelph Univ. Press, Guelph, Ontario. Pp. 73-89. Weston, M.L. 1982. A numerical revision of the genus Ochotona 

(Lagomorpha: Mammalia) and an examination of its 

relationships. Unpubl. Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. British Co-lumbia, Vancouver. Wilson, R.W. 1960. Early Miocene rodents and insectivores from northeastern Colorado. Univ. Kansas Palaeontol. 

7: l-92. 

Yakhontov, E.L. 1987. [Systematic review of pikas from the alpina 

group of fauna of the USSR and adjacent territories.] Unpubl. diploma work, Department of Vertebrate Zoology, Moscow State Univ., Moscow. 

Yanushevich, A.I., Ayzin, B.M., Kidiraliev, AK., Umrikhina, G.S., Fedianina, T.F., Shukurov, E.D., Grebenyuk, R.V. and Tokobaev, M.M. 1972. [Mammals of “Ilim” Publ. House, 

Youngman, P.M. 1975. Mammals of the Yukon Territory. Nat. Mus. Canada, Publ. 10: l-192. Yudin, B.S., Galkina, L.I., and Potapkina, A.F. 1979. [Mammals of 

the mountain country.] Siberian Branch, “Nauka,” Novosibirsk. 

Zevegmid, D. 1975. [Biology of pikas (Ochotonidae) in the Mongo-lian People’s Republic.] Mitt. Mus. Berlin 

Zheng, C. 1979. [Research on the mammalian fauna of Ngari, Xizang, and evolution of the mammalian fauna on the 

Plateau.]. In: [Report of an investigation of the fauna and flora on Xizang.] Science Press, Beijing. Pp. 191-224. Zheng, C. 1986. [Recovery of Koslow’s pika (Ochotona koslowi 

in Mountains of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, China.] Theriol. Sinica 

Zheng, C. 1989. In: Li, D. (Ed.) [Qinghai fauna eco-nomics.] Qinghai People’s Publ. House, Xining, PRC. Pp. 709-720. Zheng, C., Liu, J. and Pi, N. 1980. [Ochotona thibetana nangqenica: 

new subspecies of the Tibetan pika from the Yushu region, Qinghai Province, China.] Sinica 

Zhong, W., Zhou, Q. and Sun, C. 1985. basic characteristics of the rodents pests on the pasture in Inner Mongolia and the ecological strategies of controlling.] Theriol. Sinica 5:241-249. Zhou, Y. and Xia, W. 1981. [An electrophoretic comparison of the serum protein and hemoglobin in three species of mouse hares 

A discussion on the systematical position of Ochotona 

Theriol. Sinica 

Zimina, R.P. 1962. ecology of Ochotona macrotis Gunther dwelling in the area of mountain range.] Byull. Mosk. Obshch. Ispytat. Otd. Biol. 

Zong, H., Xia, W. and Sun, D. 1986. [The influence of a heavy snow on the population density of small mammals.] Biol. Plateau Sinica 

60 Chapter 4: The Hares and Jackrabbits 

# John E.C. Flux and Renate Aneermann 

# Status and Summary 

The genus is very confusing taxonomically, with the number of recognized species varying from about a dozen to over 30, depending on the classification used. We adopt here a conservative approach and recognize 29 species. The eight s u b g e n e r a p r o p o s e d b y v a r i o u s a u t h o r s 

Boreolepus, 

and merely add to the confusion and are now usually ignored. The genus is widespread in both the Old and New Worlds, showing close parallel evolution of forms adapted to major habitats, eg. tundra (mountain hare Lepus 

arctic hare L. arcticus), steppe (European hare 

europaeus, white-tailed jackrabbit L. townsendii) and desert (Cape hare L. capensis, black-tailed jackrabbit L. 

cus). The snowshoe hare L. americanus and European hare are very important game animals over much of North Amer-ica and Europe, respectively, and many others are of regional importance. Most species favor open habitat and have bene-fited from habitat changes caused by traditional agriculture, but the recent trend to intensive chemical farming is having deleterious effects. Far more information is needed on the taxonomy and distribution of hares before clear conservation priorities can be established. In the meantime the best that can be done is to ensure the survival of distinct forms that appear to be limited to small distributional areas, such as the Tehuantepec jackrabbit L. (recommended for endangered status); and the Hainan hare L. hainanus, black jackrabbit L. Manchurian black hare L. 

and Ethiopian highland hare L. starcki (recommended for taxonomic and status surveys). 

# Physical Characteristics and Taxonomy 

Hares (which include the snowshoe “rabbit” and jackrabbits of North America) are the most widespread lagomorph ge-nus, occupying most of North America from to southern Mexico and nearly all the Old World, up to and including Africa. They are mainly open country grazers, relying on speed and staying power to elude their many enemies, and have consequently benefited from the great decline in forest cover caused by human populations. Only the snowshoe hare is an exclusively forest animal and its boreal habitat remains largely intact. Hares are classic species in following Bergmann’s Rule; weights in the far north reach most in temperate regions average and those at the equator are about 2kg or less. There are, of course, exceptions like the 

> Snowshoe hare eating balsam fir (Photo by Len Rue, Jr.)

snowshoe hare in the north and the large antelope jackrabbit L. in the deserts of Mexico. Apart from the two forms, black jackrabbit and Manchurian black hare, all species have relatively similar “agouti” colora-tion invarious shades of greyish brown on the back, with white or very pale buff below. Alpine or northern species turn white in winter, including the snowshoe hare, arctic hare, Japanese hare L. mountain hare and white-tailed jackrab-bit. Hares have the longest ears and feet in the lagomorpha, associated with temperature control and their running ability, and the skulls are even lighter than those of rabbits. The groove on the front cutting edge of the upper incisors varies from a simple V to a complex branched structure filled with cement, possibly associated with the texture of the vegetation eaten, and is an important taxonomic character. The 

parietal bone becomes fully fused with the parietals at an early age, although it is present as an aberration in some individuals and is commonly present in Abyssinian hare L. habessinicus 

and Cape hare. Growth rates of the precocious young are rapid and correlated with final body size, but this may be an artifact because large species live in colder regions where the summer is short and a fast growth rate is necessary (Flux and Jarvis 1970) or even because northern litters are larger, but the young are individually lighter after a shorter gestation period (Chapman 1984). Despite some useful regional studies (Dixon al. 1983, Robinson 1982, Schneider and Leipoldt 1983) the relation-ships between hares remain very confused and there is no 61 general consensus on the validity of many species. A major difficulty is that widespread species can show far more re-gional variation than is found between species that occur together, so early collectors tended to describe regional forms as new species and overlooked co-existing species, which can appear almost identical in the field (Flux and Flux 1983). The genus appears to have radiated recently, allowing the produc-tion of fertile hybrids between even the European hare and mountain hare (Gustavsson 1971). Most taxonomic charac-ters show regional variation and even DNA analyses can reach completely conflicting conclusions (e.g. Palacios 1983, Schnei-der and Leipoldt 1983). Finally, natural changes in range following the ice ages, the recent expansion of agriculture and unrecorded translocations by hunters for at least 3,000 years have confused the picture even more: introduced populations can differentiate in body size in accordance with Bergmann’s Rule within 100 years (Flux 1967a) and in color within 40 years (Bergengren 1969). Given this uncertain taxonomy, it is scarcely surprising that the common ancestors and evolutionary pathways within 

are ill-defined. The only characteristic seemingly unique to hares, compared with other lagomorph genera, is the production of young born fully-furred, with their eyes open and ready to move within minutes (Corbet 1983). Their other characteristics (long legs, large hearts, dark muscle with myoglobin, wide air passage for breathing and a very 

built skeleton) are all physiological adaptations for sustained running and could be expected to arise independently in any lagomorph that took up this way of living. The earliest 

gomorphs have been found in central Asia (Dawson 1981) and early leporines were widespread in both the Old and New Worlds before evolved. All hares have 48 chromo-somes, but the banding patterns of the mountain hare and European hare are identical, while the two New World spe-cies, black-tailed jackrabbit and snowshoe hare, differ from the Old World pair in having two paracentric inversions (Van der Loo et al. 1981). This may indicate that speciation took place independently in the two hemispheres: as Hibbard (1963) suggested “The genus may be a composite group that may have arisen from both and 

instead of from just one of the stocks.” The arctic hares of both hemispheres, however, are closely related and many tax-onomists regard them as conspecific. One recent view (Baker et al. 1983) suggests that the mountain hare crossed from Asia to the Canadian arctic and developed into the larger arctic hare form. Arctic hares later expanded back across the Bering Strait into Northeast Russia, where they appear to have remained distinct from the mountain hare. On the other hand, Dixon et al. (1983) found “few significant differences” be-tween the Alaskan hare L. othus, arctic hare and mountain hare. In the black jackrabbit and some mainland forms like broom hare L. castroviejoi the parent stock is reasonably established, but there is as yet no good how has evolved as a whole. evolutionary pi of 

# Ecology, Behavior and Reproduction 

With the exception of the forest-dwelling snowshoe hare, 

hare L. and some populations of the mountain hare that occupy a similar forest niche in the Old World, the unifying aspect of habitats preferred by hares is open country. High arctic tundra, steppe, agricultural pasture, tropical savanna and desert are all occupied, but some form of cover (like shrubs, bushes or even rocks) is needed for protec-tion from birds of prey. In peaty tundra without rocks the mountain hare survives by making burrows and desert hares may also burrow. Unlike rabbits, which run to cover for protection, hares tend to use cover for shelter by day and run into the open to avoid predators when attacked. Hares are entirely vegetarian, although some records of aberrant 

eating exist for the snowshoe hare at extreme densities, when food is scarce. Many types of grasses, shrubs and forbs can be eaten and most hares are adaptable; thus the European hare in the New Zealand high country thrives in a flora without a single species in common with that of its ancestral home in Britain. In keeping with their open habitats, hares range widely. In-dividual home ranges vary from 10 to 300 ha and often overlap on favored feeding areas. There is no indication of territorial behavior, although a hierarchy exists which affects access to food (Monaghan and 1985). Compared with the European rabbit, population densities are generally far lower and more uniform, averaging about one per but dropping to or lower for the mountain hare and arctic hare over much of their distribution. Again, the snowshoe hare is a well-known exception with a ten-year cycle of abun-dance and densities rising from about 0.1 hares per ha to 11-23 hares per ha at the peak (Keith and 1978). Because hares can travel a long way in a night to visit a good feeding ground, such as an alfalfa field, they sometimes give a mislead-ing impression of high density. Hares appear to be essentially silent, solitary animals; but their behavioral interactions must be complex as they can regulate population density at levels normally far below the carrying capacity of the environment. The preservation of large areas of open grassland habitat is one factor in the conservation of hare populations, but may not be the most important one. Hare species normally exclude each other from otherwise suitable habitat, the boundary between these disputed regions being decided by subtle differ-ences in topography, cover, or predation. Thus the European hare in Scotland can occupy heather moorland, but only in the absence of the mountain hare, and mountain hares can occupy farmland if European hares are absent. In New Zealand, the European hare lives in typical mountain hare habitat on alpine grassland up to the snowline, and would doubtless be elimi-nated from this habitat completely if mountain hares were introduced. In Newfoundland the introduction of snowshoe hares was said to have resulted in the expulsion of the arctic 

62 hare from the forest habitat it formerly occupied and its restriction to arctic vegetation above the tree line. Here subtle interactions with lynx were probably also involved, because the arctic hare could apparently compete success-fully against snowshoe hares in the absence of lynx (Bergerud 1983). Whether arctic hares ever occurred in these forests has now been questioned, however (Hearn et al. 1987). In East Africa, the local distributions of Cape and African savanna hares crawshayi (= depend on the history of fires because the African savanna hare prefers shrub cover and Cape hare more open habitat (Flux and Flux 1983). In America, the white-tailed jackrabbit is giving ground in the southwest to the black-tailed jackrabbit, which seems better adapted to the changed conditions following cultivation of the prairie (Dunn, et al. 1982). Clearly, in any conservation program for a species of Lepus, it will be important to under-stand the influence of competitors as well as the more usual factors of habitat and predators. Habitat alteration probably has the single greatest impact on hare populations. For instance, the Hainan hare (endemic to Hainan Island, China) is reported to have suffered greatly from habitat alteration, in addition to hunting pressure (see Tang 1988). However, some evidence suggests that the scrub habitat preferred by the hares is actually increasing with deforestation (Song, personal communication). Populations of Chinese hare sinensis are presumably declining due to intensive agriculture throughout its range. Deforestation throughout the range of the black hare has caused it to decline in numbers. Populations of most other 

porids have probably been reduced, but their large distribu-tional ranges have precluded any endangerment due to habi-tat disruption. Some species, such as Cape hare, may have increased in numbers and distribution because they favor grassland depleted by overgrazing with domestic stock. For the Indian hare there are increasing reports of damage to forestry, agriculture and groundnut crops in India and Pakistan (Jain and Prakash 1976; Brooks, and Hussain but it is not clear whether this is due to greater awareness of pests or a real increase in numbers. Certainly irrigation and the production of green crops in formerly desert areas is likely to provide more food for hares, and hence support higher populations, but the subsequent control demanded by farmers may then exterminate the animals over far wider areas. The role of hares in community dynamics should be evalu-ated in relation to other (especially rodents and other obligate grazing herbivores). We know of few investigations on this subject. Due to their differences in body mass and corresponding life history traits, it is unlikely that, in Asia for example, sympatric pikas Ochotona, hispid hares Caprolagus, 

and Lepus compete directly. Diffuse competition for forage may occur between them because of their reliance on similar vegetation. This subject is unstudied. However, species of 

Lepus tend to occupy different habitats in regions where they overlap geographically. In north-central Kazakhstan, for ex-ample, mountain hare, European hare and Cape hare occupy mountain forest, steppe or agricultural land and desert, re-spectively (M. Erbajeva, pers. The hispid hare 

co-exists with Cape hare and Indian hare at Barnadi in northern India (Oliver, pers. probably occupying tall grassland, open country and shrubland respectively. In none of these cases, however, is it known to what extent the 

species may have been competing for resources. The ecological position of Lepus, however, is by no means static; one species can successfully corn with a 

exclude it from its former habitat if 

and 

change. An example is the replacement of the mountain hare by European hare in several large forests in southern Byelo-russia between 1964 and 1971. When hunting and changes to agriculture subsequently adversely affected the numbers of European hares, mountain hares re-invaded the forests and excluded European hares (Gaiduk 1983). Hares can travel widely in the open when feeding and their effects on the vegetation, although selective, are consequently very difficult to measure. Thus, (1962) published a remarkable photograph of cotton grass flowering profusely in a hare-proof enclosure, while the surrounding country was almost devoid of flowers. Hares can be similarly most selec-tive in eating grass seed-heads (Flux but whether this curtails or increases the spread of these grasses will depend on the relative number of seeds digested or passed through the animal (Turcek 1966). African hares transport many species of plant seeds and burrs, which get caught in their fur (Agnew and Flux 1970) and Asian hares are probably equally effective. In desert areas in America, hares seek out plants with high nutrient levels and moisture content, so the soil water levels may be more important than the actual plant species in determining their diet (Hunter 1987). In other regions vari-ation in phenol content of individual plants may determine which are eaten by hares (Haggman and Rousi 1985). In hilly country, hares almost invariably descend to feed on the vegetation on valley floors and defecate while travelling to or from their daylight “forms” several hundred meters uphill. Thus hares actively reverse the normal downhill flow of nutri-ents in an ecosystem, a function performed by few other animals except raptors. Breeding strategies in Lepus vary from one litter of six to eight young in the extreme north, to eight litters of one or two young at the equator, giving a surprisingly constant annual production of about ten young per female for most species (Flux 1981a). A notable exception is the arctic hare in Newfoundland with only three (Hearn et al. 1987). In com-parison, cottontails vary in annual production of young from about 10 to 35 (Chapman, this volume) and in New Zealand can average 45 (Gibb et al. 1985). The snowshoe hare is more variable than most hares in reproductive output, varying between areas and years from about 5.7 to 17.8 young per female per year (Keith 1981). 63 Economic Importance 

The hares of Asia are of sufficient size to be hunted and serve as food for humans. In pre-revolutionary Russia, approxi-mately six million skins of hares were sold annually by hunters. Before World War II, hares played an important role in the fur market. Mountain hare accounted for up to 6.1% and European hare for up to 5.6% of the total volume of the market (Ognev 1966). The numbers of hares taken was re-lated to their abundance during the hunting season (Tomilova 1969). After World War II the number of hare skins sold by hunters to the State fur company dropped dramatically. For example, the number of tolai hare L. capensis tolai skins bought from hunters in Kazakh SSR in 1954 was 85,166. This total decreased to 5,015 in 1964,425 in 1974, and finally to zero in 1975. This decline in the procurement of hare pelts is not related to their abundance in nature. Rather it is due to economics; the price of a hare skin has not changed there since the thus hunters are not interested in selling them (Sludski et al. 1980). Sludski et al. (1980) estimate that 200,000 hares could be caught annually without harming the popula-tion in Kazakhstan. This stability of prices (in the face of rising inflation) had the same effect on other species in other re-gions. The total sale of European hare skins in 1932 was over three million. This total declined in 1954 to around two million and in 1966 to (Gruzdev 1974). This species also experienced severe epidemics in the 1960s that have been blamed for the decrease in number of pelts (Fadeev 1966). Today, the mountain hare is important for its fur only in Yakutia; this autonomous republic produces 50% of the total number of these skins sold annually in the Soviet Union (Popov 1973). Popov (1973) has noted that the cost of hare meat in the Soviet Union is roughly three times that of the skin. He has calculated that the meat from all hares caught in good years in Yakutia weighed as much as the meat from 50,000 cows, and in the Kama-Volga region it forms 60% of animal protein eaten. In the Soviet Far East, the hare is hunted very little (Krivosheyev which is fortunate because of the decline of this species in the face of deforestation of its habitat. In Mongolia, hare hunting has always been very limited. Bannikov (1954) wrote that only a few hundred mountain hares L. and a few thousand tolai hares L. capensis tolai were collected annually. We suspect that this number is now reduced. The Mongolian people do not like the meat of hares and correspondingly do not hunt them. Very few tolai hares are caught by Kazakh people living in the Mongolian Altai Mountains; their primary use of these animals is for feeding their hunting golden eagles In the European part of the Soviet Union, hares remain important game in sport hunting, but the number of hares caught for this activity is difficult to determine. At least five farms of 

have been established in the Ukraine to breed hares for export to western Europe (Radchuk 1963). Each year from 1958 to 1981 about 10,000 Yarkand hare L. yarkandensis have been harvested without decline, in spite of its restricted range (Gao 1983). Its preferred wasteland habi-tat continues to be available because farmers rotate land after cropping. However, hunting of Hainan hares has contributed to the possible decline of this species on Hainan Island, China. They are still being hunted and snared by the indigenous Li people and are sold in the local market at 3 yuan each. Although they are not protected (even in reserves), and hence occur at very low densities, the overall numbers may be stable or even increasing because the area of suitable habitat (scrub covered hills) has been increasing as the forests are cleared (Song, personal communication). Around Beijing, China, populations of the tolai hare have declined so much over the past ten years that in 1989 a closed season was declared to conserve stocks. Most hares in this region are shot, but some are hunted with hawks. The decrease in abundance has been attributed to the increase in intensive agriculture and use of insecticides in the region (Gao, personal communication). We have no data on the use for skins or food of other Lepus 

throughout China. In Korea special hunting regulations have been suggested to allow farmers to catch hares for food and prevent damage they cause to barley and fruit trees (Howard 

et al. 1975). In Japan 500,000 Japanese hares are shot per year by 140,000 hunters, and many more are killed to prevent damage to forestry plantations (Kuroda 1953). At least one control program directed at a rodent has had a detrimental affect on a hare population. In southwestern Transbaikalia (Chitinskaya Oblast), Soviet Union, tolai hares have become very rare near the 50th parallel. The reason for this population decline is the extermination in the area of Mongolian marmots Marmot sibirica by the anti-plague sta-tion in this district. The hares use the burrows of marmots for shelter and rest, especially during their breeding season. The lack of shelters provided by marmots has apparently reduced the number of hares here, although in other areas as the 

SSR “this species does not use burrows” (Ishadov 1974). 

# Conclusion 

Our present knowledge on hares is in many respects insuffi-cient and progress is too slow. If we really wish to achieve something (which is essential as a precondition of conserva-tion attempts) we must encourage and sponsor research on hares: 1. to clarify existing taxonomic problems 2. to clarify the precise geographic distribution of species 3. to collect field data on the abundance, habitat require-ments and biology of the species As we cannot expect to get fresh material from the vast areas of Africa and Asia in the near future, one important step towards items 1) and 2) would be a careful revision of the 

64 world’s largest museum collections (many museum labels or literature data cannot be trusted, hence reliable distribution data will be obtained only after re-identifying museum speci-mens). However, because of the diagnostic problems with hares, this task can only be successfully undertaken by people who have considerable experience in the taxonomy and diag-nosis of hares and rabbits otherwise one would only add to the existing confusion. From long experience of the subject, we find that many divergent views on hare taxonomy result from a too local perspective, which leads to splitting. One can not judge on hare taxonomy without taking into account the enormous geographic variability found in this genus. 

# Species Accounts Antelope Jackrabbit 

Mearns 1890 Subspecies: Lepus Lepus palitans; Lepus 

tiburonensis 

Taxonomy 

Hall (1981) recognizes three subspecies: L. a. from South Arizona to about in Sonora; L. a. palitans further south in Sinaloa; and L. a. tiburonensis, which is restricted to Tiburon Island in the Gulf of California. 

Description 

The antelope jackrabbit is one of the largest North American hares, averaging (2.7-5.9) in Arizona (Vorhies and Taylor 1933). It is a pale, sandy-colored animal. The black 

tips present on most hares are lacking and white extends from the undersurface well up its sides, as indicated by its alterna-tive name of white-sided jackrabbit. In keeping with its desert habitat, the ears are very long: 162mm as are the hind feet: 140mm (127-150). No sexual dimorphism is re-corded. 

Distribution. 

According to Dunn et al. (1982) the distribution of the ante-lope jackrabbit has not changed markedly since 1959. It occu-pies the lower Sonoran life zone (from sea level to in south Arizona and a coastal strip of northwest Mexico, 

300km wide, south to Marginal records for Arizona are: 35 miles East of Florence; Cascabel; 7 miles North of Fort Huachua; Casa Grande; and Queen Creek 

and there is one record for Yuma County (Simmons 1966). (See Fig. 4.1). 

Habitat and Ecology 

The classic study by Vorhies and Taylor (1933) on the Santa Rita Experimental Range in southern Arizona still provides the only detailed information for this species. Its preferred habitat is grassy slopes at moderate elevation and the cactus belt, creosote bush desert and valley bottoms. Densities are highest (0.53 hares/ha) on mesa type vegetation, in contrast to semi-desert for the black-tailed jackrabbit L. in the same region. Where food and shelter are separated, daily movements occur, and ten mile round trips from desert to feed on alfalfa are known. “We frequently see groups of from 2 to 6 individuals . . . as an example of concentration . . . 17, and again 25 antelope jackrabbits in one bunch” (Vorhies and Taylor 1933: The home range probably varies greatly with habitat: “several miles in diameter” or within a 500ft square area. Fresh grass is eaten after the two rainy seasons, mesquite and cactus in the dry season. Throughout the year, the antelope jackrabbit consumes 45% grass and 36% mes-quite, compared with 24% and 56% respectively, for 

tailed jackrabbit in the same region (Vorhies and Taylor 1933). 

Behavior 

The antelope jackrabbit is nocturnal and feeds mainly in the evening and early morning. They are silent except for the usual distress cry, grunts and “chuck” calls. Mating is promis-cuous; males chase females, and box to repel rivals. There are many more forms than jackrabbits, and the same individual was noted at the same form at least three times (Vorhies and    

> Figure 4.1 Distribution of the antelope jackrabbit
> jackrabbit and white-tailed jackrabbit
> L. in North America

65 Antelope jackrabbit (Photo Leonard Lee Rue III) 

Taylor 1933). A dominance hierarchy as in other Lepus is likely, but there is no recent work on behavior. The white skin over the sides and rump is pulled up by special muscles to present a “flash” display to following predators; this escape behavior is shared only by the white-sided jackrabbit L. 

Reproduction 

In Arizona breeding was reported in every month except November; but the percentage of females pregnant showed peaks correlated with rainfall, as did the litter size which varied from about 1.5 to 3.1, the mean being 2.1 (range 1-5) (Vorhies and Taylor 1933). The age of maturity is uncertain, but females probably breed within a year of birth. 

Status and Summary 

Populations of the antelope jackrabbit appear stable and do not cycle as some northern species do. With overgrazing by stock and the consequent decline in pasture-cover, the ante-lope jackrabbit is likely to give way to the black-tailed jackrab-bit which thrives on such conditions. They are regarded as a common non-game mammal in Arizona where they are often hunted at the same time as black-tailed jackrabbits as a pest on stock range, with’ no close season or bag limit (Dunn et al. 

1982). Their status in Mexico requires investigation. 

Snowshoe Hare Lepus Erxleben 1777 Subspecies: Lepus americanus Lepus americanus bairdii, Lepus americanus cascadensis, Lepus americanus columbiensis, Lepus americanus Lepus amen’canus khamathensis, Lepus americanus oregonus, Lepus americanus pallidus, Lepus americanus phaeonotus, Lepus americanus 

Lepus americanus seclusus, Lepus americanus 

Lepus amen’canus tahoensis, Lepus americanus virginianus, Lepus washingtonii 

Description and Taxonomy 

The rabbit-sized snowshoe hare is the smallest Lepus, averag-ing with different populations ranging from about 

to (Bittner and Rongstad 1982). The ears are relatively small (62-70mm) but the hind feet are very big 

(Hall 1981). In summer the upper fur is brownish, dusky grey, or even rusty; the belly, underchin, and sometimes the feet white. In winter most populations moult to a white coat, although the under fur remains grey and the white is restricted to the tips of the hairs. Two subspecies (L. a. 

and L. a. washingtonii) may retain the summer coat coloring in winter. Taxonomically the snowshoe hare is very distinct from 

66 L. americanus L.      

> L . i n s u l a r i s
> Figure 4.2 Distribution of the snowshoe hare
> sided jackrabbit L. and black jackrabbit L.
> in North America

other in size, proportions, and coloring, as well as in behavior and habitat requirements. The distributions of the fifteen subspecies (see Hall 1981) show most subspeciation is in America and probably took place in ice-age refugia; the two subspecies which occupy practically the whole of Canada 

a. americanus in the east, a. in the west) presumably followed the retreating ice. However, Nagorsen (1985) con-siders most of the variation is clinal and follows climatic boundaries, and he sees little merit in recognizing any subspe-cies in the snowshoe hare. 

Distribution 

The snowshoe hare is the most widespread of all New World hares, extending from Alaska to Newfoundland, and penetrat-ing far south into America down the Coastal Range, the Rockies, and the Appalachians, to mid California, northern New Mexico and Tennessee. On open tundra in the far north of Canada it gives way to the arctic hare arcticus. South of the conifer belt, its main stronghold, it may occupy mixed hardwood, cut-over forest, and swamps. The snowshoe hare seems reluctant to cross open country and is not found as a relict species in small isolated patches of forest (Lomolino et al. 1989). (See Fig. 4.2). 

Habitat and Ecology 

Given their enormous geographic range, it is not surprising that snowshoe hares use a wide range of forest types: conifers, aspen, birch, beech, maple and mixed hardwoods. They show a marked preference for subclimax forest, transition zones, and swamp edges; hence fires are important modifiers. Peak numbers follow fire when the scrub and regrowth become dense, then as the forest matures and the ground cover becomes over-shaded, numbers decline. The home range is smaller in thick cover, averaging 

in different studies (Bittner and Rongstad 1982). Males have larger ranges than females, and juveniles have smaller ranges than adults (Adams 1959). Populations cycle, with peak densities every eight to eleven years up to 300 times higher than the troughs, but the normal range is to 30-fold (Keith 1981). Cycles are synchronous over wide geographic regions. At peak numbers in Alberta, Keith and 

1978) snowshoe hares have an enormous effect on the vegetation and predators in their habitat. The food eaten changes from grasses, sedges, dandelions and various herbs in summer, to birch, spruce, willow, tamarack, and pine in win-ter. At population peaks, aspen and willow may be badly 

barked by snowshoe hares; the ensuing scarcity of food has been suggested as a primary trigger of the cycles, which are then amplified by the effect of predators (Keith 1983). Other studies found no shortage of food and suggest that predation may be the only cause (Sinclair et al. 1988). 

Behavior 

Good descriptive accounts of snowshoe hare life history and behavior are given by Grange and Adams (1959) and behavioral development by Nice et al. (1956). Snowshoes are nocturnal, use forms for cover by day and make regular runways to reach favored feeding areas. The mating behavior is promiscuous, with males involved more frequently and in more intense interactions than females (Graf 1985). There is a clear dominance hierarchy at feeding stations and in the wild. Males are more dominant in winter and females in summer during the breeding season. Leverets gather at a nursing place one to two hours after sunset and suckle as soon as the female arrives for two to five minutes. (Graf and Sinclair 1987). Considering the importance of behavioral interactions in relation to population cycles, it is surprising that there is no detailed description of behavioral changes during a complete cycle. 

Reproduction 

The breeding season is primarily controlled by day length, but the effect of weather and phase of the population cycle can alter the date of the first litter by three weeks in Alberta (Cary and Keith 1979). Two litters a year are normal in the far north and in the south at high altitudes; in central parts of its distribution three or four litters are produced (Keith 1981). Total production per year per female ranges from 5.7 to 17.8. Litter size increases by about one from the first litter of the season to later litters, and regionally from about 2.2 to almost six (Keith 1981). 

67 Status and Summary 

According to Rapoport (1982) the total biomass of the snow-shoe hare in North America (2.7 million tons) is almost as high as that of the cottontail S. (2.9 million tons) and more than one million tons higher than the biomass of any other Lepus in the region. The snowshoe hare is clearly a most important animal, as game, as a pest of forestry and as a major component of the ten year cycle, indirectly and directly affect-ing the food supply and number of predators present in their ecosystem. 

Arctic Hare 

Linnaeus 1758 Subspecies: Lepus andersoni, Lepus arcticus, Lepus bangsii, Lepus banksicola, Lepus 

groenlandicus, Lepus hubbardi, Lepus 

Lepus monstrabilis, Lepus 

porsildi, Lepus            

> L. othus L.
> L. californicus
> Figure 4.3 Distribution of the Arctic hare black-tailed jackrabbit L. and Alaskan hare L. in North America Arctic hares on Heiberg Island, Canada
> (Photo by G. R Parker)

Description and Taxonomy 

Arctic hares are large, compact animals weighing Tra-ditionally three species were recognized: L. in Alaska, L. 

in northern Canada and Greenland, and L. in the Old World. Because they form a circumpolar “ring spe-cies” some authorities consider them all L. There is also the view suggested by Baker et al. (1983) that two species are recognizable: L. in the Old World; and the large form L. in Greenland, Northern Canada, Alaska and the Chukot Peninsula, Soviet Union. The hares of the Chukot Peninsula are the same size as L. othus in Alaska, and far larger than adjacent populations of L. (Angermann 1967a). Under this classification there are 10 subspecies of the arctic hare. 

Distribution 

The arctic hare appears to be excluded from boreal forest by the snowshoe hare L. americanus (or the latter’s associated predators like the lynx, Bergerud 1983). It occurs on 

polar open tundra from Greenland to the Chukot Peninsula, but with a gap in its range along the north of Alaska, reaching 

in Ellesmere Island and Greenland (Baker et al. 1983). Many of the islands it inhabits are accessible across the ice in winter. (See Fig. 4.3). 

Habitat and Ecology 

The arctic hare inhabits tundra north of the tree line, an extremely bleak habitat subject to continuous darkness for several weeks in winter. They favor hillsides or rock-strewn plateaux rather than flat and Manning 

using rocks for cover from aerial predators and occa-sionally from foxes and wolves if hard pressed. In summer, meadows of grasses, sedges, and willow are favored and in winter arctic willow can form up to 95% of the diet (Parker 1977). Snow cover and exposure to wind are also important, with hares in herds of several hundred moving from one location to another in search of food in winter. 

68 Black-tailed jackrabbit 

> (Photo by Leonard Lee Rue III)

Distribution 

The black-tailed jackrabbit has a wide distribution in the arid Southwest of America, extending from Washington and South Dakota to Baja California and north Mexico, and from the Pacific coast almost to the Mississippi. Because it adapts well to overgrazed range (Vorhies and Taylor 1933) this species seems to be expanding at the expense of the white-tailed jackrabbit in the Northeast and the antelope L. and white-sided L. jackrabbits in the south. There are successfully introduced populations in South Florida, Massa-chusetts, Virginia, Maryland and New Jersey. (See Fig. 4.3). 

Habitat and Ecology 

The black-tailed jackrabbit favors arid regions and areas of short grass rangeland, from sea level to about Many different vegetation types are used, including sagebrush-creo-sote bush, mesquite-snakeweed, and juniper-big sagebrush (Dunn et al. 1982). According to Flinders and Hansen 

where the black-tailed jackrabbit and white-tailed jackrabbit co-exist, the former displaces the white-tailed jackrabbit onto higher, more sparse vegetation and can out-compete it in adaptability to a wider range of habitats. They also occur on agricultural land in California where they can be a pest of crops and fruit trees (Lechleitner 1958). Black-tailed jackrabbit home ranges in California aver-aged with the unusual feature that females had larger ranges than the males (Lechleitner 1958). In Idaho and Kan-sas, home ranges averaged 16ha (French, McBride and 

mer 1965, Tiemeier 1965). Home range size doubtless varies with population density, which varied in a six to ten year cycle in N. Utah from 0.1-l hare/ha (Gross, Stoddart and Wagner 1974). Similar densities were recorded in Arizona 

Vorhies and Taylor 1933) but on agricultural land Lechleitner (1958) recorded and Bronson and Tiemeier (1959) 

with local concentrations as high as at night on an isolated wheatfield. 

As in most hares, the diet changes from predominantly grasses and sedges in summer, to shrubs in winter or in dry seasons in desert areas (Flinders and Hansen 1972). 

Behavior 

Black-tailed jackrabbits are nocturnal and generally solitary, although at high densities many may converge on favored food such as winter wheat. In deep vegetation a jackrabbit may attempt to sneak away from an intruder unseen; the usual response is to “freeze” and jump up suddenly when it knows it has been seen (Lechleitner (1958). Aggressive behavior be-tween males, and between females rebuffing males, is nor-mally limited to sexual chasing in the mating season (Pontrelli 1968). By day the hares rest under bushes for shelter, but in the Mojave Desert, Nagy, Shoemaker and Costa (1976) found black-tailed jackrabbits made or enlarged short burrows for protection from the sun. 

Reproduction 

The breeding season increases from 128 days in South Idaho to about 300 days in Arizona, so the potential number of litters likewise increases, from about three to seven. The litter size varies inversely from 4.9 in the north to 2.2-1.8 in the south, giving a total output per female per year of about 

(Feldhamer 1979). Litter size increases from a small first litter to a peak in the middle of the breeding season and then declines (Lechleitner 1959). Early-born females may breed in their year of birth (Gross et al. 1974). 

Status and Summary 

In the late 1800s enorm numbers ofjackrabbits were killed 

71 by farmers to protect crops, and some were sold to markets in the east (Palmer 1896). Today, sport hunting, pest control and better farm management apparently prevent serious out-breaks of black-tailed jackrabbits. This species is expanding in range and conservation of the antelope and white-tailed jackrabbits may require some reduction in competition from this more adaptable hare. 

White-sided Jackrabbit 

Wagler 1830 Description 

The white-sided jackrabbit is of medium size with a relatively short hind foot (126mm) and enormous ears (138mm). According to Hall (1981) the upper pelage is dark, slightly pinkish buff, the rump grey, sides and underparts white and the ears lack black tips. The nape is brown to blackish and the upper part of the tail is black (Anderson and Gaunt 1962). 

Distribution 

North from Oaxaca, Mexico, along the Sierra Madre to Chi-huahua and East Sonora. In the United States the white-sided jackrabbit is classified as endangered, being restricted to two valleys in Hidalgo Co., New Mexico, where the population has apparently declined by half between 1976 and 1981 because of habitat changes favoring the black-tailed jackrabbit 

(Bednarz and Cook 1984). (See Fig. 4.2). 

Habitat and Ecology 

In New Mexico the white-sided jackrabbit is restricted to high grasslands of Bouteloua, Muhlenbergia, Buchloe, and 

Sitanion, at 1,500 to Surrounding areas have lower rainfall and higher evaporation, resulting in a grass-shrub complex which is occupied by the black-tailed jackrabbit (Bednarz 1977). Since 1976 these high grasslands have dete-riorated, with an increase in shrubs. The corresponding in-crease in black-tailed jackrabbits at the expense of white-sided jackrabbits indicates the importance of open grassland habitat (Bednarz and Cook 1984). The home ranges overlap, as in other hares, but there is no estimate of range area. White-sided jackrabbits will move at least a mile to feed or when disturbed (Bednarz and Cook 1977). The densities recorded in 1976 were halved by 1981 (Bednarz and are far lower than the that black-tailed jackrabbits may reach. The food eaten is 99% grasses, including Buchloe dactyloides, Bouteloua 

Panicum obtusum and 

but in the dry season they may dig for roots of 

(Bednarz 1977). 

Behavior 

Breeding behavior of the white-sided jackrabbit is similar to that of the black-tailed jackrabbits, except that there is astrong pair bond and the male will defend its mate. It is strictly nocturnal, apparently more so that the antelope and black-tailed jackrabbits. The white side fur is raised and flashed towards a pursuer and the hare may also leap high in the air and flash at the peak of its jump, landing where it started from. Three calls have been noted: the usual scream on being handled, harsh nasal grunts dominant male towards a subordinate, and a trilling grunt when the male is pursuing the female (Bednarz 1977). 

Reproduction 

The breeding season in unknown, but extends at least from mid-April to mid-August, allowing at least three litters a year. The average litter size from ten females in the literature is 2.2 

(l-4) (Bednarz 1977). 

Status and Summary 

The white-sided jackrabbit appears to be a relatively rare species. Although little is known of its numbers in Mexico, it is likely that changes in habitat with overgrazing will favor the black-tailed jackrabbit. Information on the status of the white-sided jackrabbit in Mexico is urgently needed. 

Cape Hare 

Linnaeus 1758 Taxonomy 

The Cape hare has a vast geographic range from South Africa to East China. There are 80 subspecies (including and 

granatensis), but the whole group is in need of revision and many are likely to be invalid. Some, however, could turn out to be distinct species, and all could be of interest in evolutionarv terms. c. granatensis, for example, could be a separate species restricted to Spain, and the taxonomic status of the hares of some Mediterranean Islands has still to be clarified.   

> Cape hare capensis in the Rift Valley, Kenya (Photo by J.E.C. Flux)

72 L. capensis   

> Figure 4.5 Distribution of the Cape in Africa and Asia

Description 

The subspecies vary greatly in size and appearance. Body weights range from about to and coloring from very pale sandy buff to rich almost rusty brown on the back, white below. The ears in desert forms may be pale-edged; others have a narrow black edge at the top rather than a triangular patch as in the European hare europaeus, and the fur is very soft and straight. 

Distribution 

The Cape hare occurs over most of Northern, Southern and Eastern Africa, the Mediterranean, Israel, Arabia, Iran, Paki-stan, north India, southern Russia and most of northern China, wherever there is suitable grassland, steppe or desert habitat, from sea level to (Fig. 4.5). Like the 

tailed jackrabbit it thrives on overgrazed pas-ture and is therefore expanding its range at the expense of less adaptable hares. 

Habitat and Ecology 

Practically any open country is suitable habitat for the Cape hare; from rich savanna grassland on the equator in Africa (Fig. 4.5) to cold stony desert in the in Mongolia, where they are most numerous in river valleys but also occur with marmots at on alpine meadows (Ognev 1966). Pasture that has been overgrazed by domestic stock is favored, and in East Africa fires that remove scrub also extend the range of Cape hares (Flux and Flux 1983). In Arabia, according to Harrison (1972) “These most versatile, mobile and adaptable mammals are found in a wide variety of habitats . . . sand desert, steppe, scrubland, agricultural country or mountain terrain, in fact wherever there is sufficient vegetation, how-ever sparse...“. Although Cape hares are game animals in some countries and used for meat and fur in others, their recent changes in distribution probably reflect human pastoralism and the fell-ing of forest rather than intentional introductions. The result, 73 nevertheless, has been a most confusing mixing of gene pools which will not be clarified without great effort. Hence the status of many “subspecies” is totally unknown; some may be entirely separate species, others incipient species or former species now lost by hybridisation and some may be merely 

Home ranges of Cape hares have rarely been measured and will undoubtedly vary widely with habitats. Densities are higher in agricultural habitats and valleys than on mountain pasture and steppe (Ognev 1966). For the Orange Free State, Wessels (1978) estimated densities of 4.7-24.8 In the Serengeti, Frame and Wagner (1981) estimated densities of 9.3 hares/km 2 on long-grass plains and on 

grass plains, but some of the hares in the former habitat may have been L. crawshayi (= the African savanna hare L. 

the overall density for the area was For the same region, Curry-Lindahl (1981) estimated hare densities of and for other parts of Africa, a range from 

in semi-desert in Kenya to in Kruger National Park. From our experience, however, Curry-Lindahl’s estimates seem too high for East Africa (Eltringham and Flux 1971) and there is little evidence of any regular seasonal or annual cycle in numbers. In the same area, the Cape hare and African savanna hare ate predominantly, with the Cape hare then taking more triandra and than the latter (Stewart 1971). Diet in other habitats has been little studied and will undoubtedly vary widely. 

Behavior 

The behavior of Cape hares in East Africa is reviewed by Flux (1981b). They are strictly nocturnal, so much so in East Africa that eagles can very seldom catch them (L. Brown pers. 

1967). Where hares have not been shot at in the past, they stop at the sound of a gun and can sometimes be picked up by hand with a spotlight, as in Mexico (Griffith and Evans 1970). A major difference in behavior between the Cape hare and African savanna hare is that the former runs into the open when disturbed while the African savanna hare runs for cover 

this behavioral difference is reflected in heart weight also (Flux and Flux 1983). Compared with the European hare, the Cape hare is more solitary, with only four groups of three in about 800 animals observed (Flux 1981b). In the Namib Desert, the Cape hare may make short burrows to shelter from the sun (Dixon 1975). 

Reproduction 

Near the equator breeding is continuous and the Cape hare produces eight litters a year, the litter size varying with the rainfall seasonally from 1.3 to 2.0 in different months (Flux 1981a). In central Russia the tolai hare (L. capensis tolai) has a six to seven month breeding season, with a litter size increas-ing seasonally from two up to four. Ognev (1966) quotes Luhashkin that the tolai hare in Manchuria has only two litters a year, but the litter size is not mentioned. 

Status and Summary 

Under present nomenclature, the Cape hare is probably the most abundant of all Lepus species. Despite this, their taxon-omy is so uncertain that some subspecies may well be fully separate species. Some tiny forms such as L. c. on Masirah Island and L. c. on Bahrein are so distinctive that, regardless of taxonomic status, they merit conservation attention. An enormous amount of work remains to be done to solve this problem. As with the European hare in Europe, some populations of Cape hare in China have declined in the past ten years because of intensified agriculture and increased use of pesticides (Gao Yaoting, pers. 1989). 

Broom Hare Lepus Palacios 1977 Description and Taxonomy 

This species is of medium size averaging with fur of a rich tawny brown similar in color and texture to the European hare L. europaeus, which it closely resembles. According to Palacios (1977) the broom hare is generally more brownish-yellow than the European hare L. europaeus 

or L. granatensis in Spain. Genetic and distributional studies indicate that this species does not interbreed with adjacent populations of the Euro-pean hare L. europaeus and L. granatensis (= L. capensis) 

(Palacios 1977, 1980). On the other hand, Schneider and Leipoldt (1983) found no difference in DNA patterns between broom and European hares and suggest they are conspecific. The broom hare has a very small range and there are no subspecies.     

> L. castroviejoi
> Figure 4.6 Distribution of the broom hare in Spain
> 74

Distribution 

Restricted to the Cantabrian Mountains (Northern Spain) between the Sierra de (to Lugo and Leon) and the Sierra de Labra (to Santander and Palencia). This region is approximately 230km from east to west and 

from north to south. (See Fig. 4.6). 

Habitat and Ecology 

The broom hare lives in mountains at descend-ing in winter to to avoid snow. The habitat is 

land, mainly and Vaccinium, with much shrub cover of Genista, It also inhabits clear-ings in mixed deciduous forest of oak and beech (Palacios 1977). Little is known about the home range, population density and food preferences, but they are likely to be similar to those of European hares in comparable habitat. Palacios and 

mos (1979) state that the broom hare is relatively abundant, but that hunting is excessive at the western edge of its distribu-tion, where the hares are isolated from the rest of the popula-tion during the summer. 

Behavior 

The general behavior is likely to be similar to that of the European hare. Movement to lower ground in winter 

lacios and Meijide 1979) is unusual compared with the Euro-pean hare in New Zealand (Flux 1967b). 

Reproduction 

No information available. 

Status and Summary 

The broom hare appears to be very recently evolved from the European hare, if not conspecific. Its main distinguishing features are skull characters which show remarkably little variation between individual animals. This suggests that the broom hare has perhaps expanded recently from a small founding population. The recommendations of Palacios and Ramos to restrict hunting in the west of its distribution should be supported. 

Yunnan Hare 

comus 1927 Subspecies: Lepus comus comus, Lepus comus Lepus comus pygmaeus 

Description and Taxonomy 

The Yunnan hare is a small species (weight 

possibly related to the woolly hare L. and included in that species by many taxonomists, although it may well be a northern form of the Indian hare L. Its color is greyish brown above, with bright ochraceous mixed with yellow on the sides, a grey rump, and the tail is dark on the upper surface (Wang et al. 1985). There are three subspecies: L. c. comus in West Yunnan: 

L. c. from central Yunnan east to Guiyang City, from Bijie and Muli in the north to Luodian and Huidong in the south; and L. c. pygmaeus from the north near the Yangtse River to central Yunnan. 

Distribution 

This is a mountain species living throughout Yunnan, except that part southwest of the Mekong River, and in the western half of Guizhou. (See Fig. 4.4). 

Habitat and Ecology 

Very little is known about the Yunnan hare, which presuma-bly occupies the high montane pastures in equivalent habitat to the woolly hare in Tibet. Its specific difference from the woolly hare is based on its small size, the small, flat and low supraorbital process and the proportions of the diastema and toothrow. The brighter fur coloring is also considered diag-nostic (Wang, Luo and Feng 1985; Luo although Gao Yaoting (pers. 1989) points out that the grey rump is a character of the woolly hare. 

Behaviour and Reproduction 

Nothing recorded. 

Status and Summary 

The remote habitat of this species is unlikely to be threatened, but increasing agricultural development in the valleys may isolate mountain populations. More work is needed on 

habitat, and taxonomic relation to the woolly hare and Indian hare. 

Korean Hare 

Thomas 1892 Taxonomy and Description 

The Korean hare is a medium-sized species a little larger than the Chinese hare L. sinensis. The fur is considerably heavier, and more blackish in color on the back. It is of uncertain taxonomic position. Corbet (1978) says “there is no doubt of its close relationship with L. sinensis”, while Kim and Kim (1974) consider it the same as the Japanese hare L. 

We suggest it is closest to the hare L. mandshuricus, but here follow Jones and Johnson (1965) in according it specific status. 

Distribution 

Widely distributed in lowland Korea, Southern Manchuria (Won 1961) and some mountainous areas and may extend into mainland China (Kim and Kim 1974). They are also present on three of the five largest offshore islands. (See Fig. 

. .

Habitat and Ecology 

The Korean hare is very common on the plains (rather than the hills) and villagers trap them for food. It is a well-known game animal (Won but is also a pest in forestry 

75 m e l a i n u s L.          

> L. yarkandensis L. sinensis
> Figure 4.7 Distribution map of the Korean hare
> churian black hare L.
> Yarkand hare L.
> Chinese hare L.

tions (Kim and Kim 1974). According to Howard et al. 

hares are a problem to barley growing near the mountains in Kyeonsnam Province and in Jeonnan Province they girdled half the peach trees growing on a five hectare farm. The population density increased from in 1969 to 

in 1973, averaged over eight provinces, with peak density of (Kim and Kim 1974). In different habitats, densities range from in the mountains and on hills to none on cultivated land or by the coast. In the best habitat, forest on Mt. a density of OS/ha was re-corded (Kim and Kim 1974). 

Behavior 

Apart from damage to agriculture and forestry, little has been recorded. Won (1961) states that 200 adults were captured in one drive at but it is unlikely that the hares are gregarious. This author shot one in a pine forest, and records that a villager captured another on Mt. Solak at 500m. 

Reproduction 

No information available. 

Status and Summary 

This species seems reasonably common, but its taxonomic status and relationship with the Chinese hare and 

hare require investigation. 

European or Brown Hare 

1778 Subspecies: Lepus europaeus Lepus europaeus 

Lepus europaeus Lepus europaeus borealis, Lepus europaeus caspicus, Lepus europaeus caucasicus, Lepus europaeus cyrensis, Lepus europaeus europaeus, Lepus europaeus Lepus europaeus 

Lepus europaeus hispanicus, Lepus europaeus 

Lepus europaeus hyemalis, Lepus europaeus granatensis, Lepus europaeus Lepus europaeus 

Lepus europaeus Lepus europaeus medius, Lepus europaeus meridiei, Lepus europaeus 

Lepus europaeus Lepus europaeus niger, Lepus europaeus Lepus europaeus pamassius, Lepus europaeus ponticus, Lepus europaeus pyrenaicus, Lepus europaeus tesquorum, Lepus europaeus transsylvanicus, Lepus europaeus tumak 

Taxonomy 

The 30 subspecies given above are of very variable status. 

Description 

The European hare is a large animal, averaging (3-5kg) in weight, of relatively uniform appearance. The fur is long and curled on the back, with a tawny or rusty color over the chest and sides, darker above, white below; and the tail is large and conspicuous, black on top and white underneath. The tips of the ears have a large triangular black patch on the back contrasting with the paler grey of the rest of the ear. In winter there is some white on the sides of the head and base of the ears, and grey on the haunches. 

Distribution 

Over most of Europe to except for Ireland, the Mediter-ranean region and Scandinavia, which all now have introduced populations. To the east, European hares have expanded in range naturally and by liberations to Siberia and the south Pacific coast of Russia; in the south they are replaced by the tolai hare L. capensis and to the north by the mountain hare L. Because they are important game animals, populations have been introduced successfully in eastern Canada, northeastern United States, most of South America between and Australia and New Zealand. Small introduced populations occur on several North Sea islands, Barbados, Reunion and the Falkland Islands. (See Fig. 4.8). 

Habitat and Ecology 

Open country with scattered shrubs or hedges for cover is good habitat for European hares. They are very adaptable and 

76 reach high densities on mixed farmland under intensive agri-culture in Denmark, Germany and Poland. Modern tech-niques, with large fields for mechanized agriculture and the excessive use of herbicides and pesticides, has led to recent population declines in Britain and Europe (Schneider 1978, Tapper and Barnes 1986). Other suitable habitats range from moorland, saltmarsh, alpine grassland, deciduous and ever-green open woodland, steppe and near desert. Where no other are present, as in Chile, Argentina, Australia and New Zealand, the habitats occupied can be especially vari-able, including pampas, sand dunes, marshes and alpine 

field. The food eaten varies with the habitat: in Europe hares on agricultural land eat 90% of soft greens, 5.5% woody plants, 2.2% root crops, 1.7% grain crops and 0.5% forest plants 

1977). In New Zealand alpine areas, hares ate short grass in summer, shrubs and tussock in winter (Flux 1967b). In hunting regions of Germany and Scandinavia they are fed hay in winter. Detailed lists of species eaten are given by Brull (1976) and Homolka (1987). Estimates of home range vary from 38ha (16-78) in Eng-land (Tapper and Barnes 1986) to 53ha in New Zealand (Parkes 1984) and 330ha in Poland (Pielowski 1972). Popula-tion density in the Netherlands averaged with peaks on an airfield of (Broekhuizen 1976). In Poland the best 20% of hunting areas had the rest 

(Pielowski The highest record is for a 

island off Denmark (Abildgard, Andersen and 

Nielsen 1972). 

Behavior 

The European hare is largely nocturnal, but may start feeding in mid afternoon in higher latitudes and in the breeding season. They may move up to to reach grazing in Scotland and Taylor 1968) and can travel 

while feeding in one night (Flux 1967b). Feeding takes about a third of a hare’s time, and before entering its “form” for the day it backtracks to confuse predators (Flux 1981b). Reproductive behavior reaches a peak in spring (Mad March hares) with up to a dozen males congregating round a female in oestrus, boxing each other and chasing off rivals (Schneider 1978). A dominance hierarchy between individu-als has been demonstrated at food (Lindlof 1978; 

and 1985). Over much of their range European hares occur in the same habitat as rabbits 

and it is rather surprising that the far smaller rabbit dominates the hare (Flux 1981b). 

Reproduction 

European hares start breeding about the winter solstice in all nine countries where they have been studied except Argentina (Flux 1965; Alsina, and Brandani 1979). In captivity superfoetation (fertilization of a female already pregnant that leads to her carrying embryos of different ages) is common, giving a mean interval between births of 38 days instead of the normal 42-day gestation period (Martinet 1977). Only three of 24 females with full-term embryos showed superfoetation in the wild (Flux 1967a). The mean litter size increases season-ally to a peak and then declines; there are normally three to    

> Figure 4.8 Distribution of the European hare worldwide

77 European hare in form at St Amaud, New Zealand (Photo by J.E.C. Flux) 

five litters a year. The annual production of young per female varies between 4.6 in Argentina and 13 in Czechoslovakia 

but most populations are remarkably constant at around ten (Flux 1981a).  

> At

birth leverets weigh 123g and grow at 19g 

per day until three months old. Nursing takes place once or twice a day, in the late evening, and lasts only a few minutes (Broekhuizen and Maaskamp 1980). Adult size is reached in five months and some early-born leverets may breed in their year of birth. 

Status and Summary 

The European or brown hare is probably the most important game animal in Europe, with over five million being shot each year. There is considerable concern over recent declines in Europe, but the populations are not really threatened. More serious from a conservation view is the total loss of regional forms, like the French and Danish ones, by massive importa-tions from Hungary and Eastern Europe. The status of many local populations and subspecies requires investigation and it was only recently that what is thought to be a new species was discovered in Spain (Palacios 1977). More taxonomic studies are urgently needed. 

Ethiopian Hare 

fagani Thomas 1902 Description and Taxonomy 

The Ethiopian hare is of medium size with long, dense, harsh fur. The color of the upperparts is buff ochraceous brown, the sides, nape and chest tawny. The tail is white or buff below, with a large blackish dorsal stripe above. Below the chin is greyish and the belly white. This species is closely related to the L. complex and is usually considered part of it. Azzaroli-Puccetti however, on the basis of more material, has separated it again because of its uniform character throughout its range. 

78 L. habessinicus         

> Figure 4.9 Distribution of the Ethiopian hare fagani, Abyssinian hare and scrub hare L. in Africa

Distribution 

North and west Ethiopia on the plateau, and Kenya, at high altitudes. The type is from Lake Ethiopia. (See Fig. 4.9). 

Habitat, Ecology, Behavior and Reproduction 

Nothing recorded. 

Status and Summary 

The Ethiopian hare is probably a subspecies of the African savanna hare L. (or scrub hare L. but the mountain populations are geographically isolated, and the hares are probably also isolated by surrounding populations of Cape hares L. capensis. This isolation could have resulted in speciation and merits further research. 

Tehuantepec Jackrabbit 

Wagner 1844 Taxonomy and Description 

The Tehuantepec jackrabbit is a large animal with long ears and looks like the white-sided L. and antelope L. 

jackrabbits. The upper parts are bright ochraceous buff strongly washed with black, the flanks, chin and underparts are white. The haunch and legs are very pale grey. The ears are uniform buff, with pale whitish tips, and the nape has a black stripe extending back from the base of each ear. Ander-son and Gaunt (1962) regarded it as a distinct species related to the white-sided jackrabbit L. but separated geo-graphically from all other species. The black color on the nape that they considered a specific character is, however, known to be variable in the Indian hare L. its Old World counterpart. A numerical taxonomic analysis by Dixon 

et al. (1983) supported the retention of the Tehuantepec jackrabbit as a separate species. 

Distribution 

According to Chapman et al. the distribution of the Tehuantepec jackrabbit has been exaggerated and it exists only from Salina Cruz, Oaxaca, to the extreme west of the State of Chiapas, Mexico. The area occupied in the past was apparently but increasing clearance for agriculture is destroying most of its habitat. (See Fig. 4.1). 

Habitat and Ecology 

At present this jackrabbit is restricted to riparian vegetation, sand dune and shrub forest, which never exceeds a wide strip along the shores of salt water lagoons on the north side of the Gulf of Tehuantepec. It co-exists with the eastern cottontail and is exclusively nocturnal. 

Behavior and Reproduction 

Very little has been recorded. Two adult females collected on 7 February 1981 were pregnant, one with two embryos fully developed with CR lengths of 175 and (Dr. F.A. Cervantes, pers. 1989). 

Status and Summary 

The Tehuantepec jackrabbit is recommended for listing as endangered because its habitat is threatened by encroaching agriculture as the local human population is expanding. In addition, the species is shot by numerous parties of hunters coming from cities up to 200km away to shoot deer by spot-lighting at night. “We ask hunters, people of the areas, and they say there are still a few left, but when asked specifically, they don’t know where” (Lopez-Forment 1989). This is clearly the most endangered species at present and requires urgent attention. 

79 Abyssinian Hare 

and Ehrenberg 1832 Taxonomy and Description 

The Abyssinian hare is a small hare (weight about with upperparts of a cineraceous color marked with black or grizzled black and buff. The tail is white below, black above, and the ears of moderate length with only a narrow black edging. About half the skulls have a separate interparietal bone, which is normally fused in but also occurs commonly in Cape hares L. capensis (Angermann 1983). There is now some taxonomic consensus over the status of this hare, which Angermann (1983) considers a subspecies of the Cape hare L. capensis. Azzaroli-Puccetti (1987) agrees, “Probably . . . L. warrants only subspecific status . . . but also points out that the interparietal bone is usually absent in the Berbera population in northern Somalia, and retains specific rank pending future biochemical analyses. 

Distribution 

The Abyssinian hare is restricted to East Africa, especially Somalia, the eastern part of Ethiopia, and possibly Northern Kenya. (See Fig. 4.9). 

Habitat and Ecology 

This hare apparently replaces the Cape hare in the open grassland, steppe, savanna and desert habitats in the area occupied. Some scattered scrub is needed for shade by day and cover from predators, but thicker scrub is taken over by other hares in the L. fagani complex. 

Behavior and Reproduction 

Nothing reported, but it is undoubtedly a nocturnal species very like the Cape hare. 

Status and Summary 

In our view, this hare is a subspecies of the Cape hare and is widely distributed and abundant. Like the Cape hare, it is probably spreading with the overgrazing of pasture by domes-tic stock. 

Hainan Hare 

hainanus Swinhoe 1870 Description and Taxonomy 

The Hainan hare is small (weight 1.30-1.75) to judge from seven specimens weighed by Luo (1988). It has a smaller, more rounded head than the Chinese hare L. sinensis and brighter coloring. The back is tawny brown mixed with black, the sides chestnut brown, the top of the tail blackish with white below, the feet pale brown with white marks and the under-parts white. Taxonomically, the position of the Hainan hare is still un-certain. Most authors consider it a subspecies of the Burmese hare L. which in turn is sometimes referred to as the Indian hare L. Swinhoe’s original description of “soft, woolly fur more like that of L. and “anterior upper incisors without the deep groove”, however, are sup-ported by recent descriptions and are not characters of the Indian hare. Specific separation may be simplest pending a full review of Southeast Asia hares. 

Distribution 

Restricted to Hainan Island, south China. (See Fig. 4.4). 

Habitat, Ecology, Behavior and Reproduction 

The greatest density of hares is in the dry grassland in the northwest and southwest of Hainan; the east of the island is less suitable. Flat, dry farm land with scattered second growth scrub or plantains is best, and hares do not live in the moun-tains or on agricultural land (Luo 1988, Song Yanling, pers. 

1989). 

Behavior 

The Hainan hare is nocturnal, with most activity after dark and in the early morning, although some may feed by day. They live among grass and do not dig burrows (Luo 1988). 

Reproduction 

Little recorded, but the young are said to survive well in dry weather. 

Status and Summary 

In previous years many hares were caught and the skins sold; some are still snared for the local market. Overhunting and agricultural development have reduced numbers to extremely low levels. Luo (1988) recommended protection to let num-bers recover, when they could again be managed as a resource for hunting. A survey to assess the present numbers and implement conservation management is urgent, although it is unlikely that protection could be enforced without consider-able public education (Song Yanling, pers. 1989). 

Black Jackrabbit 

Bryant 1891 Description and Taxonomy 

The black jackrabbit is of moderate size, about in weight. It is glossy black on the upper parts, but grizzled on the sides of the body, sometimes on the head, with dark buff or reddish brown. The underparts are dark cinnamon buff or dusky brown and the ears and sides of the head dusky grey. This species is closely related to the black-tailed jackrabbit 

L. califomicus, but the bone is heavier and there are sufficient differences in the skull to separate the black jack-rabbit from both L. on the adjacent mainland and from other subspecies (L. c. xanti, L. c. on nearby islands (Dixon et al. 1983). 

Distribution 

The black jackrabbit is found only on Espiritu Santo Island in the Gulf of California. (See Fig. 4.2). 

80 Habitat, Ecology, Behavior and Reproduction 

No information available. 

Status and Summary 

Although this is a species with a very restricted distribution, Chapman et al. (1983) consider that “As it is unlikely that the island will ever be inhabited the hares seem in no danger and the population is stable”. To ensure this, however, it may be wise to obtain more information on habitat requirements and consider establishing another population on some nearby island. 

Manchurian Hare 

Radde 1861 Description and Taxonomy 

This is the smallest of the four species of hares in Manchuria, weighing The fur is soft, long and thick. The back is blackish brown or rust brown with light yellow banded hairs, the breast, flanks and legs pinkish cinnamon, ears cinnamon buff, the neck dull rust-brown, belly whitish and tail grey with blackish-brown on top. In winter the fur is paler, some individuals have an ash-grey tinge, and the underparts are white. The Manchurian hare has had a varied taxonomic career, having been shifted to the genus 

and finally back to Lepus again. It seems most closely related to of Japan, but merits specific distinction (Angermann 1966). 

Distribution 

In the north, this hare reaches the Bureya Mountains (c. 

is widely distributed in northern Manchuria, and may extend into Korea (Jones and Johnson 1965). It is a forest species, and after the forests are cleared the tolai hare L. capensis tolai takes over the area (Loukashkin 1943) as it now has in eastern Manchuria. (See Fig. 4.4). 

Habitat and Ecology 

The preferred habitat is mixed forest, not pure conifer, on ridges and southern slopes, especially where tall Mongolian oak with an undergrowth of Manchurian hazelnut is dominant (Loukashkin 1943, Ognev 1966) and creepers and vines make the forest impenetrable. Hilly country is favored, with cliffs and rock outcrops, from 300m to altitude. The Manchu-rian hare does not like open valleys or grassland, and never approaches human habitation. Little is known of the ecology of this species, but it seems to be the Old World ecological equivalent of the snowshoe hare in North America, feeding on twigs of willow, linden, maple, wild apple, birch, elm, various shrubs and herbs and fallen fruit (Angermann 1966). 

Behavior 

The Manchurian hare is presumably solitary, but “wide beaten tracks” are produced in favored habitat in thick for-ests. It is “very shy” and does not have lairs in the open like most hares, settling “in holes in tree trunks which are open on one side” (Radde 1862, quoted by Ognev 1966). 

Reproduction 

Breeding begins in mid-February, and the litter size is one or two, occasionally four to five. The number of litters per year is not recorded (Angermann 1966). 

Status and Summary 

The Manchurian hare is restricted to a forest habitat which is declining rapidly in area. Because the land is then occupied by the tolai hare L. capensis tolai any subsequent regrowth of forest may not be accessible and plantation forestry is likely to be too lacking in understorey plants. Investigation of natural forest parks and reserves for hare populations is required. 

Manchurian Black Hare 

Li and Luo 1979 Description and Taxonomy 

According to Ognev (1923) confirmed that the Manchurian black hare was smaller than the Manchurian hare, although this is not supported by the weight of five black hares given by Luo (1988): (1.7-2.05). The back and flanks are shiny black with a slight brown tinge, the throat and chest cinnamon-buff, the belly white, the ears are black with a rusty fringe and the tail dark grey with black on the top. Some very long pale straw-colored hairs contrast with the dark back and flanks. There is a small white spot on the head. Previous authors have considered the black hare a dark form of the Manchurian hare L. because the dark form seems to be rather variable, it is not geographically isolated and the density is low (Gao Yaoting, pers. 1989). A few pure black hares also occur in Manchuria; whether these are melanics of L. or L. is unclear (Ognev 1966). 

Distribution 

Rare in the Ussuri Territory, but as common as the Manchu-rian hare farther south in the Kirin Province (Ognev 1966). (See Fig. 4.7). 

Habitat and Ecology 

Presumably the same as the Manchurian hare. The Manchu-rian black hare may be adapted to dark forest or concealment in burrows or hollow trees. 

Behavior and Reproduction 

No information available. 

Status and Summary 

The taxonomic status of this species requires verification by biochemical methods and investigation of its life history and ecology. The widespread success of a form which is 81 not isolated on an island is unusual. The species would appar-ently be vulnerable to loss of forest and, as for the 

hare L. its status in reserves should be estab-lished. 

Indian Hare 

F. Cuvier 1823 Subspecies: Lepus nigricollis a yabertensis, Lepus nigricollis cutchensis, L e p u s L e p u s 

joongshaiensis, Lepus macrotus, Lepus nigrkollis rajput, Lepus Lepus nigrkollis mahadeva, Lepus nigricollis sadiya, Lepus nigricollis singhala, Lepus simcoxi, Lepus nigricollis 

Description and Taxonomy 

The Indian hare is of moderate size, averaging 

and tends to be larger towards the south of India. The fur is rufous-brown much mixed with black on the back and face, rufous on the breast and legs, and the chin and under-parts are white. The southern form (L. n. nigricollis) has a dark brown or black patch on the back of the neck and a black upper surface to the tail; in the north (L. n. these parts are grey and brown, respectively. The desert form (L. n. 

has paler, yellow-sandy coloration and females 

are on average heavier than males according to Prakash and Taneja (1969). There are 12 subspecies, but several of these might be full species or even belong to the Cape hare L. capensis. A revision of Indian hares is overdue. 

Distribution 

Indian hares range from the foot of the Himalayas to the extreme south of India, from Pakistan to Assam and Bangla-desh except in the Sunderbunds. They also occupy Sri Lanka. In Java they are restricted to the extreme west of the island and may have been introduced. Other introduced populations are on Mauritius and the nearby island of Gunners Quoin, Analega, Reunion, and Cousin island in the Seychelles. (See Fig. 4.10). 

Habitat and Ecology 

This species occupies a wide range of habitats, from open desert with scattered shrubs near Jodhpur to thick jungle, provided there are some open clearings. Large tracts of scrub      

> Figure 4.10 Distribution of the Indian hare Burmese hare L. and mountain hare L. in Eurasia

82 Indian hare (Photo by W. R Oliver) 

and wasteland alternating with cultivated plains are ideal habitat (Prater 1971). In the Nilgiri Hills they live over 

and in the Himalayas up to where they apparently give way to the Cape hare or woolly hare L. oiostolus. 

The main diet is grass and forbs. In the Sind Desert they spend the day under bushes and come out at night to feed on 

Panicum, and (Purohit 1967). In wetter regions the diet contains up to 73% grasses and in the dry season hares may travel to reach green vegetation (Sabnis 1981). Grass, young plants, sweet potato and lettuce from gardens are recorded as eaten in Sri Lanka (Phillips 1935). On Cousin Island a detailed analysis of cuticle fragments in hare droppings listed sedges and grasses as major constituents, with Achyranthes and 

in another area (Kirk 1981). Indian hares may damage young trees and agricultural crops (Prakash and Taneja peas (Ghose 1971) and groundnuts in Pakistan (Brooks 1987). In western Nepal, hares spent the day in short grassland-shrub forest areas and foraged at night on short grass and crops (Bell 1986). Home ranges have been measured in Nepal Bell 1986) and on Cousin Island Kirk but larger ranges are likely in more open country and desert. Population density was estimated at 0.25 hares/ha in Nepal (Bell 1986) and on Cousin Island; the latter is a good example of the unusually high densities hares can reach on isolated is-lands without predators. 

Behavior 

Indian hares are normally nocturnal unless disturbed and often seen in the headlights of vehicles at night (Krishnan 1972). During the day a series of forms may be used for shelter, in low shrubs, tall grass, Zizyphus, or young palms; a single animal may use different dens in the morning and afternoon depending on the weather, sometimes returning to a form after disturbance (Ghose 1971). When pursued, they may take to ditches or animal burrows for cover. Hares living at high density on Cousin Island became active in mid after-noon, usually feeding in the shade of trees (Kirk 1981). 

Reproduction 

In a detailed study near Jodhpur, Prakesh and Taneja (1969) found fertile male hares every month; some females were pregnant in all months, but peak breeding and litter size were during the monsoon. The average annual litter size was 1.8 

rising from one in the winter to 3.2 in July. 

Status and Summary 

Indian hares are shot as game and snared or netted by villagers to prevent crop damage. Many were formerly killed by predators; however, these are declining in India as human populations increase, so on balance the environment is proba-bly improving for hares. Ghose (1971) points out that many hares live close to human habitation. A major problem is the uncertain taxonomic status of hares included under the name L. For example L. 

could well be a distinct species. (1981) suggested that the Javan hare was probably an endemic spe-cies in view of its long fossil history there. If so, it would merit urgent action because its numbers are now very low (Dr. Boeadi, pers. 1989). 

Woolly Hare Lepus Hodgson 1840 Subspecies: Lepus oiostolus Lepus oiostolus kozlovi, Lepus oiostolus oiostolus, Lepus oiostolus Lepus oiostolus qinghaiensis, Lepus oiostolus qusongensis, Lepus oiostolus sechuenensis. 

Description and taxonomy 

The woolly hare, as its name suggests, has long curly hair, the color varying widely between different subspecies from dark greyish-brown (L. o. to pale sandy yellow (L. o. oiostolus). The rump is paler and greyer than the back and the tail varies from pure white to dirty white below, with a broad brown stripe above. It is a moderate to large species, weighing 

in the north of its range, in the south, with some individuals reaching (Cai and Feng 1982). The taxonomy is still somewhat confused. Kao and Feng (1964) listed five subspecies and included the Yunnan hare L. comus. More recently Cai and Feng (1982) separated L. comus and listed the subspecies given above. 

Distribution 

The woolly hare occurs on mountains from to 

in Tibet, Gansu, Szechuan, Sikkim, Nepal and Kashmir (Angermann L. o. oiostolus occupies the western half 

83 of the range, from to and the other subspecies from 

to in latitudes (See Fig. 4.4). 

Habitat, Ecology, Behaviour and Reproduction 

This species inhabits high alpine meadows and mountain slopes up to the snowline; also dry, arid plains covered in stones. It takes cover in marmot burrows and shelters among rocks. There is very little detailed information about the woolly hare, but numbers seem to be very low except in a few favoured areas. Thus Shaller et al. (1988) write of Qinghai and Gansu Provinces: “Woolly hares were gener-ally scarce. However, parts of the Shule Nanshan block had a hare eruption 17 animals were counted in one 250m stretch.” 

Status and Summary 

More field work is needed on this species. Angermann (1967b) considers that it probably moults only once a year, in which case it cannot change in winter and would be very conspicuous against the snow unless it migrates downhill. If it needs forest for cover in winter it may be adversely affected by the decline in this habitat over much of its range, but there seems to have been relatively little change to its open grassland habitat. It may also have been poisoned accidentally in pika control operations. 

Alaskan Hare 

Merriam 1900 Description and Taxonomy 

The Alaskan hare is one of the largest hares, averaging 

(3.2-6.5) for a sample of 83 animals (Anderson and Lent 1977). In summer the coat is brown (cinnamon drab) above, white below; in late September the winter moult begins and the coat becomes completely white except for black tips on the ears. The spring moult starts in late May (Howell 1936). Hall (1981) recognized two subspecies: L. o. othus in the west and L. o. poadromus in southwest Alaska, but Anderson (1974) regards these as extremes in a continuous The species is now normally regarded as conspecific with the arctic hare L. (Baker et al. 1983) and sometimes both are included in the mountain hare L. (Dixon et al. 1983). 

Distribution 

West and southwest Alaska, from sea level to over 2,000ft (600m). Their former distribution may have extended north-west to Barrow, as shown on the maps of Howell (1936) and Hall but the present distribution does not apparently include the arctic slope (Anderson 1978). (See Fig. 4.3). 

Habitat and Ecology 

Open tundra is the normal habitat, with rocks for cover on alluvial plain for the northern subspecies, while the southern population occupies coastal lowland areas on the Aleutian Island chain. There appear to be no studies of home range or density and the animal is usually described as rare. The food is likely to be the same as that taken by other arctic hares: dwarf willow, grasses, sedges and heath plants. Anderson (1974) records and Empetrum eaten in April and May. 

Behavior 

Apart from Walkinshaw’s (1947) description of a pet hare, there seems to be little recorded. The lack of records of colonial behavior is surprising; either this species differs from other arctic hares in being solitary, or field work has been restricted to summer when the groups have split up. On study areas chosen because hares were numerous, Anderson (1974) recorded 23 hares on about The young behave like other hares, grunting and drumming with the feet 

shaw 1947). 

Reproduction 

In West Alaska the breeding season starts in April and most young are born from 28 May to 14 June; there is only one litter a year and the mean litter size is 6.3 (3-8) with leverets at birth weighing (Anderson and Lent 1977). The growth rate of young over the first ten weeks averaged 

Status and Summary 

The Alaskan hare is a rare species and seems to have de-creased in numbers (Howell 1936). More work on distribution and numbers is required, although the habitat does not seem to be threatened. 

Burmese Hare 

Blyth 1855 Subspecies: Lepus peguensis peguensis, Lepus peguensis siamensis, Lepus peguensis 

Description and Taxonomy 

The Burmese hare is a smallish animal closely allied to the Indian hare L. The back is reddish grey mixed with black, greyer on the rump, and the tail is black above, white below. The underparts are white and the rather large ears have a conspicuous black tip. The feet vary from white in the Burmese specimens to fulvous in those from Thailand. The three subspecies may be conspecific with L. peguensis 

and all may be included in L. 

Distribution 

L. p. peguensis occupies the valleys of the Irrawaddy, 

win and Salween rivers from about to Rangoon (Wroughton 1915). L. p. siamensis is in Thailand where forest has been cleared (Lekagul and 1977) from 

to Bangkok and south to in the Malay Peninsula (Gyldenstolpe 1917). is in Laos, Cambodia and S. Vietnam to 225km south of Saigon (Van 1969). (See Fig. 4.10). 

84 Habitat and Ecology 

This species is a lowland hare, living on land cleared for crops and dry wasteland. In Malaya and S. Vietnam it occurs in sandy country along the coast and in Thailand on forest clearings in lalang grass or around hill tribe villages (Lekagul and 1977). There is no information on home range, population density or diet. 

Behaviour and Reproduction 

Apart from the casual references to its nocturnal habits, there is no information on behaviour. The only litter sizes quoted are one embryo (Gyldenstolpe two females with two embryos (Kloss and one litter of four (Pfeffer 1969). 

Status and Summary 

This species is represented by fairly small populations isolated from each other by forest. Their habitat is probably expanding as forests are cleared. More studies of taxonomy, distribution and behaviour are urgently needed, but the populations do not seem threatened at present. 

Scrub Hare 

F. Cuvier 1823 Subspecies: Lepus saxatilis Lepus saxatilis aurantii, Lepus saxatilis chiversi, Lepus saxatilis herero 

(including bechuanae, chobiensis, damarensis, khanensis, ngamiensis), Lepus saxatilis megalotis, Lepus saxatilis 

lemi, (including nigrescens), Lepus saxatilis orangensis, Lepus saxatilis saxatilis, Lepus saxatilis 

Lepus saxatilis 

Description and taxonomy 

The scrub hare is a large animal, averaging about 

4kg) but shows a decrease in size from central south Cape Province to the northeast. It is now thought to merge with the African savanna hare L. victoriae (Robinson and Dippenaar 

a far smaller species (average 2kg) ranging from north-ern Cape Province to North Africa. The large South African form is pale buff-colored hare with greyer sides and white below; while the small northern form is darker grey on the back and the breast and flanks are rufous or chestnut, espe-cially dark in high altitude specimens. There is also a distinct difference in ear length from in the large southern form to about 90m in the north. Taxonomically, the relationship of the scrub hare L. 

and African savanna hare L. is still in dispute (Angermann and Feiler 1988) and in the long run all may be subspecies of the Indian hare L. For the present we separate L. victoriae, giving the ten subspecies above. 

Distribution 

The scrub hare occupies most of Cape Province, South Africa, excluding open grassland and dry desert. Taking the stepped decline in ear length as the distinction between the scrub hare and the African savanna hare, the northeast boundary of its distribution is central Natal. It is commonest in southwest Africa, except in the Namib (Shortridge 1934). (See Fig. 4.9). 

Habitat and Ecology 

According to Shortridge the scrub hare is “partial to rocky or stony ground although its extensive range covers every type of country open sandveld, bushveld, or forest.” It is attracted by cultivation and garden crops, and has been recorded to dig out peanuts. There seems to be no detailed information on diet, home range or population densities. 

Behaviour and Reproduction 

The scrub hare is nocturnal, coming out at dusk to feed throughout the night. When disturbed by day it runs zigzag and lies up in cover again, and can be followed and put up several times (Shortridge 1934). It lies up on its own, but a second hare is often close; when both are flushed they run in different directions. There has been no study of reproduction, but casual reports of newly born young are for May, October and No-vember. Shortridge states there are probably two litters a year with two or three young in a litter. Bourquin and Sowler (1980) record breeding in October. 

Status and Summary 

The scrub hare appears to be common in Cape Province, but more data on population numbers and biology are desirable. Even if it is “only” a subspecies of the widespread African savanna hare, its large size and big ears remain to be ex-plained. Regardless of taxonomy, this unusual form deserves attention. 

Chinese Hare 

Gray 1832 Subspecies: Lepus sin jlaviven formosus, Lepus sinensis sinensis 

Lepus sinensis 

Description and Taxonomy 

The Chinese hare is small and is a relatively richly colored animal with chestnut or rufous tones on the back and chest. The underparts are paler and the tail brown, giving the animal a rather uniform tone overall. The tips of the ears have black triangular markings. The fur is short, straight and somewhat coarse. Taxonomically, this hare is distinct from other species in skull and tooth characters. It has been allied in the past with the Hainan hare L. hainanus, Japanese hare L. 

and the hispid hare hispidus, but none of these re-lationships is convincing. There are three subspecies (above). Many authors consider the Korean hare L. a subspe-cies of sinensis, but this does not seem established satisfacto-rily. 85 Distribution 

Although the type location is near Canton, the present distri-bution according to Luo (1988) does not extend so far south, but only to about Dao Van Tien on the other hand, lists the Chinese hare in northeast Vietnam. The north-ern boundary is the Yangtse River, and the southeast corner of mainland China is the main distribution area, from the coast to In Taiwan hares are commonest in the south where there are more farms and early stages of forestry plantations (Shao-Pin Yo, pers. 1981). (See Fig. 4.7). 

Habitat, Ecology, Behaviour and Reproduction 

There is very little published information about the Chinese hare. It appears to live on open waste-land and scrubby hills in southwest China rather than on rice fields. In Taiwan they are minor pests of forestry and are trapped in small numbers for sale in local markets (Shao-Pin Yo, pers. 1981). 

Status and Summary 

More work is needed on the distribution and status of the Chinese hare. Its populations are likely to have become iso-lated by intensive agriculture in the highly populated areas it inhabits. L. starcki 

Ethiopian Highland Hare 

Petter 1963     

> Figure 4.11 Distribution of the Ethiopian highland and African savanna hare L.

Description and Taxonomy 

This is a medium-sized hare of about 2.53kg weight. The thick, soft fur on the back is tawny mixed with black, turning greyish towards the rump; the breast, sides, nape and legs are tawny and the underparts white; the overall effect is of rich contrasting somewhat similar to the European hare 

europaeus. The tails in the population at Shoa are entirely white, but in the Bale Mountains they have a black mid-dorsal stripe. The ear is multi-colored, with a brownish grey leading edge, pale grey over most of the back of the ear and a conspicuous black patch towards the tip which is not found in other East African hares. The taxonomy is still unsettled. Petter (1963) described 

starcki as a subspecies of the Cape hare L. capensis, 

mann (1983) elevated it to a full species and Azzaroli-Puccetti (1987) considers it a relic population of the European hare 

europaeus dating from the late Quaternary. There are no named subspecies. 

Distribution 

The Ethiopian highland hare is restricted to the central pla-teau of Shoa Province, about 40km from Ababa, and the mountains of Bale Province, from 2,500 to above sea level. According to Angermann (1983) all locations are between and and to slightly east of (See Fig. 4.11). 

Habitat, Ecology, Behaviour and Reproduction 

Very little recorded. Dr. L. Brown (pers. 1967) wrote: “I have never seen so many, even on some Scottish moors, as there are in the heath zone of the Arussi Mountains in Ethiopia at over 11,000 feet. These could well be a new subsp...On the summit of the Arussi Mountains I found large brown eagles living on hares as a staple diet.” 

Status and Summary 

The Ethiopian highland hare appears to be relatively numer-ous, but more work is needed on its biology and habitat requirements. It deserves attention because of its restricted distribution. 

Mountain Hare 

Linnaeus 1758 Subspecies: Lepus Lepus ainu, Lepus 

begitschevi, Lepus canescens, Lepus 

gichiganus, Lepus hibernicus, Lepus 

Lepus kozhevnikovi, Lepus 

Lepus mordeni, Lepus Lepus 

scoticus, Lepus Lepus 

Lepus transbaicalicus, Lepus 

Description and Taxonomy 

This widespread species is very variable in size and color. Different populations average from two to four kilogrammes in weight and the summer coat can be pale grey or dusky brown in the mountains to rich rust-brown on the plains. In 

> 86

general, the head tends to be browner than the body. The ears are black-tipped and shorter than the head. The tail is short and usually all white in both winter and summer, as are the underparts. There is a seasonal change to white winter pelage in autumn in all areas except Ireland, where only a few individual hares turn white or patchy. In spring they molt from white to a brown or grey summer coat and there is a third molt from brown to brown in late summer. Following the separation of the mountain hare L. 

and arctic hare L. (Baker 1983) there are 16 sub-species. 

Distribution 

Mountain hares range from east Poland to the Pacific Ocean, from in the far north of Russia and Scandinavia, south to 

There are isolated populations in Ireland, Scotland, Switzerland, Italy, the Kurile Islands and Hokkaido, Japan. It has been introduced into the Faeroes, England and various Scottish Islands; some introduced on Spitzbergen later died out. (See Fig. 4.10). 

Habitat and Ecology 

Mountain hares occupy tundra and open forest, particularly of pine, birch, and juniper. In Scotland and Ireland heather moors and are favoured habitats, and in southern Russia copses in the middle of open steppe and reed belts around lakes. On agricultural land this species tends to be replaced by the European hare L. europaeus in Europe and the Cape hare L. capensis further east. The food eaten varies with the habitat. In Scotland and Ireland much heather is eaten, but this is not a major food in Europe where birch, juniper, poplar, willow and 

Vaccinium are favoured. Palatable grasses and are taken when available. Home ranges vary from in Scotland (Flux 1970, 

1976) to 72 and 305ha for two hares tracked in Finland (Seiskari 1957). There is evidence of a three to four year cycle in abundance in and a longer-term cycle of eight to twelve years in Scotland and Russia. Popula-tion densities are very variable: about l-2 hares/km 2 over much of Sweden and Russia; in west Scotland to 

on the best areas in northeast Scotland (Watson and 

1973); and on small islands such as Vedholmen in Sweden as high as (Angerbjorn 1986). 

Behavior 

Mountain hares are nocturnal but there is increased daylight activity in summer when nights are short, or in winter when food is scarce. In snow, hares dig to reach vegetation and also make short tunnels for protection from adverse weather or aerial predators. They are more social than other hares and often gather to feed in the same place in groups of 20-100; one large group lives on the airfield in Belfast. Reproductive behavior consists of a male (or small group of males) following behind a female for hours, but the males seldom fight each other. In Europe mountain hares are reported to confuse their tracks before resting up for the day (Ognev 1966) but this has not been seen in Scotland (Flux 1970). 

Reproduction 

The gestation period of mountain hares is longer than in other leporids (47-55 days) and in Sweden first litters average 2.15 young and second litters 3.24 1957). Superfoetation has not been recorded. In southern Norway and Scotland three litters can be produced giving an annual production of five to six young; in northern Russia there is only one litter of 6.4-6.9 young (Naumov and Shatalova but in the south three or even four litters can be born in a year (Gaiduk 1973). At birth leverets weigh about and grow at 14-30g per day. In captivity the young depend on milk for 

20 days but those of the final litter may continue to suckle for six weeks (Flux 1970). 

Status and Summary 

Mountain hares are a very widespread and abundant species. They are regarded as vermin on grouse moors in Scotland and large numbers are shot in winter for export to Germany. In Russia many were harvested annually for skins, but this mar-ket has declined. In Ireland, Scotland and Japan they cause some damage to forestry plantations, while in Scandinavia they are a major game animal. Some subspecies may be threatened at present, e.g. those in the European Alps and central Italy, and more data on their population status is desirable. 

87 White-tailed Jackrabbit 

1839 Subspecies: Lepus townsendii townsendii, Lepus townsendii campanrus 

Description and Taxonomy 

The white-tailed jackrabbit is greyish brown on the upper parts, white below and on the tail apart from a dusky or buff stripe on top. On the plains of British Columbia, Nebraska, Kansas and parts of Colorado they moult in winter into coats only a little paler, but elsewhere they turn almost completely white in winter, retaining only the black tips to the ears. The under-fur remains iron grey or reddish-brown (Hansen and Bear 1963). This hare is a little larger than the black-tailed jackrabbit, with adult males averaging and females 

in South Colorado (Bear and Hansen 1966) and 

and respectively in Iowa (Kline 1963). There are two subspecies, L. t. townsendii to the east of the Rocky Mountains and L. t. campanius to the west. The species   

> White-tailed jackrabbit in snow form (Photo by Dean E. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, F.T. Collins. Co.)

well 

id entification. tiated and there are no taxonomic problems of 

Distribution 

The white-tailed jackrabbit has changed its distribution in historical times. In the early 1900s it was extending east as far as Wisconsin, Iowa and Missouri as forest was cleared, then, perhaps because of increasing cultivation of its prairie habitat, its range declined and it became extinct from Kansas and southern Nebraska in about 1950 (Dunn et al. 1982). It now occurs from mid Saskatchewan and Alberta to the north of Arizona, and from inland Washington and California to Lake Superior. (See Fig. 4.1). to migrate considerable distances in winter to avoid hard snow cover. In Iowa the average density was mile, with peaks of about 90-114 (Kline 1963). 

Behavior 

then often congregate on favored feeding areas. 

White-tailed jackrabbits are nocturnal, spending the day in 

for example, records a group of 30-150 feeding on a 300 x 400m patch of alfalfa for ten days in Alberta, with no sign forms and starting to feed at 15.00-16.00 hr; peak activity was of interactions at 22.00-01.00 hr, and most activity stopped by 03.00-04.00 hr in summer (James 1967). In winter they burrow for shelter between into snow drifts and use shrubs and trees for cover. The hares the feeding animals. 

Habitat and Ecology 

The main habitat is open prairie and plains, but populations extend into the badlands of Dakota and on to montane 

tures among scattered evergreens to altitude in Colo-rado. In Iowa they are most numerous on recently glaciated Reproduction 

soils, and less in the west (Kline 1963). In Southern Colorado Courtship behavior is similar to that of the black-tailed 

Bear and Hansen (1966) rate the most favored habitats from rabbit, except that the jumping behavior is more pronounced grassland, sagebrush, rabbitbrush, to meadow. The meadows (Blackburn 1973). In North Dakota the breeding season 

were used more in autumn following harvest, and in winter the tends from late February through mid-July, females 

use of shrubs for cover and open ridges for travel was noted. ing an average of 3.3 litters a year, with average litter size of 4.6 Early authors maintained that white-tailed jackrabbits (l-9) (James and 1969). In Iowa, Kline (1963) gives 

well to agricultural development, but decline of two to three or four litters a year, averaging 3.6 young per bers now seems general. litter. The diet in Colorado was 70% forbs, 19% grass and 7% shrubs in summer, changing to 76% shrubs and 12% forbs in Status and Summary 

winter (Bear and Hansen 1966). In North Dakota in spring The white-tailed jackrabbit is a widespread and apparently they congregate on wheat and in summer, alfalfa (James thriving species over much of central and western USA. It 1967). Home ranges may be quite small (one measured at ten provides hunting for sport and is sold to fur buyers and mink hectares, James 1967) but movements of one to two miles ranchers. They are also regarded as pest of agriculture, 

occur between cover and feeding grounds, and hares may have cially on crops of alfalfa, corn, soybeans and winter wheat. 

88 African Savanna Hare 

Thomas 1893 Subspecies: Lepus victoriae Lepus victoriae 

Lepus victoriae crawshayi, Lepus raineyi, Lepus victoriae Lepus victoriae whytei, Lepus 

Description and Taxonomy 

The African savanna hare is of medium size, about 2kg (1.5 3kg). It tends to be more richly colored than the Cape hare L. capensis, with greyish brown back, rufous breast, sides and legs, and white below, but where the two species coexist in East Africa they may be almost identical in color (Flux and Flux 1983). Mountain forms are more rufous and darker in coloring. The ears are black towards the tip and the tail is black above, white below. The fur texture is coarser than in L. capensis. 

Robinson and Dippenaar (1987) consider it conspecific with the scrub hare L. but for the present we follow Angermann and Feiler (1988) in treating them separately. The position of subspecies is unclear; we include those listed as “crawshayi” Petter but exclude L. fagani. 

Distribution 

The African savanna hare occupies most south of the Sahara and north of South Africa, where it is replaced by the scrub hare L. There is an isolated population in South Algeria near Abbes. (See Fig. 4.11). 

Habitat and Ecology 

The Cape hare coexists with the African savanna hare over much of its range. The separation seems largely by habitat, the Cape hare preferring more open, dryer country and the Afri-can savanna hare the scrubbier, more montane areas. In Ruanda-Urundi the African savanna hare likes 

triandra and Imperata associations (Curry-Lindahl 

and in East Africa Tarconanthus scrub (Flux and Flux 1983). Smithers (1971) measured the propor-tions of hares found in different vegetation types: 83% of Cape hares were in open grassland, 15% in scrub or woodland, while for African savanna hares the percentages were re-versed. The food eaten doubtless varies widely with the habitat. An intensive study in E. Africa by Stewart (1971) showed that the main plant items eaten were unidentified grasses 

(19%) and (ll%), while the Cape hare in the same area ate far less and more 

triandra, and tended to graze closer to the ground. There appear to be no measurements of home range of the African savanna hare, but from personal observation in East Africa they appear to have small ranges of Population densities can be as high as nine hares/ha in Virunga National Park, Zaire, but averaged about in 23 areas sur-veyed by Curry-Lindahl(l981). For the Serengeti, Frame and Wagner (1981) estimated a far lower density of 0.09 hares/ha, which agrees with the in good habitat in Uganda (Ogen-Odoi and Dilworth 1987). 

Behavior. 

African savanna hares in East Africa were normally solitary or seen feeding in groups of two or three in favoured areas. They were strictly nocturnal (Flux 1981b) and in Zaire 

found that “a night count along 5km was 639 hares but at 09.00 next morning not a single animal was seen.” This refers to road-counts, however, and Frame and Wagner (1981) record that hares could be raised in almost equal numbers day and night by a vehicle travelling cross-country. Hares in Uganda are attracted to cut grassland (Eltringham and Flux 1971) or the fresh growth produced after burning or overgrazing (Ogen-Odoi and Dilworth 1987). 

Reproduction 

In Botswana Smithers (1971) found that half to two-thirds of the adult females examined were pregnant in all months of the year. A similar pattern of continuous breeding occurred in Uganda (Flux 1981a). Mean litter sizes were likewise similar, averaging 1.6 in both Botswana and Uganda. The annual production of young would average about eight per female. 

Status and Summary 

The African savanna hare is a widespread, successful species over much of Africa. Isolated populations, such as that at 

Abbes in southern Algeria, deserve attention. 

Yarkand Hare 

Gunther 1875 Description and Taxonomy 

The Yarkand hare is a small species of about 

The head and body are a uniform sandy brown color with a pinkish tint in summer, the sides sand yellow and the underparts white. The top of the tail is the of the back, without the usual black hairs of The ears are long and lack the black tips also. In winter the color is much paler. In general appearance the Yarkand is closest to L. capensis 

but seems to be a distinct desert species (Angermann 1967b). There are no recognized subspecies. 

Distribution 

The Yarkand hare is restricted to the Tarim Basin, Xinjiang, between latitudes and longitudes It has a circular distribution in a ring round the Taklamakan desert, relying on vegetation near the streams descending from the surrounding mountains (Gao 1983, Luo 1988). (See Fig. 4.7). 

Habitat and Ecology 

The preferred habitat is Chinese tamarisk or poplar forest and brushwood along the margins of the rivers, which produce “islands” of vegetation as they run into the desert. Other vegetation such as reedy meadows can be used, but the hares 89 tend to avoid agricultural fields. (Lagomorpha, Leporidae) III. Zur Variabilitat palaearktischer The hares eat grass and crops, causing some damage to Schneehasen. Mitt. Berlin 43: 161-178. melons. There is no information on home range, but Gao Angermann, R. 1967b. Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Gattung Lepus 

(1983) records that four men in the field for three hours could (Lagomorpha, Leporidae) IV. Gunther, 1875 each encounter 20 or more hares, indicating a reasonably high und Lepus oiostolus Hodgson, 1840 zwei endemische 

population density. ten Zentralasiens. Mitt. Mus. Berlin 

Angermann, R. 1983. The taxonomy of Old World Leptrs. 

Behaviour and Reproduction Fennica 

R. and Feiler. A. 1988. Zur Nomenklatur. 

Yarkand hares are mainly nocturnal and are usually seen in und Variabilitat der (Gattung Lepus) in 

the early morning or late evening. They make shallow runways Africa (Mammalia, Lagomorpha, Leporidae). 

in the vegetation under bushes. Up to six individuals may Staatliches Museum fur Dresden 43: 149-167. congregate at one place on a river bank to drink (annual Azzaroli-Puccetti, M.L. 1987. The systematic relationships of hares rainfall in this area is between 4.5 and 76mm). (genus Lepus) of the horn of Africa. (A) 9:1-22. There is little information on reproduction. The litter size Baker, A.J., Eger, J.L., Peterson, R.L. and Manning, T.H. 1983. is usually two (up to five). A pregnant female was shot in May Geographic variation and taxonomy of arctic hares. 

and a newly-born young seen in September. Fennica 

Bannikov, A.G. 1954. [Mammals of the Mongolian People’s 

Status and Summary 

Yarkand hares are shot as a game animal and about 10,000 furs are produced annually (1958 to 1981) with little sign of decline. Although the population would decline with more intensive agriculture, the present system of allowing fields to revert to scrub from time to time enables hares to persist (Gao Yaoting, pers. 1989). Nevertheless, this species de-serves attention because of its restricted habitat and distribu-tion. 

References 

Abildgard, F., Anderson, J. and Barndorff-Nielsen, 0. 1972. The hare population (Lepus europaeus of Illumo Island, Denmark. Dan. Rev. Game Biol. 

Adams, L. 1959. An analysis of a population of snowshoe hares in northwestern Montana. Ecol. Monogr. 

Agnew, A.D.Q. and Flux, J.E.C. 1970. Plant dispersal by hares (Lepus capensis L.) in Kenya. Ecology 

J.N., Alsina, M.G. and Brandani, A.A. 1979. Ecology of the European hare (Lepus europaeus P.) II. Reproduction and body weight of a population near San de Argentina. 

Serie: y Control de la Fauna Silvestre, 

No. INTA, Bariloche. Anderson, H.L. 1974. Natural history and of the tundra hare (Lepus othus Merriam) in western Alaska. Thesis, University of Alaska, Fairbanks. 

Anderson, H.L. 1978. Range of the tundra hare. The  

> “Nauka,”

Moscow-Leningrad. 

Bear, G.D. and Hansen, R.M. 1966. Food habits, growth and repro-duction of white-tailed jackrabbits in southern Colorado. Colo-rado State Univ. Sta., Tech. Bull. 90. 

Bednarz, J. 1977. The white-sided jackrabbit in New Mexico: distri-bution, numbers, and biology in the grasslands of Hidalgo County. Unpubl. MS, NM Dept Game and Fish, 

Bednarz, J.C. and Cook, J.A. 1984. Distribution and numbers of the white-sided jackrabbit (Lepus gaillardi) in New Mexico. 

> Southwestern Naturalist

Bell, D.J. 1986. A study of the hispid hare Caprolagus hispidus in Royal Suklaphanta Wildlife Reserve, western Nepal: a summary report. J. Jersey Wildl. 1. Bergengren, A. 1969. On genetics, evolution and history of distribu-tion of the heath-hare, a distinct population of the Arctic hare,  

> Lepus

Lin. Viltrevy 

Bergerud, A.T. 1983. Prey switching in a simple ecosystem. Scientific American 

Bittner, S.L. and Rongstad, O.J. 1982. Snowshoe hare and allies   

> (Lepus americanus

and allies). In: Chapman, J.A. and Feldhamer, GA. (Eds), Wild Mammals of North America. Johns Hopkins, Baltimore. Pp. 146-163 Blackbum, D.F. 1973. Courtship behaviour among white-tailed and black-tailed jackrabbits. Great Basin Nat. 

Bourquin, 0. and Sowler, S.G. 1980. The vertebrates of Vernon Crookes Nature Reserve. 1. 

Burton, R. 1989. Arctic hare. Newsletter No. 

Brandenburg, J. 1988. Moon bunnies. BBC Wildlife, October 1988. Broekhuizen, S. 1976. The situation of hare populations in the Netherlands. In: Pielowski, Z. and Z. (Eds), “Ecology and 74. management of European harepopulations.” Polish Hunting 

Anderson, H.L and Lent, P.C. 1977. Reproduction and growth of the sociation, Warsaw. Pp. 23-24 tundra hare (Lepus othus). Mammal. Broekhuizen, S. and Maaskamp, F. 1980. Behaviour of does and Anderson, S. and Gaunt, A.S. 1962. A classification of white-sided leverets of the European hare (Lepus europaeus) whilst nursing. jack rabbits of Mexico. Amer. Mus. Novitates No. J. Lond. 

Angerbjom, A. 1986. Reproduction of mountain hares (Lepus Bronson, F.H. and Tiemeier, O.W. 1959. The relationship of 

in relation to density and physical condition. J. Lond. and black-tailed jack rabbit populations in Kansas. 

40: 194-198. Angermann, R. 1966. Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Gattung Lepus Brooks, E., and Hussain, I. 1987. The desert hare Lepus 

(Lagomorpha, Leporidae) II. Der taxionomische Status von nigricollis a minor pest of agriculture in Pakistan. Pak. J.  

> Lepus

Temminck und Lepus Radde.   

> Mitt. Mus. Berlin

Brull, U. 1976. Die Bekampfung der Magen Darmrundwurmer und Angermann, R. 1967b. Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Gattung Lepus Kokzidien beim Feldhasen in Schleswig-Holstein mit Thibenzole 90 und Theracanzan. In: Pielowski, and Z. (Eds), “Ecol-ogy and management of European hare populadons.” Polish Hunting Association, Warsaw. Pp. 173-176 

D.F. 1981. Nocturnal aggregations of white-tailed jack-rabbits at Rimbey, Alberta. Blue 

Cai, G. and Feng, Z. 1982. A systematic revision of the subspecies of highland hare (Lepus oiostolus), including 2 new subspecies.  

> Sin. 2:

167-182. Cary, J.R. and Keith, L.B. 1979. Reproductive change in the lo-year cycle of snowshoe hares. Can. J. 

Chapman, J.A. 1984. Latitude and gestation period in New World rabbits (Leporidae: Sylvilagus and Romerolagus). Amer. Nat. 

Chapman, J.A., Dixon, K.R. Lopez-Forment, W. and Wilson, D.E. 1983. The New World jackrabbits and hares (genus Lepus). 1. Taxonomic history and population status. Fennica 

E.L. 1961. The recent mammals their taxonomy and distribution. Univ. Arizona Press. 

Corbet, G.G. 1978. The mammals of the region: a  

> review.

Brit. Mus. (Nat. Hist.). Cornell Univ. Press. 

Corbet, G.B. 1983. A review of classification in the family Leporidae.  

> Fennica

174: 11-15. Curry-Lindahl, 1961. Contribution a des    

> en tropicale. Exploration du National Albert et du
> National de la Kagera.

Inst. des Nationaux du Congo et du Ruanda-Urundi, Bruxelles. 

Curry-Lindahl, K. 1981. Biomass of African hares and gaps in current knowledge of the role of lagomorphs in African savanna ecosys-tems. In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, (Eds), Proceedings of the World Lagomorph Conference, University of Guelph, Ontario. Pp. 803-815 Dao Van Tien. 1978. An experience of zoogeographical 

tion of Vietnam. Zh. 

Dawson, M.R. 1981. Evolution of the modern Lagomorphs. In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), Proceedings of the World Lagomorph Conference, University of Guelph, Guelph. 

Pp. l-8. Dixon, J.E.W. 1975. A note on the burrows used by the hare Lepus capensis. Madoqua 

Dixon, K.R., Chapman, J.A., Willner, G.R., Wilson, D.E. and 

Forment, W. 1983. The New World jackrabbits and hares (genus  

> Lepus).

2. Numerical taxonomic analysis. Fennica 

Dunn, J.P., Chapman J.A., R.E. 1982. Jackrabbits (Lepus califomicus and Allies). In: Chapman, J.A. and Feldhamer, G.A. (Eds), Wild Mammals of North America. Johns Hopkins, Balti-more. Pp. 124-145. Eltringham, S.K. and Flux, J.E.C. 1971. Night counts of hares and other animals in East Africa. E. Afr. Wildl. J. 

Fadeev, V.A. 1966. [The diet and daily rhythms of the brown hare in western Kazakhstan.] “Nauka,” Moscow-Leningrad. Feldhamer, G.A. 1979. Age, sex ratios and reproductive potential in black-tailed jackrabbits. Mammalia 

Flinders, J.T. and Hansen, R.M. 1972. Diets and habitats of jackrab-bits in northeastern Colorado. Colorado State Univ Range Sci-ence Dept, Sci. Ser. No. 

Flinders, J.T. and Hansen, R.M. 1975. Spring populations responses of cottontails and jackrabbits to cattle grazing shortgrass prairie. 

> Range Mgmt

Flux, J.E.C. 1965. Timing of the breeding season in the hare, Lepus 

and rabbit, cuniculus (L.). 

Flux, J.E.C. 1967a. Reproduction and body weights of the hare Lepus europaeus in New Zealand. N.Z. J. Sci. 

Flux, J.E.C. 1967b. Hare numbers and diet in an alpine basin in New Zealand. N.Z. Ecol. 

Flux, J.E.C. 1970. Life history of the mountain hare (Lepus  

> scoticus)

in northeast Scotland. J. Lond. 

Flux, J.E.C. 1981a. Reproductive strategies in the genus Lepus. In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), Proceedings of the World Lagomorph Conference, University of Guelph, Guelph. 

Pp. 155-174. Flux, J.E.C. 1981b. Field observations of behaviour in the genus  

> Lepus.

In: Myers, and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), Proceedings of  

> the World Lagomorph Conference,

University of Guelph, Guelph. 

Pp. 377-394. Flux, J.E.C. and Flux, M.M. 1983. Taxonomy and distribution of East African hares. Fennica 

Flux, J.E.C. and Jarvis, J.U.M. 1970. Growth rates of two African hares, Lepus capensis. J. Mammal. 

Frame, G.W. and Wagner, F.H. 1981. Hares on the Serengeti Plains, Tanzania. In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), Proceedings 

of the World Lagomorph Conference, University of Guelph, Guelph. Pp. 790-802. French, N.R., McBride, R. and Detmer, J. 1965. Fertility and popu-lation density of the black-tailed jackrabbit. J. Wildlife Mgmt 

29: 14-26. 

Gaiduk, V.E. 1973. Reproduction of L. in Bielorussia. Vest. Akad. Nauk BSSR 

Gaiduk, V.E. 1983. Some aspects of the ecology of closely related sympatriclagomorph species (Lagomorpha). Sov. Ecol. 13:401-405. Gao Yao-ting. 1983. Current studies on the Chinese Yarkand hare. 

> Fennica

Ghose, R.K. 1971. Field observations on the habits of the Pachmarhi hare, mahadeva Wroughton Ryley, in Madhya Pradesh, India. J. India 

Gibb, J.A., White, A.J. and Ward, C.P. 1985. Population ecology of rabbits in the Wairarapa, New Zealand. NZ Ecol. 

Gould, J. 1988. A comparison of avian and mammalian faunas at Lake Northwest Territories, in 1961-62 and 1981-82. Can Field-Nat. 

Graf, R.P. 1985. Social organization of snowshoe hares. Can. J. Zool. 

Graf, R.P. and Sinclair, A.R.E. 1987. Parental care and adult aggres-sion toward juvenile snowshoe hares. Arctic -178. Grange, W.B. 1932. Observations on the snowshoe hare, Lepus  

> phaeonotus

Allen. J. Mammal. 13: 1-19. Grange, W.B. 1957. Those of the forest. Faber and Faber, London. 

Griffith, R.E. and Evans, J. 1970. Capturing jackrabbits by 

lighting. J. Wildl. Mgmt. 

Gross, J.E., Stoddart, L.C. and Wagner, F.H. 1974. Demographic analysis of a northern Utah jackrabbitpopulation. Wildl. Monogr. No. 

Grudzev, V.V. 1974. [Ecology of the European hare (population of the species as an element of the landscape.)] Moscow Univ. Press, Moscow. 

Gustavsson, I. 1971. Mitotic and meiotic chromosomes of the vari-able hare (Lepus L.), the common hare (Lepus europaeus 

Pall.) and their hybrids. Hereditas 

91 Gyldenstolpe, N. 1917. Zoological results of the Swedish zoological expeditions to Siam 1911-1912 and 1914-1915. V. Mammals II.  

> Svenska Vetenskapsa-kademiens Handlinger

Vol. 

Haggman, J. and Rousi, M. 1985. Relationship between repellent substances of pines and browsing by mountain 

> Ser. Bot.

E.R. 1981. The mammals of North America. Wiley and Sons, New York. 2 

Hansen, R.M. and Bear, G.D. 1963. Winter coats of white-tailed jackrabbits in southwestern Colorado. Mammal 

Harrison, D.L. 1972. The mammals of Arabia. Vol. III Lagomorpha, Rodentia. Benn, London. 

Hayashi, C. 1978. A new statistical approach to estimating the size of an animal population: the case of a hare population. Math. Scientist 3: 117-130. 

B.J., Keith, L.B. and Rongstad, O.J. 1987. Demography and ecology of the arctic hare (Lepus in southwestern Newfoundland. Can. J. 

R. 1962. Food and feeding habits of the mountain hare   

> Lepidus scoticus,

Hilzheimer. Lond. 

R. 1976. A population study of mountain hares (Lepus 

in northeast Scotland from 1956-1969. Anim. Ecol. 

R. and Taylor, M. 1968. Movements of European hares in an upland area of Scotland. 

Hibbard, C.W. 1963. The origin of the P3 pattern of Sylvilagus, Caprolagus, Oryctolagus, and Lepus. J. Mammal. 44: 1-15. 

N.H. 1957. Fortplantningen hos skogsharen (Lepus t. 

Lin.). 

Homolka, M. 1987. The diet of brown hare (Lepus europaeus) in Central Bohemia. Folia 36: 103-l 10. Horino, S. and Kuwahata, T. 1984. The food habits of the Japanese hare (Lepus (1) Stomach content analysis of hares from Ehime Prefecture. Jap. For. 

Howard, W.E., Joong-Soo Park, Young-Mu Shin, and Wang-Su Cho. 1975. Rodent control in Republic of Korea. Inst. of Agricultural Sciences, Office of Rural Development. 

Howell, A.H. 1936. A revision of the American Arctic hares. 

> Mammal.

Hunter, R.B. 1987. Jackrabbit-shrub interactions in the Mojave Desert. In: Provenza, F.D., Flinders, J.T. and E.D. (Eds), Symp. Plant-herbivore interactions. For. Ser, US Dept. Agric. Ogden, Utah. Pp. 88-92. Imaizumi, Y. 1970. The Handbook of Japanese Land Mammals. 

Shicho-Sha, Tokyo. Ishadov, N. 1974. [Winter reproduction and the tolai hare population in the Kara Kum desert.] Ekologiya 

Jain, A.P. and Prakash, I. 1976. The organ: bodyweight relationship in the Indian desert hare, Lepus Blanford. 

> Agnew

James,T.R. 1967. The ecology and life history of the white-tailed jack rabbit (Lepus townsendii Hollister) in North Dakota. Ph.D. Thesis, Univ. of North Dakota. 

James, T.R. and Seabloom, R.W. 1969. Reproductive biology of the white-tailed jack rabbit in North Dakota. Wildl. Mgmt 

> 568.

Jones, J.K. and Johnson, D.H. 1965. Synopsis of the lagomorphs and rodents of Korea. Univ. Kansas Publ. Mus. Nat. Hist. 

Kao, Y. and Feng, T. 1964. On the subspecies of the Chinese 

tailed hare, Lepus oiostolus Hodgson. 

1: 19-30. Keith, L.B. 1981. Population dynamics of hares. In: Myers, K. and 

C.D. (Eds), Proceedings of the World  

> Conference,

University of Guelph, Guelph. Pp. 395-440 Keith, L.B. 1983. Role of food in hare population cycles. 

Keith, L.B. and Windberg, L.A. 1978. A demographic analysis of the snowshoe hare cycle. Wildl. Monogr. No. 

Kim Sang Wook, and Kim Woo 1974. Avi-mammalian fauna of       

> Korea. Wildlife Population Census in Korea

No. 5. Office of Forestry, Forest Research Inst. 

Kirk, D.A. 1981. The ecology of the Cousin hare, Lepus 

in the Seychelles. Hons Thesis, Univ. of Aber-deen. 

Kline, P.D. 1963. Notes on the biology of the jackrabbit in Iowa.   

> Iowa Sci. 70:

196-204. Kloss, C.B. 1919. On mammals collected in Siam. Nat. Hist. of 

> Siam,

Krishnan, M. 1972. An ecological survey of the larger mammals of peninsular India. J. Bombay Nat. Hist. 

Krivosheyev, V.G. (Ed 1984. [Terrestrial mammals of the Soviet Far East]. Nauka, Moscow-Leningrad. 

Kuroda, N. 1953. The present status of the protection of birds and mammals in Japan. 7th Pac. Sci. Cong. Vol IV 

> 727.

Lechleitner, R.R. 1958. Certain aspects of behaviour of the 

tailed jack rabbit. Am. Midl. Nat. 

Lekagul, B. and J.A. 1977. Mammals of Thailand. 

pha, Bangkok. 

Lindlof, B. 1978. Aggressive dominance rank in relation to feeding by European hare. 10: 145-158. Lomolimo, M.V., Brown, J.H. and Davis, R. 1989. Island biogeogra-phy of montane forest mammals in the American southwest.   

> Ecology 70:

180-194. Lopez-Forment, W. 1989. News of Lepus 

> Newsletter

Loukashin, A.S. 1943. On the hares of northern Manchuria. 

> Mammal.

Luo Z. 1988. The Chinese hare. China Forestry Publishing House. 186pp. 

J.A. 1981. Conservation needs of Nesolagus in Sumatra. In: Myers, K. and C.D. (Eds), Proceedings of   

> the World Conference,

University of Guelph, Guelph. 

Pp. 929-932. 

A.H. and Manning, T.H. 1959. The birds and mammals 

of Adelaide Peninsula, Nat. Mus. Canada Bull. No. 161. 

Manning, T.H. and A.H. 1958. The mammals of Banks Island. Arctic Inst. of N.A. Tech. Pap. 

Martinet, L. 1977. Reproduction et du en In: Pesson, D. (Ed.) du petit gibier et amenagement des 

Gauthier-Villars, Paris. Pp. 265-272. Monaghan, P. and N.B. 1985. Group foraging in wild brown hares: effects of resource distribution and social status. 

> Anim. Behav.

Nagorsen, D.W. 1985. A morphometric study of geographicvariation in the snowshoe hare (Lepus americanus). Can. J. 

> 579.

Nagy, K.A., Shoemaker, V.H. and Costa, W.R. 1976. Energy 

tion and temperatu re regulation by jackrabbits (Lepus 

cus) in the Mojave Desert. Physiol. -375. 

92 Naumov, S.P. and Shatalova, S.P. 1974. Species indices of reproduc-tion in mammals and peculiarities of their geographic variation (Leporidae taken as an example). 

Nice, M.M., Nice, C. and Ewers, D. 1956. Comparison of behaviour development in Snowshoe hares and Red Squirrels. Mammal. 

Ogen-Odoi, A.A. and Dilworth, T.G. 1987. Effects of burning and hippopotamus grazing on savanna hare habitat utilization. Afr. J. Ecof.  

> Ognev,

S.I. 1966. Mammals of the USSR and adjacent countries. IV Rodents. Israel Program Sci. Trans, Jerusalem. 429pp. Otsu, S. 1965. Ecological studies of Tohoku hare, Lepus brachyurus angustidens Hollister. I. On the reproduction. Jap. J. Appl. Ent. 

Otsu, S. 1973. The breeding and ecology of the Tohoku hare Lepus brachyurus angustidens Hollister. Animals 

Palacios, F. 1977. de una nueva de liebre (Lepus castroviejoi) de la cordillera Cantabrica. 

> Vertebrata

Palacios, F. 1980. cromosomico, de DNA y 

de la liebres Vertebrata 

Palacios, F. 1983. On the taxonomic status of the genus Lepus in Spain. Fennica 

Palacios, F. and Meijide, M. 1979. geografica y habitat de las liebres en la Peninsula Naturalia Hispanica No. 19. 

Palacios, F. and Ramos, B. 1979. actual de las liebres en 

medidas su de la Estacion Central de 

Palmer, T.S. 1896. The jack rabbits of the United States. U.S. Dept Agric., Bull. 8. 

Parker, G.R. 1977. Morphology, reproduction, diet and behaviour of the Arctic hare (Lepus monstrabilis) on Heiberg Island, Northwest Territories. Can. Field-Nat. 

Parkes, J.P. 1984. Home ranges of radio-telemetered hares (Lepus capensis) in a sub-alpine population in New Zealand: implica-tions for control. Fennica 

D. 1989. Variation in survival of brown hare (Lepus  

> ropaeus)

leverets from different farmland areas in the Paris Basin. J. Appl. Ecol. 

Petter, F. 1963. Nouveaux elements d’une revision des 

Africains. 

Pfeffer, P. 1969. Considerations sur l’ecologie des du Cambodge oriental. et la vie 

Phillips, W.W.A. 1935. Manual of the mammals of Ceylon. Colombo Mus., Ceylon. Dulan, London. 

Pielowski, Z. 1972. Home range and degree of residence of the European hare. Theriologica 

Pielowski, Z. 1976. On the present state and perspectives of the European hare breeding in Poland. In: Pielowski, Z. and 

Z. (Eds), “Ecology and management of European hare popula-tions Polish Hunting Association, Warsaw. Pp. 25-27. Pontrelli, M.J. 1968. Mating behaviour of the black-tailed jackrabbit. 

> Mammal.

Popov, V.A. 1973. [The hare as a factor in biological productivity increase in the game areas of Kama-Volga.] Tran. 

> nat. Union Game Biol.

Prakash, I. and Taneja, G.C. 1969. Reproduction biology of the Indian desert hare, Lepus Blanford. 

Prater, S.H. 1971. The book of Indian animals. Bombay Nat. Hist. 

Bombay. 3rd Ed. 

Purohit, 1967. The Great Indian Desert. Perspectives in the ecology and physiology of small desert mammals. 

Radchuk, V. 1963. [Hare trapping in the Ukraine.] Zh. l:ll-13. Rapoport, E.H. 1982. Areography. Geographical strategies of species. 

Pergamon Press, Oxford. 

Robinson, T.J. 1982. Key to the South African Leporidae 

Lagomorpha). S. Afr. J. 

Robinson, T.J. and Dippenaar, N.J. 1987. Morphometrics of the South African Leporidae. II: Lepus Linnaeus, 1758, and 

1929. Annals of the Transvaal Museum 

Sabnis, J.H. 1981. The food habits of the Indian hare, Lepus  

> lis,

in Chatri Forest, Amravati, Maharashtra.J. Bombay Nat. Hist. 

Schaller, G.B., Ren Junrang and Qiu Mingjiang. 1988. Status of the snow leopard in Qinghai and Gansu Provinces, China. Biol. Cons. 

Schneider, E. 1978. Hege und Jagd. 

BLV Verlagsgesellschaft, Munich. 

Schneider, E. and Leipoldt, M. 1983. DNA relationship within the genus Lepus in S.W. Europe. Fennica 

Seiskari, P. 1957. Winter home range of the snow hare. Suomen Riista 

ll:lOl-108. Shortridge, G.C. 1934. The mammals of South West Africa. 

mann, London. 2 (Vol. 1. 437pp.). Simmons, N.M. 1966. Observations of mammals in the Cabeza Prieta Game Range area, Arizona. Mammal. 

Sinclair, A.R.E., Krebs, C.J., Smith, J.N.M. and S. 1988. Population biology of snowshoe hares. III. Nutrition, plant sec-ondary compounds and food limitation. J. Anim. Ecol. 57:787-

806. Sludski, A.A., Bernstein, A.D., Shubin, Fadeev, V.A., Orlov, G.I., Bekenov, A., Karitonov, V.I. and Utinov, S.R. 1980. [Mammals of Kazakhstan. Vol. 2: Lagomorpha.] 

Kazakh SSR, 

Smithers, R.H.N. 1971. The mammals of Botswana. Mus. Memoir No. 4. Trustees of the Nat. Museums of Rhodesia, Salisbury. 

Stewart, D.R.M. 1971. Diet of Lepus capensis and L. crawshayi. E. Afr. Wildl. J. 

Tachibana, T., Kamikawa, T., Jyogo, K. and Yamamura, Y. 1970. Diurnal activity of Lepus brachyurus brachyurus, under 

natural conditions. J. Mammal. Japan 

Tang, X. 1988. Living treasures: an odyssey through China’s extraordi-nary nature reserves. Bantam Books/New World Press, Beijing. 

Tapper, S.C. and Barnes, R.F.W. 1986. Influence of farming practice on the ecology of the brown hare (Lepus europaeus). Ecol. 

Thomas, 0. 1893. Description of two new rodents from the Victoria Nyanza. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. 

Tiemeier, O.W. 1965. 1. Bionomics. The Black-tailed jack rabbit in Kansas. Kansas State University Agricultural Experiment Sta-tion Tech. Bull. 

Tomilova, T.P. 1969. size of the hare population and the utilization of hare stocks in Kirov Oblast.] Biol. 

Turcek, F.J. 1966. [Seeds of woody plants in fecal pellets of the European hare (Lepus europaeus).] Mitt. 

Van der Loo, W., James, A. and J. 1981. Chromosome evolution in Leporids. In: Myers, K. and C.D. (Eds), Proceedings of the World Conference, University of Guelph, Guelph. Pp. 28-36. Van Peenen, P.F.D. 1969. Preliminary manual for  

> mammals

of South Vietnam. U.S. Nat. Smithsonian Inst. 

Vorhies, C.T. and Taylor, W.P. 1933. Life and ecology of  

> jackrabbits,

Lepus and Lepus californicus ssp., in relation to grazing in Arizona. Univ. Ariz. Agric. Exp. Stn. Tech. 49:471-587. Walkinshaw, L.H. 1947. Notes on the arctic Mammal. 

357. Wang, Y., Luo, Z., and Fen, Z. 1985. Taxonomic revision of Yunnan hare, Lepus comus with description of two new subspecies. 

> Res.

Watson, A. and R. 1973. Population densities of mountain hares (Lepus on western Scottish and Irish moors and on Scottish hills. J. Lond. 

Wessels, T.C. 1978. Bevolkingsdinamika van die vlakhaas Lepus capensis in die Pretorius-Wildtuin. M.S.cThesis, Univ. of Pretoria. Won, P.O. 1961. Studies on the avi-mammalian fauna of Korea from the viewpoint of the Forestry protection. Ix “Avi-mammalian fauna of Institute Agri. Minn. Agri. Forestry. Suwon, Korea. Pp. 31-139. Wroughton, R.C. 1915. Bombay Natural History Society’s mammal survey of India, Burma and Ceylon. Report No. 16. Bombay Nat. Hist. 

F. and Y. 1988. Clipping damage to the broadleaf tree seedlings by the Japanese hare, Lepus brachyurus. of the Japanese Society for Haves 

F., Shiraishi, S. and Uchida, T.A. 1988. Parturition and nursing behaviours of the Japanese hare, Lepus brachyurus brachyurus. J. Jap. 

H. 1977. Ergebnisse der Untersuchung die 

des Feldhasen Lepus europaeus 1778) im 

schungsgebiet Hakel. Beitr. 

94 Chapter 5: The Cottontails 

# Joseph A. Chapman and Ceballos 

# Status and Summary males in most (Chapman, et 1982). Phylogenetic relationships have received considerable 

The cottontails (genus comprises 13 species. However, some believe there are 14 species in two subgenera; 

Sylvilagus and the monotypic Brachylagus. All Sylvilagus are New World forms and reach their greatest diversification in North America. The swamp rabbit S. aquaticus, Audubon’s cottontail S. audubonii, brush rabbit S. bachmani, eastern cottontail S. Nuttall’s cottontail S. nuttalli and marsh rabbit are important game species managed by state wildlife agencies in the United States. The forest rabbit S. although widely distributed, is poorly known over much of its range, thus more information is needed about this species. The Mexican cottontail S. 

is found over a large region in west central Mexico, where viable populations are located in many areas, and should be considered out of danger. Status surveys are recom-mended for Dice’s cottontail S. and the San Jose brush rabbit S. mansuetus. The Tres Marias S. and the Omilteme S. cottontails are recommended for endan-gered status. 

# Overview 

in recent years. The dendrogram in Fig. 5.1 is a composite of the systematic relationship among the ten spe-cies of for which cytological data are available 

and Eabry 1970, Diersing and Wilson 1980, Robinson et al. Lorenzo et al. in press). Seven of the 13 species of apparently share a common ancestral link. The swamp rabbit and the marsh rabbit are closely related, as are the eastern cottontail, the Tres Marias cottontail and the Mexican cottontail (the last three forms share a basic diploid number of 42). Audubon’s and Nuttall’s cottontails are also closely related to each other. Cytological and morphological information suggests that the Tres Marias cottontail is more closely related to the Mexican cottontail than to the eastern cottontail (Diersing and Wilson, 1980; Lorenzo et al., in press).              

> 2 n 4 4 ANCE
> 2n 48
> =4 8
> 2 n =4 6 . 2 n =5 2
> =4 2
> =4 2
> 38
> =3 8

Cottontails are widely distributed throughout North, Central and the northern half of South America. The most widely distributed member of the genus is the eastern cottontail. It inhabits diverse habitats from southern Canada to northern South America. Other species have smaller distributions, with some found only on islands as insular forms (i.e. the San Jose brush rabbit and Tres Marias cottontail). The forest rabbit is the most successful of the southern forms. Its distribution extends from southern Mexico into northern Argentina and it is the only member of the genus occurring south of the equator. Cottontails are true rabbits, with altricial young born naked in a nest or “form”. Cottontails vary in size from the 4 2

small pygmy rabbit (approx. 400g) to the largest member, the 4 2

swamp rabbit (approx. 2,000g). Most are darkly colored on 2 n = 4 2 

the back and light below. All cottontails have relatively large ears and feet. The skull of is typically rabbit-like, with a highly fenestrated maxillary bone, a straight cutting Figure 5.1 Composite dendrogram of the systematic relationships among 

edge on the-upper incisors, and a second set of “peg” teeth posterior to the upper incisors. The presence of an 

bone distinguishes the genus SyZviZagus from the genus         

> the North American cottontails and
> The basic dendrogram is taken from Robinson et 1984 and modified using material from and Eabry 1970, Diersing and Wilson 1980, Robinson et al. 1983 and Lorenzo et in

The females are from one to ten per cent larger than press. 

95 No single vegetative community can be identified as cot-tontail habitat. Their habitat requirements are met in numer-ous diverse locations. Cottontails inhabit a wide variety of dis-turbed, successional and transitional habitats, often charac-terized by forbs and perennial grasses, with an abundance of well-distributed escape cover such as sage brush 

sp.), bramble sp.) or Frailejones sp.). Cot-tontails have high rates of reproduction and their populations are regulated through mortality and dispersal. Escape cover is essential to their habitat requirements. Population levels vary markedly between species and from year to year, depending on climate, habitat type and other factors. Local populations of the eastern cottontail have reached unusual densities of more than ten per ha. Densities of one to five per ha are probably the norm. In desert species such as Audubon’s cottontail, densities of less than one rabbit per ha are more normal. Cottontail behavior is stereotyped and fairly consistent with other rabbit species. Both non-social behavior, including basic postures, movements and vocalizations, and adult social behavior largely centered on reproductive interactions have been documented and Holler 1964, Tefft and Chapman 1987). The number of young produced annually by 

varies among species, with an elevational and latitudinal gra-dient within species. Cottontails are iteroparous. The eastern cottontail is the most fecund member of the genus often pro-ducing young per year, while the forest rabbit appears to be the least fecund, producing about ten young per year (Durant 1981, Chapman et al. 1982, Chapman 1984). In general, cottontails are cyclic in abundance, thus long term trends are more useful in assessing their status than population levels in any one year. Even with the eastern cottontail, the most common species in North America, 

term declines in numbers probably occur. Habitat is the key to cottontail abundance. According to Chapman et al. 

“We can expect weather-related, local and short-term popula-tion increases, but the basic pattern (of population decline) will continue unless there is a major agricultural recession that leads to less intensive land use... Conservationists and wildlife managers should strive to develop and preserve grassland habitat whenever possible on public and private lands. The true plight of grassland animals such as the cottontail is only beginning to be appreciated”. Despite the continued loss of cottontail habitat to agriculture and development, cottontails remain the most important game animals in North America (Chapman, et al. 1982). In those species with limited or patchy distributions, or which live in island habitats, such as the Tres Marias cottontail, Omilteme cottontail or New England cot-tontail, habitat protection is critical. The biology and status of the 13 species of cottontails in the subgenus are discussed below in detail. The genus was reviewed by Chapman et al. (1982). 

# Species Accounts Swamp Rabbit 

1837) Subspecies: aquaticus aquaticus, 

uaticus 

Description and Taxonomy 

The swamp rabbit is the largest member of the genus 

(wt 2000g). Its back is blackish to rusty brown in color. The belly and underside of the tail are white. The species possesses a prominent cinnamon-colored eye-ring. Unlike other members of the genus, sexual dimorphism is not pronounced. There are two subspecies of S. aquaticus. The more north-ern form S. a. aquaticus is found associated with mature forests, while the southern form S. a. is found associ-ated with coastal and riparian areas. Detailed range maps are in Chapman and Feldhamer (1981). 

Distribution 

The swamp rabbit is found in the southeastern United States. (Fig. including the states of Alabama, Louisiana, Missis-sippi, Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Missouri, Illinois, Indiana, Tennessee, Georgia and South Carolina.    

> S. aqua
> S.
> Figure 5.2 Distributions of the swamp rabbit
> brush rabbit and Mexican cottontail

96 Habitat and Ecology 

The swamp rabbit is a subtropical species found in swamps, river bottoms and lowland areas. Its distribution in the north is limited to the southern swamp forest community-type at about the isotherm. Swamp rabbits are always associated with water (Lowe 1958, Hunt 1959, Terre1 1972). In the northern portion of their range, swamp rabbits are found in mature forests and regenerating forest tracts 15 years old (Terre1 and in canebrake communities (Harrison and Hickie 1931). Much of this habitat has been eliminated. The swamp rabbit subspecies S. a. aquaticus has begun to decrease in the northern part of its range in the United States, appar-ently due to habitat alteration and riparian drainage. In Mis-souri, swamp rabbit habitat decreased from in 1870 to less than in 1973 as a result of the conversion of lowland hardwood forests to row crops (Korte and Fre-drickson 1977). Despite the shrinkage of swamp rabbit habitat on the periphery of the range, there are still large areas of prime habitat in states such as Louisiana where they remain important game animals. Recent studies indicate a home range of about 0.5 and for female and male swamp rabbits, respectively. Densities in timbered habitat were esti-mated at two rabbits per ha (Kjolhaug and Woolf 1988). Swamp rabbits feed on a variety of grasses, forbs and sedges. Their preferred food items appear to be and other sedges (Toll et al. 1960, Terre1 1972). 

Behavior 

Swamp rabbits exhibit a linear dominance hierarchy among males that does not include females. They form breeding groups of several animals controlled by a dominant male. The male hierarchy has been characterized by: (1) less overt aggression between conspecific males during reproduction activities, (2) restriction of dominant-subdominant challenges between adult males, (3) a direct relationship between social status and frequency of male dominance displays, a direct relationship between male social status and male-female in-teractions. Swamp rabbits are highly territorial and males may maintain their dominant status from year to year 

and Holler 1964, Holler and Sorenson 1969, Sorenson et al. 

1972). 

Reproduction 

The breeding season of the swamp rabbit varies throughout its range and from year to year. In the northern portion of their range the breeding season usually starts in February (Hill 1967). In the south they apparently breed year-round (Hunt 1959). Litter size varies from one to six. Females may produce two to five litters per year (Sorenson et al. 1968). 

Status and Summary 

Although there has been some reduction in its range, the swamp rabbit remains an abundant and important game species in the Gulf states. As a game species, its harvest is regulated by various state wildlife agencies. No additional conservation measures are needed. The species has been reviewed by Chapman and Feldhamer (1981). 

Audubon’s or Desert Cottontail 

(Baird 

Subspecies: Sylvilagus audubonii Sylvilagus audubonii audubonii, Sylvilagus audubonii Sylvilagus audubonii cedrophilus, Sylvilagus audubonii confinis, Sylvilagus audubonii goldmani, Sylvilagus audubonii minor, Sylvilagus audubonii Sylvilagus audubonii 

Sylvilagus audubonii sanctidiegi, Sylvilagus audubonii vallicola, Sylvilagus audubonii 

Description 

The Audubon’s cottontail is relatively large for the genus 

Sylvilagus (weight l,OOOg). The ears are long and sparsely haired on the inner surface. The tail is large and the feet sparsely haired. The upper body and tail are gray, the under-side white. There are 12 subspecies. 

Distribution 

The species is found from near the Canadian border in Montana, south into central Mexico and from the Pacific coast of California, east into central Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Nebraska, South Dakota and North Dakota (Fig. 5.3). De-tailed range maps for the subspecies are in Chapman and Willner (1978). 

Habitat and Ecology 

The Audubon cottontail is an inhabitant of arid regions, occurring from below sea level in Death Valley, California to at least in mountainous regions (Orr 1940). It may be       

> S. audubonii S.
> S.
> Figure 5.3 Distribution of Audubon’s cottontail
> cottontail and Omilteme cottontail S.

97 Audubon’s cottontail (Photo by Leonard Lee Rue III) 

found in woodlands, grasslands and deserts at lower eleva-tions throughout the southwestern United States (Findley 1969). The species is frequently found associated with riparian zones in arid regions. 

Behavior 

There have been no studies dealing directly with the behavior of Audubon’s cottontails, however, some behavioral observa-tions have been made. They are most active in the evening and early morning and inactive at temperatures above (Ingles 

1941). This cottontail is not gregarious, uses low prominences such as stumps as lookout posts (Orr 1940) and may climb trees (Summer 1931, Ingles 1941). 

Reproduction 

The length of the breeding season varies from year-round to seven months depending on location. Usually, the breeding season begins in December or January and extends for seven to nine months. Litter sizes are small for the genus, averaging 2.6 to 3.6 young per litter (Orr 1940, Sowls 1957, Chapman and Morgan 1974). 

Status and Summary 

The Audubon cottontail is an important game species and its status is monitored in many states. Land clearings and cattle grazing may effect Audubon cottontail population levels 

> Habitat of Audubon’s cottontail
> at Sonora, Mexico (Photo by G. Ceballos)

98 (Kundaeli and Reynolds 1972, Flinders and Hansen, 1975). In Mexico it is still common over much of its geographic range. None of the twelve subspecies is known to be under threat and no additional conservation measures are required. 

Brush Rabbit 

Sylvilagus (Waterhouse 1838) Subspecies: bachmani bachmani, 

cinerascens, Sylvilagus bachmani Sylvilagus bachmani ubercolor, Sylvilagus bachmani Sylvilagus bachmani mariposae, Sylvilagus bachmani Sylvilagus bachmani Sylvilagus bachmani macrorhinus, Sylvilagus bachmani peninsularis, Sylvilagus bachmani 

Sylvilagus bachmani tehamae, Sylvilagus bachmani 

Description and Taxonomy 

The brush rabbit is one of the smaller cottontails (weight up to l,OOOg). The color of the back is dark brown to gray brown, while the belly and underside of the tail is whitish. The feet are small and sparsely haired. The legs, ears and tail are short. There are 13 recognized subspecies, which are discussed in detail in Chapman (1974). 

Distribution 

The brush rabbit is confined to the Pacific coast, from the Columbia River in the north to the tip of Baja California in the south. It does not occur east of the Cascade/Sierra Nevada Mountain Ranges (Fig. 5.2). Its range has not changed appre-ciably in historic times. 

Habitat and Ecology 

Brush rabbits require dense bramble clumps or other thick brushy habitat (Orr 1940, Chapman 1971). These bramble clumps often have an extensive network of trails and runways. The species will occasionally use burrows, but does not dig its own. The home range is very small (less than 

depending on the uniformity of the habitat (Shields 1960, Chapman 1971). Brush rabbits eat mainly edible grasses (Orr but also will take berries and other vegetation (Chapman 1974). 

Behavior 

The behavior of the brush rabbit has not been quantified although some behavioral observations have been made (Orr 1940, 1969). Brush rabbits are extremely cautious when venturing from dense cover to feed. They exhibit aminimum individual distance of without an aggressive “chase” resulting. Nose touching and sniffing often precede a “chase”. The species also exhibits stereotype grooming behavior 1969). Brush rabbits may climb low shrubs and trees, a behavior unusual in the Leporidae (Chapman 1974). In Oregon, the introduced eastern cotton-tail S. was reported to exhibit aggressive behavior toward the brush rabbit (Chapman and Verts 1969). 

Reproduction 

The breeding season varies from north to south. In Oregon, breeding begins in February and ends in August (Chapman and while in California it begins in December and ends in May or June 1955). Litter size also varies between regions. The average litter size was 2.8 in Oregon, 3.5 in northern and central California and 4.0 in west central California (Orr 1940, 1955, Chapman and 

1972). The brush rabbit is one of the less fecund members of the genus, producing about young in five to six litters per year (Chapman and 1972). 

Status and Summary 

The brush rabbit is a game species in both Oregon and California, but is hunted little. There is no detailed informa-tion on its status in Baja California, but it is still quite abun-dant. No additional conservation measures are proposed. The species was reviewed by Chapman (1974). 

Forest Rabbit or Tapeti 

Sylvilagus (Linneaus 1758) Subspecies: Sylvilagus brasiliensis andinus, Sylvilagus brasiliensis Sylvilagus brasiliensis brasiliensis, Sylvilagus brasiliensis Sylvilagus brasiliensis capsalis, Sylvilagus brasiliensis caracsensis, Sylvilagus brasiliensis chillae, Sylvilagus brasiliensis chotanus, Sylvilagus brasiliensis 

Sylvilagus brasiliensis Sylvilagus brasiliensis Sylvilagus brasiliensis gabbi, 

brasiliensis Sylvilagus brasiliensis Sylvilagus brasiliensis Sylvilagus brasiliensis meridensis, Sylvilagus brasiliensis mimensis, Sylvilagus brasiliensis paraquensis, Sylvilagus brasiliensis peruanus, Sylvilagus brasiliensis Sylvilagus brasiliensis 

Sylvilagus brasiliensis tapetillus, Sylvilagus brasiliensis 

99 S. brasiliensis  

> Figure 5.4 Distribution of the forest rabbit

Description and Taxonomy 

The forest rabbit is a small to medium-sized rabbit with a markedly small to rudimentary tail, short hind feet and very short ears. Its color ranges from light grey to almost black dorsally, slightly lighter on the sides of the body and the tail, and a whitish belly except for a dark throat patch. The tail is dark ventrally. There are 23 recognized subspecies of the forest rabbit (Johnson and Chapman in press). However, the species is in need of systematic revision (see Diersing 1981 and Chapman and Johnson in press for examples). 

Distribution 

The forest rabbit occurs as far north as southern Tamaulipas, Mexico, southward along the eastern coast of Mexico and the Yucatan Peninsula (Quintana Roo, Yucatan and Campeche) to western Guatemala. It probably occurs southward to El Salvador. It does occur in Honduras, the eastern half of Nicaragua, eastern Costa Rica and Panama. Forest rabbits occur throughout South America except at high altitudes above snow line and in the Patagonian region south of the Argentine (Fig. 5.4). Little is known about the species distribution in the Amazonian Region (Hershkovitz 1950, Diersing 1981, Chapman and Willner 1982, Chapman and Johnson in press). 

Habitat and Ecology 

Although widely distributed, the forest rabbit has been stud-ied in some detail only in the of Venezuela (Durant, 

1981, 1983). In Mexico and Central America this species is mainly found in tropical forests, including rain, deciduous and second growth forests; it also occurs in pastures near forested habitats. In Los Tuxtlas, Veracruz, a representative habitat of the species in Mexico, the rain forest includes a well-devel-oped canopy, with trees up to high such as 

and ambigens, and a sparse understory. 

Behavior 

The forest rabbit builds elaborate above-ground nests to rear its young. The nests are built of dry grasses and consist of a central chamber, with three to four small chambers at the end of a runway system (Durant 1981, Chapman and Willner-Chapman 1982). 

Reproduction 

In Chiapas, Mexico, this species reproduces throughout the year. The gestation period is around 28 days and the litter size is between three and eight (Alvarez Toro 1977). In the 

the forest rabbit breeds year-round. They have a long gestation of 44 days and produce an average of 4.7 litters per year b. meridensis). The mean litter size is 1.2, the smallest average litter-size reported for the genus (Durant 

Annual production of young is less than ten per year. 

Status and Summary 

In northwestern South America, habitats of the forest rabbit and the eastern cottontail S. appear to be mutually exclusive. Forest rabbits cling to dwindling forests and clear-ings within them and to the of the crests. Cottontails are replacing forest rabbits in artificial savannas cutting through the original forests. Undoubtedly, the larger, more prolific and aggressive cottontail, together with the predators which follow it, is the most important factor con-tributing to the exclusion of the forest rabbit from the 

expanding artificial savannas and scrublands of northwestern South America.  

> The forest rabbit brasiliensis
> (Photo by J. A. Chapman)

100 S. brasiliensis  

> Figure 5.4 Distribution of the forest rabbit

Description and Taxonomy 

The forest rabbit is a small to medium-sized rabbit with a markedly small to rudimentary tail, short hind feet and very short ears. Its color ranges from light grey to almost black dorsally, slightly lighter on the sides of the body and the tail, and a whitish belly except for a dark throat patch. The tail is dark ventrally. There are 23 recognized subspecies of the forest rabbit (Johnson and Chapman in press). However, the species is in need of systematic revision (see Diersing 1981 and Chapman and Johnson in press for examples). 

Distribution 

The forest rabbit occurs as far north as southern Tamaulipas, Mexico, southward along the eastern coast of Mexico and the Yucatan Peninsula (Quintana Roo, Yucatan and Campeche) to western Guatemala. It probably occurs southward to El Salvador. It does occur in Honduras, the eastern half of Nicaragua, eastern Costa Rica and Panama. Forest rabbits occur throughout South America except at high altitudes above snow line and in the Patagonian region south of the Argentine (Fig. 5.4). Little is known about the species distribution in the Amazonian Region (Hershkovitz 1950, Diersing 1981, Chapman and Willner 1982, Chapman and Johnson in press). 

Habitat and Ecology 

Although widely distributed, the forest rabbit has been stud-ied in some detail only in the of Venezuela (Durant, 

1981, 1983). In Mexico and Central America this species is mainly found in tropical forests, including rain, deciduous and second growth forests; it also occurs in pastures near forested habitats. In Los Tuxtlas, Veracruz, a representative habitat of the species in Mexico, the rain forest includes a well-devel-oped canopy, with trees up to high such as 

and ambigens, and a sparse understory. 

Behavior 

The forest rabbit builds elaborate above-ground nests to rear its young. The nests are built of dry grasses and consist of a central chamber, with three to four small chambers at the end of a runway system (Durant 1981, Chapman and Willner-Chapman 1982). 

Reproduction 

In Chiapas, Mexico, this species reproduces throughout the year. The gestation period is around 28 days and the litter size is between three and eight (Alvarez Toro 1977). In the 

the forest rabbit breeds year-round. They have a long gestation of 44 days and produce an average of 4.7 litters per year b. meridensis). The mean litter size is 1.2, the smallest average litter-size reported for the genus (Durant 

Annual production of young is less than ten per year. 

Status and Summary 

In northwestern South America, habitats of the forest rabbit and the eastern cottontail S. appear to be mutually exclusive. Forest rabbits cling to dwindling forests and clear-ings within them and to the of the crests. Cottontails are replacing forest rabbits in artificial savannas cutting through the original forests. Undoubtedly, the larger, more prolific and aggressive cottontail, together with the predators which follow it, is the most important factor con-tributing to the exclusion of the forest rabbit from the 

expanding artificial savannas and scrublands of northwestern South America.  

> The forest rabbit brasiliensis
> (Photo by J. A. Chapman)

100 level to in Central Mexico (Leopold 1959; Ceballos and Galindo 1984, Armstrong and Jones 1971).   

> Habitat of the forest rabbit in the Paramo de Mucabaji, Merida, Venezuela. The plant in the foreground is frailejones a common plant of the Venezuelan Paramo (Photo by J. A. Chapman)

However, little knowledge is available regarding the im-pact of tropical deforestation on the abundance of this species. In Mexico, the abundance of the forest rabbit apparently de-clines when extensive areas are deforested. However, it sur-vives well in second growth forests and pastures (Alvarez 

Toro 1977). A systematic survey is needed to elucidate the status of the forest rabbit over much of its range. The South American forms of this species were reviewed by Chapman and Johnson (in press). 

Mexican Cottontail  

> Sylvilagus

(Waterhouse 1848) Subspecies: Sylvilagus cunicularius, Sylvilagus 

insolitus, Sylvilagus cunicularius 

Description and Taxonomy 

The Mexican cottontail is large for the genus (weight 

The fur is coarse and brownish gray to reddish above, to white underneath. Three subspecies of S. cunicularius are recognized (Hall 1981). 

Distribution 

The Mexican cottontail is found in the coastal lowlands of the Pacific coast and in the temperate forests of Central Mexico, including the states of Sinaloa, Nayarit, Jalisco, Colima, Michoacan, Guerrero, Oaxaca, Distrito Federal, Mexico, Morelos, Tlaxcala and Puebla (Fig. 5.2). It occurs from sea 

Habitat and Ecology 

The Mexican cottontail occurs in temperate forests in central Mexico and in tropical dry deciduous and semi-deciduous forests in western Mexico (Leopold 1959, Ceballos and 

1984, Ceballos and Miranda 1986). In central Mexico it is quite abundant in the pine and pine-oak forests with a dense cover of “zacatones” (bunch grasses; Festuca 

and Extensive habitat is found along the mountains of the Transvolcanic belt, especially in the Popocatepetl, Iztaccihualtl, Pelado and Nevado de Toluca volcanoes. In the mountains south of Mexico City it is 

crosympatric with two other species of rabbits (eastern cottontail and volcano rabbit diazi). 

In western Mexico it is found in dry deciduous forests and pastures, but is more abundant in pastures and other dis-turbed vegetation (Ceballos and Miranda 1986). In southern Sinaloa southward to western Michoacan, the Mexican cot-tontail occurs along the coastal plain from sea level to the mountain slopes. In the mountain slopes is parapatric with the eastern cottontail (Diersing and Wilson 1980). 

Reproduction 

The species is iteroparus and reproduction occurs throughout the year. 

Status and Summary 

Although this species has declined in some areas because of overgrazing, hunting, or the destruction of its habitat, it is still quite abundant throughout its geographic range. No addi-tional conservation measures are required. 

Dice’s Cottontail 

Harris 1932 Description and Taxonomy 

A large-bodied cottontail, with dorsal pelage a mixture of black and brown, blackish-gray sides, rudimentary blackish tail and whitish venter except for a brownish throat patch (Diersing 1981). No subspecies are recognized. 

Distribution 

Dice’s cottontail is found in the higher elevations of Costa Rica and western Panama. According to Diersing (1981) it occurs from at Cerro Chirrpo to no lower than 

at Cervantes, Costa Rica. In Panama it occurs to at 

de Rio Jimenez (Fig. 5.3). 

Status and Summary 

Little is known about the biology, ecology or status of this species. A status survey is needed. 101 Eastern Cottontail 

(J.A. Allen 1890) Subspecies: Sylvilagus Sylvilagus 

ammophilus, Sylvilagus jloridanus avius, Sylvilagus jlon’danus 

Sylvilagus jlon’danus chapmani, Sylvilagus jloridanus chiapensis, Sylvilagus jlon’danus Sylvilagus 

nus connectens, Sylvilagus continentis, Sylvilagus 

costankensis, Sylvilagus cumanicus , Sylvilagus jloridanus Sylvilagus floridanus 

Sylvilagus hitchensi, 

Sylvilagus hondurensis, Sylvilagus 

nus llanensis, Sylvilagus 

nus Sylvilagus meamsi, Sylvilagus 

Sylvilagus nigronuchalis, Sylvilagus 

Sylvilagus Sylvilagus jloridanus paulsoni, Sylvilagus Sylvilagus jloridanus restrictus, Sylvilagus jloridanus robustus, Sylvilagus jlon’danus Sylvilagus similis, Sylvilagus jlon’danus subcinctus, Sylvilagus ,Sylvilagusjloridanus valenciae, Sylvilagusjloridanus 

cus 

Description and Taxonomy 

The eastern cottontail is a large member of the genus 

Sylvilagus (weight The fur is long and dense, grayish to brownish on the upper parts and white on the venter and tail. The South American forms have a nuchal patch varying from black to yellowish-brown, depending on subspecies. There are 34 recognized subspecies of eastern cottontail (Chapman et al. 1980). However, the species is in need of sys-tematic revision. There are five insular subspecies that are probably of recent origin, introduced by man, and of question-able subspecific status. These include S. ammophilus, S. 

hitchensi, S. avius, S. and S. 

The remainder are mainland subspecies.  

> S. floridanus
> Figure 5.5 Distribution of the eastern cottontail
> Eastern cottontail
> (Photo by Jerry Focht, Leonard Rue Enterprises)

Distribution 

The eastern cottontail occurs over broad geographic prov-inces from southern Canada to northwestern South America (Fig. 5.5) (Chapman, et al. 1980). The species has been widely transplanted in North America and Europe. It is an aggressive species (Chapman and Verts 1969) and may displace other Leporids. 

Habitat and Ecology 

The eastern cottontail is usually thought of as a mammal of farmland, fields and hedge rows; however, historically it was found in natural glades and woodlands, deserts, swamps, prairies, hardwood forests, tropical savannas, rain forests and boreal forests. Its range overlaps that of six species of 

Sylvilagus and six species of Genetic studies of widely separated populations of the eastern cottontail indicate con-siderable intraspecific genetic variability within the species (Chapman and Morgan 1973, Morgan and Chapman 1981). This genetic variability may be related to the wide range of habitats the species occupies. The eastern cottontail has been the subject of widespread introduction programs, especially in the eastern United States. These introductions have permanently altered the gene pool of the eastern cottontail (Chapman and Morgan 

appear to have made the species a highly efficient colonizer and may have contributed to the species’ ability to displace sympatric cottontails, such as the New England cottontail S. transitionalis. 

Eastern cottontails have relatively large home ranges. Home ranges of both sexes averaged about three hectares in Wisconsin (Dixon et al. 1981). However, home range size varies significantly depending on season, sex, age and 

102 ual rabbits (Chapman and Tretheway 1972). Peak densities of eight to ten rabbits per hectare have been recorded (Trent and Rongstad 1974, Bittner and Chapman but densities are normally much lower. Eastern cottontails feed on a wide variety of plants depending on the season and geographic location. 

Behavior 

The behavior of the eastern cottontail has been studied more than most other members of the genus and 

way 1963, and Holler 1964, and Chapman 1983). However, much of the work has been descriptive in nature. The eastern cottontail exhibits two major categories of social behavior (1) basic postures, movements and vocaliza-tions and (2) adult social interactions, which include reproduc-tive interactions and dominant-subordinant interactions. As discussed earlier, eastern cottontails have a male dominance hierarchy which controls the social structure of their popula-tions. 

Reproduction 

Onset of annual reproduction varies from population to popu-lation and from year to year, depending on weather, latitude and elevation. Diet and rainfall also appear to be important factors, especially in arid regions and Teer 1977). Litter size varies, from 3.0 to 5.6. Five to seven litters per female have been reported as well as juvenile female breeding (Chapman et al. 1982). Annual production of young may reach 35 kittens per year under ideal climatic conditions. 

Status and Summary 

The eastern cottontail is the most important game animal in the United States (Chapman et al. 1982) and the species has been the subject of hundreds of research projects and publica-tions. It has been widely introduced in North America and many island populations are probably of recent origin. The species has also been introduced into Europe, a practice which should be stopped (Sasse 1983). The species was reviewed by Chapman et al. (1980) and Chapman (1983). 

Tres Marias Cottontail 

(J.A. Allen 1877) Subspecies: graysoni badistes, Sylvilagus graysoni graysoni 

Description 

The Tres Marias cottontail is similar in appearance and size to the eastern cottontail S. However, it is confined to the Tres Marias Islands, off Nayarit, Western Mexico, and there is no chance of confusing the two allopatric species. These rabbits are brownish to reddish dorsally, brownish to pale reddish on the sides, and whitish on the venter except for a brown throat patch (Diersing and Wilson 1980). 

Distribution and Taxonomy 

The species is endemic of the Tres Marias Islands, Nayarit, Mexico (Fig. 5.6). This group of continental islands is approxi-mately 86km from mainland Nayarit. Two subspecies have been recognized: S. graysoni, found in the islands of Maria Madre, Maria Magdalena and Maria Cleofas, and S. 

found only in San Juanito island. The species is closely related to the Mexican rabbit S. 

of the adjacent mainland. Both species are morpho-logically very similar and have the same diploid chromosome number of 42 (Diersing and Wilson 1980, Lorenzo et al., in press). Diersing and Wilson (1980) suggested that the ances-tors of S. graysoni invaded the Tres Marias Islands, that were very likely connected to the mainland during the maximum Pleistocene glaciation. The hypothesis that the islands and mainland were connected is supported by the presence of freshwater fishes on the islands. 

Habitat and Ecology 

The dominant vegetation formations of Tres Marias Islands are the tropical dry deciduous and moist forests, which are characterized by a dense cover, with many tree species. The Islands are used by the Mexican government as a high security prison and the presence of large numbers of people has resulted in extensive disturbance there. On Maria Madre and Maria Cleofas, large areas of the natural vegetation have been destroyed by local inhabitants. House rats Rattus rattus were accidentally introduced to all the Islands and white-tailed deer 

Odocoileus virginianus and domestic goats were deliberately introduced on Maria Magdalena. Introduced species have caused profound changes in the ecological conditions of the Islands, that are likely to cause (or have caused) strong impacts on the native wildlife. In a field survey done by D. E. Wilson in 1976, the Tres Marias cottontail was relatively more abundant on the unin-habited islands (Maria Cleofas and San Juanito). However, about half of the vegetation of Maria Cleofas has now been cleared in preparation for settlement (Dooley 1987, pers. 

Maria Magdalena has recently been designated an Ecological Reserve by the Mexican government.  

> Habitat of eastern cottontail in Allegany Maryland, USA (Photo by J. A. Chapman) County,

103 ml---   

> S.
> S.
> S. mansuetus
> S. gra ysoni
> Figure 5.6 Distribution of the Tres Marias cottontail
> San Jose brush rabbit S. cottontail S.
> and marsh rabbit S.

Behavior 

According to Wilson (1987, pers. these “rabbits are amazingly tame and easy to shoot.” 

Status and Summary 

The Tres Marias cottontail is recommended for endangered status because of extensive habitat alterations on the Tres Marias and San Juanito Islands. Major threats are introduced species that compete for food, alter the native vegetation and prey upon the rabbits, and habitat destruction by inhabitants. This recommendation is supported by recent expeditions to the islands by the Oxford University (Dooley 1987, pers. 

the U.S. National Museum of Natural History (D.E. Wilson 1987, pers. and the National University of Mexico (Ceballos and Navarro, in press). Additionally, a detailed, long-term study to identify the current status and basic biological characteristics of this spe-cies is strongly recommended. 

> Skin of Omilteme cottontail
> ‘(Photo by Don E. Wilson)

Omilteme Cottontail 

(Nelson 1904) Description and Taxonomy 

This is a large cottontail with a short tail, medium-sized 

and long ears. The back is rufous in color and tinged with considerable black. The sides are grayish-black, the tail is reddish-black dorsally, the venter is dingy white except for a brownish throat patch, the show considerable white dorsally (Diersing 1981). No subspecies of the Omilteme cottontail S. are recognized. 

Distribution 

The species is known from less than ten specimens. It occurs only in the Sierra Madre Sur, in the vicinity of Omilteme, Guerrero, Mexico, at elevations between and 

(see Fig.5.3). 

Habitat and Ecology 

The species is restricted to pine and pine-oak forests in the abrupt mountains of the Sierra Madre Sur. Vegetation near Omilteme, the type locality, is dominated by pine forests with temperate elements such as Quercus and Anus; 

there are, however, cloud forests with tropical species in the deep “barrancas.” The Omilteme cottontail occurs 

with the eastern cottontail S. 

Status and Summary 

S. is one of the least known cottontails. It is recom-mended for endangered status because it has an extremely narrow distribution ( and it is quite rare (see also Ceballos and Navarro, in press). For example, none were seen in a recent year-long survey of the mammals from Omilteme by the National University of Mexico (J. Juarez, pers. 

Although Omilteme has been recently declared a State Re-serve by the Mexican government, major threats to this cot-tontail are hunting and habitat destruction. The coniferous forests have been highly modified and fragmented by intense forestry and cattle grazing. Additionally, this species is of high priority for a status survey. 

San Jose Brush Rabbit 

mansuetus Nelson 1907 Description and Taxonomy 

The San Jose brush rabbit S. mansuetus is an insular species closely related to the brush rabbit S. bachmani. The species resembles the brush rabbit but is lighter in overall color. Cranial features are most useful in separating these two spe-cies. No subspecies are recognized. 

Distribution and Ecology 

Found only in San Jose Island, Gulf of California, Baja Cali-fornia, Mexico (Fig. 5.6). San Jose island ( is one of the largest islands of the California Gulf, probably originated 104 in the Pliocene, and is separated by five kilometres from mainland Baja California. Its arid vegetation is dominated by cacti and other succulent plants (Case and Cody 1983). Only six other native species of mammals are found on the island, but cats and rats have been accidentally introduced. 

Status and Summary 

Little is known about the biology, ecology or status of the San Jose brush rabbit. Thus, this species is of high priority for a status survey. 

Nuttall’s or Mountain Cottontail 

nuttallii 1837) Subspecies: nuttallii nuttallii nuttallii, Sylvilagus nuttallii pinetis 

Description and Taxonomy 

Nuttall’s cottontail is small to medium in size (weight 

The ears are short and rounded at the tip. The legs are long for the genus and the feet are covered with long, dense hair. The back is grayish and the belly is white. The tail is large and grizzled in color. Three subspecies of S. nuttallii are recognized. A detailed range map is presented in Chapman (1975). 

Distribution 

Nuttall’s cottontail occurs in the intermountain region of North America A recent northward expansion of this species’ range into southern British Columbia has been noted by Cowan and Hatter (1940). In California, Nuttall’s cottontail occurs from to at least (Orr 1940). The eastern cottontail S. has displaced Nuttall’s cottontail over much of the latter’s former range in southeas-tern North Dakota (Genoways and Jones 1972). 

Habitat and Ecology 

The habitat of Nuttall’s cottontail varies considerably over its range. The species is primarily associated with sagebrush 

sp. in the north, while in the southern part of its range it occurs in timbered areas (Hall 1951). Nuttall’s cotton-tail is commonly associated with rocky, brushy and wooded areas (Orr 1940, Hall 1951). This cottontail uses both burrows and forms (Orr 1940); however, they apparently do not dig their own burrows. Populations of Nuttall’s cottontail vary in density from 0.06 to 2.5 per ha in shrub-juniper scrublands in central Oregon  

> Nuttall’s or mountain cottontail (Photo by Irene Vandermolen)

105 (McKay and Verts 1978) and they appear to feed primarily on sagebrush. However, in the spring and summer grasses are selected (Orr 1940). 

Reproduction 

The onset and duration of the breeding season varies within the range of the species. In northeastern California, it begins in April and lasts into July (Orr 1940). In central Oregon the breeding season lasts from mid-February to the end of July (Powers and Verts 1971). In California each female normally produces two litters (Orr 1940) whereas four or five litters appear to be the norm in Oregon (Powers and Verts 1971). Average litter size is about four to six (range 1-8) and varies between locations within the species range (Orr 1940, Powers and Verts 1971). In Oregon, an adult female breeding throughout the reproduction season could produce 22 young per year. Juvenile breeding appears to be rare (Powers and Verts 1971). 

Behavior 

Nuttall’s cottontail appear to be more solitary than other 

Its solitary nature may be attributed to the uniform, often sagebrush, habitat in which it is found. When disturbed the rabbit will usually run into cover, then pause, with ears held erect. Feeding usually occurs in brush, or at least near cover (Orr 1940). 

Status and Summary 

Nuttall’s cottontail is a common game species throughout the intermountain west of the United States. It is managed by state and provincial wildlife agencies, primarily through hunt-ing seasons and bag limits. The species has been reviewed by Chapman (1975). 

Marsh Rabbit 

(Bachman, 1837) Subspecies: palustris palustris paludicola, Sylvilagus palustris palustris 

Description and Taxonomy 

The marsh rabbit is a large dark brown rabbit with rough hair. Its feet are reddish-brown above, darker below. The small tail is inconspicuous and whitish below. Three subspecies are recognized, S. p. S. p. 

(Chapman and Willner 1981) and (Laze11 1984). 

Distribution 

The marsh rabbit is found from the Dismal Swamp, Virginia, south along the coastal lowlands into the Florida Keys (Fig. 

. .

Habitat and Ecology 

The marsh rabbit is confined to marshy habitats. They are most often found associated with brackish water areas, al-though historically have been found around freshwater marshes as well. They are often found associated with cattails 

Typha sp. and, unlike other leporids, the most important factor limiting their distribution is the availability of water (Blair 1936). 

Behavior 

Like many leporids, the marsh rabbit is nocturnal, spending much of the day resting in a form. Marsh rabbits are at home in the water and swim well. The species usually walks, rather than hopping about in rabbit fashion. Their home range is considered small (Tompkins 1935, Blair 1936). 

Reproduction 

Marsh rabbits breed year round. Approximately six litters are produced per year per adult female. Mean litter size is ap-proximately three. Annual production of young ranges from 

Status and Summary 

Very little is known about marsh rabbit biology and ecology. The species is considered a pest in some prime agricultural settings; however, the insular subspecies S. p. hefneri which occurs only on the Florida Keys, Monroe Co., Florida (Laze11 1984) has recently been listed as an endangered subspecies (Federal Register Vol. 55, No. 120; 25588). The species was reviewed by Chapman and Willner (1981). The taxonomic status of this species needs evaluation. 

New England Cottontail 

(Bangs 1895) Description and Taxonomy 

The New England cottontail is a medium to large rabbit (weight up to l,OOOg). The dorsal body parts are pinkish buff to ocher in color. The back is overlain with distinct black hair. The ears are short and rounded and possess a distinct black edge. There is a distinct black spot between the ears, but never a white spot as may occur in the eastern cottontail S. 

Because of the similarity in appearance of the New England and eastern cottontails, pelage characteristics are not always diagnostic. Cranial characteristics are the most reliable means of distinguishing the two species (Chapman and Mor-gan 1973, Chapman 1975). No subspecies of the New England cottontail are recognized. 

Distribution 

The New England cottontail occurs in a mosaic pattern from southeastern New England south along the Appalachians to Alabama (Fig. 5.7). Chapman and Stauffer (1981: 978-979) suggested that the New England cottontail is a refugial relict. Further, they hypothesized that “this mosaic distributional pattern resulted from a gradual change in the climate coupled with the reinvasion of lowland areas by S. The 

106 The New England cottontail 

> (Photo by K. B. Fuller)

process appears to be continuing in the northern Appalachi-ans and is being accelerated by habitat alteration (Chapman and Stauffer 1981). 

Habitat and Ecology 

The New England cottontail is confined to the ericaceous vegetation zone of the Appalachian Mountains and New England. Chapman and Stauffer (1981) have postulated that much of their habitat is being invaded by populations of the eastern cottontail. The disappearance of New England cot-tontail throughout much of the northeastern USA has been documented by Linkkila (1971). The species is considered rare in Maryland but relatively abundant in certain portions of West Virginia where large blocks of suitable habitat still remain (Chapman and Morgan 1973). In New England, habitat preferences of the New England and eastern cottontails were difficult to distinguish (Linkkila 

1971, Johnston 1972, Jackson 1973). No clearly identifiable habitat type could be associated with either species. However, Jackson (1973) attributes the decline of the New England cottontail to natural succession. More recently, Hoff 

reported that in “Southeastern Massachusetts where maximum relief is less than the species has retreated to more cold, wet patches.” In the mid-Atlantic region, the eastern cottontail is con-fined to the higher elevations of the Appalachian mountains (Llewellyn and Handley 1945, 1951, Chapman and Morgan 1973, Blymyer 1976). The regions were characterized by presence of clear cuts, overgrown farmsteads or pockets of heath-conifer habitat. The common characteristic was dense cover and conifers. In the southern Appalachians, New England cottontails are confined to mountain balds or areas of conifers and scrubby vegetation such as Kalmia, 

dron. The relationships between this vegetation, latitude and elevation are apparent (Chapman and Stauffer 1981). 

The New England cottontail feeds on a variety of vegeta-tion, but is the only species of cottontail which may feed extensively on conifer needles (Spencer and Chapman 1986). 

Behavior 

The behavior of the New England cottontail was studied by Tefft and Chapman (1987). They divided the behavioral rep-ertoire of this species into non-social and social behavior. Non-social behavior included commonly observed activities of lone rabbits. Social behavior included basic postures, vocali-zations, movements, reproductive interactions and 

subordinate interactions of young and adult males and fe-males. The basic behavior patterns of this cottontail were stere-otyped and ritualized and similar to those reported for many other Leporidae. Access to females and reproduction are regulated by a dominance hierarchy in males. Reproductive behavior is most intense during the estrus period of females, with little social interaction occurring between estrus periods. Reproductive behavior begins two to three days before 

turtion and post-partum breeding (Tefft and Chapman 1987).    

> S. transitionalis
> Figure 5.7 Distribution of the New England cottontail

107 Reproduction 

The reproductive biology of the New England cottontail has been studied in Maryland and West Virginia (Chapman et 

1977). The breeding season of the species lasts from early March to early September, the peak being and July. New England cottonta are 

between March 

synchro-nous breeders. Juvenile breeding of females accounts for nearly 20% of the pregnancies. The litter size is about 3.5 and the average annual production of young is about 24 per female. 

Status and Summary 

The status of the New England cottontail has been of concern to biologists and resource agencies for nearly two decades. In 1979, Chapman and Stauffer (1981) suggested to the 

SSC Lagomorph Specialist Group that the species be listed in a classification of special concern. Their recommendation was based on the fact that the species appears to differ significantly from the more common eastern cottontail, with which it shares much of its range. Considerable new information has been collected since 1979 and several States have begun to consider carefully the status of the New England cottontail (Feldhamer et al. 1984, Fies and 1985, 

1985, Hoff 1987). Of interest are the differences which may exist between the demes of this species, in particular the differences between the two cytotypes. The species has a northern cytotype (2N = 52) and a southern cytotype (2N = 46) 

and Eabry 1970, Robinson et al. 1983, 1986). The species was reviewed by Chapman (1975). 

References 

Allen, J.A. 1877. North American Rodentia No. II Leporidae. In: Coues, E. and Allen, J.A. Bull. Geological Survey 

+ Pp. 

Allen, J.A. 1890. Descriptions of a new species and a new subspecies of the genus Lepus. Bull. Amer. Nat. Hist. 

Alvarez Toro, M. 1977. Los de Chiapas. Gobierno 

Estado, Tuxtla Gutierrez, Chiapas. Armstrong, D.M. and Jones, Jr., J.K. 1971. Mammals from the Mexican state of Sinaloa. I. Marsupialia, Edentata, Lagomorpha. Mammal. 

Baird, S.F. 1857 (1858). Mammals, in Reports of and 

the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean... 

xlvii + l-757 + 43 pls. 

J. 1837. Observations on the different species of hares (genus Lepus) inhabiting the United States and Canada. J. 

Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, 

Bangs, 0.1895. The geographical distribution of the eastern races of the cottontail (Lepus sylvaticus Bach) with a description of a new subspecies, and with notes on the distribution of the northern hare (Lepus americanus Erxl.) in the east. Boston Nat. Hist. 

R.W. 1951. The mammals of Big Black Mountain, Harlan County, Kentucky. J. 

Bittner, S.L. and Chapman, J.A. 1981. Reproductive and Physiologi-cal cycles in an island population of Sylvilagus In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), World 

Conf., Univ. Guelph, Pp. 182-203. Blair, W.F. 1936. The Rabbit. Mammal. 

Blymyer, M.J. 1976. A new elevation record for the New England cottontail (Sylvilagus transitionalis) in Virginia. Sci. 17:220-221. 

J. du P. and Teer, J.G. 1977. Reproduction and productivity in south Texas cottontail rabbits. Mammalia 

D. and Chapman, J.A. 1983. Social behavior of the eastern cottontail, Sylvilagus (Lagomorpha: Leporidae) in a woodland habitat, with descriptions of new behaviors. 

Penn. Sci. 

Case, T.J. and Cody, M.L. 1983. Island biogeography in the Sea of 

University of California Press, Berkeley. 

Ceballos, G. and C. 1984. Los de la Cuenca de 

Limusa, Mexico. Ceballos, G. and Miranda, A. 1986. Los de Chamela, Jalisco. Instituto de Biologia, Universidad Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico. Ceballos, G. and Navarro, D. (in press). Diversity and Conservation of Mexican mammals. In: Mares, M. A. and Schmidly, D. J. (Eds), Latin American mammals: their conservation, ecology, and evolution. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman. Chapman, J.A. 1971. Orientation and homing of the brush rabbit 

(Sylvilagus bachmani). Mammal. 

Chapman, J.A. 1974. Sylvilagus bachmani, Mammal. Sp. 

Chapman, J.A. 1975. Sylvilagus nuttallii. Mammal. Sp. 

Chapman, J.A. 1975. Sylvilagus transitionalis. Mammal. Sp. 

Chapman, J.A. 1983. Sylvilagus In: D.H. (Ed.), 

Costa Rican Natural History . Univ. Chicago Press. Pp. 492-494. Chapman, J.A. 1984. Latitude and Gestation period in New World rabbits (Leporidae: Sylvilagus and Romerolagus,. Amer. Nat. 

Chapman, J.A. and Feldhamer, G.A. 1981. Sylvilagus aquaticus. Mammal. Sp. 

Chapman, J.A. and A.L. 1972. The breeding biology of a brush rabbit population. J. Wildl. Manage. 

Chapman, J.A., Harman,A. L. D.E. 1977. Reproduction and physiological cycles in the cottontail complex in western Maryland and nearby West Virginia. Wildl. Monogr. 

Chapman, J.A., J.G. and Edwards, W.R. 1982. Cotton-tails. In: Chapman, J.A. and Feldhamer, G.A. (Eds), -Wild Mammals of North America. The Johns Hopkins Univ. Press. Baltimore and London. Pp. 83-123. Chapman, J.A., J.G. and Ojeda C, M.M. 1980. Sylvilagus 

Mammal Sp. 136: l-8. 

Chapman, J.A. and Morgan, R.P. 1973. Systematic status of the cottontail complex in western Maryland and nearby West Virginia. Monogr. 56: l-73. Chapman, J.A. and Morgan, R.P. 1974. Onset of the breeding season and size of first litters in two species of cottontails from south-western Texas. Southwestern Nat. 

Chapman, J.A. and Stauffer, Jr., J.R. 1981. The status and distribu-tion of England cottontail. In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), World Univ. Guelph. 

Pp. 973-983. Chapman, J.A. and Tretheway, D.E.C. 1972. Movements within a population of introduced eastern cottontail rabbits. Wildl. Manage. 

Chapman, J.A. and Verts, B.J. 1969. Interspecific aggressive behav-ior in Rabbits. 

108 Chapman, J.A. and Willner, G.R. 1978. Sylvilagus audubonii. Mam-mal. Sp. 

Chapman, J.A. and Willner, G.R. 1981. Sylvilaguspalustris. 

sp. 

Chapman, J.A. and Willner-Chapman, G.R. 1982. Rabbits of the 

Chapman, J.A. and Johnson, K.A. (in press). Order Lagomorpha. In: 

Mammals of South America. Univ. Chicago Press. Cowan, I.M. and Hatter, J. 1940. Two mammals new to the known fauna of British Columbia. 

Diersing, V.E. 1981. Systematic status of Sylvilagus brasiliensis and S. 

from North America. Mammal. 

Diersing, V.E. and Wilson, D.E. 1980. Distribution and 

of the rabbits of west-central Mexico. Smithsonian Contributions to Zoology, 297: l-34. 

Dixon, K.R., Chapman, J.A., Rongstad, O.J. and Orhelein, 

1981. A comparison of home range size in 

and S. bachmani. In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), 

World Lagomorph Conf. Univ. of Guelph. Pp. 541-548. Durant, P., 1981. Ecological study of Sylvilagus bmsiliensis meridensis 

in an Venezuelan Paramo. In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), Lagomorph Conf. Univ. of Guelph. 

Pp. 549-558. Durant, P. 1983. Estadio silvestre, Sylvilagus brasiliensis meridensis (Lagomorpha Leporidae), en 

mos de andes Venezulanos. J. Sci. 

Feldhamer, G.A., Gates, J.E. and Chapman, J.A. 1984. Rare, threat-ened, endangered and extirpated mammals from Maryland. In: 

A.W. et al. (Eds), Threatened and endangeredplants and animals of Maryland. Natural Heritage Prog. Sp. Publ. 84-I: 

475. Pp. 395-438. Fies, M.L. and J.L. 1985. New information on the distribu-tion and status of the New England cottontail in Virginia. Trans. NE Sec. Wildl. CT 

Findley, J.S. 1969. Biogeography of southwestern and desert mam-mals. In: Jones, Jr., J.K. (Ed.), Contributions in mammalogy. 

Misc. Publ. Mus. Nat. Hist., Univ. Kansas Pp. 113-128. Flinders, J.T. and Hansen, R.M. 1975. Spring population responses of cottontails and jackrabbits to cattle grazing shortgrass prairie. 

Range Manage. 

Genoways, H.H. and Jones, Jr., J.K. 1972. Mammals from south-western North Dakota. Occas. Papers Mus., Texas Tech. Univ. 

6: l-36. Gray, J.E. 1867. Notes on the skulls of hares (Leporidae) and Picas (Lagomyidae) in the British Museum. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. 

Hall, E.R. 1951. A synopsis of the North American Lagomorpha. 

Univ. Kansas Publ., Mus. Nat. Hist. 

Hall, 1981. The mammals of North America. 2nd Edn. Vol. I. Ronald Press, NY. 600 + 

Harris, W.P., Jr., 1932. Four new mammals from Costa Rica. Occas. 

Papers Mus. Univ. 

Harrison, T. and Hickie, P.F. 1931. Indiana’s swamp rabbit. J. 

Mammal. 

Hershkovitz, P. 1950. Mammals of Northern Colombia. Preliminary Report No. 6. Rabbits (Leporidae), with notes on the classifica-tion and distribution of the South American Forms. U.S. Nat. Museum 

Hill, E.P. 1967. Notes on the life History of the swamp rabbit in Alabama. Southeastern Assoc. Game and Fish Comm. 

Hoff, J. G. 1987. Status and distribution of two species of cottontail rabbits, Sylvilagus transitionalis and S. in Southeas-tern Massachusetts. Field- Nat. 

H.E. and Eabry, H.S. 1970. Chromosomes of Sylvilagus 

and S. tmnsitionalis. Mammal. 

Holler, N.R. and Sorenson, J.F. 1969. Changes in behavior of a male swamp rabbit. Mammal 

Hunt, T.P. 1959. Breeding habits of the swamp rabbit with notes on its life history. Mammal. 

Ingles, L.G. 1941. Natural history observations on the Audubon cottontail, Sylvilagus audubonii. J. Mammal. 

Jackson, S.N. 1973. Distribution of cottontail rabbits, Sylvilagus 

in northern New England. Agric. Exp. Sta. Univ. Conn. 

Johnson, K.A. and Chapman, J.A. (in press). Sylvilagus brasiliensis. Mammal. Sp. 

Johnston, J.E. 1972. Identification and distribution of cottontail rab-bits in southern New England. Agric. Exp. Sta. Univ. Conn. 

Kjolhaug, M.S. and Woolf, A. 1988. Home range of the swamp rabbit in Southern Illinois. J. Mammal. 

Korte, PA. and Fredrickson, L.H. 1977. Swamp rabbit distribution in Missouri. Trans. Sci. 10 and 

Kundaeli, J.N. and Reynolds, H.G. 1972. Desert cottontail use of natural and modified Pinyon-Juniper woodlands. J. Range Man-age. 

J.D., Jr. 1984. A new marsh rabbit (Sylvilaguspalustn’s) from Florida’s Lower Keys. J. Mammal. 

Leopold, A.S. 1959. Wildlife of Mexico. University of California Press, Berkeley. Linkkila, T.E. 1971. of habitat upon changes within the interspecific Connecticut cottontail populations. Agr. Exp. Sta. Univ. Conn. 21pp. Linneaus, C. 1758. Naturae 10th Ed. 1. Llewellyn, L. M. and Handley, C. 0. 1945. The cottontail rabbits of Virginia. Mammal. 

Lorenzo, C., Cervantes, F.A. and Aguilar, M.A. (in press). 

somal variation in some Mexican cottontail rabbits of the genus 

Sylvilagus. In: Medellin, R.A. and Ceballos, G. (Eds), 

ologia en Mexico. Universidad Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico. Lowe, C.E. 1958. Ecology of the Swamp rabbit in Georgia. 

W.F. 1985, 1986, 1987. New England cottontail restora-tion. Reports of the Bureau of Wildlife Research and Management. Mass. Div. Fish Wildl. Proj. W-35-R-27,28 29. 

H.M. and C.H. 1963. Behavior and the repro-ductive cycle in the cottontail. Wildl. Manage. 

H.M. and Holler, N.R. 1964. Social behavior in confined populations of the cottontail and swamp rabbit. Wildl. Monogr. 

McKay, D.O. and Verts, B.J. 1978. Estimates of some attributes of population of Nuttall’s cottontails. Wildl. Manage. 

Morgan, R.P. and Chapman, J.A. 1981. Serum proteins of the 

Sylvilagus complex. In: Myers, K. and MacInnes, C.D. (Eds), 

World Lagomorph Conf. Univ. Guelph. 983 pp. Pp 64-72. 

A.S. 1955. Reproduction of the brush rabbit in California. 

J. Wildl. Manage. 19: 177-184. Nelson, E.W. 1904. Descriptions of seven new rabbits from Mexico. 

Biol. 

Nelson, E.W. 1907. Descriptions of new North American rabbits. 

Biol. 

Orr, R.T. 1940. The rabbits of California. Occas. Papers 

109 Sci. XIX: l-227. 

Powers, and Verts, B.J. 1971. Reproduction of the mountain cottontail rabbit in Oregon. Manage. 

Robinson, T.J., Elder, F.F.B. and Chapman, J.A. 1983. Evolution of chromosomal variation in cottontails, genus 

Lagomorpha): S. aquaticus, S. and S. 

Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 

Robinson, T.J., Elder, F.F.B. and Chapman, J.A. 1984. Evolution of chromosomal variation in cottontails, genus Sylvilagus 

Lagomorpha) II. audubonii, S. idahoensis, S. 

and S. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 

L.A. 1986. Chromosomal variability in the New England cottontail, transitionalis (Bangs), 1895 with evidence of recognition of a new species. M. S. Thesis, University, New York, 

Sasse, C. 1983. Ecological consequences of the introduction of the American cottontail, Sylvilagus floridanus into Europe. Council of Europe SN-US 

Shields, P.W. 1960. Movement patterns of brush rabbits in North-western California. J. Manage. 

Sorenson, M.F., Rogers, J.P. and Baskett, T.S. 1968. Reproduction and development in confined swamp rabbits. Manage. 

Sorenson, M.F., Rogers, J.P. and Baskett, T.S. 1972. Parental behav-ior in swamp rabbits. Mammal. 

Sowls, L.K. 1957. Reproduction in the Audubon cottontail in Arizona. Mammal. 

Spencer, R.K. and Chapman, J.A. 1986. Seasonal feeding habits of New England and Eastern cottontails. Penn. Sci. 

Summer, E.L. 1931. Some notes on the birds and animals of Los Banos duck refuge with special reference to predatory species. 

Fish and Game 

Tefft, B.C. and Chapman, J.A. 1987. Social Behavior of the New England cottontail, Sylvilagus transitionalis (Bangs) with a review of social behavior in New World rabbits (Mammalia: Leporidae). 

Rev. 

Terrel, T.L. 1972. The swamp rabbit (Sylvilagus aquaticus) in Indiana. Amer. Nat. 

Toll, J.E., Baskett, T.S. and C.H. 1960. Home range, reproduction, and foods of the swamp rabbit in Missouri. 

Nat. 

Tompkins, I.R. 1935. The marsh rabbit: an incomplete life history. 

Mammal. 

Trent, T.T. and Rongstad, O.J. 1974. Home range and survival of cottontail rabbits in southwestern Wisconsin. 

Waterhouse, G.R. 1838. On a new species of hare from North America. London. Pt. 

Waterhouse, G.R. 1848. A natural history of the Mammalia. 

Zoloth, S.R. 1969. Observations of the population of brush rabbits on 

Nuevo Island, California. 

110 Chapter 6 The Pygmy Rabbit 

# Frederick C. Dobler and Kenneth R. Dixon 

# Status and Summary 

The pygmy rabbit idahoensis (Merriam 1891) is locally threatened in parts of its range. In Washington state, there remains only a small disjunct population which is cur-rently being considered by the state for listing as endangered. In other parts of its range, particularly in southeastern Idaho, it is secure, with healthy populations remaining in areas of expansive habitat. In California, where it is considered a species of concern, it is classified as a game animal and included in the open hunting season. The primary threat to the species results from the frag-mentation of the sagebrush rangeland by sagebrush removal, which isolates populations, particularly on the edges of the range of the species. As the “islands” of habitat are made smaller, local extinctions may occur. The probability of extinc-tion increases through overgrazing, wildfire, habitat modifica-tion or genetically related stochastic events. These local ex-tinctions add up to a reduction of the species distribution. 

# Description 

Body size of the pygmy rabbit is the smallest of any North American rabbit species. Orr (1940) reported a mean body weight of for six adult males and 398g (246-   

> Adult pygmy rabbit
> (Photo by Christopher Garber)

for nine adult females from California. In Utah, 

(1946) found six adult males averaged and four adult females averaged 436g The mean weights of males and females in Idaho were 418g and 

respectively, according to Wilde (1978). The grayish coat is long and silk-like when new; the abdomen is white; and the legs, chest and nape are cinnamon buff. Ears are short, rounded and thickly haired both inside and out. The tail is small: in males and in females (Orr 1940, 1946). The underside is distinc-tively buff-colored compared to the white underside found in cottontails. 

# Distribution 

The pygmy rabbit is found throughout much of the sagebrush area of the Great Basin as well as some of the adjacent intermountain area (Fig. 6.1) (Green and Flinders 1980a). The eastern boundary extends to southwestern Montana and western Wyoming (Campbell et al. 1982). The southeastern boundary extends to southwestern Utah 1946, 

Pritchett et al. 1987) and includes the only occurrence of the species outside the limits of the Pleistocene Lake Bonneville (Columbia River) drainage. Central Nevada (Nelson 1909) and northeastern California (Orr form the southern and western boundaries. The northern boundary of the main population historically reached to the southern foothills of the Blue Mountain Plateau (Bailey 1936) in eastern Oregon. Weiss and Verts (1984) found that the distribution had shrunk southward toward the central part of eastern Oregon (Fig. 

. .Within its range, its occurrence is far from continuous. Even in good habitat in southeastern Idaho, it is found only in the denser sagebrush/bitterbrush patches (46% cover), avoiding areas of lower sagebrush density (26-30% cover) (Green and Flinders 1980b). In Oregon, where the values for percentage cover were lower than in Idaho, the habitat prefer-ence was again for denser sagebrush (Weiss and Verts 1984). The northern extent of its range is Douglas County Wash-ington. The Washington population is disjunct from the rest of the range of the species and likely has been for some time. Butler (1972) stated that the pygmy rabbit has declined from its postglacial population high, which occurred more than 7,000 years ago. Habitat change likely accounts for this decline in numbers and the isolation of the Washington population. In Washington, the pygmy rabbit was found historically in several areas in the Columbia Basin (Couch including collections at seven sites. However, much of the once 

111 Pygmy rabbit habitat in Douglas County, Washington Pygmy rabbit habitat in Douglas County, Washington (Photo by Christopher Garber) (Photo by Christopher Garber) 

sive sagebrush (shrub-steppe) in eastern Washington has sive sagebrush (shrub-steppe) in eastern Washington has been removed for agriculture or has been heavily grazed. been removed for agriculture or has been heavily grazed. Recent visits to these historic sites have so far produced Recent visits to these historic sites have so far produced evidence that only one of these populations still exists. In some evidence that only one of these populations still exists. In some cases the sagebrush has been eradicated. In 1987 the rabbit cases the sagebrush has been eradicated. In 1987 the rabbit was found in Douglas County in two separate locations, both was found in Douglas County in two separate locations, both on private land. The first was near Burton Draw and the on private land. The first was near Burton Draw and the second along Coyote Canyon. Prior to this recent verification, second along Coyote Canyon. Prior to this recent verification, its continued presence in Washington was undocumented. its continued presence in Washington was undocumented. The last previous sighting in Washington was in 1979. In 1989, The last previous sighting in Washington was in 1979. In 1989, pygmy rabbits were also found near a site last collected in 1948 pygmy rabbits were also found near a site last collected in 1948 at Sagebrush Flat, also in Douglas County. This site is on state at Sagebrush Flat, also in Douglas County. This site is on state land managed by the Washington Department of Natural land managed by the Washington Department of Natural Resources. Resources. 

# Habitat Habitat 

The pygmy rabbit is largely dependent upon sagebrush (pri-The pygmy rabbit is largely dependent upon sagebrush (pri-marily big sagebrush, Artemisia tridentata), but is usually marily big sagebrush, Artemisia tridentata), but is usually found in areas where big sagebrush grows in very dense found in areas where big sagebrush grows in very dense stands. Within stands of sagebrush it selects sites that have the stands. Within stands of sagebrush it selects sites that have the       

> Pygmy rabbit habitat near Dubois, Idaho Pygmy rabbit habitat near Dubois, Idaho (Photo by Christopher Garber) (Photo by Christopher Garber)

greatest cover densities. Orr (1940) stated that tall sagebrush clumps were essential and contemporary studies corroborate this observation. In Idaho, Green and Flinders (1980b) found that shrub cover and height were significantly greater in sites selected by pygmy rabbits. They found both bitterbrush Purshia tridentata 

and big sagebrush present in equal amounts (19% cover) on six pygmy rabbit sites. The combined shrub density was 46%. The mean shrub height for the sites selected by pygmy rabbits was the mean height for all other sites was 25cm. In Oregon, Weiss and Verts (1984) found that mean shrub cover density on occupied sites was 28.8% with sagebrush species accounting for 23.7% of the cover. Mean shrub height at pygmy rabbit sites in Oregon was 84cm. Mean shrub cover on unoccupied sites was 17.7% and mean height was 53cm. While the values reported by the two studies were not the same, partly a product of different measurement techniques, both studies reported that high cover density appeared to be amajor habitat feature selected by pygmy rabbits. The density of big sagebrush in areas used by pygmy rabbits exceeds that which is found throughout most of the plant’s distribution. In Washington the areas chosen are those which have been disturbed in the past by either grazing or cul-tivation. Usually heavy grazing increases the density of big sagebrush 1960). After grazing has ceased and the grass cover has recovered, the habitat becomes optimal for pygmy rabbits. 0 ne site in Washington had been cultivated and then abandoned years ago. Big sagebrush invaded the fields and provided a dense cover of regrowth of sagebrush. Blaisdell(l953) says that the sagebrush association in 

settlement times was likely an open stand of shrubs with a highly diversified understory of perennial grasses and forbs. Christensen (1963) in Utah found that where bunchgrass vegetation has not been subjected to disturbance, big sage-brush is rarely the leading dominant. Mean density of big sagebrush in pre-settlement times was probably about 

15% cover, much lower than that selected by the pygmy rabbit (2846%). This suggests that the pygmy rabbit is an opportun-ist, inhabiting disturbed sites in the sagebrush landscape which have an increased density of sagebrush. In some natu-ral, non-disturbed situations, sagebrush density may exceed 

but these sites are rare and limited to areas where soil moisture is greater. Pygmy rabbits may be somewhat 

sustaining, however, increasing the density of sagebrush near their burrow sites 1946, Wilde 1978) by their feeding activity (Pearson 1965). The area around an active pygmy rabbit site is heavily grazed by the rabbits. The burrowing habit of the pygmy rabbit (Hall 1946, 

1946, 1950, Jones 1957, Wilde 1978, Green 1978, Green and Flinders 1980a) is unique among the western North American rabbits. Burrows are usually under big sage-brush and only rarely located in an opening in the vegetation, reinforcing the dependence of this rabbit on sagebrush clumps (Green 1978, Green and Flinders Wilde 1978). Because it makes its own burrows, soil structure is thought to be a key habitat feature. Generally soft, deep soils are 

112 B. idahoensis       

> Figure 6.1: Range of the rabbit (adapted from Green and Flinders

quired for burrowing. Wilde (1978) states that “they will live only where soil is deep enough and of a certain quality.” Alluvial fans may provide the soil requirement in some cases (Orr 1940, Green and Flinders Weiss and Verts (1984) found that Oregon burrow sites were located where soil was significantly deeper and looser than at adjacent sites. Wilde (1978) examined burrow placement and found 

tions that rabbit burrows were placed where wind-borne soil deposits were deeper. Our studies and Green and Flinders’ (1980a) show that the pygmy rabbit also uses holes in volcanic rock, rock piles and around abandoned buildings. Usually these cases are in association with a population using typical deep soil, sagebru.sh burrow sites and may only be an 

efficient alternative to digging a burrow, or may give added protection against predators that excavate the burrows. Topography also plays a part in burrow site selection beyond the deposition of soil. The rabbits use the contours of the soil, most often digging into a slope (Wilde 1978, Dobler unpubl.). Even when they use level sites, they often utilize a small rise or change in contour for the burrow entrance. 

# Ecology 

The population dynamics of the pygmy rabbit are not well understood. The best information on the population structure is provided by Wilde (1978). He showed that the average age of females tended to be greater than that of males. Because his study lasted only two and one-half years, however, the oldest observed age class was three years old. He found that mean annual adult mortality was as high as 88%. The period of greatest mortality began in January and extended through March. The survival of juveniles was initially very low, with more than 50% disappearing within five weeks of emergence. In one year of his study, 100% of the third cohort of reproduc-tion perished. Our studies in Washington, as well as studies in Idaho (Wilde showed that coyote and badger 

prey upon pygmy rabbits and may dig up many burrows. In Idaho, Wilde (1978) reported that weasels 

frenata frequently kill trapped pygmy rabbits and implied that they may enter burrows to prey upon them as well. Gashwiler et al. (1960) reported that pygmy rabbits are part of the diet of bobcats in some areas. Raptors that also prey upon pygmy rabbits include the great horned owl Bubo 

long-eared owl Asio (Bore11 and Ellis 1934, Hall 1946, Ingles 1965) and the northern harrier Circus 

eus (Wilde 1978, 1946, Green 1978, Green and 

ders 1980a). Wilde (1978) reported that the minimum number of rab-bits known to be alive on his study area reached a high of 67 in the fall and winter. He did not compute this into a density, but his study sites covered an area in excess of 300 hectares. 

using flushing transects and burrow counts, estimated densities between 0.7 and 1.4 per hectare. These estimates are much lower than the estimate reported by Green (1978) of 45 per hectare in ideal habitat. Although Green did not say how the value was computed, it may represent a smaller area than the other estimates. B. Keller (pers. suggested that the pygmy rabbit is cyclic. Green and Flinders however, do not agree. While there do appear to be fluctuations in the size of populations, more work is needed to determine if these fluctuations are cyclic. The home range size of the pygmy rabbit has never been determined. Although Wilde (1978) did study movements with radiotelemetry, he made no estimate of home range and simply stated that the rabbits did not leave the area during his study. (1946) observed feeding activity within a 27m radius of the burrow in the winter and reported that the area increased in the spring. Dobler (unpubl.) followed one set of tracks in fresh snow over 250m from an area of fresh digging to an active burrow site. Green and Flinders (1979) found that an escaped captive had returned to its burrow of origin 

from the holding pen. This may be circumstantial evidence that the rabbit was familiar with an area inclusive of the holding pen site. 

113 Behavior 

The pygmy rabbit makes extensive use of burrows and may be unique in that it usually digs its own burrow (Bore11 and Ellis 1934, Walker et al. 1964). The burrows usually have several entrances; (1946) reported that in Utah four or five were typical, but ten have been observed. In Idaho, two entrances were most often found (Wilde 1978). Entrances are in diameter and usually found at the base of a large sagebrush on a gentle slope. Tunnels usually extend to no more than one metre in depth. The species is reported to be crepuscular (Davis 1939, 

but may be found above ground any time of day. A study in Idaho showed the peak of activity to be during mid-morning (Bradfield 1975). Pygmy rabbits generally are found within a 30m radius of their burrow during winter, with an expanded home range in spring and summer 1946). They have a rather deliberate gait, staying low to the ground. To avoid predators, they may depend more on their ability to maneuver through dense sagebrush than on speed (Merriam 1891, Davis 1939, 1950). Pygmy rabbits feed primarily on big sagebrush, sometimes even climbing into the tops of the larger plants. They select big sagebrush even when other shrubs are available. In winter, big sagebrush may comprise up to 99% of their diet; grasses 

spp. and Poa spp.) may comprise 3040% of their diet in summer (Bailey 1936, Green 1978, Wilde 1978). 

# Reproduction 

Sexual development in males begins in January, peaks in March and declines in June 1946, Wilde 1978). Fe-males are fertile from late February through March in Utah 

1946) and from late March through late May in Idaho (Wilde et al. 1976). The gestation period lasts from 26 to 28 days (Bradfield 1975). Litter size ranges from five to eight and averages six (Wilde et al. 1976, Wilde 1978, Davis 1939). Females are able to produce three litters per year (Green 1978, Wilde 1978). 

# Population Status and Threats to Survival 

The status of the pygmy rabbit varies widely, from secure populations in large expanses of sagebrush such as occur in Idaho, to isolated remnants in Washington. Because the rab-bit is totally dependent upon big sagebrush, particularly the highest densities, it is quite vulnerable. Wilde (1978) goes so far as to say that pygmy rabbits and humans may be incompat-ible. Certainly, large areas in the rabbit’s range have been permanently converted to other uses such as farming and irrigated cropland. In addition, rangeland is often im-proved for livestock use by reducing the shrub cover using various methods, all of which render the shrub-steppe rangeland unsuitable for pygmy rabbits. The species will not cross even moderately large areas of open ground (Bradfield 1975, Weiss and Verts 1984). Because of this limited immigration, some populations are subject to the principles of island biology. They exist in “islands” of sage-brush inside large areas of altered habitat. While their distri-bution was at one time continuous, many populations are now isolated. The probability of survival of these populations is related to the size of the contiguous habitat that comprises the “island.” Genetic drift and stochastic events can cause sponta-neous local extinctions; fire, disease and climatic fluctuations can have major effects. As the size of the “island” is dimin-ished, the likelihood of local extinction increases. This phe-nomenon is particularly critical on the fringes of the range. One area in Washington has been isolated for over 23 years. Weiss and Verts (1984) stated that the pygmy rabbit may be subject to rapid population declines in Oregon. They found that ten of the 15 active sites sampled in 1982 showed no evidence of activity one year later. When declines occur in isolated populations, extinctions are likely. These extinctions are cumulative, progressively reducing the extent of the spe-cies’ range. In all parts of their range, overgrazing can impact popula-tions. While overgrazing will eventually increase the shrub densities, the immediate impact is to reduce the summer grass and forb forage available to the rabbits. Cattle in particular also damage the structure of the sagebrush, breaking off branches and opening the canopy. If overgrazing occurs in occupied pygmy rabbit habitat for several seasons in succes-sion, particularly if the habitat is limited to begin with, the impact could be extreme. Restocking will occur when over-grazing ceases if other populations occur within contiguous habitats, but not if the area is isolated. Green and Flinders (1980a) believe that sagebrush grow-ing along riparian areas near streams may provide avenues of dispersion between larger blocks of sagebrush. This could be used as a management tool, protecting or creating such corri-dors of sagebrush, to assist in the maintenance and mixing of populations. The pygmy rabbit uses a unique habitat: a combination of dense sagebrush, deep soil suitable for burrowing, and good grass and forb cover. Unfortunately this habitat has been reduced in most areas in the west. However, the fact that this species can use sites which were once disturbed by grazing or cultivation and have reverted to big sagebrush indicates that suitable habitat can be created. Where small populations of pygmy rabbits now exist, steps can be taken to increase the amount of suitable habitat. This may require a commitment of range or agricultural lands to restore significant areas to sagebrush range. Where isolated populations now occur, cor-ridors can be created to connect sites and thereby reduce the chances of local extirpations. In some cases this would only require a change in farming practices, leaving sagebrush along draws and field edges, connecting adjacent areas of sagebrush habitat. 

114 References 

Bailey, V. 1936. The mammals and life zones of Oregon. N. Amer. Fauna 

Blaisdell, J.P. 1953. Ecological effects of planned burning of sage-brush-grass range on the Upper Snake River Plains. U.S. Dept. Agr. Tech. Bull. 

Borell, A.E. and Ellis, R. 1934. Mammals of the Ruby Mountains Region of northeastern Nevada. Mammal 15: 12-44. Bradfield, T. 1975. On the behavior and ecology of the pygmy rabbit  

> idahoensis.

M.S. Thesis. Idaho St. Univ., Pocatello. 

Butler, B.R. 1972. The or postglacial ecological crisis on the eastern Snake River Plain. Tebiwa 

Campbell, T.M., III, Clark, T.W. and Groves, C.R. 1982. First record of pygmy rabbits idahoensis) in Wyoming. Great Basin Nat. 

Christensen, E.M. 1963. The foothill bunchgrass vegetation of cen-tral Utah. Ecology 

Couch, L.K. 1923. Pygmy rabbit in eastern Washington. 

Davis, W.B. 1939. The Recent Mammals of Idaho. Caxton Printers, Ltd., Caldwell, Idaho. 

L. 1960. Influence of grazing on plant succession of rangelands. Botan. Rev. 26: l-76. Gashwiler, J.S., Robinette, W.L. and Morris, O.W. 1960. Food of bobcats in Utah and eastern Nevada. Manage. 24:226-

229. Green, J.S. 1978. Pygmy rabbit and coyote investigationsin southeas-tern Idaho. Ph.D. Dissertation, Brigham Young Univ., Provo, Utah. Green, J.S. and Flinders, J.T. 1979. Homing by a pygmy rabbit. Great Basin Nat. 

Green, J.S. and Flinders, J.T. 1980a. Brachylagus idahoensis. Mam-mal. Sp. 

Green, J.S. and Flinders, J.T. 1980b. Habitat and dietary relation-ships of the pygmy rabbit. Range Manage. 

Hall, E.R. 1946. Mammals of Nevada. Univ. of Press, Berkeley. 710pp. Ingles, L.G. 1965. Mammals of the Pacific States. Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford, CA. 

R.G. 1946. A survey of the native rabbits of Utah with reference to their classification, distribution, life histories and ecology. M.S. Thesis. Utah St. Univ., Logan. Jones, F.L. 1957. Southern extension of the range of the pygmy rabbit in California. Mammal. 

Merriam, C.H. 1891. Results of a biological reconnaissance of 

central Idaho. N. Amer. Fauna, U.S. Dept. Biol. Survey. Nelson, E.W. 1909. The rabbits of North America. North Amer. Fauna, 

Orr, R.T. 1940. The rabbits of California. Occas. Papers  

> Sci.

19: l-227. Pearson, L.C. 1965. Primary production in grazed and ungrazed desert communities of eastern Idaho. Ecology 

Pritchett, C.L., J.A., Coffeen, M.P. and Smith, H.D. 1987. Pygmy rabbits in the Colorado River drainage. Great Basin Nat. 

Severaid, J.H. 1950. The pygmy rabbit (Sylvilagus idahoensis) in Mono County, California. I. Mammal. 

Walker, E.P., Wamick, F., Lange, K.I., Uible, H.E., Hamlet, S.E., Davis, M.A. and Wright, P.F. 1964. Mammals of the World. John Hopkins Press, Baltimore, MD. 2: 647-1500. Weiss, N.T. and Verts, B.J. 1984. Habitat and distribution of pygmy rabbits (Sylvilagus idahoensis) in Oregon. Great Basin Nat. 

Wilde, D.B. 1978. A population analysis of the pygmy rabbit   

> (Sylvilagus idahoensis)

on the INEL site. Ph.D. Dissertation. Idaho St. Univ., Pocatello. Wilde, D.B., Fisher, J.S. and Keller, B.L. 1976. A demographic analysis of the pygmy rabbit, Sylvilagus idahoensis: In: 1975        

> Progress Report, Idaho National Engineering Laboratory Site Radioecology-ecology Programs,

National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA. Pp. 88-105. 

115 Chapter 7: The European Rabbit 

## John A. Gibb 

# Taxonomy 

The European rabbit (Linnaeus 

or cony of our Norman forbears, is the ancestor of all domes-tic breeds. The genus is monospecific. There are usually considered to be two main subspecies, the now wide-spread and larger 0. c. (maximum weight about 2kg) from central Europe and the smaller (maximum 0. c. from the south of the Iberian peninsula. The validity of 0. c. cnossus on Crete is dubious. Thompson and 

(1956) listed six supposed subspecies. 

# Description 

Externally, the European rabbit is distinguished from most of the other five leporids in Europe by its smaller size, relatively shorter ears lacking black tips and the white underside to its tail; also, unlike young rabbits are usually born under-ground and are naked, blind and helpless. The European rabbit resembles the American cottontails, spp. and is separated from them on biochemical and behavioral grounds. As its Latin name implies, the European rabbit is typically a burrowing animal living communally in warrens. These characteristics are not in themselves diagnostic, however. Wild rabbits sometimes live permanently above ground, shel-tering by day in dense vegetation, and only breed under-ground. At low density isolated pairs are not uncommon. This varied lifestyle in different habitats emphasizes the species’ marked adaptability. 

# Distribution 

A rabbit resembling the European rabbit was probably pres-ent in the pre-Pleistocene fauna of central and western Eu-rope. Apparently it died out in the glacial, except in the Iberian peninsula. Familiar though the European rabbit may now be, the origin of 0. c. is obscure. Symptomatic of this is that the type locality of 0. c. is in Germany and that of 0. c. in Porto Santo, Madeira, outside their natural ranges. 0. c. having supposedly arisen in the 

rian peninsula, did not appear in north-central Europe until the Middle Ages. In cataloging the mammals in the British        

> Numbers are total islands within areas indicated Arrows point to separate islands
> Figure 7.1 Distribution of the European rabbit

116 Museum (Natural History), Miller (1912) listed specimens of 0. c. from Coto and Seville in southern Spain, near Burgos in north-central Spain, from Nimes north of the Rhone delta and Digne in the Basses Alpes, north of Toulon, in the south of France. This unbroken arc leaves little room for 0. c. cuniculus to have evolved within the species’ known range. There is much in favour of Fitter’s (1959) suggestion that the Romans produced the larger breed from 0. c. in captivity, and then released it or allowed it to escape into northern France, whence it was later brought to Britain. In which case ‘0. c. may be an impostor and should be known simply as the Feral Rabbit. 0. c. was widely distributed by the Phoenicians on islands off the northwest coast of Africa and in the Mediterranean. Presumably it still exists in the Azores and on Porto Santo and the Salvage Islands of Madeira, and in the Mediterranean on the Balearic Islands, Capri (Italy), Sicily, Sardinia, Tunisia and Crete. Many erstwhile populations of 0. c. on the European mainland have now been replaced by 0. c. the preferred quarry of hunters because of its larger size. Though conjectural, Fitter’s suggestion draws attention to the uncertain origin of 0. c. cuniculus and present status and range of 0. c. Urgent steps are needed to assess the need to protect 0. c. which may be endangered. As virtually nothing is known of the biology of 0. c. the following account refers exclusively to 0. c. cuniculus. 0. c. cuniculus is the larger and perhaps the hardier breed; it has displayed remarkable adaptability to extreme condi-tions. It survived long sea passages on board sailing ships bound for Australia and New Zealand and to other parts of the globe in the centuries; and on release reached densities unheard of in Europe. Lever (1985) described the extensive present range of the species with its three foci, in western Europe and North Africa, whence it was shipped to Australia and New Zealand, and to South America. The rabbit’s recent crossing of the Andes from Chile into Argentina and spread in Tierra 

Fuego is proof that it has not yet been halted. (See Fig. 7.1). 

There are, besides, numerous island populations of the European rabbit around the world; of 0. c. in the eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean, and of cuniculus from the Aleutians and islands off Alaska to Phoenix Island almost on the equator in the Pacific, and south to subantarctic 

quarie Island (Flux and Fullagar 1983). The rabbit was a com-mon article of trade among whalers working the southern oceans in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, and was sometimes put ashore on distant islands to supplement stocks of food cached for castaways. 

# Habitat 

Ideal rabbit habitat resembles conditions typical of the 

rian peninsula: a Mediterranean climate with a rainfall of less than about per annum., short and 

drained, loosely compacted soils that are easily dug, or with secure refuge areas in scrub adjacent to feeding grounds. As Barrett-Hamilton (1910) put it in Britain, “Although it thrives best on dry but rich pastures, the rabbit may be expected wherever a blade of grass can grow, . ..it holds its own in the face of the most relentless persecution... It plants its colonies on almost inaccessible turfy ledges on the sides of sea cliffs and precipices”, as well as on the plains. “If it objects to anything it is to cold and wet, but the objection is only relative, since it abounds in the continuous heavy rains of the Mull winters...“, as well, one might add, as in the perennially wet climate of sub-antarctic Macquarie Island, a far cry from Mediterranean Spain. 

# Reproduction 

The European rabbit is notoriously prolific. It is liable to breed opportunistically at any season, which contributes to its success as a colonist. In general, in its introduced range, breeding begins and ends earlier in the year the lower the latitude (Gibb et al. 1985). The length of the season, and hence the number of litters produced each year (at the rate of about one per month), depend on the length of the growing season of the on which it feeds. Thus breeding lasts from about four months of the year at higher latitudes to at least nine months in temperate New Zealand. Opportunistic breeding is most marked in semi-arid parts of Australia where droughts lasting many months may be punctuated by occa-sional heavy rain, to which the vegetation responds vigorously at any season (Wood 1980). There is a post-partum or seven day oestrous period. Gestation lasts 28-30 days and the young remain in the nest for 20-21 days; they are then weaned. While they are in the nest, the female (doe) visits her young only once a night, for about five minutes. The female alone builds the nest of dead vegetation lined with fur plucked from her belly. The nest may be placed either in a short offshoot of an established warren or in a separate breeding “stop” about one metre long, so called because the doe stops up the entrance with spoil whenever she leaves. Stops may be dug and stopped days, weeks or even months before they are used; indeed many are never used at all. In Australia, Mykytowycz and Gambale (1965) found that domi-nant does normally breed in the warrens and subordinate ones (less successfully) in isolated stops. But where there is 

scrub cover in New Zealand, rabbits often live perma-nently above ground and have no warrens, so all breeding is in stops. Elsewhere, extremes of temperature and lack of ground cover may force rabbits to live and breed underground in warrens. In Wales, Brambell(1944) found occasionally heavy losses and resorption of embryos early in the gestation period. Such losses may be of single embryos or whole litters. The inci-dence of pre-natal mortality is variable. It is now seen as adaptive in allowing does either to terminate a pregnancy or to 

117 European rabbit (Photo by A Apse) 

reduce the size of the litter if conditions are unfavourable for lactation, which is the most demanding stage of reproduction (Gibb et al. 1985). 

Litter size at birth peaks in spring when pasture produc-tion is maximal. Litters range in size from about three to nine young, with a mean of about four to six in mid-season, falling to three to four during off-peak periods. Winter breeding is normal in Mediterranean climates, where breeding ceases in late spring; but in more temperate climates breeding begins in early spring and continues through to mid-summer. The long-est breeding seasons recorded are in warm temperate New Zealand, with a well-distributed rainfall, where more than 50% of the adult females may be pregnant for nine months of the year. 

# Population Dynamics 

Seasonal and regional variation in litter-size is less pro-nounced than the length of the breeding season; consequently the annual reproductive rate of female rabbits depends pri-marily on the length of the breeding season. The number of young born per female per year ranges from about 15 to 45, depending on the climate, the latter figure being usual on improved pasture in New Zealand (Gilbert et al. 1987). Male and female rabbits first become fertile when three to four months old, and in New Zealand females of nine to twelve months old breed at the maximum rate (Gibb et al. 1985). If the population is stable, the high reproductive rate must be balanced by a correspondingly high rate of juvenile mortality. It is estimated in Australia that more than 80% of the young born may be killed by predators (mainly foxes and feral cats) either in the nest or within two weeks of leaving it (Wood 1980); others may die later of coccidiosis. This pattern is probably repeated in New Zealand, except that mortality rates must be even higher because reproductive rates are higher, and perhaps also in Spain where predation is certainly heavy. Annual mortality rates of adults more than six months old usually exceed 60% (Gilbert et al. 1987); but may be as low as 25% in low-density populations in New Zealand (Gibb 

publ.). In the wild, rabbits seldom live for more than seven to eight years. 

118 The density of rabbits is of course ultimately limited by plant production. In practice, however, heavy predation com-monly prevents numbers building up to the carrying capacity of the land. Populations of rabbits are capable of sustaining massive predation pressures because of their high reproduc-tive rates. In Spain, for instance, the rabbit is an important prey of species of birds of prey and ten mammalian carnivores (Delibes and Hiraldo 1981). There are rather fewer species of predators on rabbits in Australia and Chile, and fewer still in New Zealand. Even so, in New Zealand as in Spain, predation is regarded as the principal cause of death among both young and old rabbits. Since many predators concentrate on young rabbits, their abundance and effectiveness in limiting rabbit numbers may depend on the length of the rabbits’ breeding season coupled with the availability or otherwise of alternative prey for when there are no young rabbits. The effectiveness of predation may thus be curtailed in ecosystems lacking a full complement of predators (as on small islands) or without alternative prey. Climatic extremes, too, may prevent the survival of balanced populations of predators and their prey, as in semi-arid re-gions of Australia. Predation may also be restricted, as in parts of Britain, where strict gamekeeping almost eliminates preda-tory ‘vermin.’ Elsewhere, however, in more varied ecosys-tems, stable populations of rabbits may persist indefinitely at low to medium density. 

# Behavior 

Rabbits are strongly territorial and form social groups with a strict linear hierarchy of dominance. The dominant male (buck) serves several does, while some younger, subordinate bucks may live peripherally to the group and delay achieving a degree of dominance until they get older. At high density social groups may defend group territories, but at low density rabbits frequently live in small groups of two or three animals or even solitarily (males only?). Neighbouring groups may coalesce and feed together at night, or be joined by bucks visiting from other groups. Defended territories are usually small, often less than one hectare; but if food is short or distributed unevenly, rabbits may feed communally at night at distances of up to at least 500m away from where they spend the day. Adult rabbits seldom shift their ground permanently, though their territo-ries may “creep” over time. Juveniles sometimes disperse several kilometers from where they were born, though the majority stay put. When introduced to Australia, rabbits spread over unoccupied territory at rates of up to ayear, apparently unaided (Myers et al. in press), compared with about a year in New Zealand. By itself, the territorial behavior of rabbits is incapable of limiting population density, but it may play a part in regulating local densities once numbers have been reduced to a low level by some other means, such as predation (Gibb and Williams in press). 

# Disease 

The advent of myxomatosis from South America, where the 

Myoma virus is endemic and benign in local sp., to Europe and Australia in 1950-1953 resulted in a tremendous reduction in the numbers of rabbits; more than 99% of some populations succumbed in the early years. The virus is spread mechanically from rabbit to rabbit via the mouthparts of biting insects, notably the rabbit flea and various species of mosquitoes. The absence of the flea and a lack of indigenous vectors prevented the virus from becoming established in New Zealand when it was deliberately intro-duced in the early 1950s (Filmer 1953); and the absence of vectors was also blamed for its failure in Tierra Fuego. The introduction of the rabbit flea to Australia in the to augment mosquitoes as vectors, has had inconclusive results. Neither the flea nor the virus has been introduced to New Zealand since the virus first failed to become established, despite vocal pressure by farmers in rabbit-infested districts. Over most of New Zealand rabbits have now been severely r e d u c e d i n n u m b e r s b y p o i s o n i n g w i t h s o d i u m monofluoroacetate (compound ‘1080’) in carrot bait dropped from the air. This has been followed by improved farming practices which encourage natural predation, with the result that most populations are now naturally controlled at low density (Gibb and Williams in press). In Europe and Australia the more virulent strains of the 

Myxoma virus have gradually been superseded by less virulent strains; and the rabbits themselves have developed a degree of genetic resistance to the virus. As a result, the long-term effectiveness of myxomatosis in limiting rabbit numbers is in question, and in recent years they have staged a considerable resurgence in both Britain and Australia. Sporting interests in France and Italy have been responsible for the introduction there from America of the eastern cottontail 

which is resistant to myxomatosis, to substitute for the diminished supply of The wisdom of this action is dubious, to say the least. Another lethal viral disease of rabbits is being reported at the time of writing. The type of virus involved is still uncertain. Apparently the first outbreak occurred in 1984 in a consign-ment of angora rabbits from West Germany to China. Provi-sionally known as viral disease (VHD), it has been linked with a current viral disease of hares 

europaeus) in Europe, which has reduced many wild popula-tions. It is not known whether hares or other genera of rabbits are susceptible to VHD, or whether it is likely to spread to other countries with wild VHD is apparently spread by aerosol infection so, unlike myxomatosis, it needs no intermediate vector. Since 1984, VHD is reported to have killed millions of do-mestic rabbits in Italy and outbreaks have been reported among wild rabbits in at least three separate localities in Spain. Fear of the disease spreading has stopped the export of live rabbits from Spain to restock hunting reserves in France. Until recently some live rabbits have been exported 

119 annually to France and French hunters are now reported to have been inquiring about importing wild rabbits from West-ern Australia instead! Initially heavy mortality has been reported among adult wild rabbits when first confronted with VHD in Spain. Young rabbits less than about eight weeks of age may have become infected with VHD, but they develop immunity to it and are not killed. This may limit its effectiveness as a 

perpetuating means of controlling wild rabbits. Research on VHD can only be undertaken in specially equipped laboratories as at Pirbright in England and Geelong in South Australia. Research is obviously needed to identify the virus and to predict its impact on wild populations. 

References 

Barrett-Hamilton, G.E.H. 1910. A History of British Mammals. 

Gurney and Jackson, London. Brambell, F.W.R. 1944. The reproduction of the wild rabbit,  

> cuniculus

(L.). Proceedings of the Zoological Society of 

> London

Delibes, M. and Hiraldo, F. 1981. The rabbit as prey in the Iberian Mediterranean ecosystem. In: Myers, K. and C. D. (Eds), Proceedings of the Conference, August 

1979. University of Guelph, Ontario. Pp. 614-622. Filmer, J.F. 1953. Disappointing tests of myxomatosis as rabbit control. N.Z. Journal of Agriculture 

Fitter, R.S.R. 1959. The in our Midst. Collins, London. 

Flux, J.E.C. and Fullagar, P.J. 1983. World distribution of the rabbit  

> cuniculus). Fennica

Gibb, J.A., White, A.J. and Ward, C.P. 1985. Population ecology of rabbits in the Wairarapa, New Zealand. N.Z. Journal of Ecology 

Gibb, J.A. and Williams, J.M. (in press).The rabbit in New Zealand. In: Thompson, H.V. and King, CM. (Eds), The Rabbit in Britain, France and Australasia: the ecology of a successful colonizer. 

Oxford University Press, Oxford and London. Gilbert, N., Myers, K., Cooke, B.D., Dunsmore, J.D., Fullagar, P.J., Gibb, J.A., King, D.R., Parer, I., Wheeler, S.H. and Wood, D.H. 1987. Comparative dynamics of Australasian rabbit populations.  

> Australian Journal

of Wildlife 

Lever, C. 1985. Naturalized Mammals of the World. Lon-don and New York. 

Linnaeus, C. 1758. Naturae. Edit. x. 

Miller, G.S. 1912. Catalogue of the mammals of Western Europe in the Collection of the British Museum. Trustees of the British Mu-seum, London. 

Myers, K., Parer, I., Wood, D.H. and Cooke, B.D. (in press).The rabbit in Australia. In: Thompson, H.V. and King, C.M. (Eds),  

> The Rabbit in Britain, France and Australasia: the

of asuccessful colonizer. Oxford University Press, Oxford and Lon-don. Mykytowycz, R. and Gambale, S. 1965. A study of inter-warren activities and dispersal of wild rabbits, cuniculus (L.), living in a paddock. Wildlife Research 10: 

Thompson, H.V. and A.N. 1956. The Rabbit. Collins, London. 

Wood, D.H. 1980. The demography of a rabbit population in an arid region of New South Wales, Australia. Journal Ecology 

120 Chapter 8: The African Rabbits 

# A.G. Duthie and T.J. Robinson 

# Species 

Riverine rabbit (Thomas 

yoro rabbit marjorita (St. Leger greater red 

crassicaudatus (I. 

Jameson’s red randensis 

Smith’s red rupestris (A. Smith 1834) 

# Status and Summary 

Several problems exist in determining the status of the African rabbit species presented in this chapter. In general terms, their small body size, nocturnal habits and low conservation priority, exacerbated by the third world setting, have all con-tributed in various degrees to the paucity of biological data. Unlike Europe and North America, where lagomorphs are important game species and have consequently attracted the attention of biologists, leporids have traditionally been re-garded of little consequence in Africa, an attitude that has, until recently, pervaded both professional and lay circles. A notable exception concerns the riverine rabbit 

monticularis where conservation efforts by the Wildlife Soci-ety of Southern Africa and South African Nature Foundation, in concert with research endeavors, have done much to draw attention to the plight of the species. Consequently, the data on the riverine rabbit are more comprehensive than those on the Bunyoro rabbit and the three species of rockhares which, in turn, is reflected in the ac-counts of the and in information on basic biology and dis-tribution patterns. In particular, the current status of the Bunyoro rabbit 

majorita is enigmatic. Much of the species’ historic range is in areas which have been subjected to prolonged civil strife. Nonetheless, all reports seem to indicate that the spe-cies is locally abundant. It should be cautioned, however, that only the most rudimentary of data are available, and our treatment of this species as not threatened is permitted more by ignorance than sound science and should be considered tentative pending future study. Regional considerations were not considered important in setting conservation priorities for the African lagomorphs since particular may, by virtue of limited distribution, be rare in one country but relatively abundant in another. We realize, however, that this view is flawed in respect of with disjunct distribution patterns, perhaps most pronounced in the monotypic Bunyoro rabbit and also Smith’s red 

Pronolagus rupestris and Jameson’s red P. randensis, 

and those for which comprehensive taxonomic data on the species are unavailable. The problems of cryptic species and the conservation of geographic genetic variation are of pro-found importance in the development of long term conserva-tion strategies, but cannot be sensibly addressed with the existing data. Finally, the species covered by this report are restricted to two geographic regions, the Southern African Subregion and the Central African Moist Savanna. The former may be regarded as particularly pertinent in future conservation strategies aimed at maintaining species diversity, character-ized as it is, by both a high level of species endemism and a rich leporid fauna. 

# Species Accounts The Riverine Rabbit 

monticularis 

Taxonomy and Description 

Originally described as monticularis Thomas it was separated generically some years later by Thomas (1929). Although the riverine rabbit superficially resembles the Cape hare capensis, in external and cranial morphology (Robin-son and Dippenaar 1987; head body length 430mm; tail 92mm; length 104mm and ear length it nonetheless has several features which distinguish it at both generic (Robinson and Skinner 1983, Corbet 1983) and  

> Riverine rabbit
> (Photo by T. Robinson)

121 P. marjorita     

> B. monticularis
> Figure 8.1. Distributions of riverine rabbit B. and Bunyoro rabbit in Africa.

level (Robinson 1982, Robinson and Dippenaar 1987). A characteristics feature of the not shared by other members of the family in the Southern African subregion, is the dark brown stripe running along the lower margins of the jaw towards the base of the ear. Distinguishing external mark-ings which unambiguously separate it from the Cape hare and the species are, respectively, a uniformly 

colored tail (black and white in the Cape hare) and long ears 

in the species). No subspecies have been described. 

Distribution 

The species is limited to the Southern African subregion and, more specifically, is endemic to the central Karoo 

of South Africa’s Cape Province (Fig. 8.1). Recent surveys (Duthie et al. 1989) suggest it survives only in the dense, discontinuous karoid vegetation in the districts of Victoria West, West and Frazerburg, an area of ap-proximately which is linearly distributed along the seasonal rivers in these regions. In historic times the species’ range was known to include the riverine vegetation in the districts of Sutherland and Calvinia (approximately 

but recent extensive surveys suggest that it has disappeared from this area (Robinson 1981, Duthie et al. 1989). 

Habitat and Ecology 

The riverine rabbit inhabits dense riparian growth along the seasonal rivers in the central Karoo. Vegetation analyses of the typical habitat, designed to determine the percentage vegetation cover, percentage occurrence and mean plant height and width, indicate that (34.8%) 

and species (11.2%) predominate, while Pteronia eythrocaetha 

Kochiapubescens (6.5%) and Galeniaprocumbens (4%) con-tribute significantly (Duthie et al. 1989). This investigation also revealed that grasses are poorly represented, their cover being approximately one fifth that of dicotyledons. Notewor-thy from the investigation was the observation that almost 68% of the remaining riverine rabbit vegetation is found to be associated with an interconnected network of rivers; princi-pally the Sak, Klein Sak and Riet, Klein Riet in the central Karoo. The monotypic riverine rabbit is solitary, has a polyga-mous mating system and is nocturnal in habit. During daylight hours it makes use of forms usually sited at the base of overhanging vegetation. Home ranges are intrasexually exclu-sive with those of the male 2.9) overlapping those of the female 5.6; Duthie 1989). Analysis of samples collected in the field from areas previously determined as being inhabited only by riverine rabbits, indicates that the species is predominantly a browser. Flowers and leaves of the dicotyledonous Pteronia eythrocaetha, Kochiapubescens, Salsola glabrescens, Rosenia 

as well as representatives of the 

maceae are most commonly eaten. Grasses are included in the diet when these are available in the wet season (Duthie 1989). The African wild cat is a predator of the species (Duthie 1989). 

Reproduction 

Although data on reproduction are fragmentary, several gen-eralizations can be made. First, one, possibly two young are born to reproductively-active females in the period August through May. Limited observations of captive animals suggest the existence of post partum oestrus and breeding synchrony in the species. The young weigh approximately 40g at birth and are born in a fur and grass lined breeding stop similar in construction to that reported for the European rabbit 

(Lloyd and 1968) and the New England cottontail transitionalis (Tefft and Chapman 1987). The burrow has an entrance wide, is approximately 200-300mm long and widens into a chamber 120-170mm broad. Interestingly, the burrow opening is plugged with soil and twigs when the stop is not in use (Duthie 1989). The youngest juveniles noted in the wild weighed 

possibly indicating that they remain in the breeding stop for relatively long periods prior to leaving to forage independ-ently. 

Population Status and Threats 

Two censuses conducted in discrete sections of the typical habitat have yielded densities of 0.064 and 0.166 riverine rabbits per hectare (Duthie 1989). Extrapolation of these values to remaining habitat indicates that this vegetation 122 could possibly support a total population of approximately 1,500 rabbits. That this figure may, however, represent an overestimation is suggested by the observation that, in spite of intensive surveys, no evidence of species occurrence was noted for the Ongers river which alone supports approxi-mately 21% of remaining suitable habitat. Several reports have drawn attention to the destruction of the riverine vegetation in this region as a possible reason for the species’ disappearance from large tracts of its former range (Robinson 1981) but the extent of the destruction was not quantified. A recent approximation, calculated from 

aerial photographs of the central Karoo, indicates that upwards of 60% of the original riparian vegetation has been destroyed through cultivation (Duthie et al. 1989). The destruction has been attributed to a now largely defunct 

> Habitat of the riverine rabbit
> (Photo by T. J. Robinson)

scheme 

by 1950, 1955). While currently 

cultivate wheat on the banks of these rivers which, had failed due to lack of irrigation water (Green the extent of vegetation destruction is significant it is static. New cultivation still occurs adjacent to 

steads, but this is limited in extent and does not, at present, represent any significant threat to the remaining habitat. This said, however, the of extinction for this species is very real. Even preserving the remaining habitat may be 

to ensure the long-term conservation of the species, since the population numbers are so low and the distribution ap-pears fragmented along the rivers. This will tend to make the isolates more susceptible to local extinctions as well as con-tributing to the possible disruption of gene flow between adjacent subpopulations. 

Conservation Measures Proposed and Adopted 

The riverine rabbit is currently listed as endangered in both the IUCN and South African Red Data books. It is also protected Cape Provincial Nature Conservation Ordi-nance which prohibits its hunting or capture. A captive breeding colony has been successfully estab-lished at the De Wildt Cheetah Research Center 

Surplus specimens from this colony will be used for relocation to suitable areas within its historic distribution. No national reserve has yet been proclaimed for the species, but recent additions to the Karoo National Park 

may prove suitable for relocation of the species once the vegetation has recovered from the effects of overgrazing. Steps have been taken to have the farm which has formed the focus of research on the species (Duthie 1989) proclaimed a conservancy under South Africa’s Natural Heritage 

The site is situated along the Klein Brak River near the town of Victoria West. A riverine rabbit awareness programme among the farmers of the cen-tral Karoo has been instituted. 

Conclusion 

The monotypic riverine rabbit is the only species of 

on the African continent regarded as endangered. This rating is based on the degree of threat to the population, which is exacerbated by its extremely small numbers and habitat specificity (Duthie et al. as well as on its taxonomic uniqueness (Robinson and Skinner 1983). 

Bunyoro Rabbit 

Subspecies: marjorita (St. Leger 

marjorita marjorita (St. Leger Poelagus marjorita 

Setzer 1956 

Taxonomy and Description 

Originally described as majorita, the species was later elevated to full generic rank (see Honacki et al. 1982). Subse-quently, it was included as a subgenus of the rockhares 

(Ellerman and Morrison-Scott 1951) and a species of 

(Gureev 1964 in Corbet 1983). Poelagus 

is currently regarded as a monotypic genus (Petter 1972) for which the above three subspecies have been described. 

ever, we are unaware of any recent rigorous taxonomic inves-tigation of the species. Given the extensive range and appar-ent geographic isolation of the population, a 

study should be encouraged. The genus appears to lack diagnostic cranial features (Corbet 1983). The tail is reported to be brownish yellow dorsally and white ventrally; the ears and are short and the pelage harsher than other African leporids (Walker 1964). Head and body length is given as tail length as ear length 

and the species weighs approximately 2-3kg 1974). 

Distribution 

(1974) reports the distribution to extend from south-ern Chad eastwards through southern Sudan, northeastern Zaire, northwestern Kenya and southwards to the northern tip of Lake Tanganyika. If the current distribution maps are accurate and do not reflect a sampling hiatus, an isolated population would appear to exist in Angola, with a 

123 tion extending from west-central Angola northwards into southern Zaire (Fig. 8.1). 

Habitat and Ecology 

The Bunyoro rabbit is a species of moist savanna found in grasslands and woodlands in association with rocky outcrops and, to a lesser degree, with forest (Verheyen and Verschuren 1966, 1974). They are frequently found together with the rock hyrax, possibly sharing rock crevices with the latter, and in the western Rift valley occupy habitat similar to that of the rockhares 1974). Bunyoro rabbits feed nocturnally in groups which consist of pairs, or females accompanied by young 1974). During daylight hours they lie up solitarily in forms made in thick vegetation. The species is reported to forage on flowers and sprouting grasses and is much attracted to heavily grazed, newly mowed or burnt areas where the grass is short 1974). Leaves of peanut and rice plants are taken in the areas where cultiva-tion fringes suitable habitat (Akaibe pers. 

As with all lagomorphs, this species is probably taken by all opportunistic raptors and carnivores. Major predators would include and G. as well as hawks and owls 1974). 

Reproduction 

Verheyen and Verschuren (1966) and (1974) re-corded juveniles and pregnant or lactating females in all months, suggesting that breeding occurs throughout the year. Their gestation is thought to be about five weeks 

1974). One or two altricial young are born in breeding stops, the entrance of which is concealed with grass and soil (Walker 1964, 1974). 

Population Status and Threat 

The species is common and well protected in the Garamba National Park in northeastern Zaire (Verheyen and 

schuren 1966) and is also reasonably abundant in southern Sudan pers. The status in other areas, particularly Uganda, Chad and Angola are unknown. Akaibe (pers. reports that the species’ savanna habitat is ploughed under to a limited extent to provide for the cultiva-tion of peanuts and rice and that it is also frequently hunted using nets and dogs. (1974) also reports that the species habitat is burnt annually, sometimes biennially, re-moving the grassland habitat and leaving the species more vulnerable. The extent of this threat is unknown. 

Conservation Measures Proposed and Adopted 

As far as we have been able to ascertain, the species is not afforded any form of legislative protection. It is, however, reported to be locally abundant, and occurs in the Garamba National Park and Murchison Falls National Park. Possibly no form of protection may be required. 

Conclusion 

Although data on the distribution of the Bunyoro rabbit are sparse and estimates of population densities unavailable, all indications are that the species is not under threat. 

The Rockhares 

Lyon 1904 Species: Greater red crassicaudatus (I. 

Jameson’s red randensis 

Smith’s red 

(A. Smith 1834) Excluding taxonomic and distributional data, little biologi-cal information is available for the three species. 

Taxonomy and Description 

The type specimen was originally described as crassi-caudatus I. but was corrected to Pronolagus crassi-

by Lyon (Lyon 1906 in et al. 1986). The rockhares have been subjected to a variety of taxonomic interpretations with one to six species being recognized (Roberts 1951, Peddie 1975). As is currently understood, however, the genus comprises three distinct species: Smith’s red P. Jameson’s red P. randensis 

and the greater red P. crassicaudutus (Robinson and Dippenaar 1983, et al. 1986 amongst others). 

holm (1955) regards randensis as a synonym of crassicaudutus. 

A combination of external features, including the tail which is uniformly reddish brown, brown or dark brown and the short ears provide a ready means of distinguishing representatives of the genus from other Southern African leporids (Robinson 1982). Distinctive, yet subtle, pelage 

> red
> (Photo by T. J. Robinson)

124 Figure 8.2 Distribution of Smith’s red in     

> Africa Figure 8.3 Distribution of the greater red
> and Jameson’s red P. in Africa

ferences and differences in the shape and size of the crania are useful in distinguishing the three species (Robinson 1982). The taxonomy of the subspecies remains uncertain. Petter (1972) lists ten subspecies of Smith’s red 

but et al. following Shortridge 

consider to include and to be a subspe-cies of P. randensis. In summary therefore, the following subspecies are recognized: In southern Africa P. 

(A. Smith, 1934); P. r. (Ruppell, 1842); P. 

(Thomas, 1902); P. saundersiae (Hewitt, 1927); P. r. australis 

Roberts, 1933; P. r. Roberts, 1938 and P. r. 

Roberts, 1949. Outside southern Africa, two subspecies are accepted: P. nyikae (Thomas, 1902 eastern Zambia and northern Malawi) and P. r. Kershaw, 1924 (Rift 

Kenya and possibly northern Tanzania). Following et al. Petter (1972) and 

et al. (1986) five subspecies of the greater red  

> P. crassicaudatus

are recognized, although neither their status nor the geographic limits are well defined. 

ers (1983) feels that P. c. Hewitt, 1927 may be a subspecies of P. and that the status of P. c. kariegae 

Hewitt, 1927 is uncertain. However, by consensus, the five subspecies are: P. c. crassicaudatus (I. Geoffroy, 1832); P. c. 

Thomas and Schwann, 1905; P. c. kariegae Hewitt, 1927;  

> P.

c. Hewitt, 1927 and P. c. lebombo Roberts, 1936. Finally, ten subspecies of Jameson’s red P. 

are recognized by Petter (1972) although el al. (1986) have provisionally listed only nine, regarding  

> monsi

as a subspecies of and which is included in P. by Petter (1972 see above) is thought to have priority over ekmani et al. 1986). Interestingly,  

> et al.

(1986) speculate that there may in fact only be an eastern (P. randensis) and western (P. caucinus) sub-species. Nonetheless, pending further study the nine subspe-cies provisionally recognized by these authors are: P. 

1907; P. Roberts, 1924; P.  

> makapani

Roberts, 1924; P. Roberts, 1926; P.  

> caucinus

Thomas, 1929; kobosensis Roberts, 1938; P. randensis Roberts, 1938; P. kaokoensis Roberts, 1946 and P. Hoesch and Von Lehmann, 1956. 

> Distribution of Smith’s red

The species is widely distributed in the Southern African subregion, occurring throughout South Africa’s Cape Prov-ince except for the coastal forests and the extreme northern reaches of the Province. It is found in the Transkei, southern and central Natal, the Orange Free State, southeastern Transvaal and the western fringes of the Namibian escarp-ment. Importantly, it occurs extralimitally in Malawi, eastern Zambia, central Tanzania and southwestern Kenya (Fig. 8.2;  

> et

1986). 

> Distribution of Greater red

The species appears to be endemic to the Southern African subregion and, in particular, the eastern Cape Province, 

skei, Natal, eastern Lesotho, Swaziland, southeastern 125 Transvaal and southern Mozambique (Fig. 8.3; et al. 

1986).  

> Distribution of red

The species is characterized by a disjunct distribution and is largely endemic to the Southern African subregion. 

et al. (1986) report that an eastern population extends from the Vaal River near Parys, through the central, northern and western Transvaal, southern, eastern, northeastern and west-ern Zambia, western Mozambique and southeastern Botswana. Similarly, a western population is thought to ex-tend northwards from Rehoboth along the escarpment to southwestern Angola (Fig. 8.3). 

> Habitat and Ecology

All species are restricted to rocky situations in association with grass or scrub on hill and mountainsides, irrespective of whether these are basalt, granite or sandstone formations (Smithers 1983). In an ecological study on Jameson’s red rockhare, Peddie (1975) recorded the species to rarely venture any significant distance from its rocky habi-tat. The greater red is reported to occupy suitable habitat from sea level to elevations of 

The confinement of rockhares to this characteristic habitat is noteworthy, since distribution is discontinuous and there are extensive tracts of intervening country which is unsuitable. This creates a patchwork distribution of habitat “islands” which may be of considerable importance in determining geographic variation and in the planning of genetic conserva-tion strategies for the respective 

When lying up, rockhares appear to be gregarious al-though this is probably more as a result of occupying re-stricted areas of rocky habitat (Rautenbach 1982; Smithers 1983; Peddie 1975). All species forage individually at night but spend daylight resting in rock crevices or in forms. Evidence of the solitary nature is provided by Peddie (1975) who found only 15% of the nocturnal sightings of Jameson’s red 

in the Zimbabwean Matopos to be of pairs. 

ers (1983) notes that the female rock rabbit may be accompa-nied by more than one male during the breeding season. Rockhares have been reported to be the most vocal of the African lagomorphs. Roberts (1951) describes them as utter-ing loud startling screams when disturbed at night although this behavior has never been noted by either corresponding author. Other vocalizations include a sound in a hand caught juvenile, and an adult disturbed before sunrise “barked” before fleeing (Duthie pers. obs.). All three species deposit their characteristics disc-like faeces in which may serve a social function (Smithers 1983). All species are grazers (Smithers 1983). More than 90% of identifiable plant remains in the faeces of a single Smith’s red 

analyzed by Stewart (1971) were of 

ous origin. Jameson’s red prefers feeding in areas of sprouting grass and avoids areas of dense aerial cover and moribund vegetation (Peddie 1975) an observation which holds for the other as well. Leopards Pantherapardus, Cape eagle owls Bubo capensis 

and black are known to take rockhares (Peddie 1975). 

> Reproduction

Available evidence suggests that Jameson’s red 

breeds throughout the year (Peddie 1975). No comparable data exists for the other two species. Both Jameson’s red 

and Smith’s red have one or two young per litter (Peddie 1975; Shortridge 1934; Smithers and Wilson 1979; Rautenbach 1982). Altricial Smith’s red young are born in nests constructed of plant debris which are lined with fur (Shortridge 1934; Pepler pers. Further support for an altricial birth is provided by the study of 

term fetuses which are very sparsely haired (Smithers 1983). 

> Population Status and Threat

The ranges of all three species are well represented in 

tional and Provincial Parks and Wildlife refuges in Southern Africa and none of the species are considered to be in any danger. As stated previously however, the disjunct distribu-tion and probable genetic heterogeneity between populations are important conservation considerations but, with available data, this cannot be addressed. While the northernmost population of Smith’s red is widespread in south-western Kenya and central Tanzania, it is presumably a relict of a once continuous distribution; its precise relationship to the more southern population needs clarification. Likewise, a similar situation holds for the two geographic populations currently recognized as belonging to Jameson’s red 

(Fig. 8.3). 

> Conservation Measures Proposed and Adopted

The representative species are locally abundant and well represented in National and Provincial parks in South Africa, as well as in similar facilities in other regions of their respec-tive geographic ranges. The various species are afforded seasonal protection as game species by Provincial Nature Conservation Agencies.       

> References
> Corbet, G.B. 1983. A review of classification in the family Leporidae.
> Fennica
> Duthie, A.G. 1989. The ecology of the riverine rabbit Bunolagus
> thesis, University of Pretoria. Duthie, A.G., Skinner, J.D. and Robinson, T.J. 1989. The distribu-tion and status of the endangered riverine rabbit,
> Biol. Cons.
> Ellerman, J.R. and Morrison-Scott, T.C.S. 1951. Checklist or
> and Indian Mammals 1758 to 1945. British Museum (Natural History), London.
> Ellerman, J.R., Morrison-Scott, T.C.S. and R.W. 1953.
> Southern mammals 1758-l 951: a reclassification. British Museum (Natural History), London.

126 Green, L.G. 1955. Howard Timmin s, Cape Town. Honacki, J.H., K.E. and Koeppl, J.W. 1982. 

of the World: a taxonomic and geographic reference. Allen Press and Association of collections, Lawrence, Kansas. 

J. 1974. East Mammals. Volume IIB. Academic Press, London. Lundholm, B.G. 1955. Description of new mammals. Ann. Transv. 

Lloyd, H.G. and D. 1968. Some observations on the breeding burrows of the wild rabbit on the island of Skokholm. Lond. 

J.A.J., Rautenbach, I.L., Dippenaar, N.J. and Baker, C.M.  

> 1986. Classification

of Southern Mammals. Transvaal Museum Monograph No. 5, Transvaal Museum, Pretoria. Peddie, D.A. 1975. A taxonomic and autecological study of the genus  

> Pronolagus

in southern Africa. Msc thesis, University of Rhode-sia. Petter, F. 1972. Order The mammals of an identification manual. Smithsonian Institute Press, Washington. Rautenbach, I.L. 1982. Mammals of Transvaal. Ecoplan Monograph No. 1 Ecoplan, Pretoria. Roberts, A. 1951. The mammals of South “The mammals of South Africa book fund”, Johannesburg. Robinson, T.J. 1981. The Bushman Hare. In: K. Myers and C. D. 

(Eds), World Con. University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada. 

Robinson, T.J. 1982. Key to the South African Leporidae. S. Afr. 

Robinson. T.J. and Skinner, J.D. 1983. of the Riverine Rabbit, Bunolagus and its taxonomic implications. 

> J. Mammal.

Robinson, T.J. and Dippenaar, N.J. 1983. Morphometrics of the South African Leporidae. I: Genus Pronolagus Lyon, 1904. Ann. Mus. Roy. SC .

Robinson, T.J. and Dippenaar, N.J. 1987. Morphometrics of the South African Leporidae. II: Lepus Linnaeus, 1758, and 

Thomas, 1929. Ann. Transv. Mus. 

Shortridge, G.C. 1934. The mammals of South West Vol. II. Heinemann, London. Smithers, R.H.N. 1983. The mammals of the Southern  

> subregion.

University of Pretoria, Pretoria. Smithers, R.H.N. and Wilson, V.J. 1979. Check list and atlas of the mammals of Zimbabwe. Rhodesia, Salisbury. Stewart, D.R.M. 1971. Food preferences of Pronolagus. E. Wild. J. 

St. Leger, J. 1932. A new genus for the Uganda Hare (Lepus 

> Lond.

Tefft, B.C. and Chapman, J.A. 1987. Social behavior of the New England cottontail, Sylvilagus transitionalis (Bangs), with a re-view of social behavior in New World rabbits. (Mammalia: Leporidae). Rev. Ecol. Vie) 

Thomas, 0.1903. On a remarkable new hare from the Cape Colony. 

> Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist.

Thomas, 0, 1929. On mammals from the Kaoko-veld, South-West Africa, obtained during Captain Shortridge’s fifth Percy Sladen and Kaffrarian Museum expedition. Lond. 

Walker, E.P. 1964. Mammals of the World. Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore. Verheyen, W. and Verschuren, J. 1966. du National de la Garamba: et Lagomorphes. Mimeograph of the Institute des Nationaux du Congo. 

127 Chapter 9: The Hispid Hare 

# D.J. Bell, W.L.R. Oliver and R.K. Ghose 

# Status and Summary 

The hispid hare hispidus (Pearson 1839) is Endan-gered. It still exists in a few isolated pockets across the former range of its tall grassland habitat in northern India and south-ern Nepal. It is threatened by habitat destruction for agricul-ture, forestry, human settlement, flood control and irrigation schemes, together with the adverse effects of dry season burning, overgrazing and harvesting of remaining tall grass-lands. 

# Physical Characteristics 

The mean (and range of) body weights recorded from the four sexually mature male and three female hispids by Bell (1987) was and respec-tively (the female was heavily pregnant). The coarse, bristly coat is dark brown on the dorsal sur-face, due to a mixture of black and brown hairs, ventrally brown on the chest and whitish on the abdomen. In contrast to the longer ears and white underside to the tail found in the sympatric Indian hare the short (adult length approx. 30mm) tail is brown throughout in the hispid hare and the ears shorter (adult length approx. 56mm) (Bell 1987). 

# Distribution 

Historically recorded in tracts along the southern Himalayan foothills from Uttar Pradesh through Nepal and West Bengal to Assam, extending southwards as far as in Bangla-desh, although fossil evidence suggests a more extensive Pleis-tocene distribution which included central Java (Blandford 1888, Dawson 1971). Later specimens were recorded from the North Kheri, Uttar Pradesh/Nepal border in 1951; from Chuka Dhaya, Pilibhit Forest Division, Uttar Pradesh in 1960; the Goalpara District of southwest Assam and the Rajagarh areas of the Mangaldai sub-division of Darrang District of northwest Assam in 1971 (IUCN 1974) (See Table 9.1 and Fig. 9.1). The latter specimen (hailed by several authors as the rediscovery of the species) was collected from the vicinity of the Barnadi Reserve Forest near Rajagarh Village. It was taken to the Attareekhat Tea Estate, where it was kept alive for approximately one month (Mallinson 1971, 

dell 1972). Several specimens were subsequently reported or collected in areas due east and west of Barnadi: namely in 

Reserve Forest, Sanctuary and Khalingdaur Reserve Forest (Oliver 1980). The Khalingdaur popu-lation was almost certainly exterminated by the mid-1970’s as a result of extensive burning and reforestation, while another from the Gohpur Reserve Forest is also reported to have been exterminated as a result of the complete swamping of that area by illegal immigrants in 1979 (Oliver 1981). The species has been reported on many occasions in the 

Tiger Reserve and adjacent Reserve Forests. Speci-mens from this area were collected for the Assam State Zoo, Gauhati but none of these animals survived very long. A field survey of Sanctuaries and Reserve Forests in northwest Assam, conducted by Oliver in 1977, included the capture of a live specimen in Barnadi Reserve Forest, 

rang District, while long-netting for the closely-associated 

hog Sus The three other areas in Assam where the hispid hare has recently been reported are Ripu Reserve Forest, Kochugaon District (west of 

Lahan, pers. Subankhata Reserve Forest (Deb Roy pers. and the Orang Wildlife Sanctuary, Darrang District (P.C. Das, pers. Oliver 1984). More recently, the species has also been reported in a number of areas outside Assam. These areas are: the 

dapara Wildlife Sanctuary (Oliver 1984, Ghose and Ghoasi 1984) and Buxa Tiger Reserve (Oliver 1984) in northwest Bengal; Valmiki Wildlife Sanctuary, West Champaran Dis-trict, N.W. Bihar (Ghose in press); Kanha National Park, Madhya Pradesh (Bell and Oliver in prep.); Dudwa National Park in the Kheri District of Uttar Pradesh and Royal 

> Male hispid hare fitted with radio-collar. Note the large bone and short ears (Photo by Diana Bell) nasal

128 . . 

Present known distribution 

International border 

State border      

> Figure 9.1 The sites indicated as still supporting hispid hare populations are (from west to east): Royal Suklaphanta Wildlife Reserve and Royal Bardia Wildlife Reserve (southwestern Nepal); Dudwa National Park (northeastern Uttar Pradesh); Valmiki Wildlife Sanctuary (northwestern Bihar); Royal Chitawan National Park (southern Nepal); Jaldapara Wildlife Sanctuary and Buxa Tiger Reserve (northern West Bengal); Ripu Reserve Forest, Wildlife Sanctuary, Subankhata Reserve Forest and Orang Wildlife Sanctuary (northwestern Assam). The question marks indicate the approximate location of sites where this species was known to occur until recently but where there is some doubt if it still survives (e.g. Barnadi Wildlife Sanctuary*, northwestern Assam), or areas where reports of its occurrence have not been confirmed (e.g.
> Wildlife Sanctuary, southwestern Recent evidence for the presence of this species in Kanha National other areas outside the known or postulated recent range of this species have not been included, since these reports have not yet been investigated properly.
> hispid hare was confirmed as present in the Barnadi Wildlife Sanctuary during February 1990.

wan National Park, Royal Bardia Wildlife Reserve and Royal Suklaphanta Wildlife Reserve in the Terai area of southern and southwestern Nepal (Oliver 1984). An earlier survey by Rands, et al. (unpubl. 1979) found no evidence of the contin-ued survival of the hispid hare in the Terai region of southeast Nepal. Other areas outside the known recent range, for which there is some evidence that the species may occur are listed in Table 9.2. The report of in Kanha National Park is based on the analysis of pellets (see Oliver 1984 for techniques) and has yet to be confirmed by sightings. Since Kanha National Park lies approximately south of the limits of its previously understood range, this report has important implications with respect to both the postulated former range, and its possible survival in intervening areas. 

# Habitat 

Almost all recent data indicate that the hispid hare is depend-ent on the early successional communities, typically comprising dense tall grasslands, commonly referred to as elephant grass or thatchland. These grasslands are a feature of the succession between primary colonizing grasses, (particu-larly tall grasses, on new alluvium deposited by changing water courses), through deciduous forest to the sal 

forest climax. Tall grassland may also form an 

storey during later stages of the succession, particularly near rivers, or in forest clearings and abandoned cultivation and village sites. In relatively undisturbed areas, the tall grasslands are maintained by prolonged inundation during the monsoon or by periodic burning; in disturbed areas, they are 

129 tained by regular burning, grazing, or regular harvesting for thatch and domestic animal fodder. There are many species of tall grasses, which dominate in different situations. Dhungel(l982) identified eleven princi-pal tall grass species in the Royal Chitawan National Park. In the same area, Laurie (1978) distinguished four main types of grassland: which forms stands of up to six metres in clearings in sal forests, especially near old water 

courses; associations, which grow as pure or mixed stands up to eight metres high (of which the most important communities are those dominated by S. 

taneum, a primary colonizer of new alluvium; and S. munja, Erianthus ravennae and Narenga spp., which form characteris-tic stands during successional stages on well-drained ground, often with shorter grasses between them); 

associations, which form dense stands up to seven or more metres high on marshy ground and around lakes; and 

which grows as shorter stands, especially on sites formerly occupied by villages. The hispid hare evidently utilizes all of these and other communities: e.g. those dominated Typha elephantum, Cymbopogon spp. and Lea (an exotic and highly invasive herbaceous perennial) in Jaldapara Wildlife Sanctuary (Oliver 1984). These communities are of varying importance to the species at different times of the year, according to the availability of cover. During the dry season, most of these communities in most areas are subject to extensive, regular (controlled or uncontrolled) burning. Burn-ing deprives the animals of cover and all other resources until the regrowth of vegetation, which follows the onset of the early rains a few weeks (or even up to two or three months) later. During this period, the animals are obviously entirely dependent on any cover left unburnt, e.g. marshy sward, usually dominated by Phragmites spp., and/or S. 

spontaneum along river banks which are maintained by later, prolonged inundation and are therefore usually left unburnt. It remains unclear whether these are preferred habitats, or are used in the absence of cover elsewhere during the 

burning period. Equally, from the clear evidence of older 

deposits exposed by the burning, other communities are inhabited by hispids at other times of the year. 

# Behavior and Reproduction 

The results of a recent three-month study of the behavioral ecology of the hispid hare (Bell 1986, 1987) suggest that the species is both structurally and behaviorally more of a rabbit than a hare. Unlike the more typical long-limbed and solitary hares, such as the Indian hare which ranged over larger areas of open short grassland, scrub and forest, the short-limbed hispids were restricted to small home ranges (mean areas of 

for males and for females) within the dense cover provided by unburned tall grassland. Overlapping home ranges revealed by radio-tracking sug-gested that these animals were living as pairs, although the total home range of individual males individual females. Two of the three was fern larger than that of ales captured were pregnant, showing that the species is breeding during January and February in the western Nepal Terai. The uniformly small size of the scrotal testes in the males could suggest a monoga-mous mating system (Bell 1987). The single fetus found in a pregnant female hispid during the above study, the single infant born to a female captured in Assam in 1976 (Oliver 1980) and the four nipples found in all females captured at Royal Suklaphanta Wildlife Reserve in-stead of the six reported by Blandford suggest that hispid hare litters may be small in size. Further research is required to determine whether has the altricial pattern of most ‘rabbit’ species or the precocial pattern found 

in Lepus (Cowan and Bell 1986). The hispid hare may show an intermediate strategy as reported in the swamp rabbit 

Sylvilagus aquaticus, forest rabbit S. and volcano rabbit diazi, which also live in similar habitats and rear young in surface nests situated in dense cover after a relatively long gestation (37-43 days); the young being 

developed at birth and leaving the nest fairly early. 

> Hispid hare habitat (Photo by Diana Bell)

130 Table 9.1 Sites within known recent range of distribution of the hispid hare 

Country/State District/Location Last date (s) investigated or reported 

Nepal Royal Sukla Phanta Wildlife Reserve 

Royal Bardia Wildlife Reserve Royal Chitawan National Park Koshi Tappu Wildlife Reserve Koshi Barrage Uttar Pradesh Pilibhit Forest Division Kishanpur Wildlife Sanctuary Dudwa National Park 1984 Oliver 1984 Katerniaghat Wildlife Sanctuary 1984 Oliver 1984 North Gonda Forest Division 1984 Oliver 1984 West Bengal Jaldapara Wildlife Sanctuary Valmiki Wildlife Sanctuary Oliver 1984 Buxa Tiger Reserve Kochugaon Division 1984 

1984 1984 

1984 c. 1984 Oliver 1984, Bell 1986 Oliver 1984 Oliver 1984, Bell 1986 Rands et al.1979 

Oliver 1984 Oliver 1984 Ghose 1984, Oliver 1984 Oliver 1984 Oliver 1977 

Comment 

See text 

No evidence of continuing existence found by U.E.A.expedition. Remaining grasslands seriously degraded and/or flooded. Formerly extensive tall grasslands in Khatima and Puranpur districts, which almost cert-ainly supported this species until recently, now seriously reduced by encroachment and irrigation/flood controls. No evidence of continuing existence of Caprolagus found during 1984 field survey. Remaining grasslands subject to uncontroll-ed burning and grazing pressure from domestic stock. No evidence of Caprolagus 

found during 1984 survey, though it would be surprising if the species did not (for-merly?) occur here. See text As Kishanpur Former tall grasslands along international border with southern Nepal now almost en-tirely replaced by later successive communi-ties following the construction of irrigation/ flood control barrages and canals during 1970’s. No evidence of continuing existence of found during 1984 field survey. 

No evidence of obtained during 1984 survey, but subsequently reported by Ghose from the Tribeni Forest Block, in the core area of the Sanctuary (Ghose, in press). See text See text Most remaining grasslands in Kochugaon and Ripu Reserve Forests subject to regular un-controlled burning. Caprolagus not believed to survive in this area, until a specimen was captured in mid-1980’s (P. Lahan pers. 

1987). 

131 Table 9.1 contd . . . Country/State investigated or reported District/Location Last date (s) 

Haltugaon Forest Division 1977 

Wildlife Sanctuary North Kamrup Division Orang Wildlife Sanctuary Darrang Division Goalpara Division 

Source 

Oliver 1977 Various 

1977, ‘81, ‘87 

1981 Oliver 1984 

1977 Oliver 1980 1956 IUCN 1974 

Comment 

reported to occur in tall grass lands along the northern boundary of 

Reserve Forest, in areas 

with the Wildlife Sanctuary. Perhaps the single most important surviving population, was first reported in 1977 shortly after the species’ re-discovery in Mangaldai District in the same year. Found in suitable habitat throughout the Sanctuary, and reported to be increasing in numbers in some areas (S. Deb Roy pers. 

1987). 

reliably reported or definitely known to occur until recently in each of the four Reserve Forests comprising this Divi-sion, i.e. (from west to east): Subankhala, Darranga, Barnadi and Khalingdanaur Re-serve Forests. Of these, Barnadi has ass-umed prominence as being the source of the original ‘reappearance’ of this species in 1971, and was declared a Wildlife Sanctuary in 1982. However, there is some doubt whether the species still survived in this area at that time, and it has not been reliably reported since 1977. The species was almost certainly extinct in Khalingdaur R.F. by 1975 or 1976. There is no informa-tion on its current status in Darranga R.F., but the species is known to survive in Subhankata. First reports of this species obtained in 1981 (P.C. Das, pers. subsequently con-firmed by the capture of a single individual on the western boundary of the Sanctuary later that year. It is likely that occurred until recently at intervals along the northern boundary of this Division, which comprises 

a semi-continuous series of seven Reserve Forests and Wildlife Sanctuary, i.e. Sonai Rupa Sanctuary. However, the species was definitely known only from Gohpur Reserve Forest, at the eastern end of the forest belt, where it is now extinct following the de-struction of the Reserve by illegal settlers between 1979 and 1981. Evidence of this species’ former occurrence between the Brahmaputra River and the Meghalaya State border is based on the col-lection of a single specimen in Goalpara District, by a German expedition in 1956. Although no systematic investigation has been conducted since that time, the species is assumed to be extinct south of the 

maputra River, following the destruction of the former tall grasslands in this region (S. Deb Roy, pers. P. Lahan, pers. 

contd... 

132 Table 9.1 . . .     

> Country/State investigated or reported District/Location Last date (s)
> Bangladesh Jamalpur and North Mymensingh District 1980 Dhaka District 1974
> Comment
> Khan 1982, Oliver 1984 Historically reported from a number of
> precisely recorded sites, but generally consid-ered extinct in Bangladesh since the 1920’s; a single specimen was reported to have been captured in the Mymensingh District in 1980. This specimen was taken by Dhaka University, but its identity remains in doubt and present whereabouts of this specimen is not known. No certain evidence of the con-tinued existence of this species on northern Bangladesh was obtained during the course of the 1984 field survey of these and neigh-bouring areas. Khan 1982, Oliver 1984 Only recent report based on a single specimen collected in this District in 1974, but the precise origin of this specimen and its present whereabouts are unknown, and its identity has never been confirmed. No evi-dence of this species in Dhaka or neigh-bouring parts of south Sylhet District were obtained during the 1984 field survey.

# Population and Threats to Survival 

No attempt has been made to estimate population numbers, but there is no doubt that the species has declined dramati-cally in recent years as a result of the loss of its tall grassland habitat (see below) to agriculture, commercial forestry, flood control schemes and human settlement. The few pockets of tall grassland habitat which remain all lie within National Parks, Wildlife Reserves and Sanctuaries scattered across the former distribution tract and the surviving populations listed above have been found as a result of searches within these dispersed areas (Oliver 1980, 1984; Ghose (in press). While the survival of these populations is encouraging, it is impor-tant to emphasize that these areas represent only a small percentage of the total number visited (see Tables 9.1 and and secondly that these isolated, relict hispid popula-tions remain at risk because of the continuing degradation of habitat even within these protected areas by overgrazing by domestic stock, human exploitation of thatch and cane mate-rial, and the often uncontrolled, regular burning of grassland during the dry season (Oliver 1984, Bell and Oliver in press). The long-term survival of the Buxa population, for example, was deemed unlikely given the heavy overgrazing of available habitat by domestic stock (Oliver 1984). The behavioural ecology of hispid hares at Royal Suklaphanta Wildlife Reserve, western Nepal, (Bell 1986, 1987) suggests that the population carrying capacity of these areas may be determined by the extent of those small patches of tall grassland which escape the annual (sometimes bian-nual) early dry season burning. During searches from January 133 to March, fresh hispid hare sign was found only in small pockets of tall riverine grassland which had escaped the early dry season burning by virtue of its marshy location. The 

ranges of radio-collared animals were entirely restricted to these narrow strips of tall, marshy riverine sward during these months. The estimated density in unburned tall grassland 

again reflects their confined distribution within the few islands of refuge cover available at a time when the species was also breeding. The fate of two of the radio-tracked hispids suggests that their enforced concentration within these iso-lated patches of post-burn cover may also increase their susceptibility to predation. Both animals had been cached by Indian foxes Vulpes bengalensis or golden j 

one having first been killed by another, possibly avian predator. This three-month study of distribution during the 

burn period clearly needs to be followed up by further inves-tigations into the distribution of the animals during the rest of the year, particularly during the monsoon period when the marshy post-burn refuge areas are likely to be amongst the first to become inundated. Many of these areas are subject to illegal grazing of domestic cattle and buffalo by local villagers. It is estimated that over 1,000 such animals enter daily to graze Royal Suklaphanta Wildlife Reserve (S. Bajimaya, pers. 

The damage caused by livestock is not restricted to grazing and trampling, since they are also known to introduce diseases to resident wild species (Poppleton and Shah and more significantly perhaps, much uncontrolled burning to promote fresh grazing pasture is carried out by the graziers. The Table 9.2 Sites outside known recent range of the hispid hare from which (unconfirmed) reports have been obtained Country/State investigated or reported  

> Bihar Madhya Pradesh Meghalaya Arunachal Pradesh Arunachal Pradesh

District/Location    

> Rajamhal Kanha National Park Garo Hills Pakkui Wildlife Sanctuary Kobo-Pasighat and Tirap Districts

Last date (s)    

> 1981
> 1983
> Ghose (unpubl.); Oliver 1984 Oliver 1984; Bell

et    

> in prep.
> Chenda
> Oliver 1984 L.K. Mehta in
> 1984; Ghose (unpubl.)
> Mukherjee pers.
> Oliver 1984; in

litt. 

Comment                          

> A number of independent reports from Rajmahal Hills, received in 1981 but not yet investigated See text Several, apparently reliable reports obtained by Zoological Survey of India between 1982 and 1984, but not confirmed during subsequent visits by Ghose, who also notes the absence of any apparently suitable habitat over most of this region. A further survey is proposed during
> Various unconfirmed reports from Pakkui area, including an account of two hispid being captured by a D.F.O. stationed at Seijusa in November 1983. However, the identity of these animals has not been confirmed, and these reports await further investigation. Various reports from areas of surviving grass lands on either side of the Upper Assam and northeastern A.P. border. In particular, grasslands in the conjunction of the Dihang, Dibang and Luhit Rivers, where
> Mukherjee obtained convincing report of in 1979. These include grass-lands in the contiguous Wildlife Sanct-uary (Tira District, A.P.) and Dibru
> owa Wildlife Sanctuary (Dibrugarh District, Assam), which would merit investi-gation; as might suitable areas in the Dibru Reserve Forest and Namdapha Tiger Re-serve.

adverse effects on tall grasslands of illegal grazing in combina-tion with regular burning are discussed by Bell and Oliver (in press). Apart from Dudwa National Park, where the tall grass-lands are pre-emptively burned by Park staff to prevent casual burning later in the dry season, the annual burning in the other areas listed above is primarily undertaken by thatch-collec-tors. Burning of the typical thatchland grass species, such as 

Imperata, spp. facilitates the exploita-tion of thatch and cane materials by removing leaves and dead material so that the flowering can be harvested more easily. In Dudwa, Chitawan, Bardia and Suklaphanta, thatch is collected by villagers during selected periods, under varying degrees of supervision and after payment of nominal admis-sion fees. However, adequate supervision of the large num-bers of people involved (e.g. approx. 10,000 at Dudwa and 80,000 to 90,000 at Chitawan) is problematical and expensive to organize and police. Extensive flood control proposals threaten the ecological diversity of several of the above areas of tall grassland. For example, the hispid hare population in Royal Bardia Wildlife Reserve would be seriously affected by the proposed dam to be built across the Karnali River (Oliver 1984). 

# Conservation Measures Taken 

The species is accorded maximum protection under Schedule 

1 of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act 1972 and is also listed under Appendix I of CITES. The several attempts to delineate the distribution of and determine its management 134 needs were referred to above (Oliver 1981, 1984, Ghose in press, Bell 1986, 1987, Bell and Oliver in press). 

# Conservation Measures Proposed 

Recommendations submitted to the Government of India, concerning the need for status surveys of the tall grasslands in north-eastern India not previously investigated, have been agreed but not yet implemented. A shift from uncontrolled dry season burning to careful rotational burning, such that large areas of suitable cover and food are available throughout the year, may alleviate the immediate risks for relict populations of the species. In Dudwa National Park, there are plans to reduce controlled burning from an estimated average of 75% available grassland burned per annum to around 60% on a rotational basis, while in Jaldapara, the stated objective of rotationally burning 

prox. 33% of grasslands per annum has been frustrated by continued casual burning in excess of that amount (Oliver 

1985). 

However, long-term research programs examining the effects of each of the several disturbance factors (e.g. burning, thatch harvesting, and grazing) operating on this habitat are required to formulate appropriate long-term management plans for these remnants of tall grassland. Research into burning, for example, should investigate the effects of factors such as timing, frequency and soil water content on both the vegetation and resident populations (Bell and Oliver in press), so that optimum management plans can be developed for individual areas. Further long-term studies of the behavioral ecology and reproductive biology of the species are urgently required. Effective protection and long-term management of tall 

shrub habitat would also benefit sympatric endangered spe-cies, such as the hog 

# Acknowledgements 

The authors are indebted to a very large number of persons and governmental and non-governmental organizations and institutions who provided sponsorship, hospitality, transpor-tation, information and diverse other assistance. In India, we are especially grateful for the assistance and active co-opera-tion of the State Forest Departments of Assam, West Bengal, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and Meghalaya and the Department of Environment, Government of India. Particular thanks are extended to Samar Singh, Dr. M.K. Ranjitsinh, S. Deb Roy, P. Lahan, V.B. Singh, C.B. Singh, R.L. Singh, Moloy 

wdhury, Singh, Shanker Ghosh, H.N. Singh, P.C. Das and Threpfulvi Angami. We are also grateful to and Magor Ltd., the Assam Valley Wildlife Society, WWF-India, and the Zoological Survey of India; in particular Richard Magor, Michael Rome, M.P. Sigh-Sidhu, Ann and Bob Wright, Kushal Mokherjee and Dr. A.K. Mukherjee. For similar assistance and hospitality in Nepal, we are es-pecially grateful to the Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation, the King Mahendra Trust for Nature Conservation, Tiger Tops Jungle Lodge Ltd., the Interna-tional Trust for Nature Conservation and Sir William 

and Partners. We would like to thank especially Biswar Upreti, Dr. Mishra, David Anstey, Mr and Mrs. Bajimayo, Rabi Bista, Jim Edwards, John Ed-wards, Lisa Van Gruisen, Dr. Charles McDougall, K. K. Gurung, Col. Michael Allen, Pralad Yonzon, Karnya Sakya, Eric and Linda Dinerstein, Joanna Bill Newcombe, John and Kim Hudson. Grateful thanks are also extended to Schaaf, Ray 

Tim and Carol Inskipp, Francesca Marcantonio, Paul Goriup, Gerald Durrell, Jeremy Mallinson, Jon Jenson and Bill Konstant. Sponsorship and grants for field work were received from the Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust, Wildlife Preservation Trust International, the Royal Society, Fauna and Flora Preservation Society, the British Ecological Society, the Percy Memorial Trust, Roger Cox, International Council for Bird Preservation, Zoological Survey of India, Assam Valley Wildlife Society, World Wildlife Fund (India), and the International Trust for Nature Conservation; to all of which we are most grateful. 

References                                     

> Bell, D.J. 1986. A study of the hispid hare in Royal Suklaphanta Wildlife Reserve, Western Nepal: Asum-mary report. J. Jersey Trust
> Bell, D.J. 1987. A study of the biology and conservation problems of the hispid hare. Unpubl. report, University of East Anglia. Bell, D.J. and Oliver, W.L.R. (in press).The burning question and other problems relating to tall grassland management and the conservation of endangered species in the Northern Indian sub-continent. Tropical Ecology.
> Blandford, W.T. 1888. The fauna of India including Ceylon and Burma: Mammalia. Taylor and Francis, London. Cowan, D.P. and Bell, D.J. 1986. Leporid social behaviour and social organization. Mammal Rev. 16: 169-179. Dawson, M.R. 1971. Fossil mammals of Java. 1. Notes on Quaternary Leporidae (Mammalia, Lagomorpha) from Central Java.
> Koninkl. Akad. Weterschappen, Amsterdam,
> Dhungel, 1982. Ecology and behavior of the hog deer
> procinus) in the Chitawan ecosystem. Smithsonian Tiger Ecology Project Report No. 1 (Unpubl.) Ghose, R.K. (in press). Observations on the conservation of the hispid hare with notes on its rediscovery in northern West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Ghose, R.K. and Ghosai, D.K. 1984. Recent occurrence of the hispid hare Caprolagus hispidus (Pearson) in the duars of West Bengal.
> Bull. Survey India
> IUCN 1974. Red Data Book: IUCN, Morges, Switzer-land. Khan, M.A.R. 1982. of Bangladesh. University of Dhaka. Bangladesh. Laurie, W.A. 1978. The ecology and behavior of the greater

135 homed rhinoceros. Unpubl. Ph.D. thesis. University of Cam-bridge. Mallinson, J.J.C. 1971. A note on the hispid hare hispidus 

(Pearson, 1839). Bombay Nat. Hist. 

Oliver, W.L.R. 1979a. The doubtful future of the hog and the hispid hare Hog Survey Report Part I. Bombay Nat. Hist. 

Oliver, W.L.R. 1979b. Observations on the biology of the hog with a footnote on the Hispid hare. Hog Survey Report Part II. Bombay Nat. Hist. 

Oliver, W.L.R. 1980. Thepigmy hog the and consewation of   

> the hog,

Sus salvanius and the hispid hare, Caprolagus hispidus Jersey Wildl. Trust, Special Scientific Report No. 1. Oliver, W.L.R. 1981. hog and hispid hare: further observations of the continuing decline (or, a lament for Bamadi and a good cause for Jersey Preserv. Trust 18:10-

> 20.

Oliver, W.L.R. 1984. The distribution and status of the hispid hare  

> hispidus:

the summarized findings of the 1984 

hog/hispid hare field survey in northern Bangladesh, southern Nepal and northern India. Jersey Wildl. 

Oliver, W.L.R. 1985. The distribution and status of the hispid hare  

> hispidus

with some additional notes on the hog  

> salvanius.

Unpubl. Report. Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust, Jersey, 94pp. Poppleton, F. and Shah, B.B. 1977. WWF/IUCN Project 1605 Nepal 

Koshi Tappu Buffalo Sanctuary. Rands, M., Brown, P.J. P. 1979. Expedition 

University of East Anglia Report (Unpubl.). Tessier-Yandell, J. 1972. The hispid hare Caprolagus hispidus (Pear-son, 1839). 

136 Chapter 10: The Sumatran Rabbit 

# John E.C. Flux 

# Status and Summary 

The Sumatran rabbit Nesolagus (Schlegel 1880) is apparently the rarest lagomorph. About a dozen museum specimens exist, collected between 1880 and 1916, and there has been only one confirmed sighting since then, in 1972. It has always been a rare animal, living at in dense forest, much of which has been cleared for tea and coffee plantations. Forest clearing is continuing rapidly as people settle in Sumatra from Java. An extensive mammal survey in 1984 found only three areas where locals knew of rabbits and none were seen. Visits to two of these areas in 1989 indicated that in one there was confusion with feral European rabbit 

and the other had been cleared of forest. Discovery of a population and its protection pending a widespread survey for the rabbit is extremely urgent. 

# Description and Taxonomy 

The Sumatran rabbit is about the size of a European rabbit 

head and body length tail hind foot ear skull length Apart from the very short ears, this rabbit is immediately distin-guished by its wide black or dark brown stripes on a yellowish grey background that becomes rusty brown towards the rear. The fur on the underparts, below the chin and on the inside of the legs is whitish. The ears are black, and when folded forward reach only to the eye. Compared with a European rabbit, the head is broader and the muzzle shorter, and the legs are also shorter. The tail is so short that it is normally not visible and contains only 12 bones compared to 19-24 in other leporids. The fur is soft and rather short, and the delicate skin is easily damaged. According to Jacobson and Kloss (1919) the coloration is very variable between individuals, with the stripes being absent in the front or much reduced. Taxonomically the Sumatran rabbit was first described under and given a separate genus by Forsyth-Major (1899). The relationship with other leporids is very distinct and it is regarded as a primitive form with no close relatives, which is supported by the fact that it carries a unique genus of flea, (Hopkins 1957). 

# Distribution 

The Sumatran rabbit is restricted to montane forest in the Barisan Mountains, west and southwest Sumatra, with one recent record by Dr. M. Borner in 1972 from Gunung Leuser National Park, northwest Sumatra, and a possible sighting by Dr. J. Seidensticker near Mt. Kerinci in 1978. Nearly all the records are from coffee or tea estates where rabbits were seen as the forest was felled, between 600m and It is com-pletely nocturnal and lives only in remote forest, which may explain why local people have no name for it and are unaware of its existence, and it could be more widespread than the seven known locations indicate (see Fig. 10.1). On the other hand, forest clearance by man has been going on for at least 7,500 years, perhaps 17,800 years (Maloney there are now over 20 million people on the island, and detailed surveys for other rare species (tiger, Sumatran rhino) have not en-countered any rabbits, so they seem to be remarkably rare 

> animals.

# Habitat and Ecology 

In the original description, it was stated that the Sumatran rabbit lived in woods and rice fields, but the latter is certainly wrong (Jacobson and Kloss 1919). The habitat is montane forest on rich volcanic soil, and it feeds on plants which form forest understorey, not in openings or clearings. The pre-ferred diet was Jacobson does not say which spe-cies, but 35 occur on Sumatra and ten on Mt. Kerinci where rabbits live 1917). Aracea was ac-

cepted; and Ipomoea batatas, Jussieua 

> Polygonum, Tradescantia,
> Sumatran rabbit, from photo by E. Jacobson

137 BORNEO 

> Figure 10.1 Map of all known specimens of the Sumatran rabbit (circles) and the three locations where they were reported in 1984 (crosses).

colorata and spp. were eaten reluctantly. Cultivated vegetables were not accepted, nor were roots or the bark of trees. Captive rabbits took readily to cooked rice, young maize, bread, ripe bananas, and sometimes pineapple (Jacobson and Kloss and one kept in the Amsterdam Zoo, August-September 1895, ate beans, radishes, carrots, bread, and young shoots of oak, elm, and beech (Jacobson 1921). 

# Behavior 

The Sumatran rabbit is nocturnal and hides during the day in dark places at the base of trees, in burrows, or holes in the ground. Because in captivity it did not dig in the ground, Jacobson and Kloss (1919) thought it probably used burrows made by other animals. All their specimens were snared at night in holes in brush “fences” made by trappers. Captive rabbits were slow moving compared with European hares, and fed only at night, spending the day nearly motionless. 

# Reproduction 

Nothing recorded. 

# Remarks 

Considering that the Sumatran rabbit is only active at night, and lives in remot:e, inaccessible habitat, it may not be surpris-ing that local people had no name for it when it was discov-ered. However, it appears never to have been abundant any-where in its range: Dr. M. Borner saw only one in 450 days of field work on rhino in Gunung Leuser National Park, and a well-organized expedition in 1914, employing seven collectors who spent several months trapping on Mt. Kerinci, did not catch any rabbits (Robinson and Kloss 1936). et al. 

(1984) say “This species has not been reported since 1937 but the CRES team found that some farmers on the lower slope of Mt. Kerinci still see it very occasionally.” A thorough survey for many rare mammals was carried out in 1983 and 1984 by Blsuch who states: “We never encountered any direct evidence of Sumatran hares but we did find three places where local people described the animal well enough for us to conclude that it occurs there. In the settle-ment of Way south of Liwa on the border of Bukit Barisan Selatan National Park it was reported that a group of four including small ones was once seen near the edge of the forest in recently cleared land that was about to be planted with coffee. People living on both the north and south sides of the Gumai Pasemah Wildlife Reserve in Sumatra Selatan say that hares are fairly common in the reserve at an altitude of around and one was once caught and killed by a dog . . . villagers claim that no one bothers to hunt the hares. People in the town of Kurotidur in Bengkulu about 40km north of the provincial capital also report that there are hares in the mountainous protection forest east of the village.” “It seems that hares are sparsely distributed throughout the length of the Barisan Mountain chain in southern Suma-tra. Their survival depends on the continued existence of their mountain forest habitat. Whether or not they can live in disturbed forests is a moot point since in mountainous areas there is little selective timber cutting: either the forest remains in a more or less undisturbed condition or it is cut down completely and converted to agriculture. They apparently are not subjected to much hunting pressure, probably because they naturally occur at such low densities and in such remote areas that it is not worth the effort to hunt them.” In July 1989 two of these areas were revisited. We found that people living north of the Gumai Pasemah Wildlife Reserve had confused the Sumatran rabbit with a feral colony of European rabbit living in a coffee plantation, while the Kurotidur area is now largely cleared of forest. A project, “Conservation of Sumatran hare 

was designed in 1979 and submitted to IUCN/WWF by Dr. K. Myers, but funds were not available at that time. In the meantime forest has continued to be cleared, often with World Bank funding, for land to grow cocoa (Dr. C. Santiapillai, pers. 1989). The discovery of a viable population of Sumatran rabbits, and its protection, is the first necessary step. This should be followed by a thorough survey to determine the status of the rabbit in other existing reserves, and in the remaining unreserved forest habitat. 138 References 

R.A. 1984. status of the Sumatran rhino and other 

mammals in southern Sumatra. Report No. 4 

Indonesia. Forsyth-Major, C.I. 1899. On fossil and recent Lagomorpha. Trans. Linnean Lond. 2nd Ser. 

Hopkins, G.H.E. 1957. Host-association of Siphonaptera. In: Baer, 

J.G. (Ed.), First symposium on host specificity amongpamsites of 

vertebrates. Zoology, Univ. Inst. Neufchatel. Pp. 64-87. Jacobson, E. 1921. Notes on some mammals from Sumatra. J. Fed. Malay St. 

Jacobson, E. and Kloss, C.B. 1919. Note on the Sumatran hare.1 Fed. Malay St. Mus. 

Maloney, B.K. 1980. Pollen analytical evidence for early forest clearance in North Sumatra. Lond. 

Ridley, H.N. 1917. Results of an expedition to Korinchi Peak, Sumatra. Part IV. Botany. Fed. St. Mus. 

Robinson, H.C. and Kloss, C.B. 1918. Results of an expedition to Korinci Peak, Sumatra. 1. Mammals. J. Fed. St. Mus. 8:1-80. Robinson, H.C. and Kloss, C.B. 1936. An expedition to Korinchi Peak, Sumatra (1914). Fed. Malay St. Mus. 8:1-31. 

A.J., Damanik, S.J., J. and N. 1984. The 

of Sumatra. Gadjah Univ. Press, Yogyakarta. 

139 Chapter 11: The Amami Rabbit 

# Ken Sugimura 

# Status and Summary 

This species is endangered. The Amami rabbit 

(Stone 1900) is designated as a special natural monu-ment by the government, but even its existence is not widely known among’ the people of Japan. The population is pro-tected from hunting, but little attention has been paid to the management of its habitat. Scientists recognize the rabbit as one of the living fossils, because its morphological traits are similar to fossil species found in the Miocene stratum. 

# Description and Taxonomy 

Recognized as one of the most primitive lagomorphs in the world, it is most obviously distinguished from other species of lagomorphs by its dark fur . The Japanese name, 

kurousagi, denotes “the black rabbit of Amami”. It differs from typical lagomorphs for example) by having small eyes and ears, a long snout and short limbs with relatively large nails for digging nest holes. External measurements are: body length, 418-470mm; tail length, ear length, 

45mm; and hind foot, (without nails). 

# Distribution 

The species is found only on Amami Oshima and Tokuno-

two islands forming part of the Ryukyu Archipelago (areas 819.89 and respectively) (Fig. 11.1). 

# Population Size 

A population estimate based on field observations was made only once on Amami Oshima, giving a total population of 6,000 on the island (Anon. 1977). However, this estimate was based on a small number of observations and the study area was located in the part of the island where density of rabbits was high compared to other areas (Sugimura 1987). The 1977 investigation made pellet counts on three kilometres of forest roads over two days and found 72.25 pellets/km/day on average. Sugimura (1987) counted 38.5 pellets/km/day for the same season on of forest roads during 78 days of observations. Revising the previous estimate, Sugimura (1987) calculated the number of rabbits on Amami Oshima to be 3,750. The figure may be still an overestimate, because the area covered by the study had a higher frequency of rabbit tracks on average than other forest sites. The population size on has never been estimated. The area of suitable forest habitat on Tokuno-

is while the forest area on Amami Oshima is 

(Anon. 1988). If the density of rabbits is found in the forests on the two islands, the population size on 

would be roughly one seventh of that on Amami Island; less than 500. However, Sugimura (1987) indicated that rabbits were absent from areas close to human settlements. Because of the smaller forested area on Tokuno-

a larger proportion of the forest is located close to settlements compared to Amami Oshima. Therefore, the habitat quality is poorer and average density is expected to be lower on 

# Habitat 

Rabbit signs are found in forests of all successional stages but not in cultivated or residential areas (Anon. 1977, Anon. 1984, Sugimura 1987). Early investigators postulated that these rabbits live in primary forests, probably because the islands were originally covered by dense natural forests (Imaizumi 1968, Yasuma 1984). The rabbit’s dark coloration may be related to the darkness of the forests they inhabit (Imuizumi and 1960). Recent observations indicate that rabbits are also found in cut-over areas and forest edges covered by the Japanese pampas grass (Suzuki 1985, Sugimura 1987). Sugimura (1987) found droppings most fre-quently along forest roads that ran through young secondary forests and that the boundaries between young forests and primary forests were frequently used in winter. 

140 Behavior 

> Original forest habitat and recently cleared forest on Amami Oshima (Photo by Ken Sugimura)

# Food 

In general Amami rabbits are nocturnal. They frequently use passages through the undergrowth or climb up and down on steep slopes along forest roads. They make clicking sounds when communicating with each other. Burrows are used for dens and nests. Mating behavior most often occurs in Novem-ber and December, and kits first appear above ground in April or May (Mr. Minami, pers. 

# Management 

Rich undergrowth cover will provide abundant food for the rabbits, while short arboreal cover of young secondary forests provides suitable hiding places. Old forests yield acorns in fall. A mosaic of these different vegetation types will probably form the most suitable habitats for the rabbits. Extensive logging operations on the two islands have resulted in the area of old forests (selectively cut) being decreased to less than 5% of all the forests in 1980 (Sugimura 1987). Although young secondary forests may provide suitable habitats for the rab-bits, preservation of old forests will be the most important means of preserving the species. Field signs indicate that feral dogs are the most important predators of the rabbits Field signs have indicated that these rabbits feed on leaves of the Japanese pampas grass Miscanthus sinensis, runners of the Japanese sweet potato Ipomoea batatas, bamboo sprouts, acorns of the pasania tree Castanopsis sieboldii and the bark of forest trees; (Moraceae), 

phyllus (Podocarpaceae), Mussaenda 

Gardenia jasminoides (Rubiaceae), Clerodendron tichotomum (Verbenaceae), japonicus 

biaceae) . Of these food items, Miscanthus sinensis is the most im-portant in summer and acorns of Castanopsis sieboldii are 

probably the most important in winter in terms of nutrition. 

> Okinawa
> Naha-shi

No quantitative studies have been conducted on the food habits of these rabbits. The relative importance of the various VTAIWAN 

food items is unknown et al. 1989). Figure 11.1 Amami Island and its vicinity 

141 (Sugimura 1987). Mr. Minami (pers. stated that feral cats are the most important predators because they climb up and down cliffs without difficulty and do not allow the rabbits to escape. The distribution of pellets indicated that rabbits are almost absent from near human residences, where feral dogs and cats are abundant. Therefore, in addition to the preserva-tion of old forests, removal of feral dogs and cats is critical to the preservation of the Amami rabbit. The conservation of the full range of habitats on Amami Oshima is also important for the other endemic species that occur there: 17 species of reptiles and amphibians two rats, two birds, 20 plants and a large number of invertebrates. 

References 

Anon. 1984. Survey report on the in 1973. In: WWF Japan Scientific Committee (Ed.), of the 

Shoto: Part 1. World Wildlife Fund Japan: Tokyo. (In Japanese with an English abstract). Pp. 248-274. Anon. 1977. State of a special natural monument, the Amami rabbit, an survey report of a natural monument. Kohoshima-ken Board of Education, Kagoshima, Japan, (in Japanese). Anon. 1988. General picture of the Amami Archipelago. Kagoshima-ken Oshima-shicho: Kagoshima, Japan, (in Japanese). Imaizumi, Y. 1968. Amami no kurousagi [Amami rabbit]. In: Ency-clopedia Japonica, vol. 1. Heibonsha: Tokyo, 389pp. (in Japa-nese). Imaizumi, Y. and K. 1960. Mammals of Japan in natural 

Hoikusha: Osaka, 391pp. (in Japanese). Kirino, M., Hayashi, Y. and Suzuki, H. 1984. Food habits and activity patterns of the Amami rabbit, Pentalagus fumessi. In: WWF Japan Scientific Committee (Ed.), Conservation of the 

Shoto: World Wildlife Fund Japan: Tokyo. (In Japanese with an English abstract). Pp. 303-307. Sugimura, K. 1987. Forestry and wildlife conservation on Amami Oshima, Japan: an integrated study of man and wildlife. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Hawaii, 290pp. Suzuki, H. 1985. An island on which the Amami rabbit inhabits. 

Shinjuku Shobou: Tokyo, (in Japanese). Yasuma, S. 1984. Threatened Amami rabbit. Asahi 44:120-124, (in Japanese). 

142 Chapter 12: The Volcano Rabbit 

# John E. Fa and Diana J. Bell 

# Status and Summary 

The volcano rabbit diazi (Ferrari-Perez, 1893) is Endangered. Its distribution now restricted to three discon-tinuous areas of core habitat covering a total of approximately 

on the slopes of four volcanoes (Popocatepetl, 

cihuatl, El Pelado and Tlaloc) in central Mexico. Threatened by habitat destruction through forest encroaching agri-culture and property developments. Although the hunting of the volcano rabbit is now illegal, this legislation is not enforced and the species is still hunted together with two sympatric 

species. 

# Description 

The volcano rabbit is considered by several authorities to be the most primitive of the living rabbits and hares (De Poorter 

Van der Loo 1981, Corbet 1983). It is a small rabbit (adult weight around being larger than only the pygmy rabbit  

> idahoensis

amongst the Leporidae (Nelson 1909). Hind legs and feet are short, ears small and rounded, tail inconspicuous. Pelage is short and dense, dorsal and lateral parts dark brown to black. Sexual dimorphism is mini-mal, females being slightly larger than males. 

# Distribution 

The volcano rabbit is endemic to central Mexico. A recent distribution survey (Bell et 1985, Hoth et al. 1987) in 

zacaton habitat on volcanoes across the Transverse 

Belt (TNB) found evidence of the species on the slopes of only four volcanoes namely Popocatepetl and Iztaccihuatl (Sierra Nevada), El Pelado and Tlaloc (Sierra Chichinautzin). 

Tlaloc is situated 40km west of Popocatepetl and El Pelado just west of Tlaloc (Figure 12.1). The present distribution of the volcano rabbit is currently restricted to three discontinuous areas of core habitat which together cover a total of around (approx. around Popo/Izta, and 48 and around volcanoes Pelado and Tlaloc respec-tively). The results of that survey also suggest that the species has disappeared from areas of the central TNB zone where it had been reported in the recent past, for example, the eastern slopes of Iztaccihuatl (Rojas-Mendoza 1951) and the Nevada de Toluca (Granados 1981). 

# Population 

No reliable estimates. Density of animals is possibly high in certain patches of “zacaton” within the core habitats, as re-flected by the high density of latrines. A recent study (Fa et al. 

in prep.) shows a positive correlation between “zacaton” cover density and latrine density. 

# Habitat and Ecology 

Volcano rabbits are found between 2,800 and in eleva-tion inhabiting pine forests with dense undergrowth of bunch grass (“zacaton”) and rocky substrates. Most of the areas where the rabbit is found have winter drought and summer rains with a mean annual precipitation of around 

Cervantes-Reza (1980) records a mean tempera-ture of with the hottest month being May and the coldest January. The main volcano rabbit habitat is an open forest of and up to 25m high, intermixed with other pine species (P. P. teocote, P. patula and P. pseudostrobus). There is usually a dense ground cover of tall, coarse, clumped “zacaton” grass, mainly   

> macroura, Festuca F. amplissima

and  

> Stipa ichu.

Herbs associated with these species are Penstemon  

> Figure Present distribution of the volcano rabbit

143 Volcano rabbit sheltering under Zacaton grass (Photo by W. J. Bell) 

Geranium potentillaae, Stachys Lupinus montanus, Senecio Gnaphalium conoideum, 

tago patagonica, diversifolia , Alchemilla sebaldiaefolia 

and Museniopsis The rabbit occurs in a variety of plant 

communities, from pure stands of pine with an understorey of bunch grasses through formations of dense secondary vegeta-tion composed of alder and Senecio spp. However, Bell et al. (1985) suggest that the scattered distribu-tion of volcano rabbits within the above core areas correlate with density of cover of “zacaton”. Although some authors, like Cervantes-Reza dis-cuss the use of burrows by the species, there is little evidence that the species is an active burrower. This characteristic is facultative since volcano rabbits live mostly on the surface under the dense cover of “zacaton” within runways made by the movement of animals. Cervantes-Reza (1980) reports the volcano rabbit as using abandoned pocket gopher, ground squirrel, armadillo and badger burrows. Females build nests in the wild and in captivity and have been observed to excavate a round cavity in the soil or amidst a “zacaton” clump 

vantes-Reza 1980). Feeding habits are largely unknown, but Cervantes-Reza 

Gaumer (1913) and Rojas-Mendoza (1951) report volcano rabbits feeding on “zacaton” grasses, especially 

# s. ichu and Epicampes 

and Museniopsis are also food items. Volcano rabbits select the green and tender young leaves of grasses, biting the base and lower edges of the clump. Cervantes-Reza (1980) observed volcano rabbits feeding on young leaves of spiny herbs such as and 

Main predators are longtailed weasels M. frenata 

tes-Reza 1981) and bobcats Lynx (Romero 1988). Analyses of hair remains in bobcat scats revealed that volcano rabbits can be as much as 80% of the monthly diet (Romero 1988). Coyotes also prey on adult volcano rabbits 

Reza 1981). Cervantes-Reza (1981) reports the case of two volcano rabbits being found in the digestive tract of a rattle-snake. Red-tailed hawks Buteojamaicensis may also prey on the volcano rabbit. 

# Threats to Survival 

Habitat destruction and hunting continue to threaten the survival of the volcano rabbit in the three core areas. Hunting is now illegal, according to the new national hunting laws, but enforcement is difficult. A variety of agents appear to be responsible for the con-tinuing erosion of the forest/zacaton habitat. These include forest overgrazing by cattle and sheep, encroachment by agriculture and property developments, over-exploitation of timber and cutting of “zacaton” grasses for thatch and brush manufacture. According to posters produced by the Forestry Depart-ment in a campaign to reduce forest fires, 98% of such fires are started by people. Many of these originate from uncon-trolled burning of zacaton to promote new growth of pasture for cattle and sheep. Such excessive burning causes deteriora-tion and depauperisation of “zacaton” habitats. Encroach-

ment by agriculture from the surrounding villages into areas such as Volcan El Pelado is an increasing cause for concern. Land tenancy is undefined in El Pelado and Tlaloc areas. Villagers from Topilejo, Parres and other smaller villages can acquire rights to grow crops on Volcan El Pelado without prior assessment of impact on the land. Extraction of soil to depths of two metres and areas of up to one hectare is largely uncontrolled. Permits are issued by local village authorities, often without liaison with the conservation authorities. Building developments in the Izta-Popo National Park pose a threat to surrounding habitat. Each of the remaining volcano rabbit populations lies within 45 minutes drive of Mexico City, now the world’s largest city, with a rapidly growing population of 20 million people. A substantial area of original volcano rabbit habitat has already disappeared as a result of expansion of the city. The threat of urban extension lies not only from the increase of Mexico City, but from the rapid increment in rural settle-ment areas around the core habitats. 

# Social Organization and Reproduction 

Although groups of two to five animals have been reported (Rojas-Mendoza 1951, Cervantes-Reza the species’ social organization has yet to be studied in the wild. Hoth and Granados (1987) report the formation of social dominance hierarchies amongst groups of six individuals (two males, four females) housed in semi-natural enclosures, with only one male and one or two females breeding in each group. Gaumer 

(1913) reports volcano rabbit groups of two to five individuals. Captive females were clearly aggressive toward both sexes, whereas males were never observed to initiate aggression 

144 toward a female (Cervantes-Reza 1980, De Poorter and Van der Loo 1981). Female-female aggression was much more fre-quent and violent than female-male aggression. Dominant individuals were always females. 

# Captive Breeding 

Volcano rabbits have been kept in captivity by five organiza-tions (Faculty of Science, U.N.A.M.; Zoo; Central Institute for Experimental Animals, Japan; Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust and Chapultepec Zoo, Mexico City). At present, there are only three of these institutions holding colonies. These are Jersey (Durrell and 1970, Lindsay Chapultepec and the Central Institute for Experimental Animals, Japan (Matsuzaki et al. 1982). The Chapultepec colony, where the animals are grouped in out-door enclosures planted with clumps of “zacaton” grasses, bred particularly well for the first couple of years (Hoth and Granados 1987) but infant mortality has been very high. The captive breeding projects at Jersey and at Zoo have been less successful (IUCN the latter having been recently terminated. In an attempt to emulate the 

accomplishment, similarly planted enclosures have been set up at Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust (Bell et al. in 

# Conservation Measures 

Listed under Appendix I of CITES (1973). Its hunting is now illegal under Mexican law, but this legislation is not enforced. Although part of its present distribution lies within protected areas (Izta-Popo and Zoquiapan National Parks), agents of habitat destruction, listed above, continue to operate in these areas. There is a proposal from Secretaria de Desarrollo 

y Ecologia (SEDUE), currently under review, to create a protection corridor from Tepozteco National Park, across the Chichinautzin range to the Desierto de Leones National Park. This initiative would ensure the protection of buffer areas surrounding core zones for the species. A fund to promote conservation work on the volcano rabbit and its habitat has been started by Dr. John E. Fa with the Centro de Ecologia at U.N.A.M., Mexico City. The fund was initiated the proceeds from the sale of a poster depicting the species in its habitat. 

# Conservation Measures Proposed 

The survival of the species clearly revolves around the man-agement of burning and overgrazing in the prime “zacaton” habitats and the enforcement of laws that prohibit the catch-ing, sale and hunting of the animal. The following are recom-mended conservation measures: Forest areas where the volcano rabbit is found are signifi-cant not only for this species but also as a reservoir for other It is also an important zone for 

support systems in the Mexico City region. These forests are crucial as water catchment zones and can be exploited rationally for timber and other renewable resources. Emphasis on this point should be made in achieving pro-tection of volcano rabbit habitats. Within the protected areas and other zones with protec-tion pending, appropriate management must start. The supervision given by the SEDUE or the Comision 

dinadora de y Rural in Mexico City (COCODER) to volcano rabbit areas is minimal. 

dening of the Izta-Popo National Park and in the Special Protected Zones to the south of Mexico City (Volcan el Pelado and Volcan Tlaloc) is necessary. Although actions to frustrate hunting must be enforced, ways of making rational exploitation of natural resources compatible with wildlife protection must be identified. Controlled burning at regulated densities can be made compatible with the recovery of other areas and the conservation of wildlife. Education campaigns at village, national and international levels must be started. Public awareness of the species’ habitat is essential. Information on the impact of land use methods incompatible with sustained development and conservation should be made available to villages adjacent to the core habitats. Most local inhabitants are unaware of the protected status of the species. The value of captive colonies at Mexico City and Jersey Zoos to create and foster public awareness cannot be underestimated. Under no circumstances should the spe-cies be introduced as a laboratory animal as suggested by some authors (Granados, since this could create a demand that could eventually imperil the wild populations. 

145 References 

Bell, D.J., Hoth, J., Velazquez, A., Romero, F.J., Leon, L. and Aranda, M. 1985. A survey of the distribution of the Volcano rabbit Romerolagus diazi: an endangered Mexican endemic. 

Jersey Preserv. 

Cervantes-Reza, F. 1980. caracteristicas biologicas 

de diazi. Unpublished thesis, Facultad de Ciencias, U.N.A.M., Mexico. Cervantes-Reza, F. 1981. Some predators of the zacatuche (Romero-

diazi). Mamm 

Corbet, G. 1983. A review of classification in the family 

Fennica, 

De Poorter, M. and W. Van der Loo. 1981. Report on the breeding and behavior of the volcano rabbit at the Zoo. In: Myers, K. and C.D. (Eds), Proceedings of the 

Conference. Guelph, 1979. University of Guelph. 938pp. Pp. 956-972. Durrell, G. and Mallinson, J. 1970. The volcano rabbit in the wild and at Jersey Zoo. Zoo 

Gaumer, G. 1913. Monografia sobre el Lagomys diazi Ferrari Perez. 

Dir. Agric., Depto. Biol. Ser. Mexico., 4:1-51. Granados, H. 1981. Basic information on the volcano rabbit. In: Myers, and C.D. (Eds), Proceedings of the World 

Conference. Guelph, 1979. University of Guelph. Pp. 940-948. Hoth, J., Velazquez, A., Romero, F.J., Leon, L., Aranda, M. and Bell, D.J. 1987. The volcano rabbit: a shrinking distribution and a threatened habitat. 

Hoth, J. and Granados, H. 1987. A preliminary report on the breeding of the volcano rabbit Romerolagus diazi at the 

Zoo, Mexico City. Zoo. 

International Union for Conservation of Nature. 1972. Volcano rabbit. Sheet 9.59.3.1. In : IUCN. Red Data Book, I., 

IUCN, Switzerland. Lindsay, N.B.D. 1982. A second report on the management and breeding of the Volcano rabbit Romerolagus diazi at the Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust. J. Jersey Wild. Preserv. Trust, 

Matsuzaki, T., Saito, M. and Kamiya, M. 1982. Breeding and rearing of the volcano rabbit Romerolagus diazi in captivity. Exp. Anim 

Nelson, E.W. 1909. The rabbits of North America. N. Amer. Fauna, 

29: l-287. Rojas-Mendoza, P. 1951. Estudio de 

canes. Unpubl. thesis. Facultad de Ciencias, U.N.A.M., Mexico. Romero, 1988. La (Lynx en el el Pelado, Mexico D.F. Unpubl. thesis, Facultad de Ciencias, U.N.A.M., Mexico. 

146 Chapter 13: Exotic Populations 

# John E.C. Flux, A.G. Duthie, T.J. Robinson and J.A. Chapman 

# Australia and New Zealand 

No lagomorphs are native to Australia or New Zealand, but Australia did have marsupial equivalents of rabbits and hares in the rabbit-eared bandicoot or bilby and hare-wallabies Lagorchestes, Lagostrophus. Both countries were settled by Europeans in the early 19th century, and soon set up acclimatization societies to import and liberate “desir-able” game, fish and songbirds. Similar societies existed in many countries, including Britain, France, Italy, Burma, India and China, so exchanges were easily arranged. Their aim, in the words of the 1882 report of the acclimatization society for Victoria, was “to enrich it by stocking its broad territory with the choicest products of the animal kingdom borrowed from every temperate region on the face of the globe.” These societies were well funded and efficiently organized, so it is perhaps surprising that only two lagomorphs, the brown hare 

Lepus europaeus and the European rabbit 

were successfully introduced. An offer of f2.10 each for the first 20 Indian hares delivered, “extensively circulated in the principal shipping ports of the world” by the Victorian society in 1863, was luckily unclaimed. The pattern of introduction was similar in both Australia and New Zealand, probably because there was much inter-change of people and ideas, and both adopted sheep farming as the dominant land use. Domestic rabbits had arrived by 1788, taken out for food by the earliest settlers, and some had escaped and were living around the villages by about 1820-

1840. These did not spread, perhaps because the land was not sufficiently developed and feral domestic rabbits fell easy prey to native carnivores, cats and dogs (Rolls 1969). Wild-type rabbits from England were then introduced, at Geelong in Australia in 1859 and in Southland, New Zealand, in 1862 (Wodzicki 1950). Silver-grey domestic rabbits, a favored breed for furs, were liberated at Kaikoura and Nelson, New Zealand, in 1865 and spread far inland; but they were no match for the wild-type rabbits which overtook them from the south (Thomson 1922). Within ten years rabbits were causing extensive damage to farms and the first Rabbit Nuisance Act was passed in New Zealand in 1876. Tasmania had its first anti-rabbit legislation in 1871, South Australia in 1875, Victo-ria in 1878 and New South Wales and Queensland followed in 1880. Rabbits spread to occupy the southern half of Australia (4 

million in 60 years. Early rates of spread were phenome-nal, averaging across the south and up to 

slow advance northwards along the cool highlands into tropi-cal Queensland” (Myers 1983). In arid regions rabbits occupy watercourses, expanding into surrounding country in occa-sional wet years. Those in subalpine areas are restricted to open grassy valleys. The land between these extremes, con-verted to sheep farms, provided rabbits with ideal conditions. 

The damage caused by rabbits in Australia is legendary. “They bred in thousands of millions and died in thousands of millions: by diseases, natural and introduced; by drought and flood; by all manner of traps, poisons, fumigants, and enemies natural and introduced; but they thrived and they thrive yet” (Rolls 1969). The most spectacular scenes of abundance, such as rabbits piled up a metre deep against a boundary fence, or drinking shoulder to shoulder round a small pool, were part of the initial explosive phase. Numbers soon declined, to stabi-lize at the level of a high rabbit population. Even these densities, of course, cause enormous financial loss to farmers, but there are few accurate measurements. The best figures, collected by Fennessy (1966) showed in-creases in stock numbers of in South Australia and New South Wales following the sudden removal of rabbits in 

> 0.

year in north Australia (Myers 1971, Strong 1983). Even now the distribution (Fig. 13.1) is not stable and the rabbit Figure 13.1. Distribution of the European rabbit in Australia. The area in lighter tone may be occupied in years of 

ues to probe Australian habitats and is presently making a favorable rainfall. (From Myers 1983). 

147 The European rabbit (Photo by R L. Edgar) 

the After myxomatosis, it was calculated from the increased wool and meat production that rabbits had caused 

million worth of damage a year, while the sale of rabbit skins and carcasses fetched only million in 1951-52. To put these figures in perspective, a careful assessment of rabbit damage costs to wheat, field crops and grassland in Britain in the 1950s before myxomatosis was million a year, offset by f 15 million from the sale of rabbit meat and furs. In New Zealand, Wodzicki (1950) estimated rabbit damage in terms of reduced sheep-carrying capacity to be 3.5-4 million in 1945, compared with income of f1.3 million from rabbit ex-ports. Although apparently more severe in Britain, the prob-lem in Australia and New Zealand was more significant because of their dependence on farming. Faced with a problem of such economic importance, Aus-tralians tried everything. Enormous fences were built: 346 miles long between New South Wales and South 

700 miles between NSW and Queensland; and 1139 miles 

the border of West Australia, followed by another of 700 miles when rabbits crossed the first line. Individual fields were fenced and rabbits eradicated by poisoning, trapping, shoot-ing, digging, ferreting and gassing, all of which provided only temporary relief. Before the introduction of myxomatosis in 1950, Myers (1971) measured rabbit density at four study areas in Victoria and New South Wales at and 412 rabbits/ha. In 1970, after myxomatosis, these had become 2.9; 

and 0.9 rabbits/ha, respectively. Overall, Myers 

that rabbit numbers in 1970 were “clearly less than 1% 

of their 1950 levels.” Predators now exerted significant con-trol, aided by poisoning in problem areas. Eruptions still occur after good rainfall and grass production, but the average populations now seem to be of the pre-myxomatosis levels, rising slowly as rabbits and the virus co-evolve. In New Zealand, the initial explosion of rabbit numbers was as severe as in Australia, especially in the South Island and eastern North Island. The same wide range of control methods was tried, including hundreds of miles of rabbit fencing, with the same lack of success. In addition, New Zealand attempted biological control by introducing many thousands of stoats Mustela weasels M. nivalis and ferrets M. despite strong objections from acclimatization societies and scientists (Martin 1885). These predators did not control the rabbits but adversely affected native fauna, naive to mammalian predation. By 1900 rabbit numbers had peaked in the South Island, but the range was still spreading in the North Island (Wodzicki 1950). From 1900 to 1945 an average of 12 million rabbits was exported each year, with extremes between six and twenty million. Because rabbits were com-pletely out of control over most of New Zealand following World War II, the Rabbit Nuisance Amendment Act was passed in 1947. This established a Rabbit Destruction Council and led to the “killer policy,” total decommercialisation of rabbits and a most efficient national organization. By aerial and ground poisoning with 1080 in carrot and jam baits, 

148 Figure 13.2. Distribution of the European rabbit in Figure 13.3. Distribution of the European hare in New New Zealand. Zealand. 

followed up with gun and dog, or spotlight shooting at night, rabbit populations were reduced by over 90% (Bull 1956, Howard 1958). Overgrazing by stock contributes to the rabbit problem and rabbits dislike long, wet grass; it is often said in New Zealand that top-dressing with superphosphate killed more rabbits than 1080. An official attempt to introduce myxomatosis in the early 1950s failed (Filmer 1953) and the continuing absence of the disease in New Zealand may in fact allow rabbits to be kept at lower numbers than in Australia and Britain (Gibb and Flux 1983). Rabbits still exist on open grassland throughout New Zealand below about altitude (Fig. 13.2). Densities are, however, exceptionally low compared with other coun-tries; perhaps one rabbit per At these densities, cats, stoats and ferrets keep numbers stable, and the removal of annual control by Pest Destruction Boards from two million hectares has not led to a resurgence of rabbits (Gibb et al. 

1969, Williams 1983). In Central Otago, the Mackenzie Coun-try and Marlborough, however, some farms still have serious rabbit problems with densities of about rabbits/ha. These areas have a severe winter which shortens the rabbit breeding season, and in the absence of young rabbits and sufficient alternative prey, too few predators may be able to survive (Dr. B.M. Fitzgerald, pers. Although raising domestic rabbits has been legal since 1980, wild rabbits cannot be traded; hence there is little benefit gained from rabbits in New Zealand apart from sport shooting by youngsters. The first European or brown hares were introduced into New Zealand in 1851 for sport (Donne but this libera-tion may have been unsuccessful. In the next 20 years a few dozen animals were brought in, chiefly from England via 

Island in Australia, and by the 1880s shooting restric-tions on hares were lifted in Canterbury. Hares spread more rapidly than rabbits, to occupy the whole of New Zealand apart from forested areas, except for Fiordland, part of North-land and land over altitude (Fig. 13.3). Until 1966 about 40,000 hares a year were exported to Europe, but the damage to forestry and orchards, and competition with do-mestic stock for grazing probably balanced the benefits. Unlike rabbits, European hares appear to control their own density, and even on islands without predators do not exceed 3.4 hares/ha (Abildgard et al. 1972). Densities almost as high are recorded in inland Canterbury (Parkes 

but over most of the country the average would be one 

149 Figure 13A. Distribution of the European hare Australia (From 1986). 

> in

hare to (Flux 1981). They are regarded as a minor pest and not favored for food or sport, although in the absence of foxes some are used as quarry by hunters on horseback. In color, behavior and reproduction, hares are similar to their British stock (Flux 1967a). The most noticeable difference is that hares occupy alpine grassland above the timberline, the habitat of the mountain hare in Europe. Num-bers at high altitudes are low (Flux 1967b) but damage to slow-growing native vegetation can be significant, especially in National Parks. Interestingly, these alpine hares exist on an entirely novel flora. Unlike Australia, New Zealand has no native carnivores that benefit from the presence of either hares or rabbits. In Australia, three pairs of hares from Britain placed on 

Island increased to 200 by 1865 and numbers were then liberated in several places. They spread across New South Wales at mainly along the Dividing Range 

man 1986). After arrival in a district, hares increased for 

years before declining, and bounties paid on hare scalps in the Armidale region, NSW, show this pattern. Bounty payments also show pronounced summer peaks during the period of increase and more even distribution over the year in the decline, which (1986) suggested could reflect reduced ability of the vegetation to support early summer recruitment; but it seems equally likely that casual hunters killed more hares in summer in years when they were plentiful. Some idea of their abundance is given by (1986): “Between 1890 and 1902 bounties in New South Wales were paid on a minimum of three to four hundred thousand hare scalps annually.” Hares spread ahead of the rabbits in the early years, and their subsequent decline was often attributed to the arrival of rabbits, which dominate European hares; rabbits also graze more closely and carry parasites to which hares are susceptible. Although they are still spreading slowly as land is cleared for farming, the distribution has remained almost unchanged for 70 years (Fig. 13.4). The limited distribution of hares in Australia is remark-able. In other countries where European rabbits and hares co-exist, including Sweden, Russia, Italy, North and South Amer-ica and New Zealand, hares occupy far more of the country than do rabbits. Ireland is an exception, but European hares there face competition with the mountain hare. The relative success of hares is generally explained by their greater range of climatic and habitat tolerance, but this apparently does not apply to Australia. One possible explanation is that hares start breeding in mid winter, regardless of the climate, while rab-bits are opportunistic breeders, taking advantage of green vegetation following sporadic rains (Flux a dominant feature in inland Australia. Their distribution does not match any obvious vegetation boundary, but (1986) points out that it coincides with areas having a moisture index that allows plant growth in winter. Hares in Australia, however, breed for almost nine months of the year (Hesterman and Kogon so it is still curious that lack of winter breeding should limit their geographical distribution. To summarize, rabbits in Australia are still widespread and probably increasing slowly in abundance and distribution; severe damage is now local and sporadic, varying as the population increases during wet years or declines following outbreaks of myxomatosis. In New Zealand, rabbit control without myxomatosis has been highly efficient and over 95% of the country populations are stable at very low levels, apparently kept there at no cost by predators. There are three South Island areas where rabbit populations remain intrac-table. Hares are stable in distribution and numbers in both countries, at similar population levels, causing some damage to trees and crops. They are probably the least troublesome of any of the introduced mammals. 

# Africa 

The natural range of the European rabbit in Africa is confined to the coastal regions of Morocco and Algeria (Petter 1972). Feral populations are reportedly found in lower Egypt (Petter 1972) as well as on certain South African offshore islands. The introduction of the European rabbit to southern Africa began shortly after the establishment of a settlement at the Cape by the Dutch in 1652. An excellent account of the initial and 

150 S a l d a n h a  

> P o r t
> Figure 13.5. Distribution of the European rabbit on islands off South Africa

sequent introductions is given in Smithers (1983) which forms the basis of this report. The impetus for attempts to establish the species in South Africa was to provide a ready source of fresh meat for both the garrison stationed at the Cape and passing ships. Interestingly however, the early releases of rabbits took place on surrounding offshore islands and not on the mainland, apparently in accordance with instructions re-ceived from the Dutch East India company to your order we keep none here on the continent less they damage the gardens and crops (Leibbrandt 2: 1900 in 

ers 1983). Rabbits were first released in 1654 on Island, but failed to thrive. Two subsequent releases on this island in 1656 and 1658 were necessary before the population was estab-lished and by 1659 they were reported to be abundant (Thorn 1958 in Smithers 1983). Introductions to other offshore is-lands were also undertaken. In total, European rabbit popula-tions were established at 12 such islands at one time or the other although Smithers reports four of these no longer support rabbits (Fig. 13.5). The European rabbit and the European hare have been widely introduced throughout the New World. The most successful introductions have been in South America, where Argentina and Chile have extensive populations of both spe-cies. Small populations of both species are also found in the United States and Canada. A detailed account of the distribu-tion and status of exotic Leporidae in South America is presented in Chapman and Johnson, in press (see Figs. 13.6 and 13.7). Dean and De Vos (1965) discuss the distribution of the European hare in North America. A map of the distribu-tion of the European rabbit worldwide is available in Flux and Fullagar (1983). Accidental or deliberate introductions of the species on In North and Central America, European rabbits and the mainland have undoubtedly occurred in the recent and hares have not spread widely, if at all, probably because of the historic past. However, as far as is known, none of these other presence of native predators and competitors. In South than in Egypt has been successful. The inability of the species America, however, the European hare now occupies most of to establish itself, as it has done so successfully, for example, in the continent south of latitude The European rabbit has Australia and New Zealand, is probably due to the predation spread throughout Chile from and is now rapidly invad-pressure on the African Continent (Smithers 1983). ing Argentina despite the introduction of myxomatosis. Apart a 

> Figure 13.6. Distribution of the European rabbit in South America (from Chapman and Johnson, in press)

# North, Central and South America 

151 L. europeaus  

> Figure 13.7 Distribution of the European hare in South America (from Chapman and Johnson, in press)

from economic damage to crops and pasture, one serious consequence seems to be a decline in the numbers of indige-nous rodents occupying the same ecological niche, such as the Patagonian spp.). The eastern cottontail 

has also been widely translocated in North America and is established in Oregon and Washington (Fig. 5.5). 

# Europe 

There have been numerous attempts to introduce various species of cottontails and North American hares Lepus into Europe, particularly Italy and France. Attempts to establish North American jackrabbits have apparently failed. However, there is considerable concern about eastern cottontail S. and New England cottontail S. 

introduction attempts. These introduction attempts have been in an effort to establish alternate game species for native rabbits and hares in the region (see Sasse 1983). 

References 

Abildgard, F., Andersen, J. and Bamdorff-Nielsen, 0. 1972. The hare population (Lepus europaeus of Illumo Island, Denmark. Dan. Rev. Game Biol. 

Bull, P.C. 1956. Some facts and theories on the ecology of the wild rabbit. Sci. Rev. 

Chapman, J.A. and K. Johnson. (in press). Lagomorphs. In: South 

American Mammals. Vol. 2. Univ. Chicago Press. Dean, P.B. and de Vos, A. 1965. The spread and present status of the European hare, Lepus europeaus (Desmarest), in North America. Can. Field-Nat. 

Donne, T.E. 1924. The game animals of New Zealand. Murray, London. 

Fennessy, B.V. 1966. The impact of wildlife species on sheep produc-tion in Australia. Aust. Anim. Prod. 

Filmer, J.F. 1953. Disappointing test of myxomatosis as rabbit control. N.Z. Agriculture 

Flux, J.E.C. 1965. Timing of the breeding season in the hare, Lepus europaeus and rabbit, Oryctolagus cuniculus (L.). 

Flux, J.E.C. 1967a. Reproduction and body weights of the hare Lepus europaeus in New Zealand. Sci. 

Flux, J.E.C. 1967b. Hare numbers and diet in an alpine basin in New Zealand. Ecol. 

Flux, J.E.C. 1981. Prospects for hare farming in New Zealand. 

Agricultural Science 

Flux, J.E.C. and Fullagar, P.J. 1983. World distribution of the rabbit 

(Oryctolagus cuniculus). Fennica 

Gibb, J.A. and Flux, J.E.C. 1983. Why New Zealand should not use myxomatosis in rabbit control operations. Search   

> Cottontails spp. have not been successfully introduced into Europe, despite repeated attempts (Photo by B. Fuller)

152 Gibb, J.A., Ward, G.D. and Ward, C.P. 1969. An experiment in the control of a sparse population of wild rabbits 

niculus (L.)) in New Zealand. Sci. 

Hesterman, E.R. and Kogon, C. 1963. Endoparasites of the wild hare, in the Australian Capital Territory, with a note on breeding. 

Howard, W.E. 1958. The rabbit problem in New Zealand. 

Sci. Ind. Res. In. Ser. No. 

P. 1986. The brown hare a herbivorous mammal in a new ecosystem. In: R.L. (Ed.), The Ecology Ani-mals and Plants: some Australian case histories. Wiley, Brisbane. Pp. 62-76. Martin, H.B. 1885. Objections to the introduction of beasts of prey to destroy the rabbit. Trans. Inst. 

Myers, K. 1971. The rabbit in Australia. In: den Boer, P.J. and Gradwell, G.R. (Eds), Adv. Study Inst. Dynamics Numbers Popul. (Oosterbeek, 1970). Centre for Agric. Publ. and Docu-mentation, Wageningen. Pp. 

Myers, K. 1983. Rabbit. In: Strahan, R. (Ed.), The Australian Mu-seum complete book of Australian mammals. Angus and Robertson, London. Pp. 481. Parkes, J.P. 1984. Home ranges of radio-telemetered hares (Lepus capensis) in a sub-alpine population in New Zealand: implica-tions for control. Fennica 

Petter, F. 1972. Order The mammals of an 

manual. Smithsonian Institute Press, Washington. Rolls, E.C. 1969. They all ran wild. The story on the land in Australia. Angus and Robertson, Sydney. 

Sasse, C. 1983. Ecological consequences of the introduction of the American cottontail Sylvilagus into Europe. Council of Europe SN-US 

Smithers, R.H.N. 1983. The mammals of the Southern African Subregion. University of Pretoria, Pretoria. Strong, B.W. 1983. The invasion of the Northern by the wild European rabbit Oryctolagus cuniculus Tech. Rep. No. 3. Con-servation Commission of the Northern Territory, Alice Springs. Thomson, G.M. 1922. The naturalisation of animals and plants in New Zealand. Cambridge University Press. 

Williams, J.M. 1983. The impact of biological research on rabbit control policies in New Zealand. Fennica 

Wodzicki, 1950. Introduced mammals of New Zealand. 

Sci. Ind. Res. Bull., 98. 255 pp. 

153 Section 3: The Action Plan Chapter 14: Conservation Action Needed for Rabbits, Hares and Pikas 

Joseph A. Chapman, John E. C. Flux, Andrew T. Smith, Diana J. Bell, 

G. Ceballos, Kenneth R. Dixon, F. C. Dobler, Nikolai A. Formozov, R. K. Ghose, William L. R. Oliver, Terry Robinson, Eberhard Schneider, Simon N. Stuart, Ken Sugimurua, Zheng Changlin 

# Introduction 

The data presented in the previous chapters constitute the most thorough overview ever made of the lagomorphs from a conservation perspective. In this section, the data are used to compile a list of actions needed to conserve and manage lagomorphs more effectively. These actions are divided into the following categories:  

> 

Management Guidelines for Common Species; 

Conservation of Globally Threatened Species; 

Conservation of Other Species of Concern;  

> 

Priorities for Conservation-Related Research on 

gomorphs. This chapter does not attempt to go into great detail on the various conservation issues, and the reader is referred to relevant sections of earlier chapters for more information. 

# Management Guidelines for Common Species 

Many parts of the world support some common lagomorph species. Often these are of considerable economic impor-tance, either for the fur trade, or more usually as game species. These uses of lagomorphs can frequently be compat-ible with their conservation, provided that certain basic man-agement procedures are adopted. In general, these can be summarised as follows: 

# Hunting 

In many cases, the hunting of lagomorphs has been sustain-able through luck rather than management design. In some cases, most notably the brown hare europaeus in Eu-rope, hunting levels are no longer sustainable and need to be reduced. Throughout Europe, thorough population studies of the species need to be carried out and hunting quotas then set and enforced, that allow populations to recover. The 

term aim should be for each European country to set annual quotas based on regular monitoring of the populations. 

# Habitat Management 

Recent changes in agricultural practices in Europe (including the use of fertilizers and pesticides, and the planting of huge fields of monoculture crops) have resulted in declines in the European hare population. This is part of the wider problem of decisions taken to increase the productivity of agriculture, without due consideration being given to other forms of land use, such as the management of game species. Land use plan-ning programs should adopt a broader approach in future and should include environmental considerations. Land use deci-sions should be made on a cross-sectoral basis which takes into consideration the impact on other sectors (i.e. nature conservation, sport hunting, the fur industry, etc.). It should be realised that intensive agriculture is often the most profit-able form of land use only because of the hidden government subsidies that it receives; its intrinsic profitability is frequently less than often assumed. 

# Introductions 

In a number of places, lagomorphs have been introduced to areas outside their natural distribution, often in an attempt to supplement the existing range of game species. This practice should be opposed vigorously. Such introductions can severely disrupt the natural ecological balance and threaten native species. The proposed introductions of cottontails 

into parts of western Europe are likely to be especially damag-ing and should be prevented. The IUCN/SSC Lagomorph Specialist Group Statement on the Introduction of Exotic Lagomorphs is included in Appendix 1 and is compatible with the 1987 IUCN Position Statement on Translocations of Living Organisms. 

154 Table 14.1 The globally threatened lagomorph species Species              

> Gaoligong Pika
> Ochotona gaoligongensis
> Ili Pika
> Ochotona iliensis
> Koslov’s Pika
> Ochotona
> Muli Pika
> Ochotona
> Nubra Pika
> Ochotona
> Thomas’ Pika
> Ochotona
> Tehuantepec Jackrabbit
> Lepus
> Black Jackrabbit
> Lepus insularis
> Tres Marias Rabbit
> graysoni
> Omiltemi Rabbit
> San Jose Brush Rabbit
> mansuetus
> Pygmy Rabbit
> idahoensis
> Riverine Rabbit
> monticularis
> Hispid Hare
> Sumatran Rabbit
> Amami Rabbit
> Volcano Rabbit
> diazi
> IUCN Category of Threat
> Indeterminate Indeterminate Vulnerable Indeterminate Indeterminate Indeterminate Endangered Rare Endangered Endangered Indeterminate Vulnerable Endangered Endangered Indeterminate Endangered Endangered
> Countries of Occurrence
> China China China China China, India, Nepal China Mexico Mexico Mexico Mexico Mexico United States South Africa India, Nepal Indonesia Japan Mexico

# Biological Control 

The deliberate use of any disease or predator to control lagomorph populations should only be permitted after strin-gent conditions have been met, as outlined in the IUCN/SSC Lagomorph Specialist Group Statement on the Biological Control of Lagomorphs (see Appendix 1). 

# Conservation of Globally Threatened Species 

Some 17 species of lagomorph are now considered to be globally threatened, as documented in Table 14.1; the conser-vation actions needed for each of these 17 species are listed below on a country-by-country basis. 

China 

Six species of globally threatened lagomorph occur in China, all of them pikas. In nearly every case they are still too poorly known for it to be possible to make detailed conservation recommendations. 

Gaoligong Pika Ochotona 

This recently described species is known only from Mount Gaoligong, Yunnan Province, China. Nothing is known of its status. The following priority activities have been identified for the conservation of this species: 

Research. The systematic status of this species needs to be resolved, since it is possible that it is closely related to For-rest’s pika 0. This would require the collection of additional specimens and careful comparison with related species. 

Status Surveys. A survey should be carried out to assess the status and conservation requirements of this species on Mount Gaoligong. 

Conservation Action. Based on the results of the research and surveys outlined above, appropriate conservation measures should be introduced in the Mount Gaoligong area. 

Ili Pika 

This recently described species is known only from Borohoro Shan area, Xinjiang Province, China. Nothing is known of its status. The following priority activities have been identified for the conservation of this species: 

1. Research. The systematic status of this species needs to be resolved, since it is possible that it is closely related to the red-eared pika 0. or the Turkestan red pika 0. 

This would require the collection of additional specimens and careful comparison with related species. Research should also focus on the postulated decline of this species due to global warming. 

155 2. Status Surveys. A survey should be carried out to assess the status and conservation requirements of this species in the Borohoro Shan area. the Muli pika, since it is possible that the resulting  

> C d

contamination has severely threatened this species. 

2. Status Surveys. A survey should be carried out to assess the status and conservation requirements of this species in western Sichuan Province. 

3. Conservation Action. Based on the results of the research and surveys outlined above, appropriate conservation measures should be introduced in the Borohoro Shan area. 3. Conservation Action. Based on the results of the research and surveys outlined above, appropriate conservation measures should be introduced in western Sichuan Prov-ince. Kozlov’s Pika Ochotona 

This highly distinctive pika is only known from the Arkatag 

a spur of the Kunlun Mountains west of the junction of Xinjiang, Xizang and Qinghai Provinces in China. It is be-lieved to be threatened. 

Nubra Pika 

This enigmatic species occurs in a narrow range along the southern Tibetan plateau, as well as in neighbouring India and 

It is verv known. The following priority activities have been identified for the conservation of this species: 

The following priority activities have been identified for 

Status Survey. A thorough survey is needed to assess the the conservation of this species: status and conservation requirements of this very re-stricted species. The survey should produce clear 1. Status Surveys. A survey should be carried out to assess the status and conservation requirements of this species along the southern Tibetan plateau, th a view to making conservat recommendations. The ecological 

ments of the species are not understood at all. mendations for the conservation of the species and its habitat. 

Conservation Action. Based on the results of the 

mentioned survey, a conservation initiative should be launched in the Arkatag Range. The habitats of this area 2. Conservation Action. Based on outlined above, appropriate should be introduced in the southern Tibetan plateau area. the results of the surveys conservation measures are already known to be severely impacted, so some form of improved management will almost certainly be neces-sary. 

Research. The possible impact of vertebrate control cam-paigns on populations of this species should be 

Thomas’ Pika 

gated and the results used to help design the integrated This species is known only from isolated mountain ranges in conservation program. Gansu, Qinghai and Sichuan Provinces, China. It is rare and may be threatened. 

Muli Pika Ochotona 

The following priority activities have been identified for the conservation of this species: 

This very rare species is known only from thickets and steppes 1. Research. Research should focus on the impact of verte-in western Sichuan Province, China. There have been no brate control programmes on this species, since it is pos-records in the last 25 years and it could be seriously threat- sible that the resulting chemical contamination has se-ened. verely threatened Thomas’ pika. The following priority activities have been identified for the conservation of this species: 2. 

1. Research. The systematic status of this species needs to be resolved, since it is possible that it is closely related to the Glover’s pika 0. This would require the collection 3. of a limited number of additional specimens and careful comparison with related species. Research should also focus on the impact of vertebrate control programmes on 

Status Surveys. A survey should be carried out to assess the status and conservation requirements of this species in Gansu, Qinghai and Sichuan Provinces. 

Conservation Action. Appropriate conservation measures should be introduced, based on the results of the research and surveys outlined above. 156 India 

Two globally threatened lagomorph species occur in India.  

> 2. Nubra

Ochotona 

This enigmatic species occurs in a narrow range in the Ladak Range, as well as in neighbouring China and Nepal. It is very little known. The following priority activities have been identified for the conservation of this species:  

> Status Surveys.

A survey should be carried out to assess the status and conservation requirements of this species in the Ladak Range, with a view to making conservation 3. ommendations. The ecological requirements of the spe-cies are not understood at all.  

> Conservation Action.

Based on the results of the surveys outlined above, appropriate conservation measures should be introduced in the Ladak Range. 

> Hispid Hare

4. This species is seriously endangered, surviving in a few iso-lated pockets across the former range of its tall grassland habitat in northern India and southern Nepal. It is threatened by habitat destruction for agriculture, forestry, human settle-ment, flood control and irrigation schemes, together with the adverse effects of dry season burning, overgrazing and har-vesting of remaining tall grasslands. The following priority activities have been identified to ensure the survival of this species:  

> Maintenance of Protected Areas.

The continued survival of this species in India depends upon the maintenance of the tall grass habitat in the following protected areas (note that the species also occurs in Nepal: see that account): 

Reserve Forest, Sanctuary, Tiger Reserve, Barnadi Reserve Forest, Ripu Reserve Forest, Subankhata Reserve Forest, Orang Wildlife Sanctuary, Jaldapara Wildlife sanctuary, Buxa Tiger Reserve, Valmiki Wildlife Sanctuary, Dudwa National Park and possibly Kanha National Park. It should be noted that 5. governmental authority over some of the reserves in As-sam is now weak, especially the complex, as a result of security problems. In some other reserves there is heavy overgrazing by cattle, notably the Buxa Tiger Reserve, and this needs to be brought under control. It is of great impor-tance that control of these reserves be regained, but also zone developments, especially around the very important 

complex of reserves.  

> Improvement of Habitat Management.

The immediate threats to the relict populations of the hispid hare should be alleviated by a change in reserve management prac-tices, from uncontrolled dry season burning of its tall grassland habitat to a system of carefully controlled rota-tional burning such that large areas of suitable habitat (i.e. providing optimal cover, food resources, etc.) are available throughout the year. The detailed formulation of appro-priate long-term management plans for these remnant areas of tall grassland should draw on the results of the research programs recommended below.  

> Status Surveys.

Status surveys are needed in a number of areas that have not previously been investigated for this species. These include several areas of north-eastern In-dia. evidence of the hispid hare occurring in Kanha National Park requires confirmation, since this site is some distance south of the present known range of the species and would indicate the need for additional surveys for hispids in remaining grassland patches between these two areas.   

> Research. I: Long-term research programs

examining the effects of each of the several disturbance factors (e.g. burning, thatch harvesting and grazing) operating on 

spid hare habitat are required to formulate appropriate long-term management plans for the remnants of tall grassland habitat. Research into burning, for example, should investigate the effects of factors such as timing, frequency and soil water content on both the vegetation and the hare populations so that optimum management plans can be developed for individual areas.    

> 2: Long-term studies of the behavioral ecology and repro-ductive

of the hispid hare are urgently required, concentrating on habitat requirements, breeding biology and home range use throughout the year (so far only studied in the early dry season). It is important that these studies include the monsoon period, when the marshy areas used as refugia during the early dry season post-burn period are likely to be among the first areas to become inundated.  

> Captive Breeding.

A captive breeding program for this species needs to be initiated to provide a nucleus of animals for reintroduction into the wild, should this be-come necessary. At least 30 animals should be used to form the founder captive stock to avoid inbreeding prob-lems. that in future the management plans of these areas are Indonesia 

designed to ensure that the local Bodo people derive tangible economic benefits from the existence of the Of the two lagomorph species that occur in Indonesia, only serves. This might take the form of appropriate one is of conservation concern. 

157 Sumatran Rabbit 

The Sumatran rabbit is an endemic genus restricted to the montane forests of western Sumatra. There is a great 

tific interest in the species because it is considered to be a primitive relict form, because of its unusual striped coloring and because it is one of the very few lagomorphs which lives in thick equatorial forest. In addition, there is possible commer-cial interest in domesticating this animal for use in tropical countries where the European rabbit is not so well adapted. The following priority activities have been identified for the conservation of this 1. Surveys. The status of the Sumatran rabbit remains 

completely unknown. It seems to have a very low population density and is probably restricted to inacces-sible montane forest. It may have a requirement for rich volcanic soils, further limiting its distribution, and this needs to be investigated. The highest priority for this species is to locate it in the wild through a thorough status survey of all the locations in which it has been reported in the past, and to assess its conservation requirements.  

> 4. Captive Breeding.

If a population can be located, it is important to invest in a captive breeding program for the species to provide a nucleus of animals for reintroduction, should this be necessary. Japan The Amami rabbit is the only Lagomorph occurring in Japan that is of international conservation concern.   

> Amami Rabbit
> 2. Habitat Conservation.

Montane forest in Sumatra is now being cleared rapidly, through a combination of felling of 1. timber, planting of vegetables and settling of immigrants from Java through the transmigration program. It is against this background that a new National Park is pro-posed for Mt. Kerinci-Seblat. It is of the utmost impor-tance that this park be formally gazetted and measures taken to ensure the survival of the full range of habitats and species within it. The survey referred to above will need to determine whether the park contains a viable population of the Sumatran rabbit. It is essential that a management 2. plan be developed for the new park allowing for appropri-ate forms of buffer-zone development in the surrounding area, to increase the standard of living of the local commu-nities without jeopardizing important conservation priori-ties (possibly through the new WWF-funded project there). The same considerations also apply to the existing Gunung Leuser and Barisan-Selatan National Parks, 3. where the species probably occurs.  

> 3. Research.

Once a population of this elusive species has been found, it will be necessary to carry out detailed studies on its habitat requirements. A greater knowledge of the signs left by these animals will enable surveys of other areas to proceed more rapidly. Scientific studies should also be geared towards developing habitat manage-ment guidelines for the species, to be incorporated in the management plans of reserves within its range. The Amami rabbit is an endangered species found only on Japan’s Amami Island and part of the Ryukyu Island chain. These islands have many endemic terrestrial vertebrate species and subspecies. Amami Island is very im-portant for endemic species conservation and the Amami Rabbit is a representative of the unique biocommunity of the island. The following priority activities have been identified to ensure the survival of this species:  

> Habitat Conservation and Management.

To enable this species to survive, a habitat mosaic of mature oak forests and young second-growth stands is required. This enables the Amami rabbit to obtain important food supplies throughout the year. In order to maintain this mosaic, careful habitat management is necessary; certain forests should be set aside to become mature, since such old forests are now greatly reduced in area.  

> Control of Introduced Species.

The Amami rabbit suffers greatly from introduced predators such as feral dogs, feral cats and mongooses. As a result, the species tends to be absent from areas near human settlements. Populations of introduced predators should be controlled in important areas for the species.  

> Research and Monitoring Programs.

A few research programs have been conducted, sponsored by the central government, focusing on population estimates, food habits and nest site selection of the Amami rabbit. These, how-ever, are not sufficient to monitor the population because the studies are too infrequent and the amount of informa-tion collected during each period is too small. An ongoing budget is required for a research or a monitoring program with the aim of assessing conservation and management needs for the species. Researchers willing to carry out such long-term research programs also need to be identified. 158 Mexico 

With six species of threatened lagomorph, Mexico (together with China) is the highest priority country in the world for the conservation of these species. 

Tehuantepec Jackrabbit 

The Tehuantepec jackrabbit is the most endangered hare in North America. Its geographic range is restricted to a small area in Oaxaca and Chiapas in Mexico. Its historic geographic range has been reduced; unfortunately no information is available about its present distribution and population num-bers. The following priority activities have been identified to ensure the survival of this species: 

Habitat Conservation and Management. The populations of the Tehuantepec jackrabbit have been depleted by habitat destruction. The species is restricted to riparian vegetation, sand dunes and shrub forest, which never exceeds a wide strip along the shores of salt water lagoons on the northern side of the Gulf of Tehuantepec. Its habitat is threatened by expanding agriculture to sup-port the growing local human population. The only real chance of saving this species is to establish reserves for it in areas identified as supporting the denser populations. Reserve sites should be identified by the surveys referred to below and planned to ensure that their establishment does not cause conflicts with local communities. 

Regulation of Hunting. The Tehuantepec jackrabbit is also suffering from hunting. It is important to ensure an effective ban on the hunting of the larger populations which have a chance of long term viability, as part of the management programs for the new reserves referred to above. 

Education Program. Education programs are needed to inform the local communities of the uniqueness of this species and the value of its preservation. These programs should include advice to the local people on forms of land use that are both beneficial to them and which are likely to be sustainable in the long term. 

Status Surveys. Surveys are required to provide accurate inventories and documentation on the distribution of the species, with a view to identifying potential reserve sites and assessing its habitat requirements. 

Research. The biology of the Tehuantepec jackrabbit is unknown. The only information available concerns its 

Research on basic biology is clearly needed. is important to document its habitat preferences and the effect of grazing and other types of habitat disturbance on the populations of this species. 

6. Captive Breeding. A captive breeding programme should be established to enable reintroduction in the event of extinction in the wild. 

Black Jackrabbit 

The black jackrabbit is found only on Espiritu Santo Island in the Gulf of California, where its status is very little known. Although this is a species with a very restricted distribution, it is unlikely that the island will ever be settled by people and the species is probably less threatened than several other Mexican lagomorphs. The following priority activities have been identified to ensure the survival of this 

Status Surveys. A survey to determine the status of the species is of high priority. This should focus on distribu-tion, population, habitat requirements and probable im-pacts on the species resulting from introduced animals. 

Habitat Management. An integrated conservation pro-gram (emphasizing habitat management) for Espiritu Santo Island should be developed, drawing in part on the results of the survey referred to above. 

Research. Genetic and morphological studies are required to determine the relationship of this species to the 

tailed jackrabbit from mainland Baja Cali-fornia. Other studies focusing on its basic biology will be useful for long-term conservation and management. 

Establishment of Second Population. As a security against unforeseen catastrophe (such as disease), it would be wise to establish a second population on a nearby island, providing that it can be demonstrated that serious ecological risks will not result from such an introduction. 

Tres Marias Rabbit 

This species is endemic to the Tres Marias Islands, approxi-mately 86km from mainland Nayarit. Two subspecies have been recognized: S. found on the islands of Maria Madre, Maria Magdalena and Maria Cleofas; and S. 

found only in San Juanito island. The following priority activities have been identified to ensure the survival of this species: 

1. Habitat Conservation and Management. The main threats to the Tres Marias rabbit are habitat alterations (principally forest clearance) caused by introduced species and human settlements (including the high security prison), and hunting. Large areas of natural vegetation have already been removed on Maria Madre and Maria Cleofas. Extensive habitat perturbations associated with the plans to convert large pristine areas into new human 159 settlements and agriculture will undoubtedly have a pro-found impact on the populations of this species. The key factor in ensuring the long term conservation of the Tres Marias rabbit is the protection of its habitat. Reserves of sufficient size for viable populations of this species should be established on Maria Madre. The uninhabited ‘Maria 3. Cleofas and San Juanito islands should be managed in their entirety as nature reserves. This would entail a cancellation of plans to settle Maria Cleofas. These rec-ommended new reserves would also protect other en-demic species such as the Tres Marias raccoon 

and the rice rat Oyzomys The new 4. logical Reserve recently designated by the Mexican gov-ernment on Maria Magdalena should be assessed for its value in conserving the Tres Marias rabbit. 

Status Surveys. There are no quantitative data on the present status of this species on any of the four islands. Rabbit populations are, apparently, larger on the two islands without human settlements. A survey to determine 5. its present status, population densities and precise habitat requirements is urgently needed. 

Research. The only research so far carried out on this species concerns its taxonomy. Studies of its basic biology Mexican government, habitat destruction is probably still a major threat to native species since the coniferous forests have been highly modified and fragmented by intense forestry and cattle grazing. 

Regulation of Hunting. Hunting is probably a major threat to the Omiltemi rabbit. Biological surveys in the area have shown intensive hunting pressures on rabbits and 

species of mammals, though so far there has been a complete lack of information about this species. 

Research. There are no data on the biology of this rabbit. If a population is found, it will be extremely important to study urgently its basic biology and determine the factors that cause its rarity. Data on population dynamics, life history and feeding habits will be very useful for establish-ing a management plan to ensure its long term preserva-tion. 

Captive breeding. Aadvisable. captive breeding program would be 

San Jose Brush Rabbit 

and life history, and long term monitoring of its population The San Jose brush rabbit is restricted to San Jose Island in dynamics are recommended. Particularly important is the the Gulf of California, Baja California, Mexico, where its study of the ecological interactions between introduced status is unknown. species (e.g., goats, rats) and the Tres Marias rabbit, and The following priority activities have been identified for the response of this species to habitat disturbance caused the conservation of this species: by humans. There is also a need to ascertain the extent of reserves required to protect genetically and demographi- 1. 

viable populations. 

Omiltemi Rabbit 

The Omiltemi rabbit may be among the most endangered rabbits in the world; fewer than ten specimens, all collected during the last century, are known to science. It is known only in the Sierra Madre Sur, in the vicinity of Omiltemi, Guerrero, Mexico, at elevations between and 

The following priority activities have been identified for 2. the conservation of this species: 

Status Surveys. Intensive surveys are needed to ascertain whether or not this species survives and to determine its present distribution. These surveys should also focus on habitat requirements and make an assessment of the 3. threats to its survival. Until such information becomes available, a comprehensive conservation strategy cannot be developed. 

2. Habitat Conservation and Management. The species is restricted to pine and pine-oak forests. Although 

temi has been recently declared a State Reserve by the 

Status Survey. A survey to assess the status, population and precise habitat requirements of this species is a high priority. Several species of mammals on the islands off Baja California have been depleted as a result of the effects of the introduction of exotic mammals, including competitors and predators. Rats and cats, accidentally introduced to San Jose Island, may pose a serious threat to the survival of this species and this should be investigated. Monitoring population levels at least annually will be useful to check the status of the species. 

Eradication of Introduced Species. A priority action for the preservation of this species is the eradication of the introduced animals from San Jose Island, especially those which are demonstrated to be detrimental to the survival of the San Jose brush rabbit. 

Research. As with several other species of Mexican 

gomorphs, the biology of the San Jose brush rabbit is little known. Genetic and taxonomic studies are needed to clarify the relationship between this rabbit and the brush rabbit S. bachmani from mainland Baja California. Re-search is needed to document the natural history, popula-tion dynamics and life history of this species, as basis for developing an adequate conservation strategy. 160 4. Development of Conservation Program. Based on the results of the surveys and research outlined above, an inte-grated conservation program should be developed, includ-ing careful habitat management and possibly protected area establishment. 

Volcano Rabbit 

The volcano rabbit, a Mexican endemic, is endangered. Its whole geographic range is restricted to a few mountains west and south of Mexico City. Habitat destruction, hunting and pollution pose a serious threat to its survival. The species has disappeared from many localities, including the Nevado de Toluca volcano. Presently the three areas that support the most important populations are the Iztaccihualtl, 

and Pelado volcanoes. The following priority activities have been identified to ensure the survival of this species: 

1. General Habitat Conservation and Management. Vol-cano rabbits require grasslands above the tree level and conifer forests with a dense cover of zacatones (bunch grasses) for food and cover. The survival of the species clearly revolves around the control of burning and over-grazing in the prime “zacaton” habitats and the enforce-ment of laws that prohibit the catching, sale and hunting of the animal. Forest areas where the volcano rabbit is found are significant not only for this species but also as a reservoir for other It is also an important zone for life-support systems in the Mexico City region. These forests are crucial as water catchment zones and could be exploited sustainably for timber and other renewable re-sources. Consideration of these broader issues would promote the protection of volcano rabbit habitats. Habitat restoration may be possible in certain areas and this needs further investigation. 

2. 3. 4. 5.    

> Habitat of the volcano rabbit in the grasslands
> Popocatepetl, Mexico (Photo Ceballos) at

Protected Area Management. Volcano rabbit habitats are disappearing so fast that it is extremely important to select a number of areas as new reserves, in addition to those already established. Where possible, these reserves should be connected with corridors of suitable habitat and located across the species’ geographic range to ensure the preser-vation of the highest possible genetic diversity. Within the protected areas and other zones scheduled for future protection, appropriate management needs to start as a matter of high priority. The supervision so far given by the Secretaria de Desarrollo y (SEDUE) or the Comision Coordinadora de Desarrollo yRural in Mexico City (COCODER) to volcano rabbit areas is not sufficient. Provision of necessary staff to manage the Izta-Popo National Park and the Special Pro-tected Zones to the south of Mexico City (Volcan el Pelado and Volcan Tlaloc) is required. Although actions to reduce hunting need to be enforced, ways must be iden-tified of making sustainable exploitation of natural re-sources compatible with wildlife protection. Controlled burning can be made compatible with habitats and the conservation of wildlife. the of 

Education Programs. Education campaigns at village, national and international levels need to be started. Most local inhabitants are unaware of the protected status of the species. Public awareness of the species’ habitat is essen-tial. Information on the impact of land use methods that are incompatible with sustainable development and con-servation should be made available to villages adjacent to the core habitats. In particular, villagers need to be 

vided alternatives to land-use practices that are jeopardiz-ing their own livelihoods. Agricultural extension work is required to demonstrate sitive farming practices. sustainable and ecological 

Captive Breeding. A captive-breeding program in the Chapultepec Zoo, Mexico City, has been very successful, indicating the potential for restoring some of the extir-pated populations. More scientific supervision of the cap-tive breeding program is probably required and the num-ber of animals in captivity needs to be built up. The captive breeding program requires close international coopera-tion between all the institutions concerned and the num-ber of breeding facilities involved should be enlarged. In addition, the value of the captive colonies (particularly at the Mexico City and Jersey Zoos) in creating and fostering public awareness should be further developed. Under no circumstances should the species be introduced as a labo-ratory animal as suggested by some authors (e.g. 

dos, since this could create a demand that could eventually imperil the wild populations. 

Status Survey. Although the general distribution of the species is well known, intensive and extensive surveys are needed to identify the precise distribution of its 

161 tions, especially in areas where the habitat has been frag-mented. These data should be collected with a specific view to planning the necessary network of protected areas and corridors (as outlined above) for this species and other forms of endemic wildlife. 

6. Research. Studies on population densities of the volcano rabbit throughout its geographic range, habitat relation-ships, population dynamics and life history are needed to ensure that appropriate management is implemented. There is almost no information on the effect of habitat fragmentation on the genetics and population dynamics of the species. It is particularly important that the interac-tions between cattle grazing and habitat quality for the volcano rabbit are assessed. 

Nepal 

Two globally threatened lagomorph species occur in Nepal. 

Nubra Pika Ochotona 

This enigmatic species occurs in alpine steppe habitats in the Himalayas, as well as in neighbouring China and India. It is very little known. The following priority activities have been identified for the conservation of this species: 

1. Status Surveys. A survey should be carried out to assess the status and conservation requirements of this species in the Himalayas, with a view to making conservation recom-mendations. The ecological requirements of the species are not understood at all. 2. Conservation Action. Based on the results of surveys outlined above, appropriate conservation measures should be introduced in the Himalayas. 

Hispid Hare 

This species is seriously endangered, surviving in a few iso-lated pockets across the former range of its tall grassland habitat in northern India and southern Nepal. It is threatened by habitat destruction for agriculture, forestry, human settle-ment, flood control and irrigation schemes, together with the adverse effects of dry season burning, overgrazing and har-vesting of remaining tall grasslands. The following priority activities have been identified to ensure the survival of this species: 

1. Maintenance of Protected Areas. The continued survival of this species in Nepal depends upon the maintenance of the tall grass habitat in the following protected areas (note 2. 5that the species also occurs in India: see that account): Royal Chitawan National Park, Royal Bardia Wildlife Reserve and Royal Suklaphanta Wildlife Reserve. In some other reserves there is heavy overgrazing by cattle, notably the Royal Suklaphanta Wildlife Reserve, and this needs to be brought under control. 

Improvement of Habitat Management. The immediate threats to the relict populations of the hispid hare should be alleviated by a change in reserve management prac-tices, from uncontrolled dry season burning of its tall grassland habitat, to a system of carefully controlled rota-tional burning such that large areas of suitable habitat (i.e. providing optimal cover, food resources, etc.) are available throughout the year. The detailed formulation of appro-priate long-term management plans for these remnant areas of tall grassland should draw on the results of the research programs recommended below. 

Status Surveys. Status surveys are needed for this species in a number of areas that have not previously been investi-gated. These include several areas of southeastern Nepal, where it is not clear whether the species survives. 

Research. 

1: Long-term research programs examining the effects of each of the several disturbance factors (e.g. burning, thatch harvesting and grazing) operating on hispid hare habitat are required to formulate appropriate long-term management plans for the remnants of tall grassland habi-tat. Research into burning, for example, should investigate the effects of factors such as timing, frequency and soil water content on both the vegetation and the hare popula-tions so that optimum management plans can be devel-oped for individual areas. 2: Long-term studies of the behavioral ecology and repro-ductive biology of the hispid hare are urgently required, concentrating on habitat requirements, breeding biology and home range use throughout the year (so far only studied in the early dry season). It is important that these studies include the monsoon period when the marshy areas used as refugia during the early dry season post-burn period are likely to be among the first areas to become inundated. 

Captive Breeding. A captive breeding programme for this species needs to be initiated to provide a nucleus of animals for reintroduction into the wild, should this be-come necessary. 

South Africa 

Although seven species of Lagomorph occur in South Africa, only the riverine rabbit is of serious conservation concern. 162 Riverine Rabbit introduction of wild caught individuals into the captive population. The riverine rabbit is the only species of lagomorph on the African continent regarded as endangered. This is mainly due United States of America 

to its extremely small numbers and narrow habitat specificity, although habitat clearance appears now to have stopped. One lagomorph of international conservation concern occurs The following priority activities have been identified to in the United States. ensure the survival of this species: 

Habitat Conservation and Management. The riverine Pygmy Rabbit 

rabbit inhabits dense riparian growth along the seasonal rivers in the central Karoo. Almost 68% of the remaining The pygmy rabbit is found through much of the sagebrush riverine rabbit habitat is associated with an interconnected habitat of the Great Basin and surrounding areas, where its network of rivers, principally the Sak, Klein Sak and Riet, status varies locally from being highly threatened to common. The following priority activities have been identified to Klein Riet in the central Karoo. No national reserve has vet been proclaimed for the species. but recent additions ensure the survival of this species: 

to the Karoo National Park may prove suitable for relocation of the species once the vegetation 

has recovered from the effects of overgrazing. Also, plans to have the farm which has formed the focus of research on the species proclaimed a conservancy under South Africa’s Natural Heritage Programme should be implemented. The site is situated along the Klein Brak River near the town of Victoria West. 

Habitat Conservation and Management. The main threat to the pygmy rabbit is habitat loss. The removal of big sagebrush to increase forage production or create 

land has greatly reduced and fragmented the available habitat. Pygmy rabbits require dense sagebrush, for both food and cover, and soft soils for burrowing. Where popu-lation levels have become small and fragmented, nature reserves should be established and, where possible, con-nected by corridors of sagebrush cover. Fire can destroy the habitat and a fire protection plan should be developed for each critical site. In general, cattle-grazing is incompat-ible with the conservation of pygmy rabbit habitat, except in areas that have become so open that grazing is likely to increase the sagebrush density. The conservation of this species will therefore require compromises with livestock interests; these might include protecting the densest deep soil sagebrush areas and a surrounding buffer zone (of several hectares), which should be sufficient to maintain viable populations. Management plans should aim to en-sure that such protected sites are not too widely scattered, thereby permitting some genetic interchange between subpopulations. 

Status Surveys. No active monitoring of the riverine rabbit population is currently in progress. It is important that a long-term program be established, since although habitat destruction is no longer taking place, the threat of local extinctions of tiny, fragmented populations remains very real. 

Education Program. The riverine rabbit awareness 

that has been initiated amongst the farmers of the central Karoo needs to be continued and expanded. 

Research. A study is needed of the habitat area require-ments of the species, focusing in particular on the degree of population fragmentation and the amount of gene flow between nearby populations. Research should also exam-ine the feasibility of rehabilitating habitat in parts of the 2species’ former range, with a view to building up the wild population to a safer level. 

Captive Breeding. The development of a captive breeding program, which will allow the eventual reintroduction of the species into areas of suitable habitat in which it no longer survives or where it has become very rare, is a very high priority. Following recent investigations, it is clear that the captive breeding program should have the follow-ing characteristics: (a) an initial founder population of not 3less that 16 individuals (eight pairs); (b) breeding pairs remain mated for several litters; (c) the offspring from each breeding pair are subsequently systematically mated to members of other litters; and (d) inbreeding and the degree of relatedness is reduced through the periodic 

Habitat Restoration. Where sagebrush habitat has been removed, efforts should be made to restore it. In some regions, such as Douglas County, Washington, this may occur through natural succession; in other regions planting may be needed. In either case, twenty or more years may be required for this program. Restoration should be car-ried out adjacent to sites occupied by the species to in-crease the size of the conservation area and to reduce the fragmentation of populations. 

Research. Most past research has been directed at under-standing the natural history and behavior of the pygmy rabbit. This has contributed important information for management, such as the importance of big sagebrush. The highest research priority now is to determine the dispersal capability of the pygmy rabbit and how different 163 levels of habitat fragmentation relate to the genetic isola-tion of subpopulations. This should enable managers to plan for the correct areas and configurations of habitat patches needed to support genetically and demographi-cally viable populations. 

> 4 .

widely 

Surveys. 

across its The status of the pygmy rabbit varies range. In southern Idaho, it is considered secure and locally common. By contrast, in Washington it occurs only at three known sites in one county and is considered threatened. Throughout the rest of its range its status probably lies between these extremes, but in general its distribution is reduced from historic levels. Survey efforts are needed, especially in areas where habitat has been fragmented, to determine the pygmy rabbit’s status more accurately. Provinces, where it might be at risk from vertebrate control programs and habitat clearance, in addition to having a tiny, isolated and possibly inviable population (there have been no records for over 50 years). No information is available on a. 

(see account under Soviet Union) and there undescribed subspecies (see account under Mongolia). is an 

Pika Ochotona Although this species as a whole is not of conservation concern, two of its subspecies are. 

c. is restricted to the Yunzhong Shan in Shaanxi Province, where it is probably threatened by habitat loss and vertebrate extermination programs, in addition to having a tiny, isolated and possibly inviable population (there have been no records for over 50 years). c. morosa is restricted to the Tsing Ling Shan in Shaanxi Province, where the popu-lation is probably small, isolated and vulnerable, though there is no recent information on its status. 

# Conservation of Other Species of Concern Forrest’s Pika Ochotona This is a very little known species occurring in forested regions at high altitude in 

In addition to the globally threatened species listed above, west Yunnan and Southeast Xizang Provinces, as well as in there are another 21 species of conservation concern. These neighbouring Bhutan, Burma and India. Its status needs to be are discussed below on a country-by-country basis. In most assessed. cases, they are too poorly known to assess conservation needs without additional survey work, though it is believed that they are less seriously threatened than the species listed in the previous section. 

Afghanistan Glover’s Pika Ochotona This species occurs in talus habitat at high altitudes in southwest Qinghai, northeast Xizang, northwest Yunnan and western Sichuan Provinces. Nothing is known of its conservation requirements, and re-search could show that it is closely related to the red-eared pika erythrotis. 

Turkestan Red Pika Ochotona This species occurs in Himalayan Pika Ochotona This pika is known low numbers in fragmented populations in the Soviet Union. only from the Mount Jolmolungma (Mount Everest) area in Its status and conservation requirements in the mountains of southern Xizang. It is possibly a subspecies of Royle’s pika 

Afghanistan are poorly known and need to be assessed. Its conservation requirements are unknown. 

Bhutan Forrest’s Pika Ochotona This is a very little known species occurring in forested regions at high altitude, as well as in Burma, China and India. Its conservation status needs to be assessed; it is possibly a subspecies of Royle’s pika 

Burma Forrest’s Pika Ochotona This is a very little known species occurring in forested regions at high altitude in the north of the country, as well as in Bhutan, China and India. Its status needs to be assessed. 

China Ladak Pika Ochotona This species is restricted to barren areas at very high elevations in Qinghai, Xizang and Xinjiang Provinces, as well as in neighbouring India. It is not known whether it faces any conservation problems. 

Pika Ochotona Although this species as a whole is not of conservation concern, three of its subspecies are. p. occurs on isolated mountains in the  

> Desert in China (Xinjiang Province)

and Mongolia, and is probably threatened by climate change, habitat degradation and population fragmentation. is heavily con-trolled through vertebrate extermination near the Mongolian border (also occurs in Mongolia and the Soviet p. sunidica is extremely isolated and is likely to be at risk from vertebrate extermination programs and habitat alteration. 

Alpine Pika Ochotona Although this species as a Steppe Pika Ochofona Though not definitely known whole is not of conservation concern, three of its subspecies to occur in China, it might do so on the southern slopes of the are. 0. a. is known only from the Helan Shan area Tarbagatai Mountains, and this requires investigation. For near the borders of the Ningxia, Hexizoulang and Gansu further details of the species, see under Soviet Union. 164 India Turkestan Red Pika This species occurs in low numbers in the Soviet Union. Whether it occurs in the mountains of Xinjiang Province needs to be determined, along with its conservation requirements. 

Pika Although this species as a whole is not of conservation concern, two of its subspecies are. 

t. huangensis is restricted to the Tsing Ling Shan in Shaanxi Province, where the population is probably small, isolated and vulnerable, though there is no recent information on its status. For details of t. sikimaria, see account under India. 

Hainan Hare hainanus. This species is restricted to its status is needed, and public education programs might be Hainan Island, where its populations have been reduced through overhunting and agricultural expansion. A survey of 

Forrest’s Pika This is a very little known species occurring in forested regions at high altitude in Assam and Sikkim, as well as in neighbouring Bhutan, Burma and China. Its status needs to be assessed. 

Ladak Pika Ochotona This species is restricted to barren areas at very high elevations in Kashmir, as well as in neighbouring China. It is not known whether it faces any conservation problems. 

Moupin Pika Ochotona Although this species as a whole is not of conservation concern, two of its subspecies are. bringing this race to the verge of extinction. For details of 0. 

t. huangensis see account under China. 0. t. sikimaria is known only from Sikkim where its rhododen-dron thicket habitat has been severely damaged, perhaps necessary to supplement protection measures. The relation-ships of this hare to other Asian species need to be assessed. 

Indonesia Manchurian Hare Though widely dis-tributed in China (Manchuria) and adjacent parts of the Soviet Union, the forest habitat of this hare is being cleared rapidly. It is important to assess the effectiveness of existing reserves for safeguarding this species. 

Manchurian Black Hare This hare is re-stricted to a smaller area within the range of the previous species and the taxonomic relationships between the two need to be clarified. Its conservation requirements are unknown. 

Costa Rica Dice’s Cottontail dicer’. This species is restricted to high elevations in Costa Rica and Panama. Nothing is known of its status or conservation requirements and these should be assessed. 

Indian hare In Java hares are restricted to the extreme west of the island and are declining. Because they were thought to have been introduced from India, they have been of no conservation concern. The recent suggestion from fossil evidence that they may be endemic changes this view. Taxonomic and historical research is urgently needed to clar-ify their status before they become extinct. 

Kenya Ethiopian Hare This species occurs at high altitudes mainly in northern and western Ethiopia and also in northern Kenya; it is probably not threatened, but in view of its relatively restricted range, its status should be periodically monitored. Its relationship to other African hare species should be studied, since it might not be a valid species. 

Mexico Ethiopia Ethiopian Hare fagani. This species occurs at high altitudes in northern and western Ethiopia, and also in Kenya; it is probably not threatened, but in view of its relatively restricted range, its status should be periodically monitored. Its relationship to other African hare species should be stud-ied, since it might not be a valid species. 

White-sided Jackrabbit This species is largely confined to Mexico, where it has a wide distribution, but it could be at risk due to changes in its open grassland habitat. Small, declining populations survive in New Mexico, United States. Overgrazing by livestock tends to result in an increase in shrubs, thus favoring the black-tailed jackrabbit 

cus instead. 

Ethiopian Highland Hare This species is Mongolia 

to high altitudes in the central Ethiopian highlands, where it is probably not threatened. However, it needs to be Alpine Pika Ochotona Although this species as a monitored in view of its small range. Its relationship to other whole is not of conservation concern, three of its subspecies African hare species also needs to be studied. are. For details of 0. a. and 0. a. see accounts 165 under China and the Soviet Union). There is an undescribed subspecies which is known only from the Bajan Ulan Moun-tains, where its status is unknown and needs to be assessed. 

Pika Ochotona Although this species as a whole is not of conservation concern, three of its subspecies are. 0. p. occurs on isolated mountains in the 

Desert in Mongolia and China (Xinjiang Province) and is probably threatened by climate change, habitat degradation and population fragmentation. 0. occurs in the Choyr Mountains, where populations are now very depressed and threatened (though numbers may be higher in China and the Soviet Union). For 0. p. sunidica see account under China. 

Pakistan 

Pika Ochotona This species is restricted to barren areas at very high elevations in neighbouring China and India. It is not known whether it occurs as far west as Pakistan, nor whether it faces any conservation problems. 

Panama Dice’s Cottontail This species is restricted to high elevations in western Panama and Costa Rica. Nothing is known of its status or conservation requirements and these should be assessed. 

Soviet Union Alpine Ochotona Although this species as a whole is not of conservation concern, three of its subspecies are: 0. a. (see account under China); 0. a. 

which has an isolated and restricted distribution which may place it at risk, and so its status should be evaluated; and an undescribed subspecies (see account under Mongolia). 

Steppe Pika Ochotona This species is not globally threatened, but its range has declined considerably in histori-cal times, possibly as a result of the modification of its pre-ferred steppe-shrub habitat. However, research is needed to investigate the reasons for its decline more thoroughly and to assess the actions required to secure its populations in the future. 

Pika Ochotona Although this species as a whole is not of conservation concern, three of its subspecies are. For details on see accounts under China and Mongolia. 0. was formerly heavily controlled in southwestern Tuva ASSR (also occurs in China and Mongo-lia). For 0. p. sunidica, see account under China. 

Turkestan Red Pika This species occurs in low numbers in fragmented populations in parts of the Uzbek, Tadzhik, Kirgiz and Kazakh and perhaps in 

ing Afghanistan and China. Its conservation requirements are poorly known and need to be assessed. 

Manchurian Hare Though widely dis-tributed in China (Manchuria) and adjacent parts of the Soviet Union, the forest habitat of this hare is being cleared rapidly. It is important to assess the effectiveness of existing reserves for safeguarding this species. 

Manchurian Black Hare This hare is re-stricted to a smaller area within the range of the previous species and the taxonomic relationships between the two need to be clarified. Its conservation requirements are unknown. 

Spain Broom Hare This poorly differentiated species is restricted to the Cantabrian Mountains in northern Spain. It is probably not threatened at present, though hunting in the west of its range should be restricted. Its relationships with the European hare require closer investigation. 

United States American Pika Ochotonaprinceps. Although this species as a whole is not of conservation concern, four of its subspecies 

are: 0. p. goldmani, 0. p. nevadensis, 0. p. and 0. p. tutelata. These have isolated populations which may be at risk. The population from the type-locality for 0. p. tutelata has disappeared and recent studies have shown that 0. p. 

may have lost most, or all, of its genetic variability. 

White-sided Jackrabbit This species is largely confined to Mexico, where it has a wide distribution but could be at risk due to changes in its open grassland habitat. Small, declining populations survive in New Mexico. Overgrazing by livestock tends to result in an increase in shrubs, thus favoring the black-tailed jackrabbit instead. 

Alaskan Hare This species appears to have declined in numbers and work is needed to assess its status and conservation requirements. It is probably conspecific with the Arctic hare arcticus, and this needs to be clarified. 

New England Cottontail This species occurs in the higher parts of the Appalachian chain and its status varies considerably locally. The genetics and taxonomic status of this species need clarification, as well as its supposed competitive relationship with the eastern cottontail 

nus. Detailed investigations into the habitat requirements of the New England cottontail are needed in order to develop management programs. 

Marsh Rabbit This species is common throughout most of its range. However, the Lower Keys marsh rabbit, S. is an endangered subspecies. The taxonomic status of this insular form as well as its biology, ecology and habitat requirements need thorough study. 166 Priorities for Conservation-Related Research on Lagomorphs 

In addition to all the activities listed above, some general research approaches are needed to underpin conservation efforts on behalf of the lagomorphs. These are as follows: 

Taxonomy 

The of the two genera, Ochotona (the pikas) and 

(the hares and jackrabbits) is highly confused, making it difficult to assess conservation priorities between species. This is also true, to a lesser extent, with (the cottontails). A cladistic analysis, using mitochondrial DNA, should be performed as a means of resolving these problems. This analysis would entail the collection of tissues from all species and subspecies; analyses could be performed at the Smithsonian Institution or a number of other laboratories in the United States, or elsewhere. 

Survey 

Field surveys should be carried out to assess the status and conservation requirements of all the globally threatened 

species and all other species of conservation con-cern listed above. The aim of these surveys should be to ensure that all conservation actions are based on the best possible data, including biological, ecological, sociological, economic and political aspects. 

Biology of Small Populations 

To assess the nature of insularisation of pika populations, a joint research program should be initiated between United States, Soviet, Chinese and/or Mongolian biologists. This re-search program would address the effect of “island” size and degree of isolation in terms of population viabilitv analvsis (including a genetic analysis of each population). These data will form a benchmark against which extinction probabilities of isolated populations of pikas can be assessed. The data should also be robust and useful for the assessment of other similarly isolated This work should start with the pikas but should be expanded to include other lagomorph species and populations as appropriate. 

Assessment of Pika Control Programs 

There is an urgent need to carry out a full environmental impact assessment of the mammal control programs being carried out in central Asia. This assessment should consider the costs and benefits of these programs from the following aspects: risks to threatened species (including pikas); risks to economically valuable species; effects on rangeland manage-ment; effects on human health; and impact on the livestock industry and on agriculture. The assessment should produce guidelines for the best management options for the areas in which the control programs are taking place, from both the human welfare and biological conservation viewpoints. 

Setting Quotas for Commercially Valuable Lagomorphs 

Certain lagomorph populations appear to be harvested at rates too high to be sustained. In these cases it is necessary to establish long-term monitoring programs and set annual quotas based on the best possible scientific data. This pro-gram is a particularly high priority for European hare popula-tions in most European countries. 

Reconciling Agricultural Practices with Lagomorph Management 

Research is needed to determine how agricultural improve-ments can be made in ways that do not jeopardize lagomorph populations, including game species. Again, this is a high priority for the brown hare in Europe. 167 Appendix 

Lagomorph Specialist Group Statement on the Lagomorph Specialist Group Statement on the Use of Introduction of Exotic Lagomorphs Biological Control of Lagomorphs 

The Lagomorph Specialist Group strongly opposes the deliberate or accidental release into the wild of exotic lagomorphs. There can be no argument in support of the translocation of foreign species from continent to continent for hunting or fur farming without thorough examination of all aspects of any such plan, including security 

route and after liberation and environmental side-effects on other biota. Even translocations for conserving rare species must be sub-ject to strict health and environmental controls. The Lagomorph Specialist Group of the IUCN strongly opposes the deliberate use of any disease, parasite, or predator to control 

populations in the absence of a detailed understanding of the aetiology, epidemiology, specificity and humaneness of the con-trol agent. Field work as well as laboratory trials are necessary to investigate all possible side-effects. The Group believes that only in the light of this information could soundly based judgments be made on whether to use any biological control agent. 

168 Action Plans for the Conservation of Biological Diversity 

1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. Action Plan for African Primate Conservation: 1986-1990. Compiled by J.F. Oates and the IUCN/SSC Primate Specialist Group, 1986, 41 pp., 7.50, U.S.$ 15.00. Out of print. Action Plan for Asian Primate Conservation: 1987-1991. Compiled by A.A. Eudey and the IUCN/SSC Primate Specialist Group, 1987, 65 7.50, U.S.$ 15.00. Antelopes. Global Survey and Regional Action Plans. Part 1. East and Northeast Africa. Compiled by R. East and the 

SSC Antelope Specialist Group, 1988, 96 pp., 7.50, U.S.$ 15.00. Dolphins, Porpoises and Whales. An Action Plan for the Conservation of Biological Diversity: 1988-1992. Second Edition. Compiled by W.F. Perrin and the IUCN/SSC Cetacean Specialist Group, 1989, 27 pp., 5.00, U.S.$ 10.00. The Kouprey. An Action Plan for its Conservation. Compiled by J.R. S.N. Stuart and the IUCN/SSC Asian Wild Cattle Specialist Group, 1988, 19 pp., 5.00, 10.00. Weasels, Civets, Mongooses and their Relatives. An Action Plan for the Conservation of Mustelids and Viverrids. Compiled by A. Schreiber, R. Wirth, M. Riffel, H. van Rompaey and the IUCN/SSC Mustelid and Viverrid Specialist Group, 1989, 99 pp., 7.50, 

15.00. Antelopes. Global Survey and Regional Action Plans. Part 2. Southern and South-central Africa. Compiled by R. East and the IUCN/SSC Antelope Specialist Group, 1989, 96 pp., 7.50, U.S.$ 15.00. Asian Rhinos. An Action Plan for their Conservation. Compiled by Mohd Khan bin Khan and the IUCN/SSC Asian Rhino Specialist Group, 1989, 23 pp., 5.00, U.S.$ 10.00. Tortoises and Freshwater Turtles. An Action Plan for their Conservation. Compiled by the IUCN/SSC Tortoise and Freshwater Turtle Specialist Group, 1989, 47 pp., 7.50, U.S.$ 15.00. African Elephants and Rhinos. Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan. Compiled by D.H.M. Cumming, R.F. du S.N. Stuart and the IUCN/SSC African Elephant and Rhino Specialist Group, 1990, 73 pp., 7.50, U.S.$ 15.00. Foxes, Wolves, Jackals, and Dogs. An Action Plan for the Conservation of Compiled by J.R. Ginsberg, D.W. Macdonald, and the IUCN/SSC and Wolf Specialist Groups, 1990, 116 pp., 7.50, U.S.$ 15.00. The Asian Elephant. An Action Plan for its Conservation. Compiled by C. Santiapillai, P. Jackson, and the IUCN/SSC Asian Elephant Specialist Group, 1990, 79 pp., 7.50, U.S.$ 15.00. Otters. An Action Plan for their Conservation. Compiled by P. Foster-Turley, S. Macdonald, C. Mason and the IUCN/SSC Otter Specialist Group, 1990, 124 pp., 7.50, U.S.$ 15.00. Antelopes. Global Survey and Regional Action Plans. Part 3. West and Central Africa. Compiled by R. East and the IUCN/SSC Antelope Specialist Group, 1990, 169 pp., 7.50, U.S.$ 15.00. Where to order: IUCN Publications Services Unit, Huntingdon Road, Cambridge, ODL, U.K. Please pay by cheque/international money order to IUCN. Add 15% for packing and surface mail costs. A catalogue of IUCN publications can be obtained from the above address.
