Title: AI Bionic Arm Shows the Future of Prosthetics

URL Source: https://www.techtimes.com/articles/301963/20240222/ai-bionic-arm-shows-future-prosthetics.htm

Published Time: 2024-02-22T23:36:51-05:00

Markdown Content:
Atom Limbs, the company behind the "Atom Touch," a bionic arm with nearly a full range of motion, is reportedly showcasing the future of prosthetics with AI as one of its driving factors.

Dubbed the world's first artificial limb, Atom Limbs' bionic arm interprets electrical signals from a person's brain and uses them to move and manipulate a prosthetic limb using cutting-edge sensors and machine learning, a process where computers learn to be more accurate.

The arm may move in all directions at the elbow, wrist, and individual fingers, and the wearer can get feedback on the strength of their grip. An arm attachment consisting of a strengthened sportswear-style vest distributes the arm's weight equally. It is substantially lighter than other bionic arms I've seen, despite the fact that it still weighs some amount.

###### (Photo : Andreas Rentz/Getty Images)

_An international research team involving scientists from Italy, Australia, Sweden, and the United States has made a remarkable breakthrough in bionic arm technology._

It operates without the need for implants or surgery because it is non-invasive. Initially, it is fastened to the wearer's remaining leg using bands of electrical signal-measuring sensors. The arm then connects to the cup that protrudes over the top via an interface.

The BBC report on their trial using the artificial limb to control a computerized image of an arm states that it was an odd and perplexing feeling to be able to "assign" residual arm muscles to suitable hand, wrist, and elbow movements.

Atom Limbs as the Future of Prosthetics
---------------------------------------

With the latest invention, Atom Limbs has reportedly already established itself as a leader in the prosthetics industry by developing ground-breaking limb technology that gives amputees their sense of touch back in addition to their mobility.

There are around 9,000 qualified buyers on its waitlist, with a projected income of over $180 million. The revolutionary technology developed by Atom Limbs allows amputees to regain their basic sensation of touch in addition to their mobility.

With incredible support, Atom Limbs raised over $7 million in different rounds in November. A lot of people give Atom Limbs' stellar team-which includes former executives from Apple, Oculus, Zoox, Baxter, and Neuralink-as justification for investing; these individuals were in charge of bringing iconic products like the iPhone and iMac to market under Steve Jobs' direction.

AI Bionic Arm Cost
------------------

However, the BBC notes that even though this technology is wonderful, one thing that disabled people often worry about when new items come out is cost. Atom Limbs reportedly intends to position their bionic arm around the $20,000 (£15,000) price point, which is far less than many other bionic devices on the market.

While this may seem like a lot, Ian Adam, a lecturer in prosthetics and orthotics at the University of Derby, says it is a respectable price in the industry-though it will not be for everyone.

The AI-powered bionic arm, he continues, is more affordable, but if someone were to have an accident and receive compensation, their arm would have to last the remainder of their life.

ⓒ 2025 TECHTIMES.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.
