Title: Federal Election Commission (FEC) Transition Briefing for the Incoming Biden Administration, 2020

URL Source: https://www.governmentattic.org/45docs/FECtransBriefBiden_2020.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 20 Jun 2022 13:48:04 GMT

Markdown Content:
Description of document: Federal Election Commission (FEC) Transition Briefing for the Incoming Biden Administration, 2020 

Requested date: 01-January-2021 

Release date: 10-February-2021 

Posted date: 27-June-2022 

Source of document: FOIA Request Federal Election Commission Attn: FOIA Requester Service Center 1050 First Street, NE Washington, DC 20463 Fax: 202-219-1043 Email:  FOIA@fec.gov 

The governmentattic.org web site (“the site”) is a First Amendment free speech web site and is noncommercial and free to the public. The site and materials made available on the site, such as this file, are for reference only. The governmentattic.org web site and its principals have made every effort to make this information as complete and as accurate as possible, however, there may be mistakes and omissions, both typographical and in content. The governmentattic.org web site and its principals shall have neither liability nor responsibility to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused, or alleged to have been caused, directly or indirectly, by the information provided on the governmentattic.org web site or in this file. The public records published on the site were obtained from government agencies using proper legal channels. Each document is identified as to the source. Any concerns about the contents of the site should be directed to the agency originating the document in question. GovernmentAttic.org is not responsible for the contents of documents published on the website. From: FOIA < FOIA@fec.gov >

Sent: Wed, Feb 10, 2021 1:07 pm 

Subject: Your Freedom of Information Act Request to the Federal Election Commission FOIA No. 2021-033 

This email is in response to the request you filed for information under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) dated January 1, 2021 and received by the Federal Election Commission’s (FEC) FOIA Requester Service Center on January 4, 2021. Specifically, you requested: 

A digital/electronic copy of the transition briefing document(s) (late 2020) prepared by the FEC for the incoming Biden Administration. 

We have searched our records and located responsive documents. We are releasing 410 pages of documents to you in their entirety. We are withholding 54 pages in their entirety under Exemption b(5). Exemption 5 protects from disclosure inter- or intra-agency memoranda or letters that would not be available by law to a party other than an agency in litigation with the agency, including documents covered by the attorney work-product, deliberative process, and attorney-client privileges. See 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(5). Therefore, your request is granted in part. 

You may contact our FOIA Public Liaison, Christine McClarin at (202) 694-1485 for any further assistance and to discuss any aspect of your request. Additionally, you may contact the Office of Government Information Services (OGIS) at the National Archives and Records Administration to inquire about the FOIA mediation services they offer. The contact information for OGIS is as follows: Office of Government Information Services, National Archives and Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road-OGIS, College Park, Maryland 20740-6001, e-mail at  ogis@nara.gov ; telephone at 202-741-5770; toll free at 1-877-684-6448; or facsimile at 202-741-5769. 

You may appeal any adverse FOIA determination. Any such appeal must be filed in writing and should follow the guidelines set forth in 11 C.F.R. § 4.8. If you have any questions, please contact the FOIA Requester Service Center at  FOIA@fec.gov , or (202) 694-1650. 

Sincerely, 

Hina Hussain 

Hina Z. Hussain 

Attorney 

OGC - Administrative Law 

Federal Election Commission 

(202) 694-1357 (p) Federal Election Commission 

# Agency Financial Report 

# Fiscal Year 2020 Federal Election Commission 

# Agency Financial Report 

Fiscal Year 2020 

Federal Election Commission 

1050 First St. NE 

Washington, D.C. 20463 

(202) 694-1000 

1-(800) 424-9530 

www.fec.gov 

Released November 16, 2020 Contents 

Message from the Chair 1

How to Use This Report 3

SECTION I – Management’s Discussion and Analysis 4

Section I.A: Purpose, Responsibility, and Scope 4

Mission Statement 5

Organizational Structure 5

Sources of Funds 8

Risk Identification and Mitigation 10 

Section I.B: Performance Goals, Objectives and Results 13 

Strategic Goal 13 

Strategic Objectives 13 

Section I.C: Analysis of FEC Financial Statements and Stewardship Information 20 

Section I.D: Analysis of FEC’s Systems, Controls and Legal Compliance 23 

Annual Assurance Statement on Internal Control 25 

Section I.E: Limitations of the Financial Statements 26 

SECTION II – Auditor’s Report and Financial Statements 27 

Message from the Chief Financial Officer 28 

OIG Transmittal Letter 29 

Independent Auditor’s Report 31 

Financial Statements 53 

Notes to the Financial Statements 59 

SECTION III – Other Information 79 

Inspector General’s Statement on FEC Management and Performance Challenges 80 

Management’s Response to the Office of Inspector General’s Statement on the Federal Election Commission’s Management and Performance Challenges 94 

Payment Integrity 102 

Fraud Reduction Report 103 

Reporting on Internal Controls Assurances 104 

Civil Monetary Penalties Adjustment for Inflation 105 

APPENDIX 106 

List of Acronyms 106 1

## Message from the Chair 

FE DERA L ELECTION OMMISS ION     

> 11\:::'H INGTON D.C 2:l4E.3
> OFFM:E fTHE

Nmr e.mber  16 , 1020 

I am  pleased  to  pFeseo.t  th-e  federal[  Election  Com:tnifflon's  (FEC  Ageag,·  Fmancw  Report 

(.AFR ) fm- ri se.al  -y;e-..ar  t.F.l)i  20201 _ The  .i\FR.  reflects  ilie  agmc y's  program  pernmwrn :ce  md 

fmanc:ial  acii,,ities  ov er  the  past  year  and  da11on st mtes  om  eontiml.ed  commitment 

to  admimstermg  tlre  F6deml  Election  C«mpai'?11  t of  1971,  as  ameuded  (the  Act). 

The  .FEC  protect;;  rue  m.tegrity  of  rue  Federal  campaiyi  finance  Frocess  by  poo  ·-dmg  · he  pl!lbllic 

wifl:J.  .;iocurate  and  accessi.hle  imounation  abm .!lt  hm  ~ candidates  raise · and  spend  furuis  to  ,mpport 

their  campaigns  euforcwg  rue  campaign  fi:mmae  Jaw  and  enoow:agmg  vo:l1JWtaJ:y  compl!iance 

through  ·limelly  acfuice  and  educational  m11ireach.  B :fumi:mmg  11he  public  ,,; 1;,r i11h  time ly  md 

ti·anspare:nt  campai._l:!P  :fi:rumre  dam . and  fmly  and  effecti,  ely  enforcing  t he  law , the  Commiss~oo 

safeguards  ag.mist  cmruption  or  i.ts  appeanmce  and  ·p:ro\li.des  the  citizemy  i.viJh  cruciail 

mfo:nnation  by  v..ilrioh  to  ie-vaJ uate  candidates  ful- Federal  office. 

The  FEC  comti mies  seek  opportmrities  to  ~ its  sy  ·ems  and  proce M:i es  mou ~ effic ·e:m  and 

effe oti\<e , md'udin:g  eff'o:m  to  rede si gn  tire  FE  website  and  to  migrate  data  to  a dou.d  en  ·iromne:nr .

& a !reSl[Jllt  ·the  FE  .1 ha  be en  able  to  aocommod:rute  a steep  :rise  :in  · he  m1l!llbeai : of  fioao.cial 

t:ransacti011s  t" eported  to  the  agency  ova: ·  he  fast  'f.et reral.  ~-re ru ·~ " At  fihe  same  time.  the  FE 1C has 

contimled  to  pri,oritize  impt ·o , .~  the  cust-0:lnft"  sen:· ce  it  pt ovides  md  enm.1 umg  11hat  campaign 

fimroc:e  :i:nfumla .tioo.  i.,  :readily  a ·mlab1e  to  the  public 

t\i  1th  respect  to  the  agency's  IT  2020  ammal  fimncial  '~euts , tlre  C om: mi ss ion  f'eC!e:i.ved  an 

umnodified  opimoo  from  ru  ~t ..mditors.  Tws  UllllIDdilled  op ,imcm  reflecb:  the  coutmued 

commi.tmeut  by  the  Commi ss ione.rn  ruid.  FEC  staff  to  ,ew;nre  twit  · he  FE  ~, fu:wici,d  statement~ 

fmily  pres ent  the  ageug ls  fi.scail  poo "t:ion. 

:Mamgement,  i.vhich  consists  of  renio:r  :manage.rs  indi rading  lhe  Cbie:f  Fimmc:ial  Officer,  Ac ting 

Gmera1  Counsel  and  Staff  Direct « romim 1e  to  respond  to  t"i.sks  .m.duded  in  the  :rgmc  • Risk 

Profile  (s ee  Section  I)  and  chal!Lenge s identified  by  ilie  Inspector  Generali  (s ee  Section  Ill) .2

In addition,  the  petfounance  data  described  ill  tbe  FE Cs  FY 2020 AFR  were  compiled  and 

e valuated  using  appropriate  techniques  for  ochie.ving  the  desired  le vel of  crechbili ty  for the 

verificati on  and  v alidat i on  of  perfo1mance  data  relati ve to  its  in ten ded  use. 

The  effons  described  in  this  report  reilect  the  wod:  and  dedication  of  the.  agency's staff. The 

Co mmiss i on is  committed  to  continuing  to  fulfill  thewis. si ou  ofthe . .age.ucy  in  the  UlOSt  efficient 

manner  possible. 

On  behalf  of  the  Corumissiou, 

# cJr.,J;:.  .. ,,e 

James  E.  "T re. y' ' T rainor  ill 

Chair 3

## How to Use This Report 

This Agency Financial Report presents financial information, as well as relevant performance information, on the Federal Election Commission’s operations. The report was prepared pursuant to the Accountability of Tax Dollars Act of 2002 and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-136, revised, Financial Reporting Requirements , and covers activities from October 1, 2019 through September 30, 2020. 

The FEC places a high importance on keeping the public informed of its activities. To learn more about the FEC and what the agency does to serve the American public, visit the FEC’s website 

https://www.fec.gov/about/reports-about-fec/strategy-budget-and-performance /.

The FY 2020 Agency Financial Report is organized into three primary sections: 

Section I – Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) provides an overview of the FEC. It describes our mission, organizational structure and regulatory responsibilities. It also includes relevant performance information related to the FEC’s strategic goals and objectives to provide a forward-looking discussion of future challenges. 

Section II – Financial Information, including the Independent Auditor’s Report, detailing the FEC’s financial performance by 1) highlighting the agency’s financial position and audit results and 2) describing the FEC’s compliance with key legal and regulatory requirements. 

Section III – Other Information includes our Inspector General’s (IG) assessment of the FEC’s management challenges and the FEC’s response. 4

## SECTION I – Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Section I.A: Purpose, Responsibility, and Scope 

The Federal Election Commission is an independent regulatory agency responsible for administering, enforcing, defending and interpreting the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 , as amended ( FECA or the Act ). 1 Congress created the FEC to administer, enforce and formulate policy with respect to the FECA . The Act reflects a belief that democracy works best when voters can make informed decisions in the political process—decisions based in part on knowing the sources of financial support for Federal candidates, political party committees and other political committees. Public confidence in the political process also depends on the knowledge that participants in Federal elections follow clear and well-defined rules and face consequences for non-compliance. 

Under the Act , all Federal political committees, including the committees of Presidential, Senate and House candidates, must file reports of receipts and disbursements. The FEC makes disclosure reports, and the data contained in them, available to the public through the Commission’s internet-based public disclosure system on the Commission’s website, as well as in a public records office at the Commission's Washington, D.C. headquarters. The FEC also has exclusive responsibility for civil enforcement of the Act and has litigating authority independent of the Department of Justice in U.S. district court and the courts of appeals. Additionally, the Commission promulgates regulations implementing the Act and issues advisory opinions responding to inquiries regarding interpretation and application of the Act and the Commission’s regulations. 

Additionally, the Commission is responsible for administering the Federal public funding programs for Presidential campaigns. This responsibility includes certifying and auditing all participating candidates and committees and enforcing the public funding laws. 

The FEC has chosen to produce an Agency Financial Report (AFR) and Annual Performance Report (APR) pursuant to the Government Performance and Results Act of 1993 , as amended. The FEC will include its FY 2020 Annual Performance Report with its Congressional Budget Justification and will post it on the FEC website at  https://www.fec.gov/about/reports-about-fec/strategy-budget-and-performance/  in 2021.              

> 1The Commission’s primary responsibilities pertain to the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, Public Law 92-225, 86 Stat. 3 (1972) as amended ( codified at 5 2 U.S.C. §§ 30101-30145) (formerly at 2 U.S.C. §§ 431-55) (the Act or the FECA ). The Commission’s responsibilities for the Federal public funding programs are contained in the Presidential Election Campaign Fund Act, Public Law 92-178, 85 Stat. 562 (1971) ( codified at 26 U.S.C. §§ 9001-13) and the Presidential Primary Matching Payment Account Act, Public Law 93-443, 88 Stat. 1297 (1974) ( codified at 26 U.S.C. §§ 9031-42).

5

Mission Statement 

The FEC’s mission is to protect the integrity of the Federal campaign finance process by providing transparency and fairly enforcing and administering Federal campaign finance laws. 

Organizational Structure 

To accomplish its legislative mandate, the FEC is directed by six Commissioners, who are appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate. By law, no more than three Commissioners can be members of the same political party. Each member serves a six-year term, and two seats are subject to appointment every two years. Commissioners may serve beyond their six-year terms until new Commissioners are confirmed. The Chairmanship of the Commission rotates among the members, with no member serving as Chair more than once during his or her six-year term. The Commissioners are responsible for administering and enforcing the Act and meet regularly to formulate policy and to vote on significant legal and administrative matters. The Act 

requires the affirmative vote of four members of the Commission to approve official actions, thus requiring bipartisan decision-making. The FEC has its headquarters in Washington, D.C. and does not have any regional offices. 

The Federal Election Commission was without a quorum of four Commissioners for approximately 11 months during FY 2020. 2 The Act requires the affirmative vote of four Commissioners for many actions. For example, the Commission cannot defend itself in some litigation, reach decisions in enforcement actions, issue advisory opinions or initiate rulemakings without the affirmative votes of four Commissioners. The FEC has identified the loss of a quorum as risk in the Agency-wide Risk Profile. Performance goals negatively affected by the loss of a quorum are noted in the discussion below. 

While the Act requires an affirmative vote by four Commissioners to make decisions in many areas, including regulations, advisory opinions, audit matters and enforcement, staff continues to further the agency’s vital mission of administering the nation’s campaign finance laws. The requirements of the Act and Commission regulations remain in effect, and political committees and other filers must continue to disclose their campaign finance activity to the Commission on the regular schedule. FEC staff continues to help committees and the public understand and comply with the law, process and review committee reports, and provide public access to campaign finance data. While the Commission cannot act on many legal matters, staff continues to litigate ongoing court cases, process new enforcement complaints and responses, and investigate matters previously authorized by the Commission. 

In response to the pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus, the Federal Election Commission closed its offices to visitors and directed all of its employees to telework as of Friday, March 13,  

> 2The FEC began FY 2020 without a quorum. A quorum was restored on June 5, 2020, when Commissioner James E. “Trey” Trainor, III, was sworn in. The FEC again began working without a quorum on July 3, 2020, with the departure of Commissioner Caroline C. Hunter.

6

2020. A formal evacuation notice was issued the following week. Nevertheless, the FEC’s website, web-based programs and electronic filing systems have remained online, and staff access to phone and email has been uninterrupted. Most Commission operations were not interrupted by the transition to an exclusively teleworking agency. However, the Commission temporarily suspended its mail operations and ceased fingerprinting new employees. During the suspension of mail operations, the agency did not process any documents submitted on paper, including non-electronically filed reports, advisory opinion requests, enforcement complaints and court-case documents. Website notices directed those interested in those activities to use email and explained the delayed processing of mail. On Thursday, June 18, 2020, the FEC began the initial phase of its return to normal operations. During Phase I of the FEC’s reopening, the agency’s offices remain closed to visitors, and most of its employees continue to telework. However, the FEC resumed processing mail, including any mail delivered since the agency suspended its mail operations in March 2020. Additionally, fingerprinting and onboarding new employees and contractors resumed. 

As noted in Figure 1, the offices of the Staff Director, General Counsel, Chief Information Officer and Chief Financial Officer support the agency in accomplishing its mission. The Office of the Inspector General, established within the FEC in 1989 under the 1988 amendments to the Inspector General Act , is independent and reports both to the Commissioners and to Congress. The specific roles and responsibilities of each office are described in greater detail below. 

Figure 1: FEC Organizational Chart 

COMMISSIONERS                                                                                                                                                                                          

> MANAGtM[!',. I&
> AOM l"-1S1 RA flO N
> COMPllA" O
> EQliAl EMPLO YME NT
> OPPO RTU '• HTY 1
> °"TA.8,\SE
> MAMCrM[NT
> IN f()RMATlOt,,,
> S£0.. RrTY
> INSPICTOII
> GENlltAl J
> DEPUTY
> INSPfOOll CC"-1:R AI.
> 1The posrtion o f Olief lnfonnation Offic er nor ma Uy repo rts dire ctly to the St aff Director wh o. in tum, reports to the Co mm ission it.s e lLAt prese nt. ho wever, the
> same HldMdua lis se rv ing in both the positio nof the Staff Oirector an dthe pOSitiO nof the 0, ie flnfonnat ic:m Off icer, pu rsua nt to an authorization by the Co m-
> mission and based. in part, on an a ctvante deci sion fr om th e Co mptro ll er Gen eral Accor ding ly. the organi2a tiona lchart reflects bot hpos it ions-the St aff Dire ❖
> t~and the Ch ief lnfonnati on Off icer-as reporting direc tly to the CommtSsk>n.
> 2The Off"tce ol th elnspee1or General <O IG) indepen dently con<lvctsau di ts_,. evaluati ons. and ifwestiga.t tOnS .OIC keeps th eCommiss ion.a nd Co ngr ess in formed
> regar<fmg majo rclieveloprn en ts associa.t ed "' ith the ir ~-o< k.
> 3The Director fo rEqual Empl oyme nt Opport uni ty reports to the Scaff 0ired0 ron admin islrati\'e issues bul has direct repo,1i ng authority 10 the Com mi nion on
> all EEO matt ers .See 29 CTR '1614.102(b){4). 7

 Office of the Staff Director (OSD) 

The Office of the Staff Director consists of four offices: 1) Management and Administration; 2) Compliance; 3) Communications; and 4) Equal Employment Opportunity. The Office of Management and Administration is responsible for the FEC’s strategic planning and performance and works with the Commission to ensure the agency’s mission is met efficiently. In addition, this office houses the Commission Secretary, the Office of Human Resources (OHR) and the Administrative Services Division (ASD). The primary responsibilities of the Office of Compliance are the processing and review of campaign finance reports and filing assistance, audits, administrative fines and alternative dispute resolution. The Office of Communications includes divisions charged with making campaign finance reports available to the public, encouraging voluntary compliance with the Act through educational outreach and training and ensuring effective communication with Congress, executive branch agencies, the media and researchers and the general public. The Equal Employment Opportunity Office administers and ensures compliance with applicable laws, regulations, policies and guidance that prohibit discrimination in the Federal workplace based on race, color, national origin, religion, age, disability, sex, pregnancy, genetic information or retaliation. The EEO Officer reports to the Staff Director on administrative issues but has direct reporting authority on all EEO matters. See 29 CFR 1614.102(b). 

 Office of General Counsel (OGC) 

The Office of General Counsel consists of five organizational units: (1) the Deputy General Counsel - Administration; (2) the Deputy General Counsel - Law; (3) the Policy Division; (4) the Enforcement Division; and (5) the Litigation Division. The Deputy General Counsel - Administration directly supervises the Administrative Law Team, the Law Library and all OGC administrative functions. The Deputy General Counsel - Law has the primary responsibility for assisting the General Counsel in all of the substantive aspects of the General Counsel’s duties and shares in the management of all phases of OGC programs, as well as directly supervising the agency’s ethics program. The Policy Division drafts for Commission consideration advisory opinions and regulations interpreting the Federal campaign finance law and provides legal advice to the FEC’s compliance programs. The Enforcement Division recommends to the Commission appropriate action to take with respect to administrative complaints and apparent violations of the Act . Where authorized, the Enforcement Division investigates alleged violations and negotiates conciliation agreements, which may include civil penalties and other remedies. If an enforcement matter is not resolved during the administrative process, the Commission may authorize suit in district court, at which point the matter is transferred to the Litigation Division. The Litigation Division represents the Commission before the Federal district and appellate courts in all civil litigation involving campaign finance statutes. This Division assists the Department of Justice’s Office of the Solicitor General when the Commission’s FECA 

cases are before the Supreme Court. 

 Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) 

The Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) consists of four units: (1) Enterprise Architecture; (2) Operational Support; (3) Data Administration; and (4) IT Security. The OCIO provides secure, stable and robust technology solutions for Commission staff and the public. OCIO both develops and maintains the systems that serve as the public's primary source of information about campaign finance data and law and ensures agency employees have a technology infrastructure 8

that allows them to perform their day-to-day responsibilities administering and enforcing campaign finance law. OCIO also develops and supports analytic reporting tools that help staff perform their disclosure and compliance duties. 

 Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) 

The Office of the Chief Financial Officer consists of three offices: (1) Budget; (2) Accounting; and (3) Procurement. The OCFO is responsible for complying with all financial management laws and standards, and all aspects of budget formulation, budget execution and procurement. 

Sources of Funds 

Figure 2 shows the agency’s appropriations and obligations from FY 2016 to FY 2020. 

> Figure 2: Summary of Funding (in millions of dollars)

The FEC also has the authority to collect fees from attendees of agency-sponsored educational conferences. The Commission may use those fees to defray the costs of conducting those conferences. The Commission sets its registration fees at a level that covers only the costs incurred by the agency’s conference-management contractor, including meeting room rental and conference meals and compensation. All other conference-related expenses, such as materials and staff travel, are paid using appropriated funds. Registration fees for FY 2020 were $127,170.     

> $60
> $62
> $64
> $66
> $68
> $70
> $72
> $74
> FY 2016* FY 2017** FY 2018 FY 2019*** FY 2020
> in Millions

Appropriations 

Obligations 

* $5 million in 2 year funds related to the FEC office move not included in total. 

** $8 million in 2 year funds related to the FEC office move not included in total. 

*** December 22, 2018 through January 25, 2019 the FEC was shut down for 35 days. 9

Personnel vs. Non-Personnel Costs 

Figure 3 represents the Commission’s FY 2020 obligations by personnel and non-personnel costs. Personnel costs, which are primarily composed of salaries and employee benefits, accounted for 70.6 percent of the FEC’s costs. The remaining 29.4 percent of the Commission’s costs was spent on non-personnel items, such as infrastructure and support, software and hardware, office rent, building security and other related costs. 

> Figure 3: Fiscal Year 2020 by Major Category
> Salaries & Benefits 70.6%
> Other Non-Personnel Initiatives 20.5%
> Facilities 6.5%
> Other 2.4% 10

Risk Identification and Mitigation 

In Fiscal Year (FY) 2017, the FEC formed a Senior Management Council (SMC) to manage internal control and Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) efforts in response to new requirements outlined in OMB Circular A-123. The SMC delivered to OMB an agency-wide Risk Profile to assist in the effective management of risk areas impacting FEC strategic, operational, reporting, and compliance objectives. In FY 2018, the SMC took further steps toward effective management of risk by updating Commission Directive 53 Implementation of OMB Circular A-123: Internal Control Program to comply with ERM requirements. In FY 2018, 2019, and 2020 the SMC submitted an updated Risk Profile to OMB. 

As part of the annual Internal Control Review (ICR) process, program offices rated each risk from the Risk Profile, detailed how the risk affects their operations, and identified mitigating activities in place to respond to the risk. In addition, program offices thoroughly identified and evaluated fraud risk to support the Fraud Reduction Report. The current Agency-wide Risk Profile is shown below and further discussion on risk is discussed in the remaining MD&A sections. 11 

## Federal Election Commission - FY 2020 ERM Risk Profile 

Identified Significant Risk  Inherent Risk Rating  Current Risk Response  Residual Risk Rating  Proposed Additional Action 

Proposed Implementation/ Monitoring Process 

Significant and Substantive Amendments to FECA/Pending Judicial Opinions 

Medium  Acceptance: monitoring  Medium  Not in Management’s Control  OGC and Congressional Affairs 

Absence of Quorum/Confirmation of Commissioners 

Very High  Reduction: Directive 10  Very High  Not in Management’s Control  OGC and Congressional Affairs 

Significant Increase in Federal Election Campaign Disclosure Activity 

High  Reduction: infrastructure improvements  Medium 

Move to scalable cloud- based computing and development of new e- filing platform. 

OCIO Performance/ Monitoring Reports 

Changes to Government-wide Directives including Human Capital and Operating Requirements 

Medium  Acceptance: monitoring  Medium 

Continue monitoring centralized repository for new executive orders, directives, memorandums, and other guidance. 

OGC and OHR 

Disruptions to Agency Operations  Medium  Acceptance: monitoring  Medium 

Not in Management’s control. Updates to the Disaster Recovery Plan, COOP, and Shutdown Plan. 

Monitor by Senior Management 

Multiple Acting Positions, including key positions  Very High  Acceptance: monitoring  High 

Continue to support hiring initiatives and streamline hiring process. The ability to hire GS-15s and SLs when there is lack or quorum is out of Management’s control. 

Personnel and Finance Committees 12 

Identified Significant Risk  Inherent Risk Rating  Current Risk Response  Residual Risk Rating  Proposed Additional Action 

Proposed Implementation/ Monitoring Process 

High Volume of Retirement Eligible Employees  Medium  Reduction: succession planning  Medium 

Encourage succession planning, cross-training, and pooling support services. 

Retirement Eligibility Report 

Major Functions Performed by One Individual  Medium  Reduction: cross-train and document processes  Medium 

Cross-train individuals to perform major functions. Document procedures and processes. 

Internal Controls 

Privacy and Data Protection  Medium  Reduction: corrective actions and internal controls  Medium 

Continue to implement corrective actions and enhance internal controls. 

Corrective Action Plan/Internal Controls 

Assessments and System Authorizations  Medium  Reduction: corrective actions and internal controls  Medium 

Continue to implement corrective actions and enhance internal controls. 

Corrective Action Plan/Internal Controls 

Outdated Policies, Procedures, and Commission Directives 

Medium 

Reduction: implementing, revising, and reviewing policies, procedures, and Directives. 

Medium 

Update policies, procedures, and Directives in response to the FEC move, new or revised regulatory guidance, and changing operating procedures. 

Monitor as part of Internal Control Review 13 

Section I.B: Performance Goals, Objectives and Results 

This section provides a summary of the results of the FEC’s key performance objectives, which are discussed in greater detail in the FEC’s FY 2020 APR. 3 This report will be part of the FEC’s FY 2022 Congressional Budget Justification, which will be available at 

https://www.fec.gov/about/reports-about-fec/strategy-budget-and-performance/  in 2021. 

Strategic Goal 

The strategic goal of the Federal Election Commission is to fairly, efficiently and effectively administer and enforce the Federal Election Campaign Act , promote compliance and engage and inform the public about campaign finance data and rules, while maintaining a workforce that delivers results. 

Strategic Objectives 

The Act reflects a belief that democracy works best when voters can make informed decisions in the political process—decisions based in part on knowing the sources of financial support for Federal candidates, political party committees and other political committees. As a result, the FEC’s first strategic objective is to inform the public about how Federal campaigns and committees are financed. Public confidence in the political process also depends on the knowledge that participants in Federal elections follow clear and well-defined rules and face consequences for non-compliance. Thus, the FEC’s second strategic objective focuses on the Commission’s efforts to promote voluntary compliance through educational outreach and to enforce campaign finance laws effectively and fairly. The third strategic objective is to interpret the FECA and related statutes, providing timely guidance to the public regarding the requirements of the law. The Commission also understands that organizational performance is driven by employee performance and that the agency cannot successfully achieve its mission without a high-performing workforce that understands expectations and delivers results. Consequently, the FEC’s fourth strategic objective is to foster a culture of high performance in order to ensure that the agency accomplishes its mission efficiently and effectively. 

Objective 1: Engage and Inform the Public about Campaign Finance Data 

The FEC’s eFiling system acts as the point of entry for submission of electronically filed campaign finance reports, providing faster access to reports and streamlining operations. This system provides for public disclosure of electronically filed reports, via the FEC website, within minutes of being filed. When a committee files a financial disclosure report on paper, the Commission ensures that a copy is available for public inspection within 48 hours of receipt, both electronically on the website and at the FEC’s offices in Washington, D.C. 4 The FEC is committed to providing timely and   

> 3The FEC has identified senior-level staff and key managers to serve as goal leaders for each area of the strategic and performance plans. In addition, each strategic activity in the Strategic Plan has been assigned one or more program managers, who are responsible for the delivery and performance reporting of that activity. These managers serve as measure managers and data quality leads to ensure the completeness, consistency and accuracy of the reported data of their respective strategic activity.
> 4In response to the pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus, the FEC closed its offices to visitors as of Friday, March 13, 2020.

14 

transparent campaign finance disclosure to the public and delivering data in accessible and easy-to-use formats. 

During FY 2021, the FEC will continue work to upgrade the agency’s eFiling platform. In FY 2017, the Commission published a study of its current eFiling platform, including a survey of the existing functionality of the FEC’s free filing software and an in-depth investigation of needs expressed by filers. 5 The FEC will rely on the recommendations of this study to improve its eFiling platform to allow greater operating system flexibility for users when generating filings for submission to the Commission and increase the consistency and accuracy of reporting. The FEC’s new eFiling platform is expected to improve the process for validating filings prior to acceptance and generate modern file outputs that will provide for more flexibility in accessing data. The FEC had expected to begin the implementation phase of this project during FY 2021. However, COVID-19 related delays in fingerprinting and onboarding new staff and contractors subsequently contributed to delays in the FEC’s efforts to complete the development phase of the eFiling platform during FY 2020. As a result, the FEC expects to begin partial implementation of the new eFiling system during FY 2021 and to complete implementation of the new eFiling platform during FY 2022. Full deployment to filers is expected for the 2023-2024 election cycle. 

The Commission is improving and refining its website through iterative development, ensuring the FEC continues to provide an effective, user-centered online platform to deliver campaign finance information to its diverse base of users. This effort will ensure that the FEC provides full and meaningful campaign finance data and information in a manner that meets the public’s increasing expectations for data customization and ease of use. 

Performance measures for assessing progress on this Strategic Objective include measures to ensure that data from campaign finance reports are quickly made available to the public and that the FEC pursues programs to make data more accessible to the public. 

Performance Goal 1-1: Improve the public’s access to information about how campaign funds are raised and spent. 

Key Indicator: Percent of reports processed within 30 days of receipt.           

> FY 2015
> Actual
> FY 2016 Actual
> FY 2017 Actual
> FY 2018 Actual
> FY 2019 Actual
> FY 2020 Target
> FY 2020 Actual
> FY 2021 Target
> FY 2022 Target
> 92% 100% 96% 100% 94% 695% 98% 95% 95%
> 5Available at https://fec.gov/about/reports-about-fec/agency-operations/e-filing-study-2016/.
> 6The agency’s ability to meet its target for this performance goal during FY 2019 was negatively impacted by the lapse in appropriations from December 22, 2018 to January 25, 2019. 15

Objective 2: Promote Compliance with the FECA and Related Statutes 

Helping the public understand its obligations under the Act is an essential component of voluntary compliance. The FEC places a significant emphasis on encouraging compliance through its Information Division, Reports Analysis Division (RAD), Press Office and Office of Congressional, Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs. The FEC measures its progress in meeting this Objective through two performance measures: one that measures the agency’s efforts to encourage voluntary compliance through educational outreach and information and another that measures the FEC’s efforts to seek adherence to FECA requirements through fair, effective and timely enforcement and compliance programs. Progress against these measures is detailed in the charts below. 

Encourage voluntary compliance with FECA requirements through educational outreach and information. 

The FEC’s education and outreach programs provide information necessary for compliance with campaign finance law and give the public the context necessary to interpret the campaign finance data filers disclose. The FEC maintains a toll-free line and public email accounts to respond to inquiries regarding campaign finance data disclosed to the public and questions about how to comply with campaign finance law and its reporting requirements. The FEC’s Public Disclosure and Media Relations Division and Congressional Affairs Office also respond to inquiries. 

One way the Commission encourages voluntary compliance is by hosting conferences across the country, where Commissioners and staff explain how the Act applies to candidates, parties and political action committees. These conferences address recent changes in the law and focus on fundraising, methods of candidate support and reporting regulations. 

The FEC also devotes considerable resources to ensuring that staff can provide distance learning opportunities to the general public. The Commission’s website is one of the most important sources of instantly accessible information about the Act , Commission regulations, and Commission proceedings. In addition to viewing campaign finance data, anyone with internet access can use the website to track Commission rulemakings, search advisory opinions, audits and closed enforcement matters, view campaign finance data, and find reporting dates. The Commission places a high emphasis on providing educational materials about campaign finance law and its requirements. Toward this end, the FEC has moved its focus away from the printing and manual distribution of its educational materials and instead looked for ways to leverage available technologies to create and disseminate dynamic and up-to-date educational materials through the website. While the Commission continues to make available printed copies of its educational brochures and publications, transitioning to primarily web-based media has allowed the agency to reduce significantly its printing and mailing costs and use of resources while at the same time encouraging new and expanded ways of communicating with the public via the website. 

As part of this broad effort to improve its internet communications and better serve the educational needs of the public, the Commission maintains its own YouTube channel, which can be found at 

http://www.youtube.com/FECTube . The YouTube channel offers a variety of instructional videos and tutorials that enable users to obtain guidance tailored to their specific activities. 16 

The agency’s educational outreach program has been significantly enhanced with the addition of an online training service that enables political committees, reporters, students and other groups to schedule live, interactive online training sessions with FEC staff. This on-demand service allows the FEC to provide tailored, distance learning presentations and training to the public in a manner that will significantly increase the availability of FEC staff to serve the public. The service also offers an efficient and effective way for alternative dispute resolution and other enforcement respondents to satisfy the terms of their agreements with the agency. These efforts are also important in monitoring and mitigating the risk that amendments to FECA or judicial opinions have on the campaign finance environment and the FEC’s goal of encouraging voluntary compliance with the Act .

Performance Goal 2-1: Encourage voluntary compliance with FECA requirements through educational outreach and information. 

Key Indicator: Educational outreach programs and events achieve targeted satisfaction 

rating on user surveys.       

> FY 2015 Actual
> FY 2016 Actual
> FY 2017 Actual
> FY 2018 Actual
> FY 2019 Actual
> FY 2020 Target
> FY 2020 Actual
> FY 2021 Target
> FY 2022 Target
> 4.34 4.53 4.43 4.53 4.45 4.0 or higher
> on a 5.0 scale
> 4.51 4.0 or higher on a 5.0 scale
> 4.0 or higher on a 5.0 scale

Seek adherence to FECA requirements through fair, effective and timely enforcement and compliance programs. 

The FEC has formed strategies for ensuring that its enforcement and compliance programs are fair, effective and timely. The Commission’s statutory obligation is to administer, interpret and enforce the Federal Election Campaign Act , which serves the compelling governmental interest in deterring corruption and the appearance of corruption in financing elections. In doing so, the Commission remains mindful of the First Amendment’s guarantees of freedom of speech and association, and the practical implication of its actions on the political process. 

The FEC has exclusive jurisdiction over civil enforcement of Federal campaign finance laws. It consults with the U.S. Department of Justice, as appropriate, on matters involving both civil and criminal enforcement of the Act . Commission enforcement actions, which are handled primarily by the Office of General Counsel (OGC), originate from a number of sources, including external complaints, referrals from other government agencies and matters generated by information ascertained by the Commission in the normal course of carrying out its supervisory responsibilities. Enforcement matters are handled by OGC pursuant to the requirements of the FECA . If the Commission cannot settle or conciliate a matter involving an alleged violation of the Act , the Commission may initiate civil litigation by filing and prosecuting a civil action in Federal district court to address the alleged violation. Closed enforcement matters are available via the FEC website. 17 

To augment OGC’s traditional enforcement role, the Office of Compliance manages several programs that seek to remedy alleged violations of the Act and encourage voluntary compliance. These programs include: 1) the Alternative Dispute Resolution Program, 2) the Administrative Fine Program and 3) the Audit Program. The Commission’s Alternative Dispute Resolution Program is designed to resolve matters more swiftly by encouraging the settlement of less-complex enforcement matters with a streamlined process that focuses on remedial measures for candidates and political committees, such as training, internal audits and hiring compliance staff. Violations involving the late submission of, or failure to file, disclosure reports are subject to the Administrative Fine Program. This Program is administered by the Reports Analysis Division (RAD) and the Office of Administrative Review (OAR), which assess monetary penalties and handle challenges to the penalty assessments. The Audit Program conducts “for cause” audits under the FECA in those cases where political committees have failed to meet the threshold requirements for demonstrating substantial compliance with the Act and conducts mandatory audits under the public funding statutes. Subject to limited redactions, threshold requirements approved by the Commission and used by RAD and the Audit Division are public. 

Performance Goal 2-2: Seek adherence to FECA requirements through fair, effective and timely enforcement and compliance programs. 

Key Indicator: Of the enforcement matters resolved during the fiscal year, the 

percentage that was resolved within 15 months of the date of receipt.         

> FY 2015 Actual
> FY 2016 Actual
> FY 2017 Actual
> FY 2018 Actual
> FY 2019 Actual
> FY 2020 Target
> FY 2020 Actual
> FY 2021 Target
> FY 2022 Target
> 49% 38% 68% 62% 56% 50% 62% 50% 50%

Objective 3: Interpret the FECA and Related Statutes 

Commission initiatives, Congressional action, judicial decisions, petitions for rulemaking or other changes in campaign finance law may necessitate that the Commission update or adopt new regulations. Consequently, the FEC undertakes rulemakings either to write new Commission regulations or revise existing regulations. The Commission also provides guidance on how the Act 

applies to specific situations through the advisory opinion process and represents itself in most litigation before the Federal district court and the courts of appeals. The Commission’s three primary means for providing interpretive guidance for the Act and related statutes are discussed below. 

Regulations 

The Policy Division of OGC drafts various rulemaking documents, including Notices of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRMs), for Commission consideration. NPRMs provide an opportunity for the public to review proposed regulations, submit written comments to the Commission and, when appropriate, testify at public hearings at the FEC. The Commission considers the comments and testimony and deliberates publicly regarding the adoption of the final regulations and the corresponding Explanations and Justifications, which provide the rationale and basis for the new or revised regulations. 18 

Advisory Opinions 

Advisory opinions (AO) are official Commission responses to questions regarding the application of Federal campaign finance law to specific factual situations. The Act generally requires the Commission to respond to AO requests within 60 days. For AO requests from candidates in the two months leading up to an election that present a specific transaction or activity related to that election, the Act requires the Commission to respond within 20 days. On its own initiative, the Commission also makes available an expedited process for handling certain time-sensitive requests that are not otherwise entitled to expedited processing under the Act . The Commission strives to issue these advisory opinions in 30 days. 

Defending Challenges to the Act 

The Commission represents itself in most litigation before the Federal district court and courts of appeals and before the Supreme Court with respect to cases involving publicly financed Presidential candidates. It also has primary responsibility for defending the Act and Commission regulations against court challenges. In addition, the Act authorizes the Commission to institute civil actions to enforce the Act .

Performance Goal 3-1: Provide timely legal guidance to the public. 

Key Indicator: Percent of legal guidance provided within statutory and court -

ordered deadlines. 

FY 2015 Actual 

FY 2016 Actual 

FY 2017 Actual 

FY 2018 Actual 

FY 2019 Actual 

FY 2020 Target 

FY 2020 Actual 

FY 2021 Target 

FY 2022 Target 

100% 7 100% 8 100% 9 100% 10  100% 11  100%  100% 12  100%  100%        

> 7The Commission obtained extensions to consider two advisory opinion requests in FY 2015. The Commission did not have any rulemakings during FY 2015 with statutory or court-ordered deadlines.
> 8The Commission obtained extensions to consider six advisory opinion requests in FY 2016.
> 9The Commission obtained extensions to consider seven advisory opinion requests in FY 2017.
> 10 The Commission obtained an extension to consider one advisory opinion request in FY 2018.
> 11 The Commission obtained extensions to consider six advisory opinion requests in FY 2019; two of those extensions were lengthened by the partial Federal government shutdown during the first and second quarters of FY 2019.
> 12 Due to the lack of a quorum for most of FY 2020, the Commission sought extensions from all advisory opinion requestors. The Commission obtained extensions from seven of those requestors in FY 2020. Two advisory opinion requestors declined to grant an extension and, once the deadline for responding to those requests expired, the Commission notified those requestors that it was unable to approve an advisory opinion by the required affirmative vote of four commissioners.

19 

Objective 4: Foster a Culture of High Performance 

The Commission understands that the success of its programs depends upon the skills and commitment of its staff. The Commission is focused on ensuring that staff training needs are assessed and met at every level of the agency and that agency leaders receive training necessary to help manage and maintain a fully engage and productive workforce. The FEC is also focused on decreasing the time to hire, improving the agency’s performance management systems and developing a supervisory and managerial training program for senior leaders, mid-career managers and first-time supervisors. 

The FEC is also implementing a multi-phase plan to reduce reliance on physical servers and migrate appropriate systems and data to a cloud environment. In conjunction with the redesign of the agency’s website, the FEC successfully migrated its largest database, the campaign finance database, to a cloud environment and shut down one physical data center during FY 2018. Cloud hosting offers a number of benefits for the FEC’s campaign finance database and website. The agency’s internet traffic is variable, with many more visitors accessing the website during election years and near reporting deadlines. With a cloud-hosted application and database infrastructure, the FEC only needs to pay for the actual usage, rather than constantly maintaining the capacity to support peak usage, even during periods of reduced usage. Website downtime is minimized and server maintenance is managed by the cloud computing provider. During FY 2020, the FEC conducted a study to determine how best to migrate other appropriate systems and databases to the cloud, allowing the agency to realize greater efficiency and performance in future years. The FEC will focus on implementing the results of this study during FY 2021. 

The Commission’s records management program continues to make advancements, as described below. Fiscal Years 2021 and 2022 will bring continued focus on updating the agency’s records schedules in compliance with the Transition to Electronic Records Memorandum, updating the agency’s Records Management Program, and training all staff on the agency and government-wide records schedules, policies and responsibilities. 

Performance Goal 4-1: Foster a workforce that delivers results. 

Key Indicator: Commission -required quarterly updates meet targeted performance 

goals.           

> FY 2015 Actual
> FY 2016 Actual
> FY 2017 Actual
> FY 2018 Actual
> FY 2019 Actual
> FY 2020 Target
> FY 2020 Actual
> FY 2021 Target
> FY 2022 Target
> 80% 76% 85% 73% 53% 13 65% 73% 14 65% 65%
> 13 The agency’s ability to meet its target for this performance goal during FY 2019 was negatively impacted by the lapse in appropriations from December 22, 2018 to January 25, 2019.
> 14 The agency’s performance under this measure was negatively impacted by the lack of a quorum for most of FY 2020. 20

Section I.C: Analysis of FEC Financial Statements and Stewardship Information 

The FEC’s FY 2020 financial statements and notes are presented in the required format in accordance with OMB Circular A-136, as revised, Financial Reporting Requirements . The FEC’s current-year financial statements and notes are presented in a comparative format in Section II of this report. 

The following table summarizes the significant changes in the FEC’s financial position during FY 2020:                           

> Net Financial Condition FY 2020 FY 2019
> Increase (Decrease)
> %Change
> Assets $36,566,339 $42,400,892 ($5,834,553) -14%
> Liabilities $16,039,162 $15,238,967 $800,195 5%
> Net Position $20,527,177 $27,161,925 ($6,634,748) -24%
> Net Cost $79,867,804 $69,259,101 $10,608,703 15%
> Budgetary Resources $79,061,462 $75,551,616 $3,509,846 5%
> Custodial Revenue $760,511 $2,906,662 ($2,146,151) -74%

The following is a brief description of the nature of each required financial statement and its relevance. The effects of some significant balances or conditions on the FEC’s operations are explained. 

Balance Sheet 

The Balance Sheet presents the total amounts available for use by the FEC (assets) against the amounts owed (liabilities) and amounts that comprise the difference (Net Position). As a small independent agency, all of the FEC’s assets consist of Fund Balance with Treasury (FBWT), Property and Equipment (P&E) and Accounts Receivable. Fund Balance with Treasury (e.g., cash) is available through the Department of Treasury accounts, from which the FEC is authorized to make expenditures (i.e., obligations) and payments. FBWT decreased by approximately $2.7 million, or 10 percent, from the prior year. 

Accounts Receivable primarily represent amounts due from the public for fines and penalties assessed by the FEC and referred to Treasury for collection, as deemed appropriate. In compliance with the Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996 (DCIA), the OCFO takes into consideration the most appropriate approach to debt management. These amounts are not available for FEC operations and are sent to the U.S. Treasury as miscellaneous receipts. Net accounts receivable decreased by approximately $230 thousand dollars from the prior year. 

Total assets decreased by $5.8 million from the prior year to $36.5 million. Total liabilities increased by approximately $800 thousand. 

Statement of Net Cost 

The Statement of Net Cost presents the annual cost of operating the FEC program. Gross costs are used to arrive at the total net cost of operations. The FEC’s total gross costs in administering the 

FECA experienced a 15% fluctuation from the prior year. 21 

Statement of Changes in Net Position 

The Statement of Changes in Net Position presents in greater detail the net position section of the Balance Sheet, including Cumulative Results of Operations and Unexpended Appropriations. This statement identifies the activity that caused the net position to change during the reporting period. Total Net Position decreased by 24 percent, or approximately $7 million. In FY 2017, the FEC received approximately $8 million in two-year appropriated funds, which expired at the end of FY 2018. 

Statement of Budgetary Resources 

The Statement of Budgetary Resources provides information on the source and status of budgetary resources made available to the FEC during the reporting period. It presents the relationship between budget authority and budget outlays, as well as the reconciliation of obligations to total outlays. Total Budgetary Resources and Status of Budgetary Resources increase by approximately $4 million, or 5 percent, from the prior year. 

Statement of Custodial Activity 

The Statement of Custodial Activity represents an accounting of revenue and funds collected by the FEC that are owed to the U.S. Treasury’s general fund. These monies are not available for the FEC’s use. Collection and revenue activity primarily result from enforcement actions that come before the Commission during the fiscal year. Revenue and collections on the Statement of Custodial Activity consist of collections on new assessments, prior year(s) receivables and Miscellaneous Receipts. In FY 2020, the total custodial revenue and collections decreased by approximately $2 million from the prior year. 22 

The chart below displays the assessment history for the past 20 years. 15 

> Figure 4: Fines Assessed, by Fiscal Year (in millions of dollars)

Financial impact, if significant, of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) 

The FY20 financial impact of the coronavirus disease 2019 on the Federal Election Commission was not significant. Approximately $20,000 was spent on COVID-19 PPE Equipment, Supplies, Equipment, Signage, and Mitigation Countermeasures. These expenditures were made with FY20 appropriated funds allocated to the Administrative Services Division (ASD) within the scope of their normal budgetary purchasing authorities as outlined in the Management Plan. Expenditures were made either with the ASD Government Purchase Card, or through the GSA Advantage Supply Ordering Mechanism under the Supply & Materials Budget Object Class Code 26 Supplies and Materials. COVID-19 spending only utilized approximately 23% of the FEC’s Admin Office’s Supplies and Materials Budget for FY20.  

> 15 One MUR resolved during 2006 yielded the largest civil penalty in agency history, which was $3.8 million paid by Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac) for prohibited corporate activity. This 2006 penalty is the primary reason for the largest Fines Assessed (approximately $6.71 million) in Figure 4.

$1.09 

$6.71 

$0.87 

FY 2000  FY 2020 

# FIGURE 4 - FINES ASSESSED, BY FISCAL YEAR 

# (in Millions of Dollars) 23 

Section I.D: Analysis of FEC’s Systems, Controls and Legal Compliance 

I.D.i – FEC Integrated Internal Control Framework and Legal Compliance 

The Commission is subject to numerous legislative and regulatory requirements that promote and support effective internal controls. The FEC complies with the following laws and regulations: 

Annual Appropriation Law – establishes the FEC’s budget authority; 

The Antideficiency Act of 1884, as amended ;

Inspector General Act of 1978 , as amended; 

Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982; 

Federal Civil Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act of 1990 ;

Government Performance and Results Act of 1993 , as amended; 

Federal Financial Management Improvement Act of 1996 ;

Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996 ;

Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996 , as amended; 

Chief Financial Officers Act , as amended by the Accountability of Tax Dollars Act of 2002 ; and 

Fraud Reduction and Data Analytics Act of 2015 

The proper stewardship of Federal resources is a fundamental responsibility of the FEC. These laws help the FEC improve the management of its programs and financial operations, and assure that programs are managed in compliance with applicable law. 

I.D.ii – Management Assurances 

The Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA ) is implemented by OMB Circular A-123, revised, Management’s Responsibility for Enterprise Risk Management and Internal Control, 

with applicable appendices. The FEC management is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal control and financial management systems that meet the objectives of the FMFIA 

and for performing a self-assessment under the guidance of its Directive 53, Implementation of OMB Circular A-123, Internal Control Review . Directive 53 outlines the process and describes roles and responsibilities for conducting risk assessments and internal control reviews. 

Section 2 of the FMFIA requires Federal agencies to report, based on annual assessments, any material weaknesses that have been identified in connection with their internal and administrative controls. The reviews that took place during FY 2020 provide unqualified assurance that FEC systems and management controls comply with the requirements of the FMFIA .

Section 4 of the FMFIA requires that agencies annually provide assurance on programmatic internal controls and financial management systems, and effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting. The FEC evaluated its financial management systems in accordance with the FMFIA ,24 

OMB Circular A-123, as applicable, and reviewed the Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements, Reporting on Controls at a Service Organization (SSAE 18) reports received from its shared service providers. The results of management reviews provided that the FEC’s financial systems controls generally conform to the required principles and standards as per Section 4 of the 

FMFIA .

Enterprise Risk Management 

In the current fiscal year, the FEC, led by the Senior Management Council (SMC), updated its Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) Risk Profile which captures enterprise level risks, as required by the revised OMB Circular A-123. The SMC identified a total of eleven enterprise level risks the agency faces when seeking to achieve strategic, operational, and compliance objectives and rated these risk as being a medium or high inherent risk. The Risk Profile was delivered to the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) and OMB. The SMC looks forward to continuing to work closely with OIG to remediate any weaknesses which the OIG may deem to be at the level of a material weakness. 

Prompt Payment Act 

The Prompt Payment Act (PPA ) requires Federal agencies to make timely vendor payments and to pay interest penalties when payments are late. The FEC’s on-time payment rate for FY 2020 was nearly 100 percent, with less than 0.27 percent of all invoices paid after the date required by the PPA .

Improper Payments 

The Improper Payments Information Act (IPIA) of 2002, as amended by the Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act (IPERA) of 2010, Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Improvement Act (IPERIA) of 2012, and the Payment Integrity Information Act (PIIA) of 2019 and OMB guidance require agencies to identify programs that are susceptible to significant improper payments, and determine an annual estimated amount of improper payments made in their operations. The FEC reviewed all of its programs and activities to identify those susceptible to significant improper payments. Approximately 72 percent of the FEC’s obligations pertain to salaries and benefits, which represents a low risk for improper payments, based on established internal controls. The FEC also reviewed all of its FY 2020 non-personnel procurements, charge card, and payroll costs to verify their accuracy and completeness. Accordingly, the FEC is unaware of any improper payments. The FEC continues to monitor its payment and internal control process to ensure that the risk of improper payments remains low. 25 

Annual Assurance Statement on Internal Control 

FE DE RA L EL ECTI ON CO MM ISS IO N

> Washington, DC 20463

Annual Assurance Statement on Internal Control 

The Federal Election Commission (FEC) is responsible for managing risks and ma intaining effective internal control to meet the objectives of Sections 2 and 4 of the 

Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act. The FEC conducted its assessment of risk and internal control in accordance with 0M B Circular No. A-123, Management's Responsibility for Enterprise Risk Management and Internal Control. Based on the results of the assessment, the Agency can provideI easonable assurance that internal control over operations, reporting, and compliance were operating effectively as of September 30, 2020. 

# elf:¼,. .;..,  71:!" 

Ja mes  E.  "Trey"  Trainor Ill Chair 26 

Section I.E: Limitations of the Financial Statements 

The principal financial statements have been prepared to report the financial position and results of operations of the FEC pursuant to the requirements of 31 U.S.C. §3515(b). While the statements have been prepared from the books and records of the FEC in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for Federal entities and the formats prescribed by the OMB, the statements are in addition to the financial reports used to monitor and control budgetary resources which are prepared from the same books and records. 

The statements should be read with the realization that they are for a component of the U.S. Government, a sovereign entity. 27 

## SECTION II – Auditor’s Report and Financial Statements 28 

## Message from the Chief Financial Officer 

November 16,  20201 

I am  pleased  to present the Commission's financial statements for Fiscal Year (FY) 2020. The financial statements are an integral  pait  of the Agency Fi nancial Report. The Corrunission received an unmodified (clean) opinion on its financial statements from the independent auditors. This mark sthe twe lfth consecutive year with no material weaknesses identified. I appreciate and applaud the good work of OC FO and all  FEC  staff who strived diligently throughout the fiscal year to achieve the se results and maintain a commitment to excellence. D uring fiscal year 2020, FEC made considerable progress improving internal controls and agency operations. These eff01ts include strengthening FEC 's annual review of internal controls by maturing FEC 's risk identification and mitigation processes by better aligning individual program office with identified enterprise risks . In addition, I am pleased to see the progress in reducing outstanding recommendations made by the Office of the Inspector General (O IG). Working through the FEC 's Senior Management Council and OT G, the agency has resol ved 29 recommendations since August of 2018 and addressing outstanding recommendations no longer appears as a top management challenge. We look forward to continuing to work with the OIG to improve agency operations and fmther reduce outstanding recommendations. The FEC al so continues lo seek opportunities to modernize and upgrade business systems to improve operational effectiveness and efficiency. We are confident that FEC employees ' corrunitment to t he agency's mission will provide an opportunity to build on the prior year's financial management successes. The OCFO looks  fon:vard  to an ot her  successfol  year. S.inccrely, John Quinlan Chief Financial Officer 29 

## OIG Transmittal Letter 

Fedem l E.!Iec.-1:ion  Comm issio-n 

Office  o th . ,l1 111sp&ctor  Generral 

'Mi EIIORA.NDUl\\l: 

'.IO:  The  Commis-si  ll  :.--/

FROM:  Oristopher  Skl.unff  /;:.. _ .. 

> "

SUBJECT:  Tran.:miitta:I!  of  l:be  Fedem:I  i8rotion. Commi.ssi:w  's  Fi.;scai  Y~  ~02.®  Fmanci.al 

Statement  .Amifit  ~rt 

DATE·  otrember  16  2020 

!l\mmmt  to  the  ChlefiFi.nancial  Offi.cers  Ac ·· ofl990,  as  .m::iended,,  ffiis ;~ 'lrnil.SD:ll1s  the 

fu~  ADtor's  R:.epm1ismedbyBrm"'n  & CompruI J Oemfi.ed&i!  ·c  Acco un t.ants  and 

Management  CODSultm'ts,  PLl...C  (Brown  & Company ) for  the  fiscal  ye:.u:- (FY)  eruting 

Sq,te:llll:ti  JO,  2-020 . Encl!osed  )"OU  will . find!  l:he  Imdependent  Audi tor  s mm]  111udit  reyo:rt  on  ilie  FEC 

Le..,  the  4FE C"'  e.r  "'Commissimi')  FY  2020  Fi.mooia'.I .Statemenfu.  The  .final  aumt  report  iis 

addiliomilly  included  in  Sectimi  Uofilie  FEC's  Ff  2020Agency  Fiwmcia!Bi.eport 

The  aumi:  WaiS  perl'ollllfd  under  a co:mrach'\oinb,,  and  !llll.llD  orei  b}•,  th e OrG  im  acoordance  with 

gene:ralil.y  a. cce,p.ted .government  auditing  stmdmrds,  the  Comptroller  (reneral  's  uaVil'!  '!merii.Audiii,ig 

Sto:ndards.,  mm  applie21hlepro'l.i'isim:1S  of  Office  ofMwm.gement  andButillge  (O:MB ;), Bulle1inNo..  1 -

03,  A.ud1t  .Rt'quii"B'me;r,  ts  far  Fedeml  Finmicial'  Statements '. 

To  Brn'im  & Co mpmJ ls  opmi:on,  the  :limimcial  s tements  f!Iierenl:  fumy  in  -all  material  ~..  the 

fimwcia l posme:n,,  net  coot,  cbange.s , in  net  posiilioo., .budg:ewy  1esour,ees,  and  custodial  :acti'1,  ly  of  the 

FEC  as  iof  andfor ·lhe.  arrenrlmg,  SeptembeF  0,  20 .J I inoomfonn:moe  \;,ith  accoi.mmig ,principles 

generally  a.crepted  m,the  United  S te.s  of  Ama:irn. .

Additionally  due  to  the  Co:wmission's  pos ition  that  it  is  Jegallye1t:empt  from  tlie  Federal  Ii mu:olllli  n

Sysferns  Managffll!mt  Acit  (FI S14A)  l:he  OIG  requires  an  ~ssmem  ,of  the  agency' s  Infmma1ion 

Teclmo log f (IT)  iS}'Sf6m  ,seamty  ~ontlro'ls..  AccentinglyT  -audit  i.mc lude:d  an  e:xamimtion of  the 

Commi..ssi:on'sIT  sea.irityin  c..cmparison  Im  gmemwmt- ..\~de  best  practices.  TheOIGacl:mnvledges 

that  the  independent  auditors  are  onl y .reqitmied .to  ~-p'li:ciitly  ~ on  m.temal  controls  l:bat  haiive  a

matenal  imp.1ot  on  agency  i , • • al  statement  reporil!i.ng. 

Bnm!D.&  Compmy  did .DO±  report  any  material  weaknesses.  Ho~,.-m, ·er  rhey i denti1ied  s-ig nilfoant 

deficiencies  v.ilh  ilie  Co:mwission  's  intemal  controls  related  to ,IT  secmity  and  docwnented! .six 

rerowmend'a:mms  (fOlll'  of  ibic-h  were  repeatreooWlliEilda.li  :us  :lfuom  the  FY  2019  rqim:li  to  a'l!li:l:ress 

lhe  deficiencies  Mte.d.  Th,e.OIG  aclm01. 11 ifedges  that  drree  prior  yeai:r  re,comTue:m:hti.ons  have  been 

dosed  ~ilfamgement  \\'liS  pro'.\11dedl  !Ii  draft  C'cOJJY  ofthe  au.dirt  Iiepmf:  £ r review  and  comment  and  the 

official  muiagement  CPlil:llllellts  ta  tbe.rq)ort  ,can  be- fo und  in  E."'lhibil  C of  th e . report_           

> 1.50 HF.St Stre,et N:E Was 'ingto n, DC 20463

I ww .fec...g D'lt / •g30 

, OIG  red.ewed. Brown&.  C-Ompru:iy  ',s  port  ~d  .rela ted  doctune:nrnnion  md  provided  the  1"~ 

0'!.l'ers ight  throu gh.om  the  mirse  of  the  audit  Our  1e,..ii:ew  and  or.,-ersigbf  me  lm:Iitedl  1to  emn ri ng  fille   

> !.i tdit

complies  ,viith  applie .ri rble  :sta ndards ·  howei.  er  we  de  Hot  expres'S  im  opinion  1e grumog  i:  results  .. 

, OIG  s relliew  derermmed  tha t B:rtJli,  n&  Carupm:  r comp  .ed.  in  all.  mi teri  . respects,  1;,,a 

app:li~ble  G:n.renunem  A:irrutmg  St andards .

In  accordm,;_--ie  m~  0MB  Ciirc  iliu- No . . A-'50  Audir  Foflow-!lp,,  revised,,  the  f iE  is- to  prepare  a

conerti.ve  action  plan  (CAP)  l:laat  will  s :fu:nfu  the  specific- ac ti omi  pfa1med ~al  ng  v.iith  other  detailed 

· equemm  •. to  imp  e:DE nt  the  :agreedl  1:1poo  recolllllleDda'ti.o:  . Per  Commission  irective  SO,  All.di  .

F.  !Jcrn r.., up  e Commission  has  des ignated.  the  (1rie:f Firu  cw  Offioer  to  be  fue  udit  follmv-up 

of:l kial  {Af  O)  :for  fue  :financiall  s.bt  .m.di!t  lhe  AFO  1ia.s  ·thirty  dlliy.s ,:linm  fue  release  date  of ti be 

mroit  repo rt  to  pro  ·de  the  OJ  :.  with. ,Ii  draft  CAP  that  will  addre,ss  fue  report  din~  and 

Fe coilillllleDd~fio:m.  Th e om  v.ill.  re ··  ·_ eii,;- llie  CAP ' md. pm"llide  an}  ('nnmneols  within  ffireeJil.  d.,'lY  of 

•ieceipt . Th ereafter  the  /iJO  will .finalize  , · CAP  md. prn1i.l'ide  the  mm  CAP  to  the  Commissioner~ 

,vith. 3 courte-.sy  00,  fo,  l:he  rno .

\lle  appreciate  fue  ro lbloorn.tiou  and  SUIJPOiit  from  FEC  stlliff  and  the  professionalism  lfuit  Bro\ln  &

·•  mpru1 y e.xeJCmed  througb.o  the  cmme  of  the  ,md:i. t.  lify  nhave  myq  iestiom, couc,emmg  the 

·enc losed  repo  please  contact  my  office  at  (20_)  694-U:H. 

c, c:  John  Qmnlim,,  Cbief Fin .m.cial  Ofli.cer 

.i\lec  Palmer,  Staff  Diirec  orJChief  l!nfimmticm . Officer 

Lisa ·  re-ns  n,  Acting  Gen:ernl  C-OU!JSel 

Gilbert  A.  Fm-di  Dir ector  ofBudee ·

Gr~  Baker  Deputj  Genern.l  Coumel 

kCfa ri n,  Acting .Deputy  bfi"Direct  r for  Management . d

A-dmimstration      

> fUlu .'Ul -HII 31

## Independent Auditor’s Report               

> Federal E1ection Comnlfss1 on
> Office of t11 elln sp ect or Gene ral

# Audit of the Federal Election  Commi&5ion 

# Annual  Finai1cial 

# Statements Fiscal Year 2020 32 

FEDE.RU  ELECTIO N C0!'. •11\USSION 

INiDEPENDENI  AUDITOR "S  REPORT 

FOR  THE  YE..4RS  El'ID ED 

SEPTE ~l fflE"R. 30,  1020  AND  2019  

> P1 ·epa11ed

!By:          

> lh :own &. Co mpan yCPA ~and .nr.lanagement Con_snlrants:, PLLC
> Noveume1

16,  :liO _O 33 

Independent  .Audi tor's  "Report 

Exhiibit A.- Sigom.cam  Defil:cie ucies 

T able  of  Content  ,

Exhi bi t B - $tams  of  Prior  Y e,n ·'s:  F:mdwgs  and  ~ rn, nendat~ oos 

E..,du"bi t C - Managem:mf  S'  ~onse  to  file) Au:&tot·'  Report 

> l

1

14 

l. 34 

In depe nd en t  AudJ°tor 's  R:ep oir  t

Jmpector  ,GenernJ. 

Felil.eml  Eoction  Co mm issifill 

W:isbmgto:m.,  D_ 

:r  N·r  • l'l ,1, 

fu  om  i.m.d!irt  oflhe  fiscal  ye.air  2@2®  am il  019  finan  -i.a.l  statements  ofl!b.e  Federal  Elecmm.  Commimon 

(FEC)  we  found: 

• FEC'  s financial. stateoEots  as  of  md  fo r the  fisca]  yen  ended  September  30  ]020,  md  101 9, 

are  pFeSented  f'am y in  all  .ilIJaiterial  respects,  in  acrnubnoe  with  U S_ .genma'lly  aco epte d

acco  mting ·principles,  

> 1•

no  llDaJterial.  weamsse.s  in  in..temal  om:iro]  over  financial  repmtmg  ba:;elll  ,on  the  limited 

pocedi.wes11.ve  perfmmed;  and! 

• no  reportable  noncompliance.  fo r meal  J e ar  2020  wilh  provisions  of  ,atppl icable  latvs, 

regi, da -om  oontriu :it:s,  andgmnt  agireen:eutswetested 

Thefallowmg"'ec ··misdiscllils  immo.Fedel:a:il. (l )o mr ,eport  o:nthefmancial  sl:a tem e;ni;:  wmcb.  includes 

~m pp1eme:nwyimi  rmatim!L(RSI)  and  olhe!  wfi:um.ationincluded  .\!lilh'lhefiwm  ·alstnt ie me:ms; 

(1)  ounepmfonmfemaloonJ!ro]  m• e11  financia[reponing;  and  (3)  OM  repim  on  romp)iaOCJ'!.  1iWh  J aws ,

regu]ahons,  ioomrac±;; , and  _gr am  a..,:e;r;eements _

fu acoordancewithfuepmtlisions  ofAcooimtabilifyo:ffax  Doll:nsA  t of  002  (AID.I\)  (Pub . L No,_ 101-

289),  we  ilm  ;e  audited  FEC':s  finmc:iaJ  :s tat.ementil . FEC' :s , :lfui :mcial!  .sta'tem en fB  comprise  Oie  bai l a:nce 

:.be ets  a:s  of  September  3-0 , 2020  an-d  2019;  ·the  Felated  s:  temeois  of  .ne t co s changes ,i nn etposition, 

bndgehny  Feslnnce s,  and  01..<tedfal  a.cli\.ily  for  tlre:tisral  years  fhen,ended;  and  the  :related  motes  to  lhe 

financial  sta:l:eme!i1  _

We  oorumot ed  our  mdii  in  oc001rd,ance  wil!h  U.S.  gei  , l'  aroept ed  _go~  audifing  s.1:am lla:rds _ \\  ie 

be~  re  l: bat  the  audit  •evideo.ae  ~'e  obtained  ii s:  :!llrllicient  md.  appropriate  to  prO"cid e a basis  ."o r our  audit 

> ,opm1ons.

Mana gemen f s 'R!espm 1s-ibili9 

FEC'. s:  ilillaiilag e-lilHII:  is  responsihlefor  1) ,1:he  prepamtion  andfair  presentmenofthese  fina:nciaht:Itemems 

urnocommce  with  I _s _generally  a-coept eda-coo ummg  principles ; (2) 1 preparing,  me.as rn :ing,  amllpresenting 

fire  R.S I in  lKlOOliiibn re  li\\lith  U.S.  _generally  aa:epted  ru:ioomiling  prindples~  (l  pr ep mn g '3!11:di  presenting 

,olber  info:m::131:ion  irndwiedl  mdocuments  ,oo:n:fa:mmg  the  amtitoo  fin.im i a1  slaitement:s  and  au lllit  r's  report~ 

and .ensmmg  lhe  oonsis.t ency  of  ihait  mfmmation  ritb .the  mdJ.rted  fi:a:mcial  s,tat e ~ms  and  the  RSI;  md.  (4~ 

roaiutaimng  ,11, ffed:ive  mt emal  ntro.l  m:rer  mmoci  reporting  mclmling  ilie  ~ impleDEntrti.on, , and 

ma:intemmce  of  internal  c.o.mra]  m:  e,ranf  to  the  prepm-alion  and  fair  pesentation  of:fu!l.mcial  "tat emen.lE  fu-at 

are  iiree  ft om. materiiiill  missta tement,  wbefuer  due  to, fumd  or  enor_                                          

> li4111 :1 ii. I i'" ,N J'fi \:\"i :r FnH:l\ 1.-'.:-1 1;I ~; : I •IHF l 1Nl!FI.T H) ~UT il
> JIIi'I.' I!..! 1LI iITit Il9 1JI Jl• AX: 1li lI

# ,, a.!uU  I - mu  ",  I ,1,  ,1,,u~, , q:  !;.L' 1> 10  • wv.·•,,  brr·,\•cic •, :P•"·~•nm 35 

Audi tor's  Re!\(lom i:bili ty 

Om  respon s:imlity  is.to  express  an  opinion  en  these  :fi.unn cial. sratement:s  based  on  ,mrr  audit  U.S.  generall y

acrepted  goi.'ellllllfm'l:  aud'itmg , :standards  lieqime thaJ we  pl an .and  perfmm. lhe  audit  fo  ,obtain  reaooru,i.bl e

ass,,mmoo  aboo.t  whether  l:be  fuwicia:I  s:t:a  emem  :me  fitee  from  material.  misst.atement  '\:  ·e are  also ,

.responsrlde  fm .:ippfymg  ,ceitm  l.irmiited  procem.U!es  to  RSI  md  other  mfm:mation  ioolude.d  i th  ilie  fumnciail 

statenerlll .

An: imd:irt  of:lnmncial!  statements  im.--oh."es ,perfmming  prociedt.rres  to  ~bta:in  audit  evidence  about  the  ;unmmtis .

and  diisclosmes  i.n .lhe  ina.nc,i-ail!  s temenfs..  Th e pl~  selected  d.epenlil  on  t!he  audit  r's  ju dgmen t, 

including  l!b.e  :audi t or 's  llSS'eSS'l:IEl!lt  oftbe  risks  of material  !lllmfut.emeni  ofthe  .financial  stlilt.emen.ts ., whether 

miefo  fra .ud  or  erro.r . In :makmg  ihor:e  risk. asse:ssmenbi ,, l:Toe  mdiitm  m:nsidern  mtem:d  co:BliFci]  :rele vant  fo ,the 

entity 's  preparation.  and  frur  pieseutation  of  the  fina ncial  m~m:s  in  ordeir  to  desiign  :mdit  pro  rem.mes  tha1i 

are  appropriate  in  the  cin:mm  ces ,, bat  no  :fur  1he  purporie  o:f  ~ im . op.iimon  on .' lhe  e:ffediveness 

of  the  entity's  mtaml  oontrol.  Acoo rdingly,  we  exprellS  .mo  such .opinion  .ih  :mdii  c f  ftnanciaJ!  stlii:eme:uts 

also , mi.'Oh'es  ev1!.luatmg  the  app:mpri.a.~s  of  Ore  arootmting  FO!.i.cre s usellll .and  the  reason11ib leness  of 

significant  accouoring  eslimates  made  bymanag ~,  as  well  as ,,ei.'alm.ling  the  mwal.l  pFeisentafiou  ofihe  

> fulmcia]

statements_ Ou rr  armlH  al.s o,m cl miedpecfomlllll!  such  othe.rirrocemrres  as  •e  •Gmmd6re.i  necessary 

in1he  c:iFcmn..,tim£ ie. •r .

Qpinron  m:J1.Finain  ·-al  Statewems 

lf nom  opinion,  FEC' s firnmcial  :st.a teme ms  present  fairdy  m. :all  material  :respects , FE .  ' firmmcial  position 

ns  of  Septentier  31},  _ 0,  -.m.d  2(119 , -.m.d  us  net  oos  o~ ·operations,  cliumges  in  uet  position,  hudget,ry 

resom:res ,, and  ,custoruid  activity  fur  l:he  ilisca1  years  Chen  ended  in  aooorda:ooe  1ilii i lib. U .S.  genera]ly ·aooepted. 

aooountmg  principles.  

> Otlmr

l\olatte.1 

R.eqmred .SupplememruvinfomLmion 

U. S.  geneml!ly  :accepted  :e coWiltimg  pri:ru:i.p]es  is.sued  by  the  FederaJ  Accountiug  Stancbrds 

Amvory  Hoa:n-d . (F  ~ } rcequu-e  ilia.t  l:he  RSI  be  presented.  t,o  supplement  the  firut.ncia] 

statements.  Although  the  RS[  is  not  a part  oflhe  nwm.cia.l.  st arem.eols , FA SAB  co:nsidern , this 

mfm:m.~on  to  be  an  ,essential  part  of  :financial  reporting  for  :placing  the  financial!  Ss taiements  m

app:Fopriate  operation.al,  ,ooono:m.ic,  or  lristo:rica.l.  context  We  have  ipplioo  certain  liimited   

> pr oouures to

lhe  RSI  in.  ll.c.c.o:rdlmce  with  U..S _ genend.ly  accepted  go  iM!lillnenl  auditing. 

st-mdarm  which. oomisted  ofinqumes  ofDlallage.mentaocnit1he  meth  ds  of  preparing  the  RSI 

and  comparing  the  iofomuati.on . fur  COOll i:s ten cy  "'iith  illi3D.a.gemen f s  responses  to  the  auditor's 

inquiries,  l:he  financ: ial  statements,  MJ.d  other  know]edge  we  obtained  during  thti  andir  of  il:b.e  

> financial

s · te menti  in . orde:r  to  :report  ,omissi ons.  or  material  •rnues  :from  F ·.  AB 

gnideJmes,  if  my,idenfilied  b l:hese  Limited  pFOcedmes.  U e did  not  audit  md  we  do  not  express 

:m  111p:mion  or  prov.ide  my  MsuraJ!loe:  ou. the  RSI  becaD!"iie  lhe  limited  p:rocedmes  we  app lied  do 

not  p:rnll'ide  'fflfficimt  evidence  to  express  m opinion.  or  pFovide  my  8:SSl.11:aE.  e. 

FE C's  otbec  m:fo .unalion  ,comtams  a wide  range  ,of ' mfurmaiti~!!l.  some  of  which  is  not  directll y

;rel.a telil  to  lhe  fuumcial  s tmtem.ents . This  mfo:ana  :on  is  p:res ent elil  Io:r  pruposes  of  additiona] 

1maly.s ·s  and  is  not  a required  part  of  the  rmmcial  statements  ,or  ·the  R.St  \\  e reiuHhe  oilier 36 

mfm:malirm .:inclnded  Mfu. the  financial  s tements  in  cmieE  to  ide:nl:icy · material  mconsis:te:ncies, 

nany,  wit:htheau.dited:finan  · .sta·ements.  Ourmditwas  oond'lllctedfor  the  pmpose  off mmiing ;

an  opimom  on  FE  ''s  financial  stat:emenra.  Vi  e dlid  not  aud!iit  amll  do  mot  express  am  opinion  o:r 

p1ovide  any  a:ssuran  e om  'the  01:h&  m:fmmalion 

Repor t ion.  lu.rtemalC00Jroi  1n'f'r  Finaiud  lR~po1  ting 

Inoonn.eotion  «ifh . ow:  amli rh11fFEC's  financials:  temmts  we  coomdered.FE  s i.ntemal  control  o,i.rer 

D.Jllanciai  nepornng,  consistent ,  .·itb  ,om  3/uili.tm  ' s  :F esponsibility  ilisoo.~s e.ril  below.  We  pelffMmed  om 

prooedures  related  to  FiE.C'  s mtemal.  contto:ti  ,m,.e:r  financial.  repo:rlii:og  in  accordan  e with.  -_ s_ genernlly 

ceepted! .gm.remm.ent  alil.dilmg  st.m.d!ll:lfds . 

> FBC

management  ;iis  re.irpons ihle  for  mam.tammg  ,effective  intemal  contrrol  over  .finam.ci.al  .repo:rtmg, 

## m lu. iling  the  design,  i.mp1eme nt atioo,.  and  maintenance  o:f  wtema]  conbol  .rel.eva .i JJt  to  !he  pFepruaiio:n 

amll  fair  presentatio n.  of  financial s  teme.mts  th.at  file  fi, ee  from  mil  eria1  miss·  tement,  whethec  due  to 

mud  or  ,error. 

Audifo:r ' s R.e~ ,puDSlllJilib 

In  planning  and  performing  om  aml!iit  of  FEC' 's  financial  s t:ements  as  oi  and  :fur  the  y.eru- ended 

Sep tember  30,  2(1'.'  , in  accordanoe  wi1!h  U.S.  gen~  aoceptetil  go:i. Temm.ent  auditing  stmd,ards,.  we 

oomideredl  the  FEC'' s:  mtema Loon 1tm1!.  m•er  financial  repmting  111s  a basi.:i: ·fm  desigmng  amlif  pF@eedm nes 

Iha - are  .ipp: rQPriare  in.the  ciroumstauces.  fo:r  ·the  pmpose  of  expressing  our  opinion  ,on  1he  financial 

statements  but  no t for  the  pwpose  of  e::qmiessing  an  opinion  on  the  effecii•·eness  o:f  FEC' s  internal 

oo ntrnl  m, reFfinac i ' .  repm:tmg.  Acomd:iing ly,  we  do  not  express  rm  opmioo  ooFEC ' ,;  mtemai[  oomrol  

> M'fil

:financiaJ  :repootin:g . We  are  required  to  report  all  de:fi c:ien cie s:  that  a1e  ,cc:m.-; idereiil!  to  be  s.ilgnificant 

deficiencies  or  material  v:.reai.knesses _ We  did  not  ClonsideJT  all  in.tern.a]  controls  :rele  r8!Dt  to  operating 

objectiv es  such  as  those  iconh:o .lsrelevant  to, pFepruing  perfo:mllllil.Ce  :inforn.la 1tion  aiDd  ~ ·efficient 

operations. 

De:fto:itio:n  and  hili.eJe-I!ll t Lmit.lltio:os  of  Internal  Contro]  over  .f  m'3nei al  Rqumtine·  

> An

entity 's  internal.  c, cmtroi  o~'eF  :fiwmciall  xep  orting  icS  a prnoess.  effected  by  tho  "e  clmrged  \villi 

go,; •e]Ilrulce.  Dllfill!31geme nt,  "aiDd  other  peroonnel ,  lhe  o ueclii.res , ,of  wlrich  file  to  p:ro'liliide  rea;sonable 

a~sm:a.1.100  tha.rt  1)  tmnsadiom;.  me  _properly  reoordeiil,  prooes S:ed,  md  swmnariz.edl . to  permit  il:he 

p~arati.o:n  of:liiwmcial  s tfillle-Jrts  .in  ilccordanoe  v-.ifu  U.S.  gen.er.ally  aocepteiil  accOW1ting  pri.1.11::ip l es ,

and!  assets  are  sa:f eguro:ded  aga:ins  los.s  from  UEa ulho: ri.zed  aoquisitioll,  use,  ·or  dispD:Silion,  and  (2) 

mmsadions  are  ,execu ted  in  accora.an  e ~ iitb.  pm\'YIODS  ofapplicab!e  laws,  in  iudmg  those  ge  -.emmg ·

the  1>ESe ·o bu dget  authmity,  .regul.alii.1iHl.'l  ,contrw: ts,  and!  gr111mt  agreemtmts  noru:o:mplim. ce  '"'ith. which 

oould  har11le  a material  ,effe0t  on  the  finan  id  s"  tements~ 

Beca:1i 11se  ofirniinherent  llmui  bollii  internal  ooniro'l  m: .ei:  ruran~ial  r,epomng  may  not pre  :ent,  o:r  detecl 

amll  correc  m.issta  em.ents  due  t,o  fraud  or  :err  r. 

Rerullts  of  Ou,  Consideration  of  Intema.l.  Co ntr ol . o ~ Fmmcial  &epo~  

> Our

cons:idern'lii:o:n  of  internal  oentro]  ras , for  the- 1.:i:mited . pmpose  de.imbelil  above,  amd  was  11:ot 

designed  to  :irlenti.i.1r  ail  deficiencies  m mtenw  co:nko l lh.af  .might  be  material.  w, eakne:1ses  and 

sip.can  deficiencies  o:r  to , express  an  opinion  on  the  effocii.i.•eo.ess  of  .FEC's  !internal . eontrol  o,  rer 

> PU..C

37 

furi11ncial  reporting_  ThNefo:re.  material  weal'nes-:ses:  or  sigmficant  dem.ciencies  may  exit  that  have·  aotr 

been.  i.dentifi:ed.  Given.  these  - - ·li.oEs , dmmg  our  audit,,  li\ 'e  rud . not  .idartify  my  de:lic i enci.es  in 

internal  cmnlroJI .011,;er  :finmcial  reportmg  di.a  v. re  ,oomider  to  e matermll  weakness:es_ Howeve1  ma: teria]  

> i

·eakoes~s:  may  ,e,ml  'th.at  ha . -e  not  been  ideatiified. 

Dm:ing  our  FY  2020  audit , we  idadified  deficiencies  mFEC'  s intemal  onlrol  o -er  tlioaacia1  l!'epm:tmg 

that  we  do  not  cmmdeF  to  be  materi-al.  weaknesses_ Ncmetbe le ss  these  deficienci es : wa:mmt  FE 

mmagemen:f .s  att em tion..  We  h'ITT,.·e  comm 1wi catelll . ~ matieI"  tD FEC'  s .lill!llllilgem.ent  Below  and  in 

Exmb it  A are  the  significant  defi  iencies:: 

1- Logrcal.  acomml:  management  activm.es  me  not  ronsisrently  pmomEld  for  sepru:atedUSiffi'.s _

2_  Hastiline  ,c.onfiguration  stamfards  are  no _ fi:illy  .impleme uted  fm  all  '\\i'mdow  de:vroes _

3_  Gon'tiimrity  of(1pera. ti ons  is  not  implemented  mi.-d  tested. 

4_  SecmifJ I"  .a  rarenes s b-ainmg  Vi •as  not  comp  etedl  by  :all  F:EC  system.1llre]'S _ 

> j _

C-Onective  Acri  n Plans  are  oot  oompliam  with. government  requnemem.s _

Intended  Pm:pose  o,f  R~:it  on  Intem1d  Control  O• t'fil  F inancial. Reyorting 

The  pmpo.Be  of  lms  report  is, solely  m, de:.enoe  the  so.ope  of  om  con.si.dem tion  o.fFEC' :s  · co:n:ttol 

m.rer  financial  reporting  and  the  r e-Snits , of  om  pmc, edmes,  andl  no ·  to  [lD'm.r:ide  an  o;piimon.  on  'lhe 

effecti,;reness  of 1!he  FEC ':s  mremal  conlro]  ,over  fioan  ia]  repomng.  Tim  r,e -po rt  :iis  m .integra]  part  .of an 

udit  pa:fmmed  in  accmdlance  ·wiith  U S_  generally  a cept ed  go:i.•emmen.t  audiring  shm.duds  in 

ool'lS idermg  rnfemm  c.oJiltml  owr  ' mam:i:al  reportmg_  AocordinglJ  furs  1eport  on  internal. conilol  0,1,re r

nuca:nc.:ial  r e,pomng  iisnot  smtahle  :fo:r  my  other  pm:pose_ 

Rf.pot  on  Compli.mi!'!e  mth.  La~  Reg)tl'L.111iom  on lr.a  ru,  and  Gt."311t  .Agl!\eements 

ltn  oouneciion  , 1ith  om  .a udit  of  .fEC 's  finau  i:d  statements,  we  tested  co:mplimre  v.ith.  ·elected  JllFO'l.Wom 

of  applicable  Jaws , Fegu]a ti oos,  oo n'lrn.cfu,,  and  grant  :agreements  comisteut  with. om  audil:,m: ' s  .respoDSJ'llili'.iq •

discw  ed.  be10Vit  We  caution  that  nonromp  - .may  OCOl. ll"  and . not  be  detected  by  these  tests.  We 

perl'mmedl  mrr  · est s of  co:mpl!imre  m ac.cordmce  wifu  U generally  :acaep  ed  gova rn re ut  andi.lmg 

stmda!rds ,

l.bnagement'  g, Respomiliilif] 

FE.Cman,agemeEit  is  Fe spo:nsili  , fon:omplying  ¥ti.th  faws~  :regwations,  oontr, &cls ,, aml  grant  agreements 

'8,pplicable  to  fEC _ 

> A:l!ldito:[ '

s:Responsib:illli.ty  

> Our

.Fe!}p onstbility  is  to  l, est  oomp  -an  e wifh  sele die<l:  piovisi@m  of  app.licalJle  ]a.11  -s  Iegulalio:m, 

co'.llltracts,  ad  grant  ageements  applicable  to  FEC  Iha  ilrave  a direct  effect  on  lhe  deteonmation  of 

material  mmmlls  and  msclosures  in  FEC's  financial  sbdeme. n ts  -and  pe :r fo:nm.  ced:am  oilier  '.lim:i ·ed 

prnoedure;s~  Accm:dmgly  w,e  did  noUes!  compl!ian:ce  wilh  ill  law.s  .regul,'aliom  oontrac:ts,  and  grant 

ag1eements  .applicable  to  FBC,_ 

lte..!!iults  ofOurT  ests.  for  CoDlJ)llianoe ·Vii  · th .Laws,  Regulla  ·· ons._  Contracts:_  amd  Grant  Aereem=ents .

Om  tests  for  ,comp  ::m~  v.-ith  selected  pro, risio: ns  of  :i i; 1pJieahle  Jaws  :regulations,  rnmt:Jracts,  and  grant 

apeemenl:s,  disdosed. no  msf1mcies  of .l!Ull ncomp1ian -oe  foF FY  _@  tliat  wou]d  be  1,eporrable  under  1 _ •

ge na:ally  acrepted.  goi;,rermnent  ai 11diting  sland! :;11:ds _ Efoweve:r  the  objective  of  Ollilf  e,st:s:  was  not  1to 

> Pl.LC

38 

pro,,;nde  an  opinion  OD  compliance  "Wilh  laws:  regulat io ns  contracts,  and  grant  agreemen tll  applicable 

to  FBC  Aoco:rdmgiy  we  do  note-Xpre~  suc-h  an  opinion. 

The  pmpose  of  this  report  is  "oL e! ly  to  desm'"be  llie  .soope  of  om  tes1mg  of  oo:mpl.:iamoe  '!11.-ith  • eJec:tedl 

pnJCvisions  of  app : "cable  laws,  regulations,  ,coo'lir.lcts , and  grant  agr, eemenb ,  and  Ui.e  re sulm , of  that 

tes1ing,,  arnL  no!  to,  pro  iide  an  opinion  oD  complianoe.  'Ibis,  report  ~ an  mtegral  pm  of  an  audit 

## :penormedl .m.accordance  Vi i tb . ·· .' .  generally  ,1c:oepled  gova:m:nent  auditing  standards  moons.id eling 

oompliaooe.  Aoc-0rdmg ly,,  lms  11epo:rt  ,on  oomplianre  with  ,ws , re gulations  contracts,  and  .grmi1 ·

agr, eeme ,nts  is  :not  suitable  for  any  o1lher  pmpose. 

trim  of  Prim. ·1:· em  s:  Emdiogs  and  Remmm.eu.d:atious 

We  ha  .re  rev .'e  ;vM  fue  staliu!s  o: f open  reoo:mmendatiom  from  fue  FY  2019  Independent  Am dit m:-'s 

R.epmi:,  dated.No, i.rem.ber  l9 , -CH9 . The  ~atm  @fpri o.r  yea.rreoomm.mdations, :is  presented  mExm  .it 

R

Management  has ,presented!  111  .res,ptlnse  to  tlr .e findings· idenfilied. in.  om  .:r ,eport.  Mmaagemenf  s .response 

to  the  :~ort  u:  Jlresented  in  Exm:""bit  C_ We  did  n ot  :m d:i t FEC  's,  resp  on.se  and,  a c-ordi:ng ly  'We  expires&    

> llO OJll!lllOll OD !Ii

E ,  lua.ti.o:o,  o:fl\!fana gemen t's  Respo:me- to  fih e.Au.di.tors  .Re-pott 

In  Ii~  to  the:  dm ft  Fepcmt ~FEC  p:ro1,!ided  its  plans  to  address  the.  fiodmgs., , amll  agr ttd  li  iith  fbe 

reoo lll.ID31 dations  h:!  i mp rove  .iofmnn ti oo  5J;stem  seem]  _ conttol!s..  ·are  five  firuimgs  o:f  which  two 

are  new  •~ and! .six.  open.  mommnenifu ti lil.lli  .. FEC  OOIJmlellts  :me  in cluded  in  ·l.heiJi:  entirety  in  F..,chlbif ·

# c_ 

# ~f~ 

Greenbe lt  i~,fan~  

> li lf'l iem"be.:

16 . -.20 _0, 39 

## Exhibit  A- Signifiieaot  Defirie-ndes 

Eifectiv ,eo e:ss  ~iflmo nnauon  .··~-~ tem  CoD!trols  Oveill'  :financial  Re:porti11 1g  

> Cdil 'n=

d D .-- ·- ~ '- •

..1cm~  an ·  ,.m,.rt.-um:menU'i.lfi.om 

ITEtmiling  :.,-020 -01:  :logical  AKol.lllt  Mmmgement  A('t:iiiities  Are  Not  C on. ~istendy  P'e:rmnned  F'or 

Sep  . ed.l  &er  {Repeat  :Fimling) 

Condmon: 

We  i:dem:i:fioo.  an  inco  •istent  .imp lementati@ n of  FECs:  mt  m.,nagaoml  011o:b:dh  fm  separated 

e!!Upieyees . FEC  acommt  mana~t  rud .no  docum.enti.ts  mmm1l  re\!iew  of user  accounts  for  the  General 

SYppmt • S}'-stem  fG  S) , and  majoT  iippliratiou  sy. ·reim  in  acoo:rdance  wifu  the ir  ~rem  serurity  p

Specificnlly,  FEC- s:  :mcomrl  ma:oa~  did  m . rei. ria1r  user  a.ccount  ooess  rigbis  and  pmrileges  fm  !he-

finanoia]  :sJ'St ems  such  as  the  Web TA,,  Fegasys  and  Cmuprizon  s,rstems..  .As  a readt,  FEC  manageme;  did. 

oot  bmcly  remm ;e  ,s,ys: tmi.  user' s  RCCOlilIIIS  lle  fu~ ,user  separat ed!Jirom  fue  :agency .

Based on ,om iFe\oi.ew  of~  IT Systemmeracoooms,  we  identified:-

• ·ltiree:  of  ele:~  GSS  ·'IJSeIS  rere  no  remJved!  ti meir,  .md 

• one  of302  WebiTA  meraccmm.ts  \Vl!Sll@1iremoved  tinEly, 

We  note  ·l!bat  upon  ooti.qmg  management  effhis  fin•  ilie  three  U S mer  aor.ollllfs  . ·here  innnedfa  ;1¥ 

remoi.'00! .

1'llS'I'  ~ ~1 , ·:c:atien  (SP)  800 -53,  Revision  4 (Rev  4),  ~ and  Pm-.i2l)I  C.ontrois  for  Fedeml 

Itfrmmfkm.  .S, •st~  {IIW  ~ons , Sea.mty  Comro l AC  Aoooonf  Managamm,  ntes the  fti.U · v.ing: 

Control : Tue  Igia:nmdion: 

f Oems , e:ntbles: .,  modme:s  disabl es: "'  m:miretn01.res  .mfon:nanon  s.ystan. .acoo. 1nns  :in .aooo rdmre 

-with  EAssignm.ent:  oiglUlization-de  - , , p:roceduries  er.  (loorutions ]; 

Monitru:s  ~ use  cif  i nfoi:ma tion  S}t:m em  acc ,mmt:s ;

h.  _ otifies  aOOCIWll:  managers: 

1.  ·\lilben  acoou nts  ,.o:e  no  l ng;er  ;reqrured!; 

2.  Vilbe:n  'llS!ill! , m;e  emrinated  or  Ir.ms~  and .

3.  Vi.i'h en im:u \li.dt:Utl  mfm:mationsygtemw~  or  need-to -know  changes:; 

i .~fuo:riz.es  3iccess : to , the , mfo:m10.tion  !liil'l!lem · ased  n: 

l .  A , ralid  aa:ess  111 uth  riz!Itiorr,  -

2.  Inten !iledl  system  mr.age ; am 

3_  OtheF  attributes  as  required  by  the  orgamzafiou  or  associated  :wiss.ions il:m ;. siness ,

.fimctio.m ;

j_  Re .ri ews  a.coowJ.m  for  comp  ·an-ce  with  aoommt  m.ma:gemem  ~ [Assigmn en t: 

~fum.-defin.ecl .firequa:i  l and 

k.  Establishes  21  process  for  reissuing  sbaredlgroop  -accoum  ,c,redei  (if  depfo _y edj) , wnen 

indi .li:  "dmls  are~  from  1h e group. 

640 

FEC  A!."coimt  .M,mnge1.1e1Jt  Raliq•  stales: 

A.IJ  lEW  accm:mt  access  Ii.gbti  and  pm,-il~s  sho~  d.  be  rei.iewed  -anmnlly  and  v,ilirurled  in 

aroordancev.iifh  Geneml! .Suppcm.5'}~ tenmndMa:jor  Application  system  secmityp]ms  by  the  use.r "•

Direct  M'llnmger _The  re 'l!'eJ  of  appm ,t'l.d  autb o .-ty  granted  foor  u;;er  aooounls  shomdl .be  0.11.'ied  an  lhe  

> bmmess

criticality  ofihe  inftmnation. or  system  fu  which  the  a.ccmmfu  -are  assoc iated 

Arnmmts  of  users  ·l:erminared  unde£  rum<4lrultile  cin;wmtmoes  ·shotdd  be~~  oo  lata:  lb.an 

fue  dose  ,ofbu~ in-ess:  (8:IIIOp .m. ) of  then  fi.u'll]  dlay  o-f ,emplOJ!IDeJ!l.l 

FEC  management  has •oot  ,complied  with  !he  FEC  AccoontMan,age~  Policy  or  .imp .!.e.ment.ed  sufficiem 

llillilllirto.ring  controls  t ll  enrnre  oomplianDe  with  NIST  account  DlllllagenEDl  standards  md. guidelin~--

filffct: 

By  oo  implementing  a periodic  re l!i.ew'  of  all  tmer  corn.mis  and  cma-bl:irng  the  a.CG:!Illlrn  according  to  po]icy ,

there  i:s  m mc,reased  risk  mers  cioold  gm  r Felain  uumrthorizetil  acres li  and/or  pemimL  .mautl:m:med 

fuoc  · ·ns  and  lnmsact:iom  wiili.in  FEC  sys remi _

Rttommeni:falion  I : 

We  re:amn::iend  fue  FEC  10CIO  in  conjunction  with  the  direct  m:margers  perfuan  and  doc m:nen t perio  ·e

115'a'  a-roes~  :re'\i:ews  for  FEC  systems  0000111illl:g  ID  the  agency's  sys tem  ·seouritypfaa 

IT  Finding  .W20- 02:  Basiefine  Config:m:a .norn  t.:mdatm  .Are  Not  Fully  Iinpfe.mfnt  Fo  . All  \\mdo  ·.s 

Illni ces .

ondin.on: 

FEC  has  not  firlly  in'1lemeoted  baseline  oonfiigura  ~w .stmduds  fur  all  Wmmm.rs  ,~  in  acc cm ::lruroe 

,..,;,th  Secmity  Teo lmi.c..al  Imp lementation  Gu i de- STI G) . A STIG  is  a cyiimeruri  methodolllfil • for   

> ~sec uri. ty pmtooo]s,

lhi. thin  .netwmks , senrern,  oornputers,  and  Iogij .ral.  demgjllS  to  e!lma!llce  mera11 

seam!} '- \iVhen  imp leDEmelil  tlJese  guides  ,enhance  ,;eamty  fo r •software,.  hardware,  phJ,rsial  and  Jogi  al 

!lldlitedure;, t ll  m.uthar  J.eduoe  ,,1.dnera h ilities .

FY  2010 . FBC  OCIO  diangecll .l:heix  stmrl'ru:d  c, omigi,uati:on  baseline • ~ for  '\\i.ndm\03  operating 

_systems  fuJm .fue  Uni tfll!l  St'2tes  Gowmliiffii:  Configuration  Baseline  (USGCB)  to  STIG ..  The  FEC  OCIO  is •

cw:rentlyrepbcing, Wmdow.s  7 opera 1ting  sy3tews  ;i;iilh  \\f mdows  W to ,ilDeet  lire  STIGrequm-enei.!:s . Hov,-ever, 

the  imp~tio11  of  ST IG  cmmgmatian  .smndards  •1ias  oot  been  fully  rrnplememed 

NIST  Special  Publicatioo  SOOL5.l  Rffiii.si.on  4 (R £-I1 . 4),  &.-tuiaj r and  .Rln-ag. 1 Coritrols  for  .F:akro.l 

bifarmtmun •~m'em.r  {D'Jd  Oi:g ,m-uzilliom , Serurity  Control™ -- ~ Co . , guratio:n.  ~.s  fue  following: 41 

Coutrol: 

The  ~ iEl,,:-lops  docturems,  and  IO:J3 inta ins  ,. Illder  ~mi.ti.on  COJ!l1m  a cwrent  b~ ·

oonfiiguralioo .of  ili.e  :im an:mtion.sys tem.. 

NISI  SP  &00-53,  Re. v.  4f,  Se.cwi  , mll.1.P11vL1.9 1 Cowmfar  F.rkral  Ieformati.oo  rJi;sten15  and  ~oJlis-,

April  2CU3 ,_  Seotmty  Co:n1rol  CM~  Comigurn.tion  Setfu,gs  states  the  f ollo1i,, iiug: 

Contra  . fbe  organiza  ..  Il . 

> a.

iEsafuhl:ishes  and!  ~ m~.uarion  s~  i"oc  mfu:mmion  tecJmol.Ofil r pillll:Dil)i:s  emploved 

11\lithin  fue  infanmt:icm  .system  tlfilllg  [ A.~sif?IDjlP)Ji ' orgrue1.tion..defum  seruri  .' ccmfi~ 

meckti;sti:: ] that  reflec . the  imrt  restr.icti ,r e Imde  consistent  ,vilh  opezatioml requn;emeli[3 ·

b.  I:mpl~nts  the  nfig uration  settinW, 

.[ ~ doaimen!:s.  md  iipllliOVa  any  ~tions  from  esrnblishedl  corm~Ol!Ji  settings  for 

[Assi gJ.l.Il!lffil  ~ -' on..ue fin ed  infi  rum  s:vstau  OOllljJOllemS ] based  on  [ ~

~ - n~  ~ reqi.maiieot si t and 

d Monirors  aniJl  routrols  dhaQges  f,  the  c~ticm  ~ m : I iilh . ~tio nal 

-polic · es  and  procedulra 

The  FE C OCIDpo.s,tponed  mil  ~emBli:afiion.ofthe  ~11Ghaseline  ooofi.gmatioustml!Jards  1las  · rearbecmtse 

~t  ras:  in  the  proc.e;;s  ofmlling  out  DB\\'  Lap~  libat  v,,"Oliil!d  inclu de  WWIDWS  10.  &we,; •ei:  - process  was-

:fimtbeJ:  delayed  due  to  the  OOr\l'ID-19  ,em.cifoDDEDt  ,conslra.imi;,_ 

Efft d: 

FE C mfor mdiOIII . ~ am  me  at  in«eased  ru.k  'b),  not  :ii.nplementmg  ifs.  STIG  baseline  clilllfigw:ation 

st mdimik  ,~l'lmhed  fm  the  .rgency .

Rleconnn.e,nd,  tiou.  .?: 

We  recommend  l:hat  lhe  .FEC  OCIO  fully  imple:ment  S'TI G baseline  c oomguratio:n  standaiids  fm  Wirulb,ws 

de liices:. 

[l ' Fm .din.g  !-010-03:  Continruity  Of  Ope1·ati.on. :1;  Flan  ~ No  hnplem. e,nred  .-md  T~red  ~peat 

Finding) 

Co ndition :

Based. oa  om  re  ·ew  of  the  mll!rt  ament  FEC  Ca11.tin , · of  OJnmtioas  Plm  (COOP)  :and  other  upporrine: 

dornmemati  n,  we  oo.nc.lude  that  1be  000P  has :no  been  fully  imp]~  2lliil  te s:tecl! . In  FY  2020 , the 

FEC  10CIO  upda t ed!  · FEC'  Conti11 1Ii ty  of Opm"lh'iUJl  Plan . Ho  re'Li'er 1 FE , mmaigemmf  bas  oot  :pelfo~ 

les  l:raimDg  and  exeroise  ( IT&E)  activ.i  ,· e:i  m:a ocm:dmce  with  die  FEC  OOOP _TI&E  -a.id's  m1-~ ing 

that  m o:rgimiiz:d ioo  s mminmlyp  is  capable  of :sup,portmg  1: he  co:mimled ,e,~ec.unon  offue  mgamzation'8, 

essential  ftmc  ~ons  Ummgbrnit  the  durati:mwf  a. oontimm:y  e:v-ent  S-pecifi  illy  FEC  has  not  full 1,  de\i-e1.1.ope.d, 

i::oo:rdimt e.d,  and . cm:lll'l.l.cieii  IT&:.E  to,  assess  and  lli--alidate  its  oontim ri f]I  plans,  _palicit::s,  proeedme.s  !Ind 

systems .

Afso ,, as . reported  in  pnor  penods , the  FEC  did  not  imp len:EDli  the.  agency 's  policy  to  develop  sys  m-

~c  oo:ntmg~ncy  plans  fl  r critical  immmatioo  ~!Jj tezm. 

8

## B~~&uo.,1PANY ;:;;;:;;;;;;;:;:;;;;:::;:;;~= -=_=_=_=_=_=_=_=_=_= _:a.., =======:a mii1iHimi:ii ~, a~~ unTil.N ,I • • l!M!MG  &'I  LC _42 

-nsl  Special  NJ .lica ti ao.  , 000-53,  Rei.,isi.o  . 4 ~ ij,_  , ~13 1 Wi:1  .Pl 'ffi\KJ/  Comr ols'  for  .F~ m

lnf!JI  natia1,15}~em,r  a,JdOrg1NJ 'irmions,  Secmit yC OI!tro  .CP-2  C n:tingenc y Pl an  !im ·tfs  the · tillowmg: 

Control:  'The  oura:nization: 

a.  De¥el ops  a contingency  plm  for  the  :i.nifmmati.o:n  ,;;ystem  tmt: 

1. [dei.J.tmes  ~al  missions  md  busirness  :functio:ns  md  assocj:,f  ed.  c~c:y 

reqmreDEDts; ,

Provides.  IeC0\'6I"I'  objectiv  '.  restoration  prioriitie s,  and  metri .cs; 

3.  .A.~es  c~  roes.  respomibili ties:,  ass~ed  :individuals  "l'with.  contact 

mfmmatio:n; 

4.  .Addresses  maio:t~  essential  mi~ons  and  1:Jus:ioess  imctioos  de-spite  an 

.inf cmmtion  system  d.isr uμ ti.Oll!,  CCD:ijW onrise . or  failme· 

5.  ...~es  e\"e!l tn -ai]  fu)]  .information  .system  reitoo:arion . w:ifhmtt  deteriondion  of  the 

secmity  saf'egm:nis  origi.uru1y  planned  md  implemented;  and 

6' . Tu  w;ie .v.-ed!  and  approved  by  [Assignment  ~tion-defined  personnel  r ml  l

b.  Distributes  copies  of  fue  contingency  plm  to  l[ AssiJ;D!IIIEllt : orga:mzati  n-defirned  key 

co:nJin,..,~·  personnel  ( i.d.emi:fied  bv  nam:-,.md/or  by  role)  and  mganizational  ,eleme 0nl5  l; 

c.  C'-00rdiaares  co:ntingen  , planning  acti.11'1ties  · nth  inciden t brutdliu~  activ i.tie s: 

d.  Reviews  l:he  ~ plan  fur  the  :infonnatio:n  system  [.A_sj;~  or_ganjzation-defured 

freqnen  1];  

> e:.

Updates.  the  conl:ingen.cy  plan  fa  addries  changes  to  l:he  ,o~tion.  .infomia:tiOOl!  S"jistem.  o:r 

·eam.~t  of  operation  and  prob  ems  enc:oun:tered  during  conting enc y plan  i:mpl-eme:ntation. 

,ea_ecution,  m tes~ 

f.  Commmicates  ·COD~ency  plan  ·~  to  [rusi_gmnent  orgamzati  n-defin.ed  key 

c~  per-soon.el  (identified  b name  .md/or  bv  role)  and  rnrganizario:ml  d.emenl5 J- and 

g.  Proiects  l:he  contingency  plan  :iom  'LDJla.Uthorized  dis.domre  and!  modmca.ti-on. 

Ni£S1'  .Special  Pl!lb  ·ca ti on  SP)  800-5.11 , Re-aon  4 ~\ . Sa.-wi , am  An'!ll) 1 Cottirols- ·llr  Fakml 

.lnfcmMiirJ.  i -mt,t,r  and  OJ,g1miz.ati-oos;  Sectni~  Orm:i!i"C!I  CP-4  Contingency  Pfau. T~  stat es  fue  f olilhtw:ig: 

Control:  The  or gamzatiorr. 

a.  1'erts  die  oo ntingenq  plan.  t"i  . die  irm :mnatio n S)"St an  [Assiigm:mnt ~ mgan irntim-J.>.Jmedl 

~]  u~  {.A.ssigonert:  ao:ganizatioo-~  tests]  to  detem:ii:1!1e  Im  ,effecti veness  o'f  tlie  plan 

and.  Ille  o:r~  ·onaJ  reamnes:. .to  e&eet'lte  the  μfa ~_ 

b.  Re.i.ei:  ra  the  oo~plm  rest  results ; andJ  

> c.

Initiates  cmred!i.ve  actions,  :if :neei.B!l.. 

> PLI..C

43 

The  FEC  Con  ·nui .  r of Clp,:;rations  and  Disast.er  Re..om-'CJfY  Rofi  , P' ol:icy  Nm:nber  58 -2..9  i.,ras  adoptecli  m

~1004  mihpdatedirnFehnwy  20l0.  TheffiC  poficysra  :

Bus.ines.'l :(lmmmraity  a:ndl .disaster  reoo\rery  pfaru: ,should  be  tested/re-assessed. ou  ii  regrifar  baisis .

> Carn~:

• Plam  :should  no  ·be.  (lOUSidared  i.'1ili.dhmtiJ  tested  fur  praclicality.  executability,  ,errors 

md im  omiiscsions . Tue  initiill  validation.  rest  sbnld . oonsi:s  · of  a.  sm:mlation  ,or  bwti  al   

> .es t.

• Once  i.'lilidated!, . plans  should.  be  tested  am:mally,  or  when  Sl~  e chmges  ocarr  to 

Ure  system,,  to  the  system  emn:rolllllelll:,  or  to  l:he  pl.arii  ~t:self 

• Test  resw.~  $hou]d  be  munta:med .mIll  j OII!llal  foomat  mdl  ret.amed  fur  ~icS.. 

• Valihhted  dbange  recornmeudatiOilS  ·remll:mg  from  testing  'acti.'l;li.ties  S:ru:! 1rud  be 

incorporat ecli  imo  p mm:red'.iately .

The  FE C OCIO  did  no t prioritize  resomces  fo  implemeat  ru 1.d  perfum:rJ.  at  !iouline  res ,t of  iits  COUP  to 

rnmiliarize  staff~  v.lith  ·fueir  ro·  es  and  responsibili ti es  mq  an  eim rge nq r,  eDSlll"e  l:ha t systems 

aruJ.  eqnipment  ,:1remamtruned i1u11  COD5tmf  sl>ire  ofreaidmess , ,3!Il.d  V<ilida te  oertam  ~ o:fthe  COOP .

> Effed ":

Without  ·.  1

ementing  and  testing  a COOP  befo:  e ne  'is  needed, . increases:  the  ·risk  ·that  lhe  fEC' .s 

rontmgency  plan .Vi'Ol.dd  .nt(  .inclllde  ,e ;,'eI}ifum g i,t  needs  and/ar  nol:  be  able  to  exeoute  the  pl fflle ·in. the  .most' 

effectiv e,.  efficient,  md  secmr e way 

Reeommendalion  3: 

We  recon:n:aend  tlie  FEC  OCIO  utilize  lessons  l eamed. .from.llie  OOVID -19  pamremic  to  detenmne  ll ,aJJ¥  

> rei.-isilimS

are  need.  to  the  Con1inuil),'  ojOperoiian  P'/m , mi  .. .cl1 eduleperiodic  testing. 

Rtto:mmendation  4: 

We  recommend!  lhat  lhe  FEC  da-elop ,~an...specilic  co.oting:encj  plans,  as  ippropriate  f.  r the  agency  mk 

leve l (Repeat  Reammrendalio:o) 

Il  Finding  ?1010 1

-0.J:  Secwi.ly  AwaI1~ness;  Trnin:ingWas  -ol  Comp  eted  .By  .cUl iFEC  s.~t ~m  Use . 

C ondi.lion :: 

Based  on  01.rr  rewe  ;v ofFE.C: 's  security  trnwng  status ,reports  £'o r FY  20W,  all  FEC  system  users  ( ~oyees 

and  oomractmrs)  did  no  · comp  ere  sernn:iity  aWliffi.Jffis  ninmg  as  required  "by  lbe  FEC  Fi:ikn1l  SE'aniry 

Tminilig  anil  Awr11m, •ru3  Poliq.:  Ptikey  Niimh.er  S.8-1.2 . The  FEC  Chief  Infonnati:on  Officer  (ClO)  mr-en;ees ,

lihe  imp!emBUtation .and .entfoir.enBJJ:  of  the  tranring  poli cy _ FEC  000  provides  nining  to  all  lS.jSlem  mm  

> ~

its  oriline . h:aiomg  i:a:ogram  lha: t motifi.es  users  of  tmining  ~ mill  due  dates . Hm  revec  alll 

system  irers:  did .not  1c, omp  e e the  required  ~ -

Speril:ically , limed  w OW:re\,le\\ l o:flbe  ~ · a:w.arenes:s  ~ still :t~  ~ nine  ~ lo} -ees  :md  cne 

ronflra.clcr  of  319  S}'mem  users  fisted  did  m ·  ro°:'Plete . _ · ·.  .. · Based  mi~ · re\Tav  of  the  phmhmg  1rnimng 

status  nport,  oneemp  oyee  of3  5 sys:t emusers . lisred  did  Mt  Offlll!ll  etetra.LJ;..g.    

> -------CPU..C

44 

Cii .eti:a ::

NatimJal  Insti tute  of  Slandmls  and  Teclme  gy  (NIS'O  Special  Publir::mitJJ.n  SP)  800 -5 3,  Rev . 4,  Seeuri !), 

and  Pr:imcJ,  Ccmtrolr  for  .Fedeml  ltifonrmfi.r:m  SJ r.s-t.ems  and  Organirntion,  AT-2  Security  Aw!Dlaiess ,

Trainmg,  ~at es  the  fullcw.mg: 

Control:  The  orgamzafi.on  p1:iii, 1.-ides  bas.ie  secm:irt)  nVll!reness  ·iraming  to  infoimll!tion  system  I IS'Br:S 

(inoh .1.dmg  l!lllmlllge.rs: , senior  ,meeulii t res,  and  co:n!:nlctors ) : 

au !\.s  pm  of  initi al  b:aming  fm  mew  ~isas; 

b. . \Ji.Ulen  required  by  mfo:nnalion  system.changes, ; 8lld 

c_ [Assigmn:mr  rnganiz.1ti.on-defined .fu equmi:y]  l!he.rerureF .

.FEC  Sxu.rt, ·  Tmirlii.g  ,m,1't."IAllll1reness  Poltey , Policy  Mmt°fNI  S8-U_ , !:ita tes  lbe  following :

A b:a:iomg  ctmicllll mu  fo:r  each  group  of  emp  oyees , ·· i1ell.doJS  and  oon.suftanls:  silmu1d  be  established 

andmaintained;--all  ~ shrn: dd  be  trnioed  and  educated.in  sr~  sewri l),~ princ ip  es  app.ropria  e

> to ,

their  !l.e\lel  of  managemenl  re.sponsrbilify  ~ acces s.. 

Ca a~ : 

> The

FEC  ocro  does  no  ruwe  effedi  -e  proced ures  to  ffl!furoe  the  FEC  &cm-ii  I Trai.ni1Jg  ,anti  Awanme.s.s 

Pol"i q ;  to  enmre  all  sysl:em .mers  ,oomp le  e amnrail  training. 

> Effeet~

Wuhout  adequate  training_.  empf(I'}'--ee  may  not  un.de~tand  sys tem  secmi.ty  risks ,and  theu- role  im  mitigating 

ll!ho.se  risks_ 

Rff:omm.enru  tion  5: 

Wereoollll!Delli11he  FEC  OCIO  imp lemen1 r me ·ffeclive • ~ to  enfl . rre  oowpl i. am: :e  with  the  secm:it y

awa:reoess  trammg  polii.cy  to  ensure  all  1rctem  use:F s oomp let:e  sei::tirity  lrnining  :iin  acoord'ance  m.th  the  FF£ 

Seei:mJil) •.Imm.mg  mid  Awrmmes5:  Polic,. 

IT  Fmding  .llO:l@ ,- Os:  1l'JJ ec ti.1<'1' ' Action.  Pbm  A. ire  _ ot  Comp6..wt  With.  Gm rernmen it  R.equi.rements 

(Repeat  Fin-ding)   

> Condmon :

During  Uie  fudl  year  (Flr1  02:-0  atleti t,  lhe  f'EC  Deputy  Chief  Infi  mJatiw  O:ffioorupda teiil  the  FEC  C-0:irectii,re 

Ac ti on  Plan  (C.o\P_)  l!Ild .P]m  of .Action  ffld  Milestone  (ro1i\&.!.,\f) . However;  'ibe .FEC  CAP  and  PO.A&.M.need. 

implrm'eOlellt  to  comply  n'ifu  gm ,-emmeni.  req uirem ents _ We  identifi ed  lhe  fo' ll O"'l\!ing  meas  where 

imp:m,; •~ . are  needed 

• The  p]m  does  not  identify  the  resrnm:ies  ~d .fo  oorrec  a dencienqr,  inch ididg  the  t}ipes  of  

> remmces

needed  to  coned  the  deficiency _45 

• The  pbn  does  oot:  lm!e  aitical  path  milestones  that  31:ffed:  the  m.·eralJ  scihedJJ1e  or  1he  OOlirectilt-e 

imti  ns  needed  t:e  resol\ll!  the  defici:  ·,  including  a "date  cata:m ''  lhal:  lhe  deiic-ellC}'  will  be 

conooted.  

> 1•

Concemin:g  lbe  ~ t fa.Ohffl  OrrnJ!a:r  A-123  aml  Com:n.mionllirecti.\i  .50,  lhe  ~• 

nrus  pmmptlJ  olve  and  pelformintemal  oonlrall  t:emmgt:o  ,..· alidate  Hie  rrectionofl:hece:ntrcil 

de. fl  ·enc y. 

Cri.tetlfil: 

O:MB  CircuL.u  A~12l  M.tn· a~ant's  &rpormbilii  _{(Jr  EnfmJJrise  Risk.Vilna}iflm'J.mtaml  b~m.nml  Cofu"rol 

dared  Ju:ly  2016  iequire  each  agency 's.  C.A..P  t adfua1>  l!b.e  folilc n'img  areas :

• Resources  requjred. · o collect  a e,ontrol  defic  · . The  oorrecfu.-e  :ac  -on  μlain  l!D.ist  ··  ilirate  il:he   

> ·. μes

ofreoomres:  :needed  (e. /:!l ·.,  additional  pemmnel  ooo:tmct  mlW(ITT.  ~ etc.),  i.ndludm~ 

no n-:lirumcIBl  lf:.ilmrrces  :slleh  as  ·or  d'ershlp ,:sripport for  ,c.OIFectmg  the  ,c.ontr ,ol  ddlctenCj'~ 

• Criliral  pafu  milestm 1. es  :t  affect  the  01reral  sd1edrne  :for  implementin_ g the  imecti,re  ,-om 

are  needed  to  resolve  e oo:ntro]  deficienc  r_  The  milest ones  mmt  lead  to  a date  ~ill  of  the 

conedion  of  the  oontro  deficieni...7' .

• Requ:iire  1»omp  resolution  anrll  int-erua]  control  testing  to  vallidarte · fue  rre ctii:m  ofthe  ntro l

deficiency. 

• Procethu,es  to  emsmethart  accl1rnte  re cords  of~  &ta:tm  of  fll e i.cIBI1DD.OO  romroJI  defic·ency  are 

m.'OO!ta.inedl  and  up.dated  throughout  ·the  ,entire  _prooess .

0 m C:imlw  .AA23 , .Seciti  n , provides  that  ag,ency  mma .~ers  ,are  r,esμamible  for  taking  l:ime]y  a.rul. 

effedli.  re  acl:ion  to  co:rred  deficieniDies · correcting  deficiencies  i.s  :m.  m.regrnil  pm  of  mami.gement 

acr :o .untability  and  l.'DlJSt  be  eonsidered  a priori ty  by  the , 11gen...  c.OIFec  -,._ ere  m:l:ion  pl ans  mould.be  ,dei.elopellil 

fu r ~  material .-weaknesses  and  progieSS  argamstplfil!S  sho uld  be  periodi~all:ii  asse.ssedl  ::w.J:  reported  to  agency 

il.ill,-ootgement  iMiamgement  u:l.d  lrac,k  p:mgresll  ro  eni:ruIDe ' timely  and  e1Iecfrl.re  resnl!  '. 

atiomJIImti  ne  o:fSt.mdarm  :md . eclmo!o  · (NIS T)  Specw  Pti1bl.i.rafum.(SP)  00-.37  Remion(Rev .)  ',. Risk 

i\/@1'ligem.mt  F~.rk  .. . l-1F  foF  Inforo .rafi:on  .isre;ms  and  Orgm,imiionr  December  2018 , S:t.ates  the 

foUm  ring  inregμrd  to  plan  of  am · andl  milestores: 

.Ha~  ofAc1ion  a,Jd  Mi~;  IaskA-6: ~ the  pl.,10.of  ac  -on  arid  mil.esto :re  'oosed  on  the  fmdin.g;i 

re,. ~~mu:iennlati  om  of  the~ro,e:u • TeJllOffi .

Discussio n:  "IM  plan  of  acti'Oll.and!  mi!Iest::aoe.s  is  inriuded  as  pm  of  the  aufuari.zationprlalll_g;e _The  plan 

of  ac  · 001  and  miles,tollfS  describes  fu.e  ac  '. om,  lmt  are  pbnnedl  ro  emrect·  de&i.eacies  in  the  ,e,m:dro 

i.dem:i.fied  mniog  the~  ofllE  control;,;  and!  du ring  cm1:iwDm  mo .- ring.  'The  ..  m of  · cm 

milesto:re  mriudes  mm  to  be  OC'COWplimed  v.iih  a mc~nda 1ion  fo r completion  befure  after 

systan  aufJhorizati  : resomces , :required  to  ace~  the . · '• s;  n:mesfones  ,e.sJab lished  to  illl:iet  the 

task  ~ a:mh:he  sdbediil:ed  oampl.ebon  d.1"!'.es  for  ibe  nmen:ones  ruxham. 46 

NIST  SP  800-.'. B ... 0..,  Rel r.  4 As;s-es.m1_a  S~ i ,rmd  Pi1'fWiC) ' Caru'rols  in  .Fedimi  ltrfcmffilioo  S~mms:  and 

Organiz/Iiicms , - Bulldin?,  ~tfoctml  'ilSes:sm:atr  Plnnr,  Decemmer  JOM , Semri  Control  C..t\. -5  Pfan  of  Ace.ti.on 

,aind  _filestone,  stttes  lhe ·fo ll m\line: 

.Detamme  if  !:he  orgmiizab.cm: 

• I>evelops  a pbn  ofai::tim  and  lllllilestones  fur  the  infmmaticm  system.to :

o cb:m:aem  the~  ·on "· s p rom:rl  remedial  acticms  to  ron,eci  v-, ~

or  & fi cienci :es  noted  dming;  1he  asses~ nt  of  the  .securi ty  com:ro]s ·

_ rei:mre  or  eliminate  knm\iii  ,.-m ne ratilifi-es  in  the  system; 

• Defines  tile  ~·  ki  update  the  ,existi:ngphm  of  action  ,imd . · estooes· 

• Updates  the  ~stingphm  of  action  and  milestones  ,\ldh  the  OE:~ . n-de:fined .· m" ~1t:~· 

baood  on  the~  ftom:: 

o .seam  ommols~ ;  

> osecmily

ID.ilj):1d:  :llk1l:yse;r  mi  

> oont:inuow;

mnnitmmg  activities: 

FE Cbas  not  ~l .emJ~i!ilμmcedme:i  to  ~ · •w1t h lhe  requirements ,fun  pbn  o:facti  ns  llilld  rnilest  s 1:111.l  

> iwee

fe~ral  r~m:emeUiS.  Th:iil  c,ondiii.on  is  al'.ilo  caused  by  a nee::!.  for  add.itiollllll  m.er  -• a:nd  mom t ori:llg  ·

eru.1ne  the . agency  meets  Co:mmi  -·  '. on  Dir ective  A-.50  ma .related!  mm .reg ulations. 

E ff.ect: 

• Emme  tbat  re.ifutic  mile.stones  Me- established; 

• Emme  that  rnrgeted  r esol  -oo  dates  ru:e  comis,te  y 1mt  to  mdw.:i e· l:he ·:agency 's  risk  ,exμoowe; 

and 

• Det~ e if  risb  are  n@ · a. cceμted.  mitiga,tedJ  or  riespcnded  to  -with  a:ctiomloo:e  -pl.ms  !!lld 

decisi ons _

Rtermnmendalion  6: 

We  Fecommend  Ihat  ilie  FEC  Chief  fufonu:ation  Officer  impro¥e  ilie  plan.  of  acticm . and  milestones  report: 

fur  the  mformation  S}rs:tem  t.o  include: 

• Rfsow;ces ·re:quired  to  c.cmeci r lil  cOlll:ro l denei:ency .

• Gnlica]  path  milest:ones  that  affect  the  O'iler, :ill  scb.edme:  fur  implementing-Uie ·conecti\re  ,actiom .

are  needed .ID  Fes.01'1:re  lhe  comral!  d'eficimqr 

• Plan  for  pn:m::ipt  resolunon  md  iinfemal  control  testin?i  to  va ]idi:rte  the  rredicm  of  ihe  ,oom::ro] 

deficiency. 47 

## .Exhibit  H - S tatus . of'  P'lioir  Year's  Findings  and  RiecoounendatioD.s 

_-umber 

L

2. 

J_ 

4. 

> j _

6. 

7_ 

g_ 

9_ 

## m. 

: t.  ms  of  I'\ " :_OU  and  Prim:- Years  Au.di  Recommendations 

Take  aciIOJ!15  to  enmre.  l:hat  ·lhe  agency 's  C.AP  .inc.hi.des  all  of  the 

requiren:,enls .of  Ce:mn:ossfo:n  Dire:oti\1-e  A-SO  and  0MB  Cm:uJar  A-123 .

Ce mpJeJ:e  Ure  pooj  ect  relalmg  to  review  of  mer  a.ocess  auHJmities  and 

ensure  .m~  budgetru:y  md.  person ne l Fesomces  ar e pnn,ided  t: e

OI1¥"lete  ibis  pr oj ect  in  a lime:ly  :m.:mneF .

Fm.aime  l:he  draft  FEC  po  'cies  !hat  1require  mmm.I  Fecertii.fica ti  of 

users'  ac.ces s mlhmiti~ . Ensure  that  the  policies  mfmess  priviiEeg,ed 

a oc.mmts  and  require  \tuihti.on  to , :achlal . s;  tem.  ,mcess  rec0J!'ds:,  by 

~mpav.iro.ry  personne l who  would  have  knowledge  of  the  users' 

· . foF  ao:e  · - . FEC  infu:amti.on  :md  iinformalio n rstenis. .. 

Implement  USGC.B  baseline  coonguralion  standards  f. .r all  ~ti.ons 

rega:nll.e,ss  oflhe  cU1Fenli  oodt'liaFe  m.  use. 

Emme  timt  :s ufficient  resources,  are  ass igned  ,to  l:he . msk  of  testing  file ,

COOP  a critic al  IT amtro]  process,  i.n  order  to  reduce  risk  to  the  FEC, 

amt  oomp lete  all  :requires ·.ests  ma timely  manner. 

Dei.:•e.lop  md  iL ~ite,  I pl:m  of  action  1111d  .mi[estones  for  the  mfmmMi.on 

~ em  th.a " dOC11DEn.ts  the  o.rganmilion ' s pl anned,  impleme,n:ted,  md 

e'i! iMl!lllted  remedial  actions  to , med  deficiencies , rui  ed.  dwmg  the 

31ssessmeof  of  the  security  ,con:Jro ls  and  fu . reduce  or  elimmate  knov.11 

\!Ulnera:biliti.es  mthe  ,·IStem. 

R.e\ti.e:\lii r infom:lld ion  S)IS :fan  '3Cro,mlfs  maccmdruire  \\iilh  orgimri!rntion -

rcfefiueciJ  fi:equeru: y and  the  FEC  ini.ti:ites  required  actioru: : oo  .m:fimmnon. 

emoooomits  based  on  there,,iiew. 

Upcb te  the  FEC's  Segr-egiat:ion  of  Dulies:  Polic,  m im ::ll!lde " defining 

Dm •rn:1:dion.  ~em  ooress  a1 rrtbi:uizations,  ·to  .• mation  of  dnti.es .

Imp l ement  session  l®Ckout  co:mml  in  acoor da:noo  tviili.  e~.tion-

demred  ocednres. 

14 

itatns  ~ of 

Se'ptem'ber  30 1

> ,1(l_Q
> ()pen

See  Findmg  1

Closed 

Open 

SeeF,·, 

Closed. 48 

## Exhibit  C - _fanagement  s Re spq nse  tu  the  Audilor' :s  Repm.t      

> J1, 1·Iiltl llllf

·Irie  l 'i nlll  ·,ti  111:bLYr 49 

..Agffl.Cy  Rts,pome  to  the  Final  Draft  Repo1t 

The -Agenc.y  oonlim.lies  on  thepafu  to  remedi.are  ru.1  findings_  OuI- 1-espomses  pro v ide  ,an  oveni·  -ew 

ofhow · -e  plan  to  rem ed.i:rte  each  of  the  :fin-dmp_ 

Fmdin: s :and. Reuwuneod 'ation-s 

ITF!im:lin~-0..:D-OI:  Logka~.  ~-\.,rt"ount  l\.fa:n'3gemeut  A£dlli! l:ie  Are  Not  ConSiis  eotlr)-

Performed  fm. · SepaFated. Usei  (Repeat  Findling) 

Auditm ·' s t-eoommeod,1.tion:  We e reronunend  the  FEC  OCIO  m ronjnnclion.  1.vi1!h  the  direct 

.manag  . pai'Ollll  and  docwnent  pe.riowc  1J1s er  access  re\<~  . :fo.r  FE C systems  acronliog  to  the 

agency' .s  system  security  plan. 

1\lanag:ement  l',espo:o~e: 

Management:  ronoms  v;ljth  flus  rea:mi11DeOdation  but  notes  thait  flri.s  findimg  has  no  .impact  m1  the 

-artnal  seam.ty  of  FEC  s~ 

Viilihil.e  OCIO  has  i:mp!lem.emed  strict  acoo11111t  mam.geinem  prooedures , it  .recognizes  1he  need  to 

dooommt  ·lhese  pcocedores,  :md'nwng  :pe-tiodic  user  :oocess  re\iiew  for  FEC  systems.  OCIO 

contimies  to  researoh  ,effective  ways  tu  review  ac count  maoagenrent  procedmes:.  ff  an  effective 

proi::.-iedtme  is  fo1J1u:d  fur  a reasoooble  cost~  it  ~ill  ·tie  :unpfemented  to  ,enable  snpen •isors  to  re, lf-~ '

user  -aoc , ;s  allJlihoriities  mmually. 

In . regm:d  to  the.  three  IT  USff  acoonn  in  1ihe  -GSS  that  we .re  noted  .in  lihe  audit  findmg.  OCIO 

1.,iisbes  to  note  fm  the  recom  that  these  u.s,,ers  no  loo.ger  have  ne tv, rm. ik:  access. 

IT  Fi odin~  2020--02.:  :Ba s:e lio.e  Co .o~·aoou.  ta.ndlank  An_  o1  Full  · Impl .ement  ifo : AD 

,1Viod0w:s  Devices 

Audi.to-r' '  reoommencbtion:- We  reco.mmen.d  &a  l:he  FE C OCIO  fully  imp"?emem  SHG  baseline 

C~VJII:nl.tion  standards  fru:-Wmoo\VS  dev" ce; _

l\.lanagement  Foe-spmt s ,e •:

Mmagement  CO!WW."S,  v;ljlib  the  .Au:&toi- re,§anling  f!he  fl.ill  implemet:rraliou  of  secmifcy  teclmical! 

implem.ent.man  ~de  (STIG)  baseline  ~ti.on  ~ . for  Window  IO  de.rices_ ]in  early 

2020,.  lhe  OCIO  be-,gan  dismmli:mg  ·~indm.'.lS  m liaptopg  then  had  to  suspend  tempo:rari]y  due  kl! 

the  COVID- 19  pand emi c.  As  of  October  2:02.0,  W mdows  10  lapt1 op  mmbutioa .has  :IHI.Wled  and 

UISA  S-TIGs  Bl"e  being  tested  with  ru11 e~.ted  imp1ememation  date  of  S;P-rin g 2021  .

. ,m 50 

IT  Fiodi:ug  lOlilil-03~  Cm11iim.nfy  of  Ope:1 ."3rtio1 1-:i;  Plan  Is . oli:  Implemenkd  and .Tmed . (Re, pfflt 

Finding) 

Audi  or ' l"eoommmdation:  We  .recommend  the  FEC  000  utilize  Lessom  .learned  ii-mu  Ille· 

OOVll)-19  p imAemi c to  determine  if  any  revisions  are .need  to  the  Ccm<tinuil) • ofOpenmon  Ha 

aod  dedme  pa-iodic  testmg. 

l\<fanagement  Re-.sa poose :

Management  amcw:s  with  ib.e  •.t\udito. r's  rec:o:mm.enootion  to  use  lessons  le,amed  fi:om  &e 

pandemic  and  "". ,chedtile  periodtc  t .  0mg .

Jo  2019,  the  000  awarded-a  oomract  :fur  a complete  iU:pdale  to  d!ie  COOP  plan  .Phase  l of  this 

update  was  comp?eted  at  the  end!  of  FY  2020,  i.vrth.  the  ool:weiy  of  an  updated  COOP  plm:L 

Mand.1.ro:ry  OOOP  traming  v.ias  a1so  oo:m:1ooted  dutmg  FY  2020. 

Plhase  II  oftbe  .implementatio:a  of  1tibe •COOP ' plan  has  begtm.  We  will  look  at  th e lessom  Learned 

during  fue  pandemic  and  implement  th.em  imo  these  l!IJldated  plms  aml  petiodic  testmg 

acc ordingly.  'The  OC1O  is  actively  ,engaged  in  revie, i.vmg  test  p am  and  e:x:ercis  and  amicipate..s 

complet ion  offuese  i tems , by  Spring  2021 . 

Auditor 's  R.ecirnfilmendation:  \:\lie  l!leCommemi  that  the  FEC  der.re1op  ~--speci :tii c contmgency 

plans,  as  appropriate  fm:- the  agency  ris!k:  lev el  (Repeat  Rec:o:mm.endation) 

l\rfanagemeut  Re s, pouse :

Management  conCl!ICS  with  ibe  Auditor'  reaommemlat:ion.  a:ud  .is  a:otivei y engaged  i:m  Phase  II of 

lhe  000,P  Plan  to  complete  im:on:natiou  system  oo:n tmgem:: y pl.am  for  mission  essemiail  :liimoti ons. 

Expected  oompMion:is  Septe:m\:rel" 29 2021.  ·W e believe  it  is  io:!pmmnt  ronol:e  thatfuev.-o tld wide 

CO\ l]D- 19  pandemic  baa  demonstrated  Um  FE C's  c.ommitme:nt  to  eui.m:ing  its  00111:mwty  of 

operations.  Jin  March  20 :m,  the  agen cy  went  into  an  1e\filCliJaf!on  oroer  and  m.mi'ed  :swiftl~•  m d 

suocessii1Uy  ·ti o a l 00  pen-ent  :man.datoty  tel.ewml::  sc ,enario. 

ITFiodw11:  20!0 1-04·  Seeuri ~yAwa 11 ene ss Traiuin.g:" 'a sK o Co mp]eted  by AllFEC 

Emplo  ·, flK 

Al!Wtor ' rec.ommendation  We  recommend'.  the  FEC  OC[O  :implement  aa  e:ffecti,, .- e pmcedure  t o 

enfmu  rompfumre  ,:ritih.ilie:  serurityawfflleness  trammg  po]icy  to  ,ensure  all  system  wers  complete 

security  b-aming  in  accmdamce  wi th  the  FEC  Securi  Tmining  and  A»raren.ess  Policy. 

l\rfanagement  Respouse: 

Mimagemmt  cxmcut1!  v.iith  this  reoommmdat:ion  and  is  commi rt ted  to  continued.  edu:ca ti cm  of  all 

staff  imd  co ntn ,c~  in  imomm i on  security  m1 •; t af'enfSS c Dm:mg  FY  20  0,  the  OCIO  oo.ndoafed 

am6-phissbingf!rainmgm  April!  202. 0 and  begmrts  annmd  serurity ·trni:wng  du:mmgSeptembel-2020. 

17 51 

While  some  usen  did  no t oompl.ete  ilie  ~ phi  sbiug  ·tmmiog  on  tim e;  l:be  OCIO  oontfo ned  to 

prod  osern  o oo:mple te  the  tira:ioing _By  the  iend  o f  FY  2020  aH  ·sti ff  and  oonti 1:-11dors , had  :finzhed, 

lhe  pbishiog  tmiwng  except  fur  two  iudi vidmlls  .. 

The  agenq r coo.doried  amm.al  pasmrord  trai.mug  in  Sept.em.be£  1020  wirth . a due  date  of  October 

21 , _f.120.  "Based  ouJessom  .leam .ed  :from  fu  phishi.ng  kami.ng~  OCIO  .implemented  an  ,enforcement 

.meebarusm:  Users  were  \vam. ed  to  complete  the  training  by  October  2]  or  ha ve  fh-eif"  netvi•ork 

aroess  revoked_  '.Im-s  newly  .implemented  m.e clmni.sw.  pror,red  suooess.ftd  !li5  all.  aciti "\l 'e  users 

compl'et e.d .the  p ;vord  training,  exrept  fo:r  one  -who  has  .receili.•ed.  an  ex.cqniom  due  to  a lo:mg -1:eml. 

illne.ss  and  one  oontraotor  on  a ·stop-work  mdeJ"  due  to  the  pandemic.. 

Based  on .flhe  snccesis  of  the  ,enfolCe!llfflt  mecrumism  iu  the  Septembei:  - October  2020  password 

mmi:mg,  0010  believes  this  ~ shomd.  be  dosed.  Going  fOf"'Wafd  the  OOIO  intends  1io 

c,anti:one  to  ·use  the  pemhy  of  oeti.wrlc  access  revocal:ion  combine.cl  with  intali.Siive  outreach  ,effuits 

to  FEC  staff  and  C01!11r~  ~o  en.sum  fhe,y  are  aurare  oftheirrei.pOlllSibilities  re-.gardwg  ~

sectlriqr  and  oomplete  at1I.  req,im:ed .trai:nmg 

IT  Findi:R.=:  100.IJi-OS~  Con'ectiw  }\dion  "Pla!IIS  Are  _-ot  Gorn.plian t TI<ith.  Gnremmeut 

Reqmmi~ments  (Reipea.f  Fiindling) 

Audit-o r ':s  Rec.o:mm.endatioo: 

\Ve  re.commend  mt  dre  FEC  Cbiefiliofoimat.ion  Officer  mi.pmli.l-e  · he  plan  of  action  mtdmil:estones 

·r epon  for  ilie  info:rmation  SJ/~ -ro  indnde: 

• R.eso:un:es  reqwred  to  oorrect  a contm[  deficiency.  

> 1•

Critica.11  path  .milestones  1hat  affect  rue  overni  oo hedm.e  foe  impiem.e:ntmg  the  cmrectnre 

aoti.OD!l  an:• needed  to  .resoke  the  comrol  defilcie:ocy _ 

> ,•

:Pfa.n  for  proo:ipt  r otution  and  :wremru.  co ntm l tfil>img  to · rallida 1te  the  co tTI: dion  of  the 

cowo]  deficiency, 

Management  Re~poose: 

Management  agrees  Viifb  the- .. i\Jiiditor's  JP.f'lOWmPltJilatioo  to  .improve  1:h.e  iPOA.J.'1  nsed  for 

dooumenting  and  tradking  'fhe , agency  planned!,,  implem.emed  and  evaluated  rem-edia.11  adi:0113  to 

oaa:ect  deficiencies  noted  durimg  ihe  assessment  of  siecwity  cooltols.  Dmmg  FY  1020 , tire  CIO 

and!  crso  de· lfelo ped  a phm  of  aeition  and  milatones  repoit  for  unommti:on  systems  and 

management  con lli.m.!led  to  u:pdate  and  report  on  comecfu.re  action.  plans  m aooo:rd:mre  urillh . the 

timeliue  i:denti!fied  in  Commimon  D.irectii .re  :so_  OCIO' s:  S:e .cwily  and ,Operational  groups:  bai;.re  a. 

\.\reddymeetmg,  rogo  01. ~er,-,..1 !1 me:rab:ilii tyofGSS  symam  and  prio ri tize  and  fix  vul!ne:rabilities,  with .

the  critical!  one.  meed  first  Detailed  POAM  ,sheets  .u-e  used.  to  docu.mem  !he  WOK  of  planning, 

im:p.iew.entmg  and  evaluating  actions  uoted  dt:umg  the  assessmen t of  s ecurity  c.ommls.  OCIO ' s

Security  and  Oper ati.omi]  teallllS  are  fuUy  oommitted  ·~o  .reduce  o:r  e:timirute  knov;'lll.  ~bili  res 

in  agency's  informahon  systems  ao.di..,riU.  c.om:inue  to  work  on  indndUlg  fue it em.s :no t ed  in  1fh e audit 

fimdin.y_ 52 

This page marks the end of the Independent Auditor’s Report 53 

## Financial Statements 

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements. 

2020 2019 Assets: (Note 2) 

Intragovernmental: Fund Balance With Treasury (Note 3) 23,431,710 $ 26,164,174 $Total Intragovernmental 23,431,710 26,164,174 Accounts Receivable, net (Note 4) 352,810 583,160 General Property, Plant and Equipment, Net (Note 5) 12,781,818 15,653,558 

Total Assets 36,566,338 $ 42,400,892 $Liabilities: (Note 6) 

Intragovernmental: Accounts Payable 1,249,618 $ 276,752 $Other: (Note 7) Employer Contributions and Payroll Taxes Payable 555,293 413,442 Other Post Employment Benefits Due and Payable 3,500 3,500 Unfunded FECA Liability - 61 Custodial Liability (Note 12) 352,811 583,160 Deferred Rent (Note 9) 7,254,175 7,850,409 Total Intragovernmental 9,415,397 9,127,324 Accounts Payable 1,037,120 1,363,678 Federal Employees and Veterans Benefits 232 7,792 Other: (Note 7) Accrued Funded Payroll and Leave 1,884,885 1,505,528 Employer Contributions and Payroll Taxes Payable 84,731 65,896 Unfunded Leave 3,546,642 3,112,591 Liability for Advances and Prepayments 70,155 56,158 

Total Liabilities 16,039,162 $ 15,238,967 $Net Position: 

Unexpended Appropriations - All Other Funds (Consolidated Totals) 18,546,408 $ 22,479,219 $Cumulative Results of Operations - All Other Funds (Consolidated Totals) 1,980,769 4,682,706 Total Net Position - All Other Funds (Consolidated Totals) 20,527,177 27,161,925 

Total Net Position 20,527,177 27,161,925 Total Liabilities and Net Position 36,566,338 $ 42,400,892 $

BALANCE SHEET 

As of September 30, 2020 and 2019 (in dollars) 54 

> The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.

2020 2019 Program Costs: 

Administering and Enforcing the FECA 

Gross Costs 80,027,415 $ 69,333,519 $Less: Earned Revenue 112,883 74,418 Net Program Costs 79,914,532 69,259,101 

Net Cost of Operations 79,914,532 $ 69,259,101 $

STATEMENT OF NET COST 

For The Years Ended September 30, 2020 and 2019 (in dollars) 55 

> The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.

All Other Funds (Consolidated Consolidated Total 

Unexpended Appropriations: 

Beginning Balance 22,479,219 $ 22,479,219 $

Budgetary Financing Sources: 

Appropriations received 71,497,000 71,497,000 Other adjustments (476,424) (476,424) Appropriations used (74,953,387) (74,953,387) 

Total Budgetary Financing Sources (3,932,812) (3,932,812) Total Unexpended Appropriations 18,546,408 18,546,408 Cumulative Results from Operations: 

Beginning Balances 4,682,706 4,682,706 Beginning balance, as adjusted 4,682,706 4,682,706 

Budgetary Financing Sources: 

Appropriations used 74,953,387 74,953,387 Other 46,728 46,728 

Other Financing Sources (Non-Exchange): 

Imputed financing 2,259,208 2,259,208 Other (46,728) (46,728) Total Financing Sources 77,212,595 77,212,595 Net Cost of Operations 79,914,532 79,914,532 Net Change (2,701,937) (2,701,937) 

Cumulative Results of Operations 1,980,769 1,980,769 Net Position 20,527,177 $ 20,527,177 $

STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN NET POSITION 

For The Years Ended September 30, 2020 and 2019 (in dollars) 

FY 2020 56 

> The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.

All Other Funds (Consolidated Totals) Consolidated Total 

Unexpended Appropriations: 

Beginning Balance 16,421,949 $ 16,421,949 $

Budgetary Financing Sources: 

Appropriations received 71,250,000 71,250,000 Other adjustments (386,245) (386,245) Appropriations used (64,806,485) (64,806,485) 

Total Budgetary Financing Sources 6,057,271 6,057,271 Total Unexpended Appropriations 22,479,219 22,479,219 Cumulative Results from Operations: 

Beginning Balances 6,247,456 6,247,456 Beginning balance, as adjusted 6,247,456 6,247,456 

Budgetary Financing Sources: 

Appropriations used 64,806,485 64,806,485 

Other Financing Sources (Non-Exchange): 

Imputed financing (Note 10) 2,887,867 2,887,867 Total Financing Sources 67,694,351 67,694,351 Net Cost of Operations 69,259,101 69,259,101 Net Change (1,564,750) (1,564,750) 

Cumulative Results of Operations 4,682,706 4,682,706 Net Position 27,161,925 $ 27,161,925 $

STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN NET POSITION 

For The Years Ended September 30, 2020 and 2019 (in dollars) 

FY 2019 57 

> The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.

2020 2019 Budgetary Budgetary BUDGETARY RESOURCES 

Unobligated balance from prior year budget authority, net (discretionary and mandatory) 7,439,271 $ 4,169,352 $Appropriations (discrectionary and mandatory) 71,497,000 71,250,000 Spending authority from offsetting collections (discretionary and mandatory) 125,191 132,264 

Total budgetary resources (Note 11) 79,061,462 $ 75,551,616 $

STATUS OF BUDGETARY RESOURCES 

New obligations and upward adjustments (total) 72,007,887 $ 69,232,534 $Unobligated balance, end of year: Apportioned, unexpired account 374,272 2,851,236 Unapportioned, unexpired accounts - 7,264 Unexpired unobligated balance, end of year 374,272 2,858,500 Expired unobligated balance, end of year 6,679,303 3,460,582 Unobligated balance, end of year (total) 7,053,575 6,319,082 

Total budgetary resources 79,061,462 $ 75,551,616 $

OUTLAYS, NET 

Outlays, net (discretionary and mandatory) 73,753,039 64,987,148 

Agency outlays, net (discretionary and mandatory) (Note 11, 14) 73,753,039 $ 64,987,148 $

STATEMENT OF BUDGETARY RESOURCES 

For The Years Ended September 30, 2020 and 2019 (in dollars) 58 

> The accompanying notes are an integral part of these statements.

2020 2019 Revenue Activity 

Sources of cash collections Civil penalties 831,658 $ 2,046,477 $Administrative fines 136,799 362,800 Miscellaneous receipts 22,404 361,361 

Total cash collections 990,861 2,770,638 Accrual adjustments (230,350) 136,024 

Total custodial revenue (Note 12) 760,511 $ 2,906,662 $Disposition of Collections 

Transferred to Treasury 990,861 2,770,638 Amount yet to be transferred (230,350) 136,024 

Total disposition of collections 760,511 $ 2,906,662 $Net custodial activity -$ -$

STATEMENT OF CUSTODIAL ACTIVITY 

For The Years Ended September 30, 2020 and 2019 59 

## Notes to the Financial Statements 

Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies 

Reporting Entity 

The Federal Election Commission (FEC or Commission) was created in 1975 as an independent regulatory agency with exclusive responsibility for administering, enforcing, defending and interpreting the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA), 2 U.S.C. 431 et seq., as amended (“the Act”). The Commission is also responsible for administering the public funding programs (26 U.S.C. §§ 9001- 9039) for Presidential campaigns, which include certification and audits of all participating candidates and committees, and enforcement of public funding legislation. 

The financial activity presented relates to the execution of the FEC’s Congressionally approved budget. Consistent with Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board’s (FASAB ) Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Concept No. 2, “Entity and Display,” the Presidential Election Campaign Fund is not a reporting entity of the FEC. Financial activity of the fund is budgeted, apportioned, recorded, reported and paid by the U.S. Department of Treasury (Treasury). The accounts of the Presidential Election Campaign Fund are therefore not included in the FEC’s financial statements. 

Basis of Accounting and Presentation 

As required by the Accountability of Tax Dollars Act of 2002 , the accompanying financial statements present the financial position, net cost of operations, changes in net position, budgetary resources and custodial activity of the FEC. While these financial statements have been prepared from the books and records of the FEC in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for the Federal Government and in accordance with the form and content for entity financial statements specified by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in Circular A-136, as revised, Financial Reporting Requirements , as well as the accounting policies of the FEC, the statements may differ from other financial reports submitted pursuant to OMB directives for the purpose of monitoring and controlling the use of the FEC’s budgetary resources. 

These financial statements reflect both accrual and budgetary accounting transactions. Under the accrual method of accounting, revenues are recognized when earned and expenses are recognized when a liability is incurred, without regard to receipt or payment of cash. Budgetary accounting is designed to recognize the obligation of funds according to legal requirements. Budgetary accounting is essential for compliance with legal constraints and controls over the use of federal funds. 

Throughout these financial statements, assets, liabilities, revenues and costs have been classified according to the type of entity with which the transactions are associated. Intragovernmental assets and liabilities are those resulting from transactions with other federal entities. Intragovernmental earned revenues are collections or accruals of revenue from other federal entities and intragovernmental costs are payments or accruals to other federal entities. These statements should be read with the understanding that they are for a component of the Federal Government, a sovereign entity. 60 

Assets 

Assets that an entity is authorized to use in its operations are termed entity assets, whereas assets that are held by an entity and are not available for the entity’s use are termed non-entity assets. Most of the FEC’s assets are entity assets and are available for use in carrying out the mission of the FEC as appropriated by Congress. The FEC also has non-entity assets which primarily consist of receivables from fines and penalties. These custodial collections are not available to the FEC to use in its operations and must be transferred to Treasury. 

Fund Balance with Treasury 

The FEC does not maintain cash in commercial bank accounts. Treasury processes cash receipts and disbursements. Fund Balance with Treasury consists of appropriated funds and custodial collections. With the exception of the custodial collections, these funds are available to pay current liabilities and finance authorized purchase commitments. Custodial collections, which are not available to finance FEC activities, are classified as non-entity assets. 

Accounts Receivable 

The FEC’s Accounts Receivable mainly represents amounts due from the public for fines and penalties assessed by the FEC and referred to Treasury for collection. The FEC establishes an allowance for the estimated loss on accounts receivable from the public that are deemed uncollectible accounts. This allowance is included in Accounts Receivable, net on the balance sheet. The allowance is a percentage of the overall receivable balance, based on the collection rate of past balances. 

General Property and Equipment 

General Property and Equipment (P&E) is reported at acquisition cost, and consists of items that are used by the FEC to support its mission. Depreciation or amortization on these assets is calculated using the straight-line method with zero salvage value. Depreciation or amortization of an asset begins the day it is placed in service. Maintenance, repairs and minor renovations are expensed as incurred. Expenditures that materially increase the value, capacity or useful life of existing assets are capitalized. Refer to Note 5 General Property and Equipment, Net for additional details. 

Liabilities 

Liabilities represent amounts that are likely to be paid by the FEC as the result of transactions or events that have already occurred; however, no liabilities are paid by the FEC without an appropriation. Intragovernmental liabilities arise from transactions with other federal entities. Liabilities classified as not covered by budgetary resources are liabilities for which appropriations have not been enacted (e.g., annual leave benefits and actuarial liability under the 

Federal Employees Compensation Act ), or those resulting from the agency’s custodial activities. The FEC has an intragovernmental liability to Treasury for fines, penalties and miscellaneous receipts which are due from the public but have not yet transferred. These funds may not be used to fund FEC operations. 

Accounts Payable 

Accounts Payable consists of liabilities to other entities or persons for amounts owed for goods and services received that have not yet been paid at the end of the fiscal year. Accounts Payable also consists of disbursements in-transit, which are payables that have been recorded by the FEC and are 61 

pending payment by Treasury. In addition to accounts payables recorded through normal business activities, unbilled payables are estimated based on historical data. 

Accrued Payroll and Employer Contribution 

Accrued payroll and benefits represent salaries, wages and benefits earned by employees, but not yet disbursed as of the statement date. Accrued payroll and Thrift Savings Plan contributions are not classified as intragovernmental. Employer contributions and payroll taxes payable are classified as intragovernmental. 

Annual, Sick and Other Leave 

Annual leave is recorded as a liability when it is earned by FEC employees; the liability is reduced as leave is taken. On a quarterly basis, the balance in the accrued leave account is adjusted to reflect the current leave balances and pay rates. Accrued annual leave is paid from future funding sources and is reflected as a liability not covered by budgetary resources. Sick leave and other types of non-vested leave are expensed as taken. 

Federal Employee Benefits 

A liability is recorded for estimated and actual future payments to be made for workers’ compensation pursuant to the Federal Employees Compensation Act . The liability consists of the net present value of estimated future payments calculated by the Department of Labor (DOL) and the actual unreimbursed cost paid by DOL for compensation paid to recipients under the Federal Employee’s Compensation Act . The future workers' compensation estimate is generated by DOL through an application of actuarial procedures developed to estimate the liability for the Federal Employee’s Compensation Act , which includes the expected liability for death, disability, medical and miscellaneous costs for approved compensation cases. The liability is calculated using historical benefit payment patterns related to a specific incurred period to estimate the total payments related to that period. These projected annual benefits payments are discounted to present value. 

Employee Retirement Plans 

Each fiscal year, the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) estimates the Federal Government service cost for all covered employees. This estimate represents an annuity dollar amount which, if accumulated and invested each year of an employee’s career, would provide sufficient funding to pay for that employee’s future benefits. As the Federal Government’s estimated service cost exceeds the amount of contributions made by employer agencies and covered employees, this plan is not fully funded by the FEC and its employees. As of September 30, 2020, the FEC recognized approximately $ 2,259,200 as an imputed cost and related financing source, for the difference between the estimated service cost and the contributions made by the FEC and its employees. This represents a 22% decrease when compared to the $ 2,887,900 of imputed cost and related financing source recognized in Fiscal Year 2019. 

FEC employees participate in either the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS) or the Federal Employees Retirement System (FERS), which became effective on January 1, 1987. For employees participating in CSRS, the FEC withheld 7% of base pay earnings and provided a matching contribution equal to the sum of the withholding. For employees covered by FERS, the FEC withheld .8% of base pay earnings and provided the agency contribution. The majority of FEC employees hired after December 31, 1983, are automatically covered by FERS. 62 

Effective January 1, 2013, the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 created a new FERS retirement category, Revised Annuity Employees (RAE) for new federal employees hired in calendar year (CY) 2013 or thereafter. In FY 2020, the FERS-RAE employee contribution rate was 3.1%. 

Effective January 1, 2014, the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013 introduced a new FERS retirement category, Further Revised Annuity Employees (FRAE) for new federal employees hired in CY 2014 and thereafter. In FY 2020, the FERS-FRAE employee contribution rate was 4.4%. 

FERS contributions made by employer agencies and covered employees are comparable to the Federal Government’s estimated service costs. For FERS covered employees, the FEC made contributions of 15.8% of basic pay for FY 2020. For both FERS-RAE and FERS-FRAE covered employees, the FEC made contributions of 9.4% and 14.2% respectfully of basic pay for FY 2020. 

Employees participating in FERS are covered under the Federal Insurance Contribution Act (FICA) ,for which the FEC contributed 6.2% to the Social Security Administration in FY 2020. Effective in FY 2012 FERS and CSRS – Offset employees were granted a 2% decrease in Social Security for tax year (CY) 2012 under the Temporary Payroll Tax Cut Continuation Act of 2011 ; and H.R. 3630, the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 . During FY 2013, employees contributed 4.2% to Social Security through December 31, 2012. Effective January 1, 2013 the employee contribution rate is 6.2%. 

Thrift Savings Plan 

The Thrift Savings Plan (TSP) is a retirement savings and investment plan for employees covered by either CSRS or FERS. The TSP is administered by the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board on behalf of federal agencies. For employees belonging to FERS, the FEC automatically contributes 1% of base pay to their account and matches contributions up to an additional 4%. For employees belonging to CSRS, there is no governmental matching contribution. 

The FEC does not report on its financial statements CSRS and FERS assets, accumulated plan benefits or unfunded liabilities, if any, which may be applicable to FEC employees. Reporting such amounts is the responsibility of the Office of Personnel Management. The portion of the current and estimated future outlays for CSRS and FERS not paid by the FEC is in accordance with Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standards ( SFFAS ) No. 5, Accounting for Liabilities of the Federal Government , and is included in the FEC's financial statements as an imputed financing source. 

Commitments and Contingencies 

A contingency is an existing condition, situation or set of circumstances involving uncertainty as to possible gain or loss. The uncertainty will ultimately be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. SFFAS No. 5, as amended by SFFAS No. 12, Recognition of Contingent Liabilities Arising from Litigation, contains the criteria for recognition and disclosure of contingent liabilities. A contingency is recognized in the financial statements when a past event or exchange transaction has occurred, a future outflow or other sacrifice of resources is probable and the future outflow or sacrifice of resources is measurable. A contingency is disclosed in the footnotes when any of the conditions for liability recognition are not met and the chance of the future confirming event or events occurring is more than remote but less than probable. In other words, contingent losses that are assessed as probable and measurable are accrued in the financial statements. Losses that are assessed to be at least reasonably possible are disclosed in the notes. 63 

According to OMB Circular A-136, as revised, in addition to the contingent liabilities required by SFFAS No. 5, the following commitments should be disclosed: 1) an estimate of obligations related to cancelled appropriations for which the reporting entity has a contractual commitment for payment; and 2) amounts for contractual arrangements which may require future financial obligations. The FEC does not have commitments related to cancelled appropriations or amounts for contractual arrangements that would require future financial obligations. 

Revenues and Other Financing Sources 

Annual Appropriation 

As a component of the Government-wide reporting entity, the FEC is subject to the Federal budget process, which involves appropriations that are provided annually and appropriations that are provided on a permanent basis. The financial transactions that are supported by budgetary resources, which include appropriations, are generally the same transactions reflected in agency and the Government-wide financial reports. 

The FEC received all of its funding through an annual appropriation as provided by Congress. Additionally, the FEC received funding through reimbursement for services provided to other Federal agencies. Services performed for other Federal agencies under reimbursable agreements are financed through the account providing the service and reimbursements are recognized as revenue when earned. 

The FEC’s budgetary resources reflect past congressional action and enable the entity to incur budgetary obligations, but they do not reflect assets to the Government as a whole. Budgetary obligations are legal obligations for goods, services, or amounts to be paid based on statutory provisions (e.g., Social Security benefits). After budgetary obligations are incurred, Treasury will make disbursements to liquidate the budgetary obligations and finance those disbursements in the same way it finances all disbursements, using some combination of receipts, other inflows, and borrowing from the public (if there is a budget deficit). 

Imputed Financing Sources 

In accordance with OMB Circular A-136, as revised, all expenses should be reported by agencies whether or not these expenses would be paid by the agency that incurs the expense. The amounts for certain expenses of the FEC, which will be paid by other federal agencies, are recorded in the Statement of Net Cost (SNC). A corresponding amount is recognized in the “Statement of Changes in Net Position” as an “Imputed Financing Source.” These imputed financing sources primarily represent unfunded pension costs of FEC employees, as described above. 

Statement of Net Cost 

Net cost of operations is the total of the FEC’s expenditures. The presentation of the statement is based on the FEC’s strategic plan, which presents one program that is based on the FEC’s mission and strategic goal. The program that reflects this strategic goal is to administer and enforce the Federal Election Campaign Act efficiently and effectively. 

Net Position 

Net position is the residual difference between asset and liabilities and consists of unexpended appropriations and cumulative results of operations. Unexpended appropriations include the portion of the FEC’s appropriations represented by undelivered orders and unobligated balances. 64 

Unobligated balances associated with appropriations that expire at the end of the fiscal year remain available for obligation adjustments, but not for new obligations, until that account is cancelled, five years after the appropriations expire. Cumulative results of operations represent the excess of financing sources over expenses since inception. 

Statement of Custodial Activity 

The Statement of Custodial Activity summarizes collections transferred or transferable to Treasury for miscellaneous receipts, fines and penalties assessed by the FEC. These amounts are not available for FEC operations, and accordingly, are reported as custodial revenue. 

Use of Estimates 

The preparation of the accompanying financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions that directly affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. Actual results could differ from these estimates. 

Classified Activities 

Accounting standards require all reporting entities to disclose that accounting standards allow certain presentations and disclosures to be modified, if needed, to prevent the disclosure of classified information. The FEC has no classified activities. 65 

Note 2 Non-Entity Assets 

Non–entity assets, which primarily represent amounts due to the FEC for fines and penalties on those that violated the requirements of the Federal Election Campaign Act , consisted of the following as of September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2019:            

> 2020 2019 With the Public
> Accounts Receivable -Custodial 352,810 583,160
> Total non-entity assets 352,810 583,160
> Total entity assets 36,213,528 41,817,732
> Total Assets 36,566,338 42,400,892

66 

Note 3 Fund Balance with Treasury 

Fund Balance with Treasury consisted of the following as of September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2019: 

Available unobligated balances represent amounts that are apportioned for obligation in the current fiscal year. Unavailable unobligated balances represent amounts that are not apportioned for obligation during the current fiscal year and expired appropriations that are no longer available to incur new obligations. Obligated balances not yet disbursed include amounts designated for payment of goods and services ordered but not received, or goods and services received but for which payment has not yet been made.        

> Fund Balances
> Appropriated Fwids
> Total Status of Fund Balance with Treasury
> Unobligated Balance Available Unavailable Obligated Balance not yet Disbursed
> Total

2020   

> $23,431,710
> $23,431,710

2020   

> $374,272 6,679,303 16,378,135 $23,431,710

2019   

> $26,164,174
> $26,164,174

2019   

> $2,851,236 3,467,846 19,845,092 $26,164,174

67 

Note 4 - Accounts Receivables, Net 

All accounts receivable are with the public and consisted of the following as of September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2019: 

Non-Entity receivables consist of civil penalties and administrative fines assessed by the FEC through its enforcement processes or conciliation agreements reached with parties. The FEC has three offices that administer the penalties: the Office of General Counsel (OGC); the Office of Administrative Review (OAR); and the Office of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR). Each office has a distinct role in the enforcement and collection process. The allowance is based on the historical rate of collection and an overall assessment of the debtor’s willingness and ability to pay. Delinquent debts are referred to Treasury in accordance with the Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996 . The terms of the agreement between the FEC and the parties establish the conditions for collection.                                                             

> 2020
> Gross Net Accounts Accounts Allowance Receivable Receivable lntragovenunental
> Intragovemmental $$$
> Totallntragovenunental $$$
> With the Public
> Fines and Penalties $528,125 $175,315 $352,810
> Total Non-Entity $528,125 $175,315 $352,810
> Total $528,125 $175,315 $352,810
> 2019
> Gross Net Accounts Accounts Allowance Receivable Receivable Intragovenunental
> lntragovemmental $$$
> Totallntragovenunental $$$
> With the Public
> Fines and Penalties $714,855 $131,695 $583,160
> Total Non-Entity $714,855 $131,695 $583,160
> Total $714,855 $131,695 $583,160 68

Note 5 General Property and Equipment, Net 

General Property and Equipment (P&E) is reported at acquisition cost. The capitalization threshold is established at $25,000 and a useful life of two or more years. For bulk purchases, items are capitalized when the individual useful lives are at least two years and have an aggregate value of $250,000 or more. Acquisitions of P&E that do not meet the capitalization criteria are recorded as operating expenses. 

General P&E consists of items that are used by the FEC to support its mission. Depreciation or amortization on these assets is calculated using the straight-line method with no salvage value. Depreciation or amortization begins the day the asset is placed in service. Maintenance, repairs and minor renovations are expensed as incurred. Expenditures that materially increase values, change capacities or extend useful lives are capitalized. 

Effective FY 2017, the estimated useful life of assets such as office furniture and motor vehicles is five years. The estimated useful life of assets such as office equipment, IT equipment, IT software, telecommunications equipment, and audio/visual equipment is three years. 

The office building in which the FEC operates is leased through the General Services Administration (GSA) under an occupancy agreement, which manages the lease agreement between the Federal Government and the commercial leasing entity. The FEC is billed by GSA for the leased space based upon estimated lease payments made by GSA plus an administrative fee. The cost of the office building is not capitalized. The costs of any leasehold improvements, which are managed through GSA, are financed with FEC appropriated funds. Construction costs of $25,000 or more are accumulated as construction in progress until completion and then are transferred and capitalized as a leasehold improvement. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the lesser of five years or the remaining life of the lease term. 

The internal use software development and acquisition costs capitalization threshold changed as a result of a new policy that was implemented in FY 2011. Internal use software development and acquisition costs of $250,000 are capitalized as software in development until the development stage is completed and the software is tested and accepted. At acceptance, costs of software in development are reclassified as internal use software costs and amortized using the straight-line method over an estimated useful life of three years. Purchased commercial software that does not meet the capitalization criteria is expensed. In addition, enhancements which do not add significant new capability or functionality are also expensed. 

The general components of capitalized property and equipment, net of accumulated depreciation or amortization, consisted of the following as of September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2019, respectively: 69 

2020 Service Life Acquisition Accwnulated Asset Class Depreciation/Am Net Book Value (years) Value ortization 

Software 3 $ 19,935,722 $ 17,683,340 $ 2,252,382 Computers and peripherals 3 $ 3,328,407 $ 2,449,332 $ 879,075 Furniture 5 $ $ $Leasehold Improvements 5 $ 10,125,947 $ 4,950,903  ..  $ 5,175,044 Software-in-Development n/a $ 4,475,317 $ $ 4,475,317 

Total $ 37,865,393 $ 25,083,575 $ 12,781,818 

2019 Service Life Acquisition Accwnulated Asset Class Depreciation/Am Net Book Value (years) Value ortization 

Software 3 $ 18,703,643 $ 14,228,331 $ 4,475,312 Computers and peripherals 3 $ 3,067,116 $ 3,067,116 $Furniture 5 $ 852,754 $ 852,754 $Leasehold Improvements 5 $ 9,964,256 $ 2,697,201 $ 7,267,055 Software-in-Development n/a $ 3,911,191 $ $ 3,911,191 

Total $ 36,498,960 $ 20,845,402 $ 15,653,558 70 

Note 6 Liabilities Not Covered by Budgetary Resources 

Liabilities Not Covered by Budgetary Resources consisted of the following as of September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2019: 

Liabilities not covered by budgetary resources require future congressional action whereas liabilities covered by budgetary resources reflect prior congressional action. Regardless of when the congressional action occurs, when the liabilities are liquidated, Treasury will finance the liquidation in the same way that it finances all other disbursements, using some combination of receipts, other inflows, and borrowing from the public (if there is a budget deficit). Liabilities that do not require the use of budgetary resources are covered by monetary assets that are not budgetary resources to the entity. 

Beginning FY 2018, the FEC entered into a new lease agreement for its office building that provided a rent abatement of $8,943,504, which covers the equivalent of 22 months of rent. Consistent with generally accepted accounting principles, the FEC has recorded rent abatement as deferred rent, which is amortized over the life of the ten-year lease. 

The FEC accrued a liability related to the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act as of September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2019. 

Liabilities for Advances and Prepayments consist of unearned revenue from registration fees collected for the Regional Campaign Finance Conferences. As part of its program to encourage voluntary compliance with the Federal Election Campaign Act, the Federal Election Commission hosts educational conferences throughout the country. The FEC has received additional reimbursable authority for FY 2020 for conferences.                                                   

> 2020 2019 Intragovemmental:
> Cuslodial Fines w:1J Civil Penalties $352,810 $583,160 Deferred Rent 7,254,175 7,850,409 Unfunded FECA Liability 61
> Total Intragovemmental 7,606,985 8,433,630
> With The Public:
> Unfunded Annual Leave 3,546,642 3,112,591 Liabilities for Advances and Prepayments 70,155 56,158 Actuarial FECA Liability 232 7,792
> Total Liabilities Not Covered by Budgetary Resources $11,153,859 $11,554,013
> Total Liabilities Covered by Budgetary Resources $4,815,148 $3,628,796
> Total Liabilities Not Requiring Budgetary Resources $70,155 $56,158
> Total Liabilities $16,039,162 $15,238,967

71 

Note 7 Other Liabilities 

As of September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2019, respectively, components of amounts reported on the Balance Sheet as Other Intragovernmental Liabilities and Other Liabilities along with a categorization of current versus long-term are as follows: 

2020 Non-Current 2020 Current 2020 Total Other Intragovemmental Liabilities: 

Employer Contributions and Payroll Taxes Payable $ $ 555,293 555,293 Other Post Employment Benefits Due and Payable 3,500 3,500 Unfunded FECA Liability Custodial Liability 159,207 193,604 352,811 Deferred Rent 6,657,942 596,233 7,254,175 

Total Other Intragovemmental Liabilities: $ 6,817,149 $ 1,348,630 $ 8,165,779 Other Non-Federal Liabilities 

Accrued Funded Payroll and Leave 1,884,885 1,884,885 Employer Contributions and Payroll Taxes Payable 84,731 84,731 Unfunded Leave 3,546,642 3,546,642 Liability for Advances and Prepayments 70,155 70,155 

Total Other Non-Federal Laibilities $ $ 5,586,413 $ 5,586,413 Total Other Liabilities $ 6,817,149 $ 6,935,043 $ 13,752,192 2019 No n -C uITent 2019  CuITent  2019 Total Ot her In tragovenuuental Liabilities: 

Empl oy er Contributions and Payroll Taxes Payable $ $ 413,442 $ 413,442 Other Po st Employment Benefits Due and Payable 3,5 00 3,500 Unfunded FE CA Liability 61 61 Custodial Liability 2 7, 030 5 56 , 130 583,1 60 Deferred Re nt 7, 254,175 59 6, 2 34 7, 850,409 

Total Other Intragovenuuental Liabilities: $ 7, 281 , 205 $ 1,569,367 $ 8,850,572 Other Non-Federal Liabilities 

Acc rued Funded Payroll and L ea ve 1, 505, 528 1,505,528 Emp l oy er Contributions and Payroll Taxes Payable 65,896 65,896 Unfunded Lea ve 3, 112 ,591 3,112,591 Liabili ty for Advances and Prepayment s 5 6158 56 1 58 

Total Other N on-Federal Laibilities $ $ 4, 7 40 ,173 $ 4,740,1 73 

Total Other Liabilities $ 7, 281 , 205 $ 6,309,540 $ 13 ,590,745 72 

Note 8 Commitments and Contingencies 

As of September 30, 2020, in the opinion of FEC management and legal counsel, the FEC was not party to any legal action which results in a probable, measurable future outflow of resources that requires recognition in the financial statements. However, the FEC was party to legal action which could result in losses that are at least reasonably possibly. Furthermore, there are cases where amounts have not been accrued or disclosed because the amounts of the potential loss cannot be estimated or the likelihood of an unfavorable outcome is considered remote. 

For comparative purposes, the following table includes the status of Commitments and Contingencies as of September 30, 2019. 

Contingent Loss Table 

Accrued Liabilities 

Estimated Range of Loss 

Lower End  Upper End 

As of September 30, 2020 

Legal Contingencies: 

Probable  $ - $ 500  $ 500 

Reasonably Possible  $ - $ 34,483  $ 34,483 

As of September 30, 2019 

Legal Contingencies: 

Probable  $ - $ - $ -

Reasonably Possible  $ - $ 255,401  $ 255,401 73 

Note 9 Leases 

The FEC did not have any capital leases as of September 30, 2020 or September 30, 2019. The FEC has a non-cancellable operating lease for its office space through November 30, 2032. 

As contained in the FEC’s Occupancy Agreement with the General Services Administration (GSA), as amended July 30, 2019, future payments under the operating lease are as follows: 

As per the terms of the lease agreement, the FEC was granted a total of $8,943,503.52, or 22 months, in free rent from the lessor. Per the FEC’s policy, the total free rent will be amortized as deferred rent over the life of the lease. 

The table above represents the actual cash outlays for rent payments, as contained in the FEC’s Occupancy Agreement with GSA, and does not include the amortized Deferred Rent referenced above.                    

> Future Payments Due for Non-Cancelable Operatcy Lease -Building 2020 Fiscal Year Lease Payment
> 2021 5,161,065 2022 5,215,071 2023 5,270,698 2024 5,327,993 2025 5,387,007 2026 5,447,791 2027 5,510,399 2028 5,708,203 2029 5,801,287 2030 5,869,701 2031 5,940,166 2032 6,012,746 2033 933,755
> Total $67,585,882 74

Note 10 Inter-Entity Costs 

The FEC recognizes certain inter-entity costs for goods and services that are received from other Federal entities at no cost or at a cost less than the full cost. Consistent with accounting standards, certain costs of the providing entity that are not fully reimbursed are recognized as imputed cost [in the Statement of Net Cost], and are offset by imputed revenue [in the Statement of Changes in Net Position]. Such imputed costs and revenues relate to employee benefits and claims to be settled by the Treasury Judgement Fund. The FEC recognizes as inter-entity costs the amount of accrued pension and post-retirement benefit expenses. However, unreimbursed costs of goods and services other than those identified above are not included in our financial statements for current employees. The assets and liabilities associated with such benefits are the responsibility of the administering agency, OPM. For the periods ended September 30, 2020 and 2019, respectively, inter-entity costs were as follows: 

2020  2019 

Office of Personnel Management  $ 2,259,208  $ 2,887,867 

Total Imputed Financing Sources  $ 2,259,208  $ 2,887,867 75 

Note 11 Explanation of Differences between the Statement of Budgetary Resources and the Budget of the U.S. Government 

The Statement of Budgetary Resources (SBR) compares budgetary resources with the status of those resources. For the year ended September 30, 2020, budgetary resources were $79,061,462 and net outlays were $73,753,039. For the year ended September 30, 2019, budgetary resources were $75,551,616 and net outlays were $64,987,148. 

Apportionment Categories of Obligations Incurred 

The FEC receives apportionments of its resources from OMB. Apportionments are for resources that can be obligated without restriction, other than to be in compliance with legislation for which the resources were made available. 

For the years ended September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2019, direct obligations incurred amounted to $71,882,696 and $69,100,270, respectively. For the years ended September 30, 2020 and September 30, 2019, reimbursable obligations incurred amounted to $125,191 and $132,264, respectively. 

Comparison to the Budget of the United States Government 

SFFAS No. 7, Accounting for Revenue and Other Financing Sources and Concepts for Reconciling Budgetary and Financial Accounting , requires an explanation of material differences between budgetary resources available, the status of those resources and outlays as presented in the Statement of Budgetary Resources to the related actual balances published in the Budget of the United States Government (Budget). The Budget that will include FY 2020 actual budgetary execution information is scheduled for publication in February 2021, which will be available through OMB’s website at 

http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/budget . Accordingly, information required for such disclosure is not available at the time of publication of these financial statements. 

Balances reported in the FY 2019 SBR and the related President’s Budget reflected the following: 

The difference between the Statement of Budgetary Resources and the Budget of the United States Government for budgetary resources is primarily due to expired unobligated balances. The differences for obligations incurred and net outlays are due to rounding.                                      

> Budgetary New Obligations Distributed FY2019 Resources &Upward Offsetting Net Outlays Adjustments Receipts
> Statement of Budgetary Resources $75 ,5 51 ,616 $69,100,270 $$64, 987 ,148
> Budget of the U.S. Government 71,000,000 68,000,000 65 ,000,000
> Difference $4,5 51 ,616 $1,100,270 $$(12,852)

76 

Note 12 Custodial Revenues and Liability 

The FEC uses the accrual basis of accounting for the collections of fines, penalties and miscellaneous receipts. The FEC’s ability to collect fines and penalties is based on the responsible parties’ willingness and ability to pay: 

The Custodial Liability account represents the amount of custodial revenue pending transfer to Treasury. Accrual adjustments reflected on the Statement of Custodial Activity represent the difference between the FEC's opening and closing accounts receivable balances. Accounts receivable are the funds owed to the FEC (as a custodian) and ultimately to Treasury. The accrual adjustment for civil penalties is composed of a net decrease of approximately $306,000 for FY 2020 and a net increase of approximately $119,000 for FY 2019, respectively. The accrual adjustment for administrative fines is composed of a net increase of approximately $316,000 in FY 2020 and a net decrease of approximately $74,000 in FY 2019, respectively.                   

> Custodial Revenue 2020 2019
> Fines, Penalties, and Other Miscellaneous Revenue $760,511 $2,906,662
> Custodial Liability
> Receivable for Fines and Penalties $528,126 $714,855 Less: Allowance for Doubtful Accounts $(175,315) $(131,695)
> Total Custodial Liability $352,810 $583,160 77

Note 13 Undelivered Orders at the End of the Period 

For Fiscal Year 2020, Unpaid Undelivered orders were $12,420,553, of which $2,388,787 were Federal and $ 10,031,766 were non-Federal. As of September 30, 2020, there were no Fiscal Year 2020 Paid Delivered Orders. 

For Fiscal Year 2019, Unpaid Undelivered Orders were $16,582,115, of which $3,331,937 were Federal and $13,250,178 were non-Federal. As of September 30, 2019, there were no Fiscal Year 2019 Paid Delivered Orders. 78 

Note 14 - Reconciliation of Net Operating Cost to Net Budgetary Outlays 

Budgetary and financial accounting information differ. Budgetary accounting is used for planning and control purposes and relates to both the receipt and use of cash, as well as reporting the federal deficit. Financial accounting is intended to provide a picture of the government's financial operations and financial position so it presents information on an accrual basis. The accrual basis includes information about costs arising from the consumption of assets and the incurrence of liabilities. The reconciliation of net outlays, presented on a budgetary basis, and the net cost, presented on an accrual basis, provides an explanation of the relationship between budgetary and financial accounting information. The reconciliation serves not only to identify costs paid for in the past and those that will be paid in the future, but also to assure integrity between budgetary and financial accounting. The analysis below illustrates this reconciliation by listing the key differences between net cost and net outlays.                             

> Reconciliation of Net Operating Cost and Net Budgetary Outlays
> Intragovemmental With the Public Total FY 2020 Net Operating Cost (SN C) $79,867,804 $$79,867,804 Components of Net Operating Cost Not Part ofthe
> Budgetary Outlays

Property,  plant,  and equipment depreciation (5,743,370) (5,743,370)     

> (Increase)/Decrease in Liabilities not alfecting
> Budget Outlays:

Accounts payable (972,867) 312,561 (660,306) Salaries and benefits (141,851) (398,192) (540,043) Other liabilities (Unfunded leave, unfunded FECA, actuarial FECA) 596,294 (426,491) 169,803 

> Other financing sources

Federal employee retirement benefit costs (2,259,208) (2,259,208)                

> Total Components of Net Operating Cost Not Part ofthe Budget Outlays (2,777,631) (6,255,491) (9,033,123) Components of the Budget Outlays That Are Not Part of Net Operating Cost

Acquisition of capital assets 352,760 2,565,598 2,918,358                               

> Total Components of the Budgetary Outlays That Are Not Part of Net Operating Cost 352,760 2,565,598 2,918,358 Other Temporary Timing Difl"erences
> Net Outlays $77,442,933 $(3,689,894) $73,753,039 Related Amounts on the Statement of Budgetary
> Resources Outlays, net (SBR) 73,753,039
> Agency Outlays, Net (SBR) $73,753,039 79

## SECTION III – Other Information 80 

## Inspector General’s Statement on FEC Management and Performance Challenges 

.Federal  Eletti  u Commiss i on 

Office  of tliio  11n.spector  Gener,  I

TO : The  C-o:mw:ission  .

# ,,,---/ 

:FROM : Christopher  Skimler  ;::__  , '

SU BJECT:  fus~or  Genernil  (lG ) Statement  Sw.nmarizmg, the  ~gement  and 

Pmonna:ni:e  Ohallenges  Facing  'the  Federal  Eiec~on .Commission  (FEC)  for 

IT2021 

November  l3,  2020 

fu  acooraance  with.the  R.epo 11S  Consofulal:iol!l  Art  of  2000,  1ihe  Federal!  Election  Commission 

(r.  e. , the  'FE · ' or  ~' Commission" ) Office  of  Inspector  Genemll  ( OIG ) ide ntifies  the  mo5t 

serious  management  ,md  perl'ormance  ohal!lenges  facing  the  Commission  and  provides  a brief 

assessme,m:  oflhe  Commission 's  progress,  m.  add ressing  those  olmll:engesc t .Bystamte  l:ms  

> '.lepo. 11

:i.s  required  to  be  included  in  the  FEC's  A~cy  Fmmoial  Rqron. 

The  Government  l"ed'onmnce  andResnU s Modemizmiou  Ad  of20'10  ide.utifies  maj'oc 

management  challenges  M programs  or  mana;ge:m.eni  fiw.chom  fuat  are  1.-!Uln:erabre:  to  uraste. 

fra ud.  abuse  and  mismanagemen t and  \\ih-ere  a f.aillure  t io  pe:rfmm  wen  could  seriously  affect 

the  ability  offhe  FEC  to  aclnei;-e  its  miss ion  objectives.  Ea cli.  cli.alle.ug e ,;n-ea  is  i-el:lted  f<.o  tire 

PEC 's  .l.lllS .si ou  and  re:lil.ects  cominumg  Vlii!nerabililies  and  ,emecgwg  issue .s . The  FEC  OIG 

identified  fu.e  top  managemen t aod  pecfomw 1ce  dralienges  facing  the:  CommiJssion. as  the 

folfov.ing: 

1- Growlh  of  campaign  spending 

L Lad::  of  quorum 

3.  Coronaw :us  ( COVID-19 ) pandemic 

4_  Lade  offullUune  s:uppo1 t ro  Chie ffuf onn ation  Officer  ( CIO  and  1Gene.rai.  Cmmsel 

.P os itions 

5- Cyber:recnwfy     

> 1ne R,epo!Tts Conso!ili:ltion

."Le  .o!f .200 0 pe,mii.13\  agency  c:ommelll  o ;n  tile  IG  s ~arem.e:at5_  Aa:o r din ,gfy.  we                

> p!".omdedi senior l!llall3[el!l!Dt. am-afl: of om srateme;nt fur mm:me: on October 21, 102 0,
> 1

50  Fi rst  Stree  N E  Wa sh i ¢ort . iJC  2.046 381 

We  hope  that  coufum.ed  attemiou  to  fue,  management  dialilenges  identified  in  this  report  will 

improve  llie  Conimissiou  ,.,  ab.illityto  execute  its  mission  obj eetci. ves .  The  FEC  OIG 

enoourage.5  the · Commission  to  contci.nue  to  f.ocw  on  addressing  the  mmageme.nf  chaiUeuges 

d:i s arn...sed  herein..  \\  e hope  frui t fuis  repmic , aocomp:.:tnied  by  ihe  m;ernigbt  work.  w-e.  pafoon 

throughom  the  year  awts  the  C-0:nm:iiss.i.on  in  its  e.ffods  to  impfo,re  the  effect, i,~  and 

e:fficienq  f ifrs  pro  grams  arui  operaitions_ 

W ,e  appreciate  too  Conuni.ssi.on  s cooperation.  throughout  the  -r ear  io  a.ddEesffll.g  ti he 

man.,;gement  ch:dlenges  process_ Please  coutad  me  if  you  ih..,'I  e any  conc:emes  :n:eganling  the 

idemified  challenges. 

ac .:  Alec  Pallmet' , Staff  Director  and  Chief  fufunna t: io:n  Officer 

John  Qu:iml:m,,  ChiefF i&111c .ia]  Officer 

I.isa  Stevenson.  Ac-tmg  General  Couns, eI    

> fE'-Git. Jll. \ - 1 H10-

82 

Federal.  Election  Comndsston 

Office  of  t1 ffl  Insp e cto:r  Gene ral 

# Management and Performance Challenges Facing  the, 

# FEC for Fiscal 

# Year2021 83 

Table·  of  Co11teu ts 

Introdocti.on  and  App ro ach  __.. ___ __ .·--···... -- ··...---····--·-... _____ .----····---·... __ ___··-- ·- .... ___ _.. ---· ·._ ___ _.. -- -···· -- ···· -- ·--...1 

]lt.;fana gem.ent  and  Perl b nuance  Challeng e:  lliowili  ofCampaigo  Spending  .. __ __.. ···-·····-·..... .. ·····--..  2

]lt.;fana gem.e.nt  and  Pe:rfomimoe  Oba!lenge:  L ack  of  Quo rum  ___ ...--··... ______ ______.. .. ____ .. ____ _.. --··..---····--··.....4 

]lt.;fana gement  and  Perlmman ce  Chall enge : OOV ID-1 9  Pand.emic  __ _______ ________ _______ ______ ___ ___ _______ _______ ____5, 

fanagemen t and  Perlmma:nce  Challeng e:  Lack  ofF uJl!-Tim.e  Chief  Infoa:nation  Offi c er  ( CIO )

and  Genernl  Co1w.cse l Posi.t.i.ons  ............. .. ······-........ .. ___ __ .._ ___ ._ __ ___·····-·····--··· ·- -...._ ___.. __ ___... .. ..····-·· ......····· -- ... 6 

> 1·

fanagem.ent  and  Perlb!.manoe  C,1iallenge:  ;ybet.-s eourity  ··--·· ·---- ···----·······-·· -- ·-· ····-· ·· ········ ·· ·· ··· ·· ····· FY O O M:ma:gemem  Chall!eu ge s not  Induded .i.nFY  1021  Repo1 1 ___ __ ____ __ ____ ___ ___________ _____ __________ ____8

Appendix : H ot l!ine  Pre-l ei- ___···--- -··.......... .. ...............····· ·- -· ....... .........······-· ...... .. ·····-·· ............................................. .. ....  ] 084 

Introduct  ·on  and  App  oach 

l m aoco:rrdance  1;,vith  the  Repor.ts  Consolida ti on  Act  m 2000,  the  Fed.et.ti  Elec tio n Co:mmi '!S :iou 

j_ e __ t he  ''FEC  or  Com:w.i ssi on ) Office  oflnspector  Gene:i-a ] OlG)  -dent.mes  ·the  mo r. t s en.o m

m.1ill.agem.ent  and  perfunaance  challenges  facing  the  Commis sion  and  pro v· de s a brief 

as~men t o fie  Com:n.m si on  s progress  maddres s.i.ng  those  ohcru!le.nges . By  statute  iliIB  report 

is  -re4 1. tli red  to  be  iw:: iluded  .in  the  FEc·  s Agency  Fw..mcial  Report. 

Th.e  Go  remm.el!lit  Be:tformance  a:n d Re m lts  M odemii:za t io:n  .Act  of  20  mideoitifie  m.1J or  

> :tl'.lafiagetllffit

challenges  as  programs,  or  management  fun c:l fo'.11. ;1;  that  .are:  vul ue:rabre  to  waste, 

:fraud,  abnse  auf!!  miso1:;u:mgement  .and  'l.lii iiere  a :fa:il.mie  ro  perfoim  weJ !l  c ou ld  s e.riou. d , • affect  the 

abili ty  of fheFEC  tea  ac hie  ·e  rts  umsiou ob jec ti;v es.  Ead] .chall~  H:fe .a  i£  :related  to  llie  FE G s

·missi on  and  :r:eflec.t .,,,  continuing  v ulmernbiliti.es  3il!ld  emeigi.og  isme  . The  FEC OIG  identified  ·t he  

> top

:m.an:ag.ement  au<l  penoml!iilloe  ohallle.nges  facing  the  Commissi on  as  the  foUo ,wmg:    

> •· Gro\\lilh ,

campaign  spending  

> 1

Lack  of  qu .o mm 

• Cormia,  ims  OO VIl) -11 9 · pandemic 

• Lack  offitl l-time  support  to  CbieffufOl.1:llil.tion  Offic, er  ,CIO ·  and  Ge.uernt  Couns el 

Positions 

•·  Cy bet ' cmit y

H ow  md!  we  ideuticy  the se  d1all euge s':'  

> l,\

e ·demtified  ·he  Comiwss io:n ' '?.  maj or  mrumgement  and  perfmm.w.ce  d1a.lile.nges  by  r ec ognizing 

and  ass.ess. iog  key  themes  rrom  OIG  a1 rn:li  , special.1-eview  . hotline  compl.aw ts ,,  m,;, ,est:ii gaJions., 

and  an  in t.e:i.ual  ruk  a:illeS smen t,  as  w e ll  ·ru.  ~ publirJied  by  externa l ov ~ bodies,  ·s 1iJCh 

the  Office  of  Personnel  :M.111agewent  (OPl\4)  and  the  Gov etmne11t  Acemw.tability  Office  (GAO). 

Additi0-11ral ly  V, ""e  reii"i.e w ed.  pre  -i o:w.  :rrrumage.moot  challeillige  reports  to  detenni.ue  :irf  those 

dJa.111.eng,e s t-emam  si gm:fica:nt  for  tb is  submission.  Fimllil. y,  111 ve  oo.asidered  p111 b: lid  3'1i"aiilab le 

lll!fm:maiioo  and  i ntcemal  Commissi Olil.  rec orm; . As  a :res,11!:t , '\ \re  idenii::tied  :fi ve  ke _.  mma ,gel'llf.n t

and  perf om:1anre  challmge .s  " midi  are  de  ru l ed  herein... 

I85 

The  FE  wa~  estabhmed  neady  fifty  year.;  ago  to  provide  oversight  of  federal  camp~ 

:tmance.  ince  then.  federal.  campaign  imdcaiswg  and  .spen.dm:g  ha.ve  increased •  ·runafa:allly. 

partic:Dwly  after  the  1 . . • S.  ~ -Cmui 's  decision  in  Citizens  [lnited  . FEC  :in  I) ]  0..  Indeed, 

total  speumng  on.  fed.era]  ele,ction  e,ampru.gas  bas  increased  from  l .6  billion.iu  1998  to  more 

·Ihm  JO  billion  p.  • ·ected  for  _o::w _

EJ ,ect ion  Spend·ng:  199  - 2020 

> 1

•

Figwrs. -:- Torol  .:x:pmJtfirur.ss  pm · ele:c:Jicm  . 'Ch  T6p01'ted  to  tlw  FEC  ~ -t1llfili=.  2020  ,dal!'.1  i;i;  as· of .hme  30 . 2010 

anilp,.'0jw6d  w .~  '. J]  - , Vt  billion  The  totals  ii.I'  d.Iisfi~D"fJ  npre:s;mJt  aggi·q:ai  ~tdiw:m.  ~ t1U  filer.:,, 

illcht.1'i1.rgcan,pai;,.~s . partJ. 1oommitteBS , ,a1,Ylpoiilirol ,action  car.tmJi ~.;  (P.~Q-).  ob1ai11edfi·o  FE Cfi liPigS.. 

The  totaJI  nnniber  of  trnm:actions  f. Mject  to  FEC  regulation  and  o e.rsigbt  ha.ve  also  drn :1natically 

.w:creas.ed , especially  mreaeot  ·ears.  lransac Jti;  .w:clnde  :lit.Wldafory  filings  and  cons.fist  o · firnmcfa] 

repmt s filed  with  the  FEC  and  include  S1.tmmary  financial  iofommt .i on  a:nd  · temized  de  ails  of  receipts 

(wclluwng  oomrimdio-:11-. ),  dis:linu'Semenrn  (including  expendimres)  and  oth e.r  fimmci.aL  adi \ii"i.tly .

Indeed,  as  detailed  t1trtlher  in  ffle  figare  below: 

• Bew."OOlll  ]9 81)  and  ...  002,  ilie  totail . nllJmbel"  of  o:aosactio  ,s,oo ject  to  FEC  regufat.ion  and 

O'li'a'Stghl  increased  from  appr~ y 602,000  to  nea!'ly  twee  mi.l!lion .

•·  That  nu:m b-er  is  _prn j ected  t.o  exceed  600  milliou  m.2020 .86 

.3.5  ., 

HIM 

L5 

1.5M 

1,  '

0.5!.\ 

0.  •

# FEC  Tot.a  Transactions  (19 18,0- 2020) 

## 1980- 2002 

# II

'UIM 

1950  1.982  1984  19.11,t;  198.11  1990  1!.192.  19~  199i;  l99H  2000  ;zooz 

I-

By  2018,  11he  FlEC  h:-anc:l l e:d  nearly 

270  million  transactions.  That 

numbe.- is  proj  etted  to  exeeed 

1600  million  1i' 1:1  2020. 

600M 

SOOM 

-WOM 

100M 

:IOOM 

DM 

> I

# .II

•

Between  1980  anc:I  2.002 , tile  total1 

1number  of  transa(:ljions  ~Ject  ro  IFEC 

regulation  and  oversight  increased  from 

app,ro,cimately  602,'900  ro  ne:arty  three 

million. 

## ,Continued:  2002 . - 2020 

Projected  tota l tra  n sac. t io n iS  fo r 20. 21) 

T11ta l tran:sactlio:ns  i!!S  of  gust  202.0 87 

Despite  drnmaliic:  incre  , in  campaign  expenditl!ll:es  and  the  mwiber  of  k"awm :1:ions  snbject 

l:o  FEC  :regulation  andm'f'.CSighl  the  Commission's  budget  has  :rem:ained  beget  static.  Since 

2008  Ure  FEC ·s budget  m w.creased  by  an  average  of  only  0.66'  o per  yeru: . Those  increases 

have  not  kept  up  wi th  inflation,  which  has  averaged.  approximately  1. 60/4  pee  year  since  2006 , 

FEC Annua l Approp1 riations:  2008  - 2020 

> SlOO
> $90

$SO  

> $76

.--.  = - - - -- - .....  - -$60  - ,oa-,  

> li on, $50
> $40
> $30
> $20
> $:!I.O

## so  -

ioos- 2:009  :Mio  :wn  2.012  :wa  2.o.111  rots  '2016  wu  2018'  2019  :mro 

In  addifcm.,  the  namre.  offed.era]  c:.1mpaigns  has  evolved  in  re~utyearis.  Online  fimdraising, 

'th-e  influence  of  d!ark  money,  and  pot e.t1t i a]  foreign  e:il.ed:ora]  i.m:i h!lenCe  will  contmne  to ,place 

fu rt lhec  strni:n  on  the  FHC'  s ability  to  pro  ride  o ·et" · i.l.ght  of  federal!  c-.ampaigns . A.s  ' , J.Cb,.  absent 

additional  r esomres , the  FE C race;  challe uge .s  in  .t iroessfuUy  .regulating  campa  i~,n  tln :m.ce  wi1ih 

.~t.s  c-mi:em  :fim_diug , which  has  '1:.ell tially  :lfemained  tibe  same  OT i !M . file  past  tmrtee.n  years  or  more. 

A s. igru. ficant  managemeiilt  and  p et  ~oimance  challenge  for FY' '2021  resides  with  the·  July 

.2020  ;mn  mi.cement  offh e res igna tion  of  ~ -one, 1:  Caroline  Ht. mtec.  le .:wmg  tcbe  FE C

v.:ithout  a fum -membe:lf  quon Wil.  The  Co.mmiss i. oo.  il"f  :requin :'ld  to  be  composed  of · ·~ 

oo:mmiss:i.ooe, 1 appointed  by  th e President  with  no  m me  than  ilm ee  members  af fi li a ted  1/1.iilth  the 

s.. 1me  poli tci c.11  p ai. 1y. 1 Fmthemrore,  5_  1 .S  .C.  § 3 0106  i-e qui l' es  he  affimmtiv  e vote  of  four 

members  to  oct  on  certain  ma tt er  . Ille  FEC  ha!.  mcl.::ed , a quom m fur  al!l  bu t  29  days  .wF'f  020. 

# ·.·  w-ce  its  mcep t0icm,  the  FE C has  l.aclred  a quorum  on  lllllT ee  oc:c .as ions :  a ~-x-mmrth  period  in  2008 

from. Septem be r , 019  to  MaT  2020  and  :li Ol!IJ! ,Jmy  4,  2-020  o l:ih-e  _pre-J.ent 

The  fack  of  a qu orum  pF er ents  the  CommiJ.:sio n from  a:mo n.e  other  things  wuing  decisioos 

on  peruiing  enforcem.em  act,ions,  opening  imresliigatci:Ol!IS , :m d .is.suin g :i dii  irory  opimons.  This 

concem  also  prominenrty  direc ,ti y an d indifeotl,  -:impac n.  agency  programs  an d procedures. 

488 

> 1

Commi.:rnfou  Di.i:ec:t ,ive  l 0,  Section  L se  ' fOl.ith  ilie  ml  of  procedure  to  be  foUowed  when  t he 

Comm.isriou  bal!i  fevr er  than  fo-w·  ·s:i:tlwg  membeu , md  in.dudes  a li st  of  matte .cs  on  \ hi.c h the 

C~ ·ou  DIBY  still  ac t.  These  UJCllude  notices  ofillmg , dates,  non-filer  notioes  d.e-lmt  sefflem.em 

pfans,  adrum.is.trati\re  tenm.na.tions  and  appeals  mder  the  Fttedom.  ofln.fumlatioo  and  Privacy 

Ac ts. 

1iVbi1e  the  Federal  Election  Campaign  Act  of  19  1 ..  as  amended  (FE CA ).  requires  an 

affinuative  ro te  by  fonr  Commisrio ners  to  make  dec.is:ioa~ m many  .ueas  inc-hldin g,  regul:atioo.s, 

a irory  opinions,  al!Jdi t matt. em;  and  en:fim:ement~ the  ~ Ill  remaim  open  for  mis.in ess .

taff  c.om ,imle ,s  to  ft11fll.e r the  agency  s vital  mi s -on  of  admimsteri JJ ,g  ·the  nation  s cru:upaign 

finance  bn ,vs  .

The  OliGiuudemta:nds  toot  ~maw1gemenf  C:ha!ll!~e  is  beyoo.d  f.he  cootro]  of~he 

~on;  bl!lt  we  would  be  remiss  if we  mil  to  ackn m,;4 edge  th e bckof  a quon1lll . iis  an 

ongoing  significant  m.1ru1gemetJif  chal11euge .

The  ongoing  COVID-19  :rmuiemi i:  poses  OWi_} ' mamagemeo:t  and  pe t om.mace:  clialleog, ez  to 

the  C-0:mmission.  Mrnrt  notab ly  "t  bas  forced  die  FE C,  and  nlMlY  other  agencies,  to  ope.rate  in  a

renJ.ot.e  status  since  MM-ch  _O_O .

Fortuna te ly  much  of  the  Con:w:wssiou ', ._  bus:im.e JlS.  is  be:wg  accomp-l!ish-ed  i:em.otely.  One 

a · ti.call  mission  area  'tih e pandemic  has  affec ted  relates  to  · he  ·S1.tbmiissio:m  and  .aceeptan.ce  of" 

campaign  financ:e  complamm.  By  llaw,  all  comp,lamts  mn: sit  be  made  in  ,w.i.ting  arul!  m liLi  provi de 

the  fuU  rum:te  .and  address  of  the  person. fifuJg  l:he  oompwn t. •·  Complain·  mlil st  be  si gned  SV.'0 1'D,, 

and  notarized~ mefill!Wg  hat  he  notary's  ce11ifi.cate  mmt  Si tate  fha _t the  comp,faint  wae,;  11 s:i gne.d  and 

swam  t • before  me " or  lllli-m  iw!licate  that  tlre  oomplawaut,  affi nn ed  ~he  eompfaint  "under  penalty 

of  petjmy ."  Cunen1il y,  the  FEC  is  proce-~g  mru l on  an  .i.meamttent  basis  until  :it  1e~ sl!mle .s  

> 1101m:d

mail  operations  arui  as  ai  :re .su1t,  t he  Commission  has  req_~ted  that  anyone  who  wishes  t:o 

file  a complarint  1.1v i t!h  Office  of  General  C •-nm el  OGC · Emorr:ement.  do ,so  by  mail  and  s e:md  an 

efootro:mc  cop · of  the  complawt  via  email  w adddi.on.  th e Commission.has  em: ow:aged  the  m e 

of  e:lee lronic  siig na tm: e and  notarizatiiOl!IS  where  penru.tted  by  state  law  .3

Addmonal!ly  due  to  th e :inteml!ittent  procesirmg  ofmaii]  he  FEC  OIG  ms  e.x:pai.eneed  de.fa r

io  re  ;ponding  to  hotlin e co:mplamt"  deliv ered  v ia  m.1 ii L As  such.  we  ha ve  past ed  announcements 

to  our  webpage  ,email! , and  hotline  phone  :rernniing  · hat  smmgly  e, ncmirag_es  complainants  to  file 

a]l  :imqm.ries  an  OJ'  c,ompfaints  tJ.u-;ougb.  ·. he  newly-estahhmed  FEC  CHG  Hotline  Portal! .

, :Iana:gern.ent  was  fumed  to  react  to  the  COVID-]9  pandemic  and  as  ai  r-esult  established  a

COVID  m.im.gemen.t  team  w ad dre ss  and  act  on  pandew ,c-re 11l 1ted  .onc en1c ~.  A few  b'f those 

act:io:11,  wcblde  but  are  not  limit ed  to:   

> ?&re

52  U.S .C  :m 09{a)  ). 1 Elecb:onic;ill_,  ~lmritted  copies  ,of  compl~t;  &at  o fua v.'ise  appear  to  be  m ords- a:re  deeme.d  JE:() e:J. ,·ed  on  1ne  d.,te        

> the copy "'~ .ectm.mically ll!Q!!l 'i.· eci. 1=taff.

Complaints  dliai: ·a:re  ml.ed  only  by  mail  will  ,deeme,il  i:ecei. ,·ed  \\ihem.          

> ' recei,-ed by 10GC stm'. sub ject to mail prooessing del:ays .

.Mam~ ge.tn£c:?1t  and  Perjonn ,wce  Challen!£"@  Fad11g  the  FE C in  FY  f'Ll  589 

• Estabh '3  · · g fl1exible  ~wk.  .ochednl.es  aad  wai  1ing  core  working  how:  requireme:11t s

•,  Pm-chru:mg  and  miplem1mtmg  ·".deo  commtwic-.ation  tool-s  

> •, Pro,.Tj_dfog

vi deo  coo!ferem:ing  ~...,s  and  tel!eurm:k  security  best  p,raetice  tips 

• •• omimmic.ati.ng;  ai  weekll y compilation.  of  guidance  and  in:fum1aition  to  assist  FEC  ·~ mff 

while  the  a:!!enc-y  a l!ID.der  mandlakriy  tel e1w·ot'k 

• EsrabfuJwJ.2  a Phar;.e  1 :re-opewng  quick  reference  guide  

> ,• ,

Esrabw.J:wg  Phase  I :re-ope-1.m 1g kawing  for  FE C staff  members  wmch  includes  a self-

chrek  for  COVID  funn,  fEC  contact  tracing  log,  and  protec  ·\;e  persona]  ,equipment 

for  s taff  membe.rs  entering  the  office  during  .iPhase  I

'• 1 :M:audatmg . ace  masks  in  oommcm  areas,,  limiting  the  nru11ber  of  people  i:m.  l:he 

bui l dmg  and  establishing  emarn:::ed  deMIWg  pml:ocols 

•,  h:ruing  an  evamation  order  on  March  -4 , 2!020  and  cemew .ing  Umt  o:roe:r  oa.  September 

18.  2020  to  reduce  con:eem'>  reg.udiugpotential  COVID -19  e:,,.'])osnre  purrru:mt  to 

O~f s teg)lila1\ions  at  5 C. F'.R  Part  SSO  Subpart  D

•,  Trnckrng  the  operatcmg  ••;tams  of  approximately  25  public.  schoo i rusb:ic  in .DC. 

]\Jar yla:nd  ·and  .•i:rg:ini.a 

In  add ition,  the  Commis s ion  launched  a :re--opemng  smi.,ey  to  s taff  membecs  in  Ju]y  ~020  in 

effo 1t s  to  use  employee  feedback  in  conjunct.ion  i,,vifb  go  ·eiument  regu ilations  to  fonmd31te  a pl an 

for  a phased  re~opem:ng  approach.  TIie  Slfll1i'e )f  reoeived  a 9 ffl1  response  rate  w which  a marjor  ·ty 

m . responden · repot'ited  tha t ·  heyv.u tdd :lilie  to  co.rrdinue  to  t-emai:n  in  a m:ix:iarum  tel im·ook  £:1.itie 

due  to  COVID!-19  ooncerns  md  tliat  they  can  suitc.e smil!ly  comple1e  work  lasks  fromhom :e, 

_ ifuteo  ·er  half  of  the  1e .s; po:mc'fe.u ts  repmt.ed  concerns  r~dmg  expoonre  to  CO  ..  ID -19'  i,,vi;th  1: he 

use  of  public  tta11. :. po1tation. 

Out  of  shoo-:tenn  necessity.  th~·  Commission  bas  irupl em.Jell1:ed  ages£',  ·-wide  procedw:1:: s m

reaction  to  the  OOVID -19  pandemic.  \\  e id emify  this  as  a.  continliled  cballeug,e  fucwg  llie 

Commission  in  FY  202]  dl!le  to  fJ he  ·olatihty  of the  si tuation  and  eecoura ,ge  the  agenc y to  be 

proarn  · em .~ ts  re.."Fonis.e  s bategy  in  IT  10  l to  miogatepo t en  ·al  impacts  to  mission 

re~ -- 

> .1

hmlgemmt  and  Pe:cbmance  ~ : Lm::'l:  ,:,  Ftill-T!me  Orief 

Infurmatron  Officec  (1 IO  !md  Genem.1  CoDnSel  P~~tions 

Clu1ie11tly , the  s eni.rn- leade:rship  ro le .s  of  the  Staff'Director  ruid  CIO  are  occupied  by  th~·  s: mn-e 

m.di  ridua1  and  m \. -e  been  since  A1 1gust  2011.  lnfo.rmatioo  technology  is  eriret ·-evoh, mg  which 

affects  .dl  gm temm.ent  ageucies  a:md  w ·ihout  a fo l l  deditated  CIO  to  focm  on  teclmoiogical. 

issues  to  ensii1 re  r e-s ou.re  ru:e  ·propec!  • ml!ooated  md  adequate  pooesse -s  are  in  p:la:c.e  for  the 

profec, tion  and  safeguacds  of  the  agency.  the  agency  w:iU  remain  at  risk 

On  April  l ,  019,  llie  Committee  on  House  Adm:im. ~tration  ofllie  U.S_ HOl!ISe  of 

Repre .s enta:tives  posed  a.  nmnloer  of  ,que  ~oos  to  the  FEC  Comm i ssi oner  about  agency 

.l iJimage m m<1t  ,and  Peif o.n rtI111'Ce  Chall en g es  Fm::ing  th e FE C i ti  FY  ] () JJ  690 

ope.ra1io11 s,  indruiing  if  lhe  ComtlllSSion  agr:eed  it h.  ooncer:ns  hit  · he  CIO  and  StaffDirec-tar 

should.  ha r...· e a fulJl -tim.e  ,dedicated  persoo. for  each  positi.oll!.  The  Commissioners  agreed  v.rifu  tms 

cim c ern  and  added  that  file  sail ary  limit  placed  ,o:n  he  Staff  Direotor  by  ilie  FECA  is  capped  at 

Lev ei  of  rue  Ex:ec:nti , re  chedme~  This  st atutory  req,.w:e.men t pro, r.r  ·des  t hat  he  Smff  Director 

S1!1J)ff\'-i s e.,  per~h H he  GS-15  and . eniorL~  ·a  pai  scales,  lv irom  often  h,n, -e  hightt  s.dru:ie ". 

·than  fue  taff  Daectm-.  Once  the  COOJ:lll13:sion  promoted  he  C10  to  the  Staff  Directm , the 

Commi. "5 -on.,a]l ow ed  :him. to  cominue  tio  s en-re  as  the  CIO  and  he  compensated  at  that  l evel  i'ath.e.r 

than  take  a pa y cl!lt. 

Similitrlv:  he  i'\r;,n, ;a ih:  Genera]  COl!ll!ISel  for  L'l w :is . concu.rrentt  • s~  as  ·11. e Ac-ting  Genern] J ,  ~P ~J  -

COl!WSel  and  has:  ooen  do ,mg  so  s-mce  September  2016.  This  iha s potent.ml.  to  pe t the  agency  at 

Wlk  and  inhibit  the  ·agency  ro  effect :i t rely  and  efficiently  m~ t it~  miss ioo.  :requirements,  as  mtm.st 

internal  dialogue  'fW.d  · ·ersil :y  of  opi.m .oo.  we  emial  to  ensuring  fue  ageney  ocm.sidern 

competing  legal  theories  aHd  emu  e o:f  acf ou .

The·  Committee  oaHouse  Ad:miru: 11: tration  o:f  the  U. S .  Bouse  ,of  Representati \re s similarly 

mqt.WTed  a 11  to  ·h.  · fire  position.  of  General  Counse]  bad  n.o t been  peml!illlentiJ: ~· filled.  In  response, 

the  Commissi,on  identified  that  fue  FECA  reJl!llrel  ilie.  Genera]  Couesel  to  be  paid  a1  Leve[  of 

the  Exec.utive  chedul.e  and  tha t mis  limitation  can  make  diffirnU:  to  a1Plrac t amt  retai.o.  good 

talent.  s·  .· 1  a.i:·  10  ille  St affD irect.orpooi tioll!,  the  General  Cmm ,re]  Sl!IJ)e['tri s es  pen .mm.el  aJt  ilhe 

GS-15  and  'enior  I.e, rel pa y seal  , ,. i ,i ch  often  p1 m 'i.de  mgh.er  safa ri  ·trum. l e'!irel  \ of  the 

Executive  chedu 1le. 

Management  previously  tq!IOt1ed  ilhat  the  Commi5:rion.adopted. Jeg is lati  e Fecomm.endatiom; 

m 0 18 , 2-0  n 2016,  2-0]  5 2014- 20 13  and  201  I th.a t urged  Congress  to  remo, ie · the  sb hitmy 

reference  to  11 he  E.'"'tecl!ltive  Sd ti. edme  in  fECA  wi th.  respect  to  the · FEC  S taff  Director  and 

Genet·a]  O:mnsel  :? ositi O!l& . The  rem.mrn1  of  that  referencce  11, ,;rowd  eU'sll.ue  the  h:  ·o  pos it-ions  be 

c:ompe mated  under  11 he  s ame  scliedul!e  as  the  C ~i:on ' • other  ·sew.or  mruiagers .

Filling  the  CTO  and  GellleraJ  Coun cffi ] P-osi t,ioos  with  full-time  Ul.l"'il.J.IDDeu  wo uld  he~  en..sl!lfe 

the  fEC  is  e:ffect.i  ·el ·  and  effici ently  s:uppomng  · , m reral.1!  mission  obj ec:ti  e As sign.mg  aotmg 

pa:somie ] w tw.o  e~tw.  leadermip  po s itcio:ns  on  a loog -term .basis  is  no t .1Il.  efficient  sol uti on 

Coo:v erse ly , due  ro  the  lad:  of  a qnoium  the  Commi S!  ·onern,  have  opted  not  to  appm;;e  tihe 

selec ti on. s.  of  GS-15  and  SeniOf'  Le \< ;el  pos itio.n.s . Ba.s.ed  on  the  foregoing  and  upoa  :renewal  of  a

quorum,,  \.\re  enoow:ag_e  ~he  agency  to  me  Of'  appoint  someone  to  cany  out  t he  agency  ao  and 

Genet·a]  Co 1!1DSe l dl!Jtie .s  on  a foll-hillF  basis. 

Protecting  da1a  syst ems  and)  networks  li om  hea ts  rema:ims.  a top  cb.alleog.e . The  FE •' i.., ras 

established  to  protect  lhe  mtegrit:y  of  federal  campaign  :finance  by  pro  ·ding  t,ranspare:ncy  and 

,eJJlorcmg  and  ~er~Tfederal  crunpaign  firumoe  Ja u rn . fu  doing  o,  the  FE C d'i sdose; 

campaign  fimmce  dab1.  to  ~ pub.li e and  as  a res ult c,  encounters  laige  mlurn.e &of  webp.age  traffic 

fro:m  alreholdea=  and  membeJ!'S  of  t he  public.  In  efforts  kl  sh"emmme  trau=.p.ai:enc y imtiatir,: 

and  imp.ro ,ve  bl!JS in-ess  p:roresse5  the  Couuw ss iom  is  mD:1:e  techn ol ogy  reliam  today,  a s.  is  society; 

as  ~'IJCh,  1t.i:  imperat ci ."e  fhat  the  Cmnmiss ioo.  contim!ae  to  prioritize  cyuersec,uri ty .91 

Cyber:sec-mity  encompasses  attemp ts.  from  crirn 1ioa,ls  and  am rer~e s fo  o btam  sensitive 

.info1mafu.on  linked  ·to  go . emment  netv.·orb.  persoml  identifiable  infomia1 tioo,  mtel!lectual 

properly  and  other  se.ns iti. ve  data.  Cjiber  flh reats  may  artlf.e  fi:om  phishrng,  nn:1&omw.1re  or  other 

m.:tl w ru:e  atta ck ~ and  can  wfilfirate  any  level  wifhin  an  or-~0111. 

Since  Angost  ,019,,  he  Commission  engaged  :in  fhree  j omt  eff'orts  urifh  the  Depmtm,e11t  of 

:Homeland  Secucrt y (DHS)  to  imptolil:e  it!>  o,;• er-all  ~uri:ty· pastme: 

1.  The  C m1i111w ssion  encountered  an  m ·ue  here  a:n  elillp loyee  was.  temi:imted  fOi: 

downloading  prohlbi.tive  so ftware  ou  tchemr  FEC ~re,dl  laptop.  Tibrm  incident  promp t ed  FE C

mruaagemem·  to  partner  1,,1ri1b  t he  DHS  Cyber!lecmity·  illld  Infrfil11nldl:lre  ecurity  Agency  (O ISA)  

> H1wf:

and  Incident  Response  Te..,1m  (HIR.I)  in  .August  01 19.  to  petfom1  an  ~.ssment  ;to 

de.1.'e.1miue  if  an  il!:ttmsi.o:m  ocCl!lll-ed  \1,o ·itl!Im  fh-e · FEC" s nen. vmk  en  irOl!lIDB :11 t. 

. In  .fan.uary  _Q 1]0  at  the  request  o.f  the  OIG  the  CISA  HIR.Tpe,tfonned  a Risk  and 

··ulne.rabrnt:y  .i\sse  ~mel!l!t  {R\  A)  oft ,he  TEC  :neh'i.'Dtl:  wl:rieh  .rind 'u.de d a penetrntion  te s t  and 

phisbmg  asses  mem. 

3.  InJvfay  _Q@  CISA  perfonned  a ·  ecurity  A ~sm ent  Re  riew  (S AR ) to  assist  \\.rith 

i.dlentifJuig  addruomd  cyber  mb .

As  ai  1T esuJt  of  fhe  furego mg  1.-e .ri ei. v tb ~ DHS  te.run.s  identified  pote.urcia]  n" -k;;  and  provided 

recflll)Jme'Jliiaf  ow;  to  impr,;::ir  e the  fE C m"el3!ll  seci ~i ty  p rtw.-e.  Additioo.allly,  in  eff om  to  help 

safe ll'l i-.1rd  the  Commission's  netv.  ode  and  instill  a C:l!JUm e of  c~.1 .. eF~itv  all  ~t m includim! :::i--- •:,-v  ,;  . ._. 

c.onfnlct ,ors,  are  r:eqniI'ed  ·:o  SlilCCessfully  cmnplete  rea.muig  infuimmion  secw: i ly  trnirung. 

It  is  -g eutia.l.  t h.1t  ti he  Cooimission  cooti.nne  t · m.aintam  · be  mt, egri. ty  and  a railab ih  of  its  

> i.il.l!futm.at~cm.

as  it  lo oh  to  modernize  its  sys tems,  whi.ch  indude  moving  towards  a cloud 

,env: mmmem.t.  To .large  part  t he  a_ gemcy  has ,been  :reactive  to  cybersecurity  concerns  and  we 

enc  m:age  the  Commission  ta ,b e  proactive  in  establishing  a cyb ersecm ty  frame  ·ork  and 

strengthen  intei.'Dail . cootro]s  lio  mitigate  e:x.t;emai l l'hreats  from  entering  the- FE C'  s network 

Condus -on 

The  OIG  presents  tile  e ch,,,lleoges  a. :s.  p.re: ,._ious  and  e¥olvmg  iss:ue-S  facing  t he  FE  in  FY 

02: L The  challeuges.  seni -e  as  impending  barrier~  to  promote  efficiency  a:nd  effecti  1; rene  in  the 

:m:.m:agement  of FE C openitioru  and  procednre.s.  The  OIG  remains  dedic.3!ted  to  independent 

o, .e .cs i. ght  to  ea '.me  acOOIWtcabili ty  of  the  :mi ssion  oft he- FEC. 

FY  10~0  :M.anagemenJ  Challenges  not  Indu.ded  in  FY .,_  021  Report 

:~  uagemen  Challenge:.  A ddr ess  ont s tamliog  OIG  anmt  l:'ecommeudations  

> The

OIG  and  FEC  have  made  tremendlom  prog1.-ess  m.resolvmg  29  1TeCon.tllil.e1Il.d t iom~  runce  

> .Anp.lS!i

20  ]8.  The  OIG  acknowledges  t bait  :tiG:l!ll  'ovem.bel-- 2018  to  August  2019  ilie  fEC  OIG 

lad~  an  Inspe ctor  Gen.enl]  and  Deputy  Impecrm  Ge!lle ,rn]  and,  as  a re.smt  ooul:d  not  :appro ,re 

acf  all!'.  :r ,eqiiiestred  to  do:ie  oliltst. 111dwg,  "!"ecommmdat.ions. 92 

Gun e ntly , there  are  11  ou tst anding  a dit  recommenda~01!1S  l:lirn.t  cb:  :e  back  to  2010.  111 ,e  agency 

should.  contim .ie  ro  de-votie  'attetrtion  kl  address  the  ,outltfraruiing  :lifC ommeruiatio.ms  in  efforts.  to  

> ell.'fflfe

ade qm. te  .inte:ma lc oll!t~ o:ls  are -dentifi.ed..  documented,  and  imp lemented.  The  OIGwill 

c:ontinue  to  promo te  ongoing  and  l'ec1ll11:mg  di. Kus  ·oms  with  m.'llllligemelli · to  he lp  focu:ir  iitlentio :1 1 

> ·to

c:l.lirellt  prooe  - and  reeoo1meud  speci fic  act ioos . w cl  o 1eDJ1.ai.nm.g  rec:ommendatioM. 

M:aua§e meni  Cbaileuge:  Addre,ss  results  from  th .e  amtnal  FE 1/'S  aod  .1016  hot  Causes  ,of 

Lo iii  Employ ee  ~lora 1e  Srudi  ~

In  the  OP M Hli.llllm  Capital  Man.ageJ!l:lffit  E va hiat ioo . report  o: fihe  FEC  dared  i\ingust  13  1019 

OPM  identifi ed  that  IB C liacks  a fumt.u  ,. - for  uswg  FE. "\  S re- 1Lts  t imo1m  m:aoaig,ement 

decisions  and  focrn  1tlilpfOve:ment  ,efforts.  Tue  010  believes  that  implemell!t ,ing  a mmal  proress  

> ·to

addr~  empfoy  e oonceu1s  111.vo uld  fi:uthef"  benefit  the  agency  and  .iucrea  e employ ee  m rue .

The  agency  continues  to  make  strides  illl. iw.pro  ·ing  ag~  :l!l:ID:rale  tmu ugh  the  impro'\'e'.lilleil  illl 

management,  traiwng,,  pro:fe,~ionru.  de  ,elopm. ent , and  increased  coo1u111UJ i!".a'tions.  Management 

should  con:tmue  to  de 1; relop  and  implement  action  plans  to  address  · hese  ooncems .

The  Conm.nss ion  ~t at:ed  that  11; piamied  to  1..H. mch  an  ont: ,reach  progrnm  to  lerun.  :from  sit aff  hol'.1-

best  to  build  m1  the  Sl!JOC~  rep orte d in  tire  OHJ  FEVS  and  how  to  addre:.s  tho.foe  empl oy ee 

.issues  Uia1 : oo.atwne  fo  reqime  :managemmt  s fucli;red  atfention..  The  OIG  ad:noi.¥ledges  fila, t his 

,effo-l'it  v.illl.  t..d:e  time  mdl  V. '.f'  p1m  to  re  -is. it  tms  ie-oncem  at  a later  date. 

993 

## Federal  Election  Co:nunission 

## Office  ofthe  I nspector Genera l 

# 0 · 11G Hotline Po  tal 

# https //fecoig 1.a i ns .co,m 

## I_. 

* A lso  aeic: e.ss ib l 1

e via: 

httjp://www. fe. c.gov/oig 

## OIG Hotlin 1e Phone 

# 202-694-1015 

· Av,ail'ab le  fro m  9: 00  a.m . to  5:00  ,p .m . 

Ea s te rn  St a ndard  lime , 1M  onday  through 

Fr iday,  e xd udi  g federal  ho l1 days. 

Or  you may ca ll  to ri  free at 1-800-424 -9530  (press  O;  then  dial  1015).  You  may  also  file 

a complaint  by  comp,leting  the  Hotline  Comp laint  Form  (http://W\vw.fec.gov/oig)  and 

mailing  It  to:  1050  First  Street,  N£,  Suite  1010,  Wash1ngton  DC  20463. 

lndivic!u~s  including  FEC  and  FEC  cootractor  employees  are  encouraged  to  alert  the  OIG  to  h-aud,  waste , abuse , and 

mismanagement  of  agency  proi;,rams  and  operations.  lndiwduals  w.ho  con1tact  the  OIG ,cm  remain  anonymous.  Hm1o-,

persons  who  report  alegations  11ra  encouraged  to  ifWO'lioe  the ir  cont&ct  imorm&ticm  in the  event  a.dditional  questions 

anse  as  the  otG  evaluates  the  a ll egations.  Aiegations  wit!h  limiitecl  detai ls  or  ment  may  be  neid  il1I  abeyance  until  furthe'l" 

specific  details  a.re  reported  or  obtai n ed  Pursuant  to  the  Inspector  General  Act  of  1978,  as  <11111ended,,  llhe  l ~ectO'f 

Genera!  Wtill  IOOt  clisdose  the  ~:lentity  of  arJ  indmdual  who  provides  immmation  •nfthout  the  coruent  of  that  mdvildual. 

mess  the  Inspector  General  determi~  mat  such  disclosure  is , unaYOidable  elm~  the  course  oil  ail  imres:tigation.  To 

[ieam  more  abou:t  the  OI G. , visit  our  Website  at  lrttp://www.fec. gov/oig .

# Together we can make a difference! 94 

## Management’s Response to the Office of Inspector General’s Statement on the Federal Election Commission’s Management and Performance Challenges  16 

November 13, 2020 

In its Statement on the FEC’s Management and Performance Challenges (“Statement”), the Office of the Inspector General (“OIG”) identified five overarching management and performance challenges for inclusion in the FEC’s Agency Financial Report for Fiscal Year 2020. Management’s response to the OIG statement is below. 

Challenge 1: Growth of Campaign Spending 

As illustrated in the OIG’s description of this management challenge, increases in the amount of money raised and spent in federal elections, and changes in the way political committees raise and report contributions, have resulted in explosive growth in the number of campaign finance transactions reported to the FEC each election cycle. Each of these transactions represents a data element that must be received by the FEC, added to our database and disclosed and made searchable on the FEC website and via the FEC campaign finance API. 

In large part in response to projected increases in campaign finance activity, in FY 2015 the FEC proactively launched a comprehensive, multi-year IT Modernization project. Since this project was launched, the Commission has requested and received as part of its annual budget funds to support this crucial effort. As part of the IT Modernization project, the FEC redesigned its website and migrated both the website and the campaign finance database that supports it to a cloud environment. In addition to providing faster and easier access to campaign finance data hosted in the cloud, this migration allowed the agency to shut down one of its physical data centers during FY 2018, realizing attendant costs associated with maintaining that data center. During FY 2020, the FEC made additional database enhancements to improve database performance and control costs of hosting and maintaining the database. 

To continue to mitigate an anticipated steep rise in future cost from maintaining physical data centers, the FEC is pursuing a modernization plan which requires investment now and over the next several years to continue cloud migration and realize improvements in its IT processes. During FY 2020, the FEC conducted a study to determine how best to migrate other appropriate systems and databases to the cloud, allowing the agency to realize greater efficiency and performance in future years. The FEC will continue to implement the recommendations of this study during FY 2022 with the goal of reducing costs in future years while maintaining high levels of service to the public. 

In addition, the FEC is currently working to upgrade the agency’s eFiling platform. In order to reduce the financial burden of compliance for committees and other individuals and groups who must file with the FEC under the Federal Election Campaign Act (the Act), the FEC provides access to free filing software. In FY 2017, the Commission published a study of its current eFiling  

> 16 Management consists of the agency’s senior managers, including the Staff Director, General Counsel and Chief Financial Officer.

95 

platform, including a survey of the existing functionality of the FEC’s free filing software and an in-depth investigation of needs expressed by filers. 17  The FEC will rely on the recommendations of this study to improve its eFiling platform to allow greater operating system flexibility for users when generating filings for submission to the Commission and increase the consistency and accuracy of reporting. The FEC’s new eFiling platform is expected to improve the process for validating filings prior to acceptance and generate modern file outputs that will provide for more flexibility in accessing data. The FEC had expected to begin the implementation phase of this project during FY 2021. However, COVID-19 related delays in onboarding new staff and contractors subsequently contributed to delays in the FEC’s efforts to complete the development phase of the eFiling platform during FY 2020. As a result, the FEC expects to begin partial implementation of the new eFiling system during FY 2021. 

Campaign finance reports filed on paper remain the most costly filings for the FEC because they must be manually received and processed by FEC staff. The Commission has also taken steps to reduce this burden on the agency. Most notably, in 2000 the Commission began requesting through Legislative Recommendations that the Act be amended to make the FEC the point of entry for Senate filings. This amendment, which became law in September 2018, had the effect of subjecting Senate filers to the FEC’s mandatory electronic filing rules, which require committees to file electronically if they receive contributions or make expenditures in excess of $50,000 in a calendar year or expect to do so. In 2018, the Commission recommended legislative changes to require reports of electioneering communications to be filed electronically with the Commission, rather than on paper and to increase and index for inflation certain registration and reporting thresholds. If enacted, each of these recommendations would have an effect of further reducing the number of paper filings received by the FEC. 18 

Challenge 2: Lack of a quorum 

The Commission was without a quorum of four Commissioners for approximately 11 months during FY 2020, and began FY 2021 without a quorum. 19  However, the President has nominated Allen Dickerson, Shana M. Broussard and Sean J. Cooksey to become FEC Commissioners, and those nominations are currently pending before the Senate. 

Management agrees that the present lack of a quorum presents challenges for agency staff and managers. In the agency’s Enterprise Risk Profile, management has listed the potential lack of quorum as a very high risk since FY 2018. 

While the Act requires an affirmative vote by four Commissioners to make decisions in many areas, including regulations, advisory opinions, audit matters and enforcement, the Commission remains open for business. Staff continues to further the agency’s vital mission of administering the nation’s campaign finance laws.    

> 17 Available at https://fec.gov/about/reports-about-fec/agency-operations/e-filing-study-2016/.
> 18 The Commission lacked the necessary quorum of Commissioners to approve Legislative Recommendations in 2019.
> 19 The FEC began FY 2020 without a quorum. A quorum was restored on June 5, 2020, when Commissioner James E. “Trey” Trainor, III, was sworn in. The FEC again began working without a quorum on July 3, 2020, with the departure of Commissioner Caroline C. Hunter. 96

The requirements of the Act and Commission regulations remain in effect, and political committees and other filers must continue to disclose their campaign finance activity to the Commission on the regular  schedule . FEC staff remains ready to help committees and the public understand and comply with the law, process and review committee reports including issuing Requests for Additional Information, and provide public access to campaign finance data. While the Commission cannot take action on many legal matters, staff continues to litigate ongoing court cases, process new enforcement complaints and responses, conduct audits that were previously authorized by the Commission, and investigate matters previously authorized by the Commission. 

Commission Directive 10, Section L sets forth the rules of procedure to be followed when the Commission has fewer than four sitting members and includes a list of matters on which the Commission may still act. These include notices of filing dates, non-filer notices, debt settlement plans, administrative terminations, and appeals under the Freedom of Information and Privacy Acts. The Commission intends to comply with the statutory requirement set forth at 52 USC §30106(d) that the Commission meet at least once each month. 

During the brief period the Commission had a quorum in FY2020, the Commission closed 33 MURs, 39 ADR matters, and 206 Admin Fine matters, totaling $842,413 in administrative fines and penalties assessed. Management continues to prioritize matters so that the Commission can quickly act on pending matters upon the resumption of quorum and is prepared for the restoration of a quorum at any time. 

Challenge 3: COVID-19 Pandemic 

As noted, Senior Management moved swiftly and efficiently to implement policies and workplace flexibilities to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. Prior to the official declaration of a pandemic, Senior Management met and held informational sessions with staff to strongly encourage employees to telework. Immediately, a management team was assembled to stay up-to-date on changing circumstances and make recommendations to the Commission. With the strong backing of Chair Hunter, Vice Chair Walther, and Commissioner Weintraub, the COVID-19 management team quickly moved to implement workplace flexibilities, including enhanced telework, maxi-flex hours and administrative leave for employees with childcare and elder care responsibilities. The COVID-19 management team holds weekly briefings with the Commission to keep them abreast of the situation and ensure they are aware of any changes to the building operating status and impacts to our employees. Management’s number one priority continues to be the safety of all FEC staff. The COVID-19 management team also began a weekly update email that is sent every Friday to alert staff to upcoming events, new guidance and general reminders. The weekly update has been well received by staff and managers. 

Management continues to closely monitor the situation and is pleased to report that nearly all FEC functions have been seamlessly transitioned to the telework environment and that agency performance goals are continuing to be met. Senior Management and the Commission have been holding virtual meet and greet sessions for new FEC staff and also held an all employee town hall in September. Senior Leaders are regularly holding division meetings to check on staff and hear any concerns they may raise. 97 

The Administrative Services Division has been procuring personal protective equipment (PPE) for staff going in to the building as part of Phase I operations. ASD has also installed signage regarding social distancing and shared space guidelines throughout the building in preparation of the return of FEC staff in the future. ASD continues to communicate with building management about the status of FEC operations. 

Members of the COVID-19 management team have been participating in government-wide groups including: OMB small agency group, OPM CHCO/HR Director group, General Counsel Exchange, and the CIO/CISO council. 

Challenge 4: Lack of full-time Chief Information Officer (CIO) and General Counsel Positions 

Management fully supports the Commission’s ongoing efforts to fill vacant leadership positions and to ensure senior leadership roles are filled by separate individuals. The Commission specifically addressed this issue in response to questions posed by the Committee on House Administration. In its May 1, 2019, response, the Commission stated: 

All of the Commissioners agree that the Commission should have separate individuals filling the senior leadership roles of Staff Director and CIO. As is true of the General Counsel position, the salary limit placed on the Staff Director by the FECA (Level IV of the Executive Schedule) means that the Staff Director supervises personnel whose positions, on the GS-15 and Senior Level pay scales, often provide higher salaries than the statutory salary for the Staff Director. The Commission has long recommended that Congress de-link the Staff Director’s salary from the Executive Schedule. 

When the Commission promoted our CIO to Staff Director, we allowed him to continue to serve as CIO and be compensated at that level rather than absorb a substantial pay cut in order to accept the promotion. This has allowed the Commission to maintain consistency in its most senior staff leadership. 20 

Because of the challenges in maintaining consistent senior leadership, the Commission unanimously adopted a Legislative Recommendation in 2018, 2017, 2016, 2015, 2014, 2013 and 2011 that urges Congress to address this situation. Specifically, the Commission recommends that Congress remove the statutory bar on the FEC’s participation in the Senior Executive Service (SES) Program and remove the statutory references to the Executive Schedule in FECA with respect to the General Counsel and Staff Director, so that those two positions would be compensated under the same schedule as the Commission’s other senior managers. This revision would remedy the current situation where the Commission’s top managers are compensated at a lower rate than many of their direct reports, and would ensure that the Commission can retain highly qualified individuals to serve in those positions as well as enable it to remain competitive in the marketplace for Federal executives when filing the current vacancy or when further vacancies arise.  

> 20 https://www.fec.gov/about/committee-on-house-administration-april-2019-questions/ 98

Due to a lack of quorum and in accordance with Commission Directive 10, the Commission is unable to approve the selections of GS-15 and Senior Level positions. During the brief restoration of a quorum in FY2020, the Commission approved the permanent selection of the Director of Human Resources. The Personnel Committee has approved the following positions to be filled on a permanent basis: Assistant General Counsel for Litigation and Assistant General Counsel for Enforcement. Upon resumption of quorum, management anticipates the hiring process for these and other SL and GS-15 positions to be quickly completed. 

Management continues to work with the Personnel and Finance Committees for approval to post and hire qualified individuals for all of the identified positions. As the senior leadership vacancies are filled, the Personnel and Finance Committees will closely scrutinize any remaining vacancies. In light of the current federal budget conditions, prudent management requires that close examination is paid to the potential impact of each vacancy that is approved to hire. The Personnel and Finance Committees are committed to analyzing the current FEC workforce and looking ahead to fiscal years in order to avoid having to implement a reduction in force. 

Challenge 5: Cybersecurity 

The FEC secures the agency’s infrastructure and prevents intrusions through a holistic cybersecurity program led by the Chief Information Security Officer (CISO). The FEC’s overarching strategy to protect the security and privacy of its systems and network begins with the adoption of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Risk Management Framework and NIST IT security control “best practices.” NIST Special Publication 800-37 2 – Risk Management Framework for Information Systems and Organizations,” identifies seven steps essential to the successful execution of the risk management framework (RMF): 

• Prepare to execute the RMF from an organization- and a system-level perspective by establishing a context and priorities for managing security and privacy risk. 

• Categorize the system and the information processed, stored, and transmitted by the system based on an analysis of the impact of loss. 

• Select an initial set of controls for the system and tailor the controls as needed to reduce risk to an acceptable level based on an assessment of risk. 

• Implement the controls and describe how the controls are employed within the system and its environment of operation. 

• Assess the controls to determine if the controls are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired outcomes with respect to satisfying the security and privacy requirements. 

• Authorize the system or common controls based on a determination that the risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation is acceptable. 

• Monitor the system and the associated controls on an ongoing basis to include assessing control effectiveness, documenting changes to the system and environment of operation, conducting risk assessments and impact analyses, and reporting the security and privacy posture of the system. 99 

The FEC currently employs this continuous monitoring and ongoing authorization approach to assess the risk to systems and networks and allow the authorizing official to determine whether that risk is acceptable. Three of the FEC’s major systems follow the formal Authority to Operate (ATO) process: the General Support System, the FEC website and the FEC’s eFiling system. 

Robust Security Architecture 

As a result of, and in support of, the RMF, the FEC’s Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) continues to take steps to implement a robust security architecture. For example, in partnership with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, the OCIO has collaborated with FEC stakeholders and technical experts to identify, protect, detect, and respond to the impact of known and unknown threats, continuously assessing security controls and addressing the remaining residual risks. 

As identified in OIG’s description of this management challenge, the FEC has proactively pursued three significant joint efforts with DHS over the past two years to better identify and remediate emerging threats to the FEC’s systems and networks. In addition, the FEC maintains ongoing information security efforts, including our security operation center and the applications for continuous diagnostics and mitigation, and implementing security controls to address identified cybersecurity gaps. These efforts help to ensure that identified risks are appropriately addressed and that its cybersecurity program and security architecture will continue to safeguard the agency’s infrastructure, networks, and applications against cyber threats and malicious activities. 

Continuous Monitoring and Mitigation 

OCIO Security has worked with DHS to improve security capability by integrating with the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) program. OCIO Security has also introduced the use of secure baselining standards, such as the use of DISA STIGS and Benchmarks. System hardening and secure baselining practices are being expanded in OCIO teams. The OCIO security team has developed a privileged user account agreement and a new password policy to add administrative controls to supplement the technical access controls. The addition of the new password policy and multi-factor authentication (MFA) has improved the security posture of authentication types within the FEC’s information systems. 

Cloud-First Initiative 

The FEC has also adopted a cloud first initiative for security, accessibility and recoverability. Hosting systems and data in a cloud environment allows the FEC to utilize our cloud service providers’ significant resources that are dedicated to maintaining the highest level of security. In addition, by utilizing the cloud service providers’ robust disaster recovery solutions, the FEC eliminates the need to maintain physical disaster recovery sites, which are costly to maintain and secure. The FEC has already completed the migration of its largest database, the campaign finance database, and its website to a cloud environment. The FEC’s new website, launched in May 2017, uses FedRAMP Authorized cloud services, which provides a standardized approach to security assessment, authorization, and continuous monitoring for cloud products and services. 100 

Building a Cybersecurity Culture 

At the same time, the FEC is working to build a cybersecurity culture among its employees. The first line of defense in maintaining the protection and integrity of the agency’s network is the ongoing education of employees about their role in identifying and preventing malicious actors— internal or external—from compromising the FEC’s systems and networks. Efforts to build a cybersecurity culture include steps to educate staff about FEC IT security policies and to ensure staff awareness of potential cybersecurity threats, such as phishing scams. The FEC promotes this cybersecurity culture in part through annual, mandatory IT security trainings and through year-round communication and notices to staff from the CISO. This year, the FEC implemented additional trainings for all staff to help staff recognize and avoid social engineering attempts. 

Building Capacity in the Information Security Office 

The FEC has also taken steps to build capacity in its Information Security Office. In April 2019, the FEC entered into a partnership with the Partnership for Public Service to participate in the Cybersecurity Talent Initiative. This selective, cross-sector program, which provides loan forgiveness to top bachelors and masters graduates around the United States in exchange for at least two-years’ service at a Federal agency, addresses the immediate cybersecurity talent deficiency faced by Federal government agencies by attracting service-minded individuals to government who might not otherwise have applied. During FY2020, the FEC completed the selection process and brought on board an individual for a two-year cybersecurity fellowship. 

Management Challenge: Addressing outstanding OIG audit recommendations 

Management looks forward to continuing to work with the Office of Inspector General to close out the remaining audit recommendations. During FY 2020, significant progress was made on addressing several recommendations, particularly related to the FEC’s Disaster Recovery Plan and Continuity of Operations Plans, Audit of the FEC’s Office of Human Resources, Audit of the Privacy Act and Audit of the FEC Telework Program. Management would like to note that some of the remaining items are dependent on creating or updating existing FEC policies which will require a Commission vote after a quorum has been restored. 

Management looks forward to continued discussions with the OIG on the remaining recommendations. Management believes these discussions will help focus attention on current processes and allow OIG to identify recommendations that align with current high-risk areas. 

Management Challenge: Address results from the annual FEVS and 2016 Root Causes of Low Employee Morale Study 

The Commission understands that the success of its programs depends upon the skills and commitment of its staff. During FY 2020, management undertook several initiatives and programs to engage staff, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic. 

FY 2020 saw the launch of the FEC Engagement Steering Committee. This group is led by Co-Coordinators Rhiannon Magruder and Greg Baker who have been participating in a small-agency Engagement Collective through the Partnership for Public Service. The Senior Leaders received briefings on employee engagement throughout FY 2020 and have instituted several suggestions, including division Zoom calls and the employee town hall. 101 

In collaboration with the agency’s EEO Office, the Diversity and Inclusion Council was launched with the support of all Senior Leaders and the Commission. As part of the Diversity and Inclusion Council, employee resource groups will be established. Senior management has also worked to ensure that hiring panels are diverse throughout the agency. 

During FY 2020 and the first quarter of FY 2021, management has continued to partner with OPM to bring in trainings for both managers and staff. The following courses were provided: Engaging & Encouraging Employees, Coaching & Mentoring for Excellence, Dealing with Poor Performance & Conduct, Supervisory Fundamentals and Leadership Skills for Non-Supervisors. Upcoming courses open to all FEC staff include Resilience in Leadership and Emotional Intelligence. Additionally, many staff members have taken part in free virtual webinars and courses through OPM and the Employee Assistance Program. 102 

## Payment Integrity 

The Improper Payments Information Act (IPIA) of 2002 , as amended by the Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act (IPERA) of 2010 , Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Improvement Act (IPERIA) of 2012, and the Payment Integrity Information Act (PIIA) of 2019 

requires agencies to review all programs and activities they administer and identify those which may be susceptible to significant improper payments. 21  The FEC does not have any programs or activities that are susceptible to significant improper payments and is only required to perform an improper payment risk assessment. 

Risk Assessment 

In FY 2020, the FEC performed a systematic review of its program and related activities to identify processes which may be susceptible to “significant improper payments.” “Significant improper payments” are defined as gross annual improper payments (i.e., the total amount of overpayments and underpayments) in the program exceeding (1) both 1.5 percent of program outlays and $10 million or (2) $100 million. The review was performed for the FEC’s only program area which is to administer and enforce the Federal Election Campaign Act. For FY 2020, the FEC considered risk factors that may significantly increase the risk of improper payments as outlined in OMB Memorandum M-18-20, Transmittal of Appendix C to OMB Circular No. A-123, Requirements for Payment Integrity Improvement. Based on the systematic review performed, the FEC concluded that it is not susceptible to these risk factors and none of its program activities are susceptible to significant improper payments at or above the threshold level set by OMB. 

Recapture of Improper Payments Reporting 

The FEC has determined that the risk of improper payments is low; therefore, implementing a payment recapture audit program is not applicable to the agency. 

IPIA (as amended by PIIA) Reporting Details  Agency Response 

Risk Assessment  Reviewed as noted above. 

Statistical Sampling  Not Applicable.* 

Corrective Actions  Not Applicable.* 

Improper Payment Reporting  Not Applicable.* 

Recapture of Improper Payments Reporting  Not Applicable.* 

Accountability  Not Applicable.* 

Agency information systems and other infrastructure  Not Applicable.* 

Barriers  Not Applicable.* 

*The FEC does not have programs or activities that are susceptible to significant improper payments.     

> 21 At this time, OMB has not issued PIIA implementation guidance and agencies are advised to continue to follow Memorandum M-18-20, Transmittal of Appendix C to OMB Circular No. A-123, Requirements for Payment Integrity Improvement until implementation guidance is published. 103

## Fraud Reduction Report 

The Fraud Reduction and Data Analytics Act of 2015 (Pub. L. 114-186, 31 USC 3321) requires agencies to report on their progress in implementing financial and administrative controls to identify and assess fraud risks. In FY 2019, the FEC assessed its progress and can report that it has adequate financial and administrative controls in place to identify and assess fraud risks as well as monitor and mitigate the potential for fraud and improper payments. 

The agency uses OMB Circular A-123, as revised, GAO-14-704G, The Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government (the Green Book) , GAO-15-593SP , A Framework for Managing Fraud Risks in Federal Programs, and the Association of Government Accountant’s 

Fraud Prevention Tool as a guide for its fraud reduction efforts. 

In FY 2017, the agency created the Senior Management Council (SMC) to monitor and manage risk to the agency achieving its operational, strategic, and compliance objectives. The SMC updates the agency Risk Profile on an annual basis, facilitates the detection and remediation of fraud risk throughout the agency, and addresses potential fraud issues during its quarterly meetings. The agency Risk Profile can be found in Section I, Management’s Discussion and Analysis, under Risk Identification and Mitigation. In addition, the SMC oversees the agency’s annual Internal Control Review (ICR) process which is based on GAO’s Green Book. As part of the ICR, each program office conducts an evaluation of fraud risk, documents controls in place, and reports on mitigating activities. 

The FEC uses a risk-based approach to design and implement controls. It has controls in place to address identified fraud risks related to payroll, procurement, information technology and security, asset safeguards, and purchase and travel cards. The agency does not issue beneficiary payments or grants. 

Financial and administrative controls in place to monitor and mitigate potential fraud include documented system authorization procedures, manager oversight and approval of transactions, and separation of duties. Financial activity is tracked, monitored, and reviewed or reconciled on a periodic (monthly or quarterly) basis. The agency utilizes resources such as Treasury’s Do Not Pay system, GSA’s System for Award Management (SAM), and the Internal Revenue Service’s Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) Match Program to facilitate data analytics. To safeguard assets, the FEC has tracking processes in place, conducts a biannual physical inventory count, and maintains equipment in a secure location. The FEC has comprehensive controls in place to address information technology and security fraud risks to include automated system controls. 

Payroll is the largest expenditure for the agency, with salaries and benefits constituting seventy (70) percent of the FEC’s costs. Payroll is tested for improper payments under the Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act (IPERA ). Improper Payments Act reporting details can be found in Section III of the AFR under Other Information. 

Finally, the FEC works closely with the OIG to identify and address fraud. The FEC had no reported instances of fraud in FY 2020. 104 

## Reporting on Internal Controls Assurances 

The FEC is responsible for establishing and maintaining effective internal control and financial management systems that meet the objectives of the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA), as implemented by OMB Circular A-123, revised, Management’s Responsibility for Enterprise Risk Management and Internal Control. Internal control is an integral component of management to provide reasonable assurance that (1) programs operate effectively and efficiently, (2) financial reports are reliable, and (3) programs comply with applicable laws and regulations. The FEC conducted its evaluation of internal control in accordance with OMB Circular A-123. Based on the results of the Fiscal Year 2019 internal control review, the FEC reported no material weaknesses under the FMFIA and is able to provide an unqualified statement of assurance that the internal controls and financial management systems meet the objectives of the FMFIA. 

The Annual Assurance Statement on Internal Control which was signed by the FEC Chair in accordance with OMB Circular A-123 and provided in “Section I.D: Analysis of FEC’s Systems, Controls and Legal Compliance” is supported by detailed assurances from each of the FEC’s assessable units. 

The assessable units that participated in the internal controls review process and provided assurances were as follows: 

• Office of Communications 

• Office of Compliance 

• Office of Equal Employment Opportunity 

• Office of Management and Administration 

• Office of the Chief Financial Officer 

• Office of the Chief Information Officer 

• Office of the General Counsel 

• Office of the Inspector General 

Detailed assurances from each of these assessable units were provided to the FEC’s OIG and independent auditor to support the single assurance statement signed by the FEC Chair. 105 

## Civil Monetary Penalties Adjustment for Inflation 

The following is the FEC’s table of Civil Monetary Penalties Adjustment for Inflation for FY 2020. 

US Code 

Statutory Authority; Public Law 

Year of Enactment/Adjus tment Other Than Pursuant to IAA 

Name/Description of Penalty Latest Annual Inflation of Adjustment 

Section in Title 11 of CFR for Penalty Update Detail 

Current Penalty or Penalty Formula 

52 U.S.C. 30109(a)(5)(A), (6) 

Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1976, PL 94-283 sec. 109 1976 

Violations of FECA or chapters 95 or 96 of title 26 of U S Code 

Civil Monetary Penalties Annual Inflation Adjustments, 83 Fed. Reg. 66593 (Dec. 27, 2018), https://sers.fec.gov/fosers/showpdf.ht m?docid=401529 111.24(a)(1) 20,288 

52 U.S.C. 30109(a)(5)(B) 

Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1976, PL 94-283 sec. 109 1976 

Knowing and willful violations of FECA or chapters 95 or 96 of title 26 of U S Code 

Civil Monetary Penalties Annual Inflation Adjustments, 83 Fed. Reg. 66593 (Dec. 27, 2018), https://sers.fec.gov/fosers/showpdf.ht m?docid=401529. 111.24(a)(2)(i) 43,280 

52 U.S.C. 30109(a)(5)(B) 

Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002, PL 107-155 sec. 312(a) 2002 

Knowing and willful contributions in the name of another 

Civil Monetary Penalties Annual Inflation Adjustments, 83 Fed. Reg. 66593 (Dec. 27, 2018), https://sers.fec.gov/fosers/showpdf.ht m?docid=401529. 111.24(a)(2)(ii) 70,973 

52 U.S.C. 30109(a)(12) 

Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1976, PL 94-283 sec. 109 1980 

Making public an investigation without consent 

Civil Monetary Penalties Annual Inflation Adjustments, 83 Fed. Reg. 66593 (Dec. 27, 2018), https://sers.fec.gov/fosers/showpdf.ht m?docid=401529. 111.24(b) 6,069 

52 U.S.C. 30109(a)(12) 94-283 sec. 109 1980 

Knowingly and willfully making public an investigation without consent 

Civil Monetary Penalties Annual Inflation Adjustments, 83 Fed. Reg. 66593 (Dec. 27, 2018), https://sers.fec.gov/fosers/showpdf.ht m?docid=401529. 111.24(b) 15,173 

52 U.S.C. 30109(a)(4)(C) 

Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 2000, PL 106-58 sec. 640 2003 

Late and Non- Filed Reports 

Civil Monetary Penalties Annual Inflation Adjustments, 83 Fed. Reg. 66593 (Dec. 27, 2018), https://sers.fec.gov/fosers/showpdf.ht m?docid=401529. 111.43(a) 

Penalty formula that accounts for (a) level of activity in late or non-filed report; and (b) if report was filed late, (i) the number of days late and (ii) the number of previous violations; or (c) if the report was not filed, the number of previous violations) 

52 U.S.C. 30109(a)(4)(C) 

Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 2000, PL 106-58 sec. 640 2003 

Election Sensitive Late and Non-Filed Reports 

Civil Monetary Penalties Annual Inflation Adjustments, 83 Fed. Reg. 66593 (Dec. 27, 2018), https://sers.fec.gov/fosers/showpdf.ht m?docid=401529. 111.43(b) 

Penalty formula that accounts for (a) level of activity in late or non-filed report; and (b) if report was filed late, (i) the number of days late and number of previous violations; or (c) if the report was not filed, the number of previous violations) 

52 U.S.C. 30109(a)(4)(C) 

Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 2000, PL 106-58 sec. 640 2000 

Late or Non-Filed Reports where Commission cannot calculate amount of activity 

Civil Monetary Penalties Annual Inflation Adjustments, 83 Fed. Reg. 66593 (Dec. 27, 2018), https://sers.fec.gov/fosers/showpdf.ht m?docid=401529. 111.43(c) 8,135 

52 U.S.C. 30109(a)(4)(C) 

Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 2000, PL 106-58 sec. 640 2000 

Late or Non-Filed 48 hour notices 

Civil Monetary Penalties Annual Inflation Adjustments, 83 Fed. Reg. 66593 (Dec. 27, 2018), https://sers.fec.gov/fosers/showpdf.ht m?docid=401529. 111.44 

Penalty formula is 149+ (.10 x amount of contribution(s) not timely reported), subject to a 25% increase for each prior violation 106 

## APPENDIX 

List of Acronyms 

AFR  Agency Financial Report 

AO  Advisory Opinion 

APR  Annual Performance Report 

ASD  Administrative Services Division 

CFR  Code of Federal Regulations 

CSRS  Civil Service Retirement System 

CY  Calendar Year 

DCIA  Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996 

DOL  Department of Labor 

EEO  Equal Employment Opportunity 

ERM  Enterprise Risk Management 

FAR  Financial Audit Report 

FASAB  Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board 

FBWT  Fund Balance with Treasury 

FEC  Federal Election Commission 

FECA  Federal Election Campaign Act 

FERS  Federal Employees' Retirement System 

FMFIA  Federal Managers' Financial Integrity Act 

FRAE  Further Revised Annuity Employees 

FRDAA  Fraud Reduction and Data Analytics Act 

FY  Fiscal Year 

GAAP  Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 

GSA  General Services Administration 

IG  Inspector General 

IPERA  Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act 

IPERIA  Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Improvement Act 

IPIA  Improper Payments Information Act 

MD&A  Management's Discussion and Analysis 

NPRM  Notices of Proposed Rulemaking 

NTEU  National Treasury Employee Union 

OAR  Office of Administrative Review 

OCFO  Office of the Chief Financial Officer 

OCIO  Office of the Chief Information Officer 

OGC  Office of General Counsel 

OHR  Office of Human Resources 107 

OMB  Office of Management and Budget 

OPM  Office of Personnel Management 

OSD  Office of the Staff Director 

P&E  Property and Equipment 

PPA  Prompt Payment Act 

RAD  Reports Analysis Division 

RAE  Revised Annuity Employees 

SBR  Statement of Budgetary Resources 

SCA  Statement of Custodial Activity 

SFFAS  Statement of Federal Financial Accounting Standards 

SMC  Senior Management Council 

SNC  Statement of Net Cost 

SSAE  Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements 

TSP  Thrift Savings Plan Legislative Recommendations of the 

## Federal Election Commission 

## 2018 

Chair Caroline C. Hunter 

Vice Chair Ellen L. Weintraub 

Commissioner Matthew S. Petersen 

Commissioner Steven T. Walther 

Adopted December 13, 2018 

Table of Contents 

Electronic Filing of Electioneering Communication Reports ........................................ 1 

Authority to Create Senior Executive Service Positions ................................................ 2 

Prohibit Fraudulent PAC Practices ................................................................................. 5 

Fraudulent Misrepresentation of Campaign Authority ................................................... 6 

Conversion of Campaign Funds...................................................................................... 8 

Prohibit Aiding or Abetting the Making of Contributions in Name of Another ............ 9 

Increase and Index for Inflation Registration and Reporting Thresholds ..................... 11 ii 

Increase the In-Home Event Exemption and Unreimbursed Travel Expense 

Exemption for Candidates and Political Parties............................................................ 13 

Permit Political Committees to Make Disbursements by 

Methods Other than Check ........................................................................................... 14 

Update Citations to Reflect the Recodification of FECA ............................................. 15 

Repeal of Convention Funding Provisions Rendered Non-Operational by the 

Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act ..................................................................... 16 1

Electronic Filing of Electioneering Communication Reports 

Section: 52 U.S.C. § 30104(a)(11)(A)(i) 

Recommendation: Congress should require reports of electioneering communications to be filed electronically with the Commission, rather than on paper. 

Explanation: The Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 2000, Pub. L. No. 106-58, § 639, 113 Stat. 430, 476 (1999), required the Commission to make electronic filing mandatory for political committees and other persons required to file with the Commission who, in a calendar year, have, or have reason to expect to have, total contributions or total expenditures exceeding a threshold amount set by the Commission (which is currently $50,000). In addition, many independent expenditure reports are already subject to mandatory electronic filing under 52 U.S.C. § 30104(a)(11)(A)(i). However, because electioneering communication reports are not filed by political committees, and because funds spent for electioneering communications are reported as “disbursements,” and not as “expenditures,” the mandatory electronic filing provisions do not apply to electioneering communication reports. 

Compared to data from paper reports, data from electronically filed reports is received, processed and disseminated more easily and efficiently, resulting in better use of resources. Reports that are filed electronically are normally available to the public, and may be downloaded, within minutes. In contrast, the time between the receipt of a report filed through the paper filing system and its initial appearance on the Commission’s web site is 48 hours. 

Electronic filings are not subject to delay due to post office processing or disruptions in the delivery of mail, such as those arising from security measures put in place after the discovery of anthrax powder and ricin in mail. Because of these security measures, the Commission’s receipt of mailed paper filings is delayed. In contrast, electronic filings are not subject to these delays. 

Only entities that report more than $50,000 of electioneering communications would be subject to mandatory electronic filing under the proposal. The current threshold selected by the Commission ensures that entities with limited financial resources can file reports on paper, which avoids the limited cost of internet access and a computer sufficient to file reports. 

Legislative Language: 

Section 304(a)(11)(A)(i) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (52 U.S.C. § 30104(a)(11)(A)(i)) is amended by inserting “or makes or has reason to expect to make electioneering communications” after “expenditures”. 2

Authority to Create Senior Executive Service Positions 

Sections: 5 U.S.C. § 3132(a)(1) 

52 U.S.C. § 30106(f)(1) 

Recommendation: Congress should delete the exclusion of the Federal Election Commission from eligibility for the Senior Executive Service (SES) under the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 (as amended by the Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1979). See Pub. L. No. 96-187, § 203, 93 Stat. 1339, 1368 (1980), codified at 5 U.S.C. § 3132(a)(1)(C). Additionally, Congress should revise section 306 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, Pub. L. No. 92-225, 86 Stat. 3 (1972), as amended (“FECA”), to delink the salaries of the Staff Director and the General Counsel from Level IV and Level V of the Executive Schedule. 

Explanation : The Commission believes that these statutory changes are needed to bring the Commission’s personnel structure in line with that of other comparable federal agencies. This would ensure that the Commission is better able to compete with other government agencies in recruiting and retaining key management personnel. 

Currently, the Commission is prohibited by law from creating Senior Executive Service positions within the agency. 5 U.S.C. § 3132(a)(1)(C). The Commission recommends that it be made eligible to create Senior Executive Service positions because: (1) the agency currently has several top management positions that the Commission believes would fully satisfy the criteria for SES positions set forth in 5 U.S.C. § 3132 ( e.g., directing the work of an organizational unit, monitoring progress toward organizational goals, etc.); and (2) the SES system would provide institutional benefits to the agency and agency employees. 

As a result of the current prohibition, the Commission’s senior managers (other than the Staff Director and the General Counsel) are employed in Senior Level positions. The current Senior Level positions (the Chief Financial Officer, the Inspector General, four Deputy Staff Directors, two Deputy General Counsels, and three Associate General Counsels) oversee major programmatic areas and supervise not only staff, but other managers as well. Although these eleven top management positions are designated as Senior Level, because supervisory and executive responsibilities occupy 100% of the time of the employees filling these positions, the positions would be more appropriately designated as SES. 1

The FEC’s expenses would not increase significantly if it were permitted to participate in the SES program. In 2008, legislation brought the salary ranges for Senior Level employees into parity with Senior Executive Service employees. See Senior Professional Performance Act of 2008, Pub. L. No. 110-372, 122 Stat. 4043 (2008). Like SES employees, Senior Level employees may now carry over 720 hours of annual leave into the next year, rather than the    

> 1In fact, OPM’s guidance on the Senior Level positions indicates that the Senior Level system is generally for positions in which supervisory duties occupy less than 25% of the employee’s time. See
> http://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/senior-executive-service/scientific-senior-level-positions/ (last visited Dec. 12, 2018). OPM’s guidance does note, however, that “in a few agencies [such as the Federal Election Commission] that are statutorily exempt from inclusion in the Senior Executive Service (SES), executive positions are staffed with SL employees.”

3

previous Senior Level limit of 240. Nonetheless, the SES system would provide institutional benefits to the Commission and its employees by enhancing the quality and quantity of the pool of persons available to fill vacancies that may arise. 

SES candidates must go through a competitive selection process in order to enter a Candidate Development Program. Completion of a Candidate Development Program by candidates within the agency ensures that a cadre of SES-approved employees is available for selection and thereby assists in good succession planning. In addition, the SES system enables agencies to hire experienced and skilled leaders from a government-wide , not just intra-agency, pool with relative ease and with the assurance that all such employees have met the same standards of development and experience. For example, because SES-certified applicants from outside the agency will have met all of the Executive Core Qualifications, the Commission would be able to evaluate their applications with the assurance that fundamental competencies have already been developed. 

The current provision in FECA specifies that the Staff Director and General Counsel are to be paid at Level IV and Level V of the Executive Schedule, respectively. Both positions supervise personnel at the GS-15 and Senior Level pay scales, which often provide higher salaries than Levels IV and V of the Executive Schedule. The Staff Director and General Counsel have significant responsibilities and oversight duties with respect to both administrative and legal areas, as well as management over almost all agency personnel. According to recruiting specialists working with the Commission, the current limit makes attracting a strong pool of applicants to these positions more challenging. The appointment and retention of these key leaders have been identified as ongoing management and performance challenges to the Commission by the Inspector General in the 2018, 2017, 2016, 2015 and 2014 Agency Financial Reports and in previous Performance and Accountability Reports. The General Counsel’s position is currently filled on an acting basis. 

The Commission proposes removing the statutory references to the Executive Schedule, so that the Staff Director and General Counsel would be compensated under the same schedule as the Commission’s other senior managers. This revision will remedy the current situation where the Commission’s top managers are compensated at a lower rate than many of their direct reports, and will ensure that the Commission can retain highly qualified individuals to serve in those positions as well as enable it to remain competitive in the marketplace for Federal executives when filing the current vacancy or when further vacancies arise. This change will not require an increase in the Commission’s appropriation request. 

Accordingly, the Commission believes that the positions of Staff Director and General Counsel, as well as the current Senior Level positions within the agency, would be more appropriately categorized as SES positions. Because salary ranges for Senior Executive Service employees and Senior Level employees are in parity, as discussed above, the foregoing amendments will affect the salary expenses for only two positions: the Staff Director and the General Counsel. 4

Legislative Language: 

Section 306(f)(1) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (52 U.S.C. § 30106(f)(1)) is amended by striking the second and third sentences. 

Section 3132(a)(1)(C) of Title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking “the Federal Election Commission, or”. 5

Prohibit Fraudulent PAC Practices 

Section: 52 U.S.C. § 30114 & 52 U.S.C. § 30124 

Recommendation: Congress should examine potentially fraudulent fundraising and spending activities of certain political committees. These committees solicit contributions with promises of supporting candidates, but then disclose minimal or no candidate support activities while engaging in significant and continuous fundraising, which predominantly funds personal compensation for the committees’ organizers. In many cases, all funds raised by this subset of political committees are provided to fundraising vendors, direct mail vendors, and consultants in whom the political committees’ officers appear to have financial interests. Based on its examination, Congress should amend the Federal Election Campaign Act to address and prohibit fraudulent fundraising practices. 

Explanation: Most political committees appropriately use vendors and consultants in support of their fundraising and political efforts, and these vendors are often compensated with significant amounts that constitute large percentages of committees’ disbursements. Yet, from its examination of campaign finance disclosure reports and media accounts, the Federal Election Commission is seeing a recurring pattern of certain unauthorized political committees soliciting contributions with fundraising materials that promise to use solicited funds to support candidates, sometimes even implying that the materials originate from a named candidate for Federal office without that candidate’s knowledge or permission. Then, the contributions are not used as indicated in the solicitations, but instead for significant and continuous fundraising by the committees. In some cases, 90 percent or more of their disbursements are paid to vendors in which the committees’ officers have a financial interest, while 10 percent or less of their disbursements are spent on candidate-support activities, such as contributions to candidates, independent expenditures, or donations to state and local candidates. 

The Commission believes that Congress should give the Commission the authority to protect contributors from committees that defraud their contributors. Congress should consider whether any political committee should be permitted to solicit contributions with false promises of supporting candidates, but then, over the course of years, deliver only support of the committee’s vendors. While legal recourse against such committees might be pursuable under mail- and wire-fraud statutes or the Lanham Act, candidates and contributors who believe they have been victimized by these committees often seek the FEC’s assistance. Amending FECA to address and prohibit fraudulent solicitation, including false claims of candidate endorsement and the use of the federal political committee as an artifice to defraud contributors solely to enrich committee organizers, would provide the Commission jurisdiction to consider the complaints of aggrieved candidates and contributors. 

Another troubling aspect of this recurring pattern is the frequency of relationships between the individuals who established or operate the political committees and the vendors who receive a large amounts of the committees’ disbursements. In some instances, the committees pay fees directly to individuals who established or operated the committees, and in other instances, the fees are paid to entities with financial relationships with those who established or operate the committee. Congress could also consider adding standards addressing payments to vendors with financial relationships with the individuals who establish or operate political committees. 6

Fraudulent Misrepresentation of Campaign Authority 

Section: 52 U.S.C. § 30124 

Recommendation: Congress should revise the prohibitions on fraudulent misrepresentation of campaign authority to encompass all persons purporting to act on behalf of candidates and real or fictitious political committees and political organizations. In addition, Congress should remove the requirement that the fraudulent misrepresentation must pertain to a matter that is “damaging” to another candidate or political party. 

Explanation: The Federal Election Campaign Act prohibits a Federal candidate or his or her agents or employees from fraudulent misrepresentation such as speaking, writing or otherwise acting on behalf of a candidate or political party committee on a “matter which is damaging to such other candidate or political party” or an employee or agent of either. See 52 U.S.C. § 30124(a). The Commission recommends that this prohibition be extended to any person who would disrupt a campaign by such unlawful means, rather than being limited to candidates and their agents and employees. Proving damages as a threshold matter is often difficult and unnecessarily impedes the Commission’s ability to pursue persons who employ fraud and deceit to undermine campaigns. Fraudulent solicitations of funds on behalf of a candidate or political party committee have been prohibited without any required showing of damage to the misrepresented candidate or political party committee. See Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002, § 309, Pub. L. No. 107-155, 116 Stat. 81, 104 (2002) (“BCRA”), codified at 52 U.S.C. § 30124(b). 

In addition, while both subsections (a) and (b) of 52 U.S.C. § 30124 directly address fraudulent actions “on behalf of any other candidate or political party,” they do not address situations where a person falsely claims to represent another type of political committee or claims to be acting on behalf of a fictitious political organization, rather than an actual political party or a candidate. For example, the current statute does not bar fraudulent misrepresentation or solicitation on behalf of a corporate or union separate segregated fund or a non-connected political committee. 

Legislative Language: 

Section 322 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (52 U.S.C. § 30124) is amended: 

(1) in subsection (a), by striking “who is a candidate for Federal office or an employee or agent of such a candidate”; 

(2) in paragraph (a)(1), by striking “candidate or political party or employee or agent thereof on a matter which is damaging to such other candidate or political party or employee or agent thereof” and inserting “candidate, political party, other real or fictitious political committee or organization, or employee or agent of any of the foregoing,”; and 7

(3) in paragraph (b)(1), by striking “candidate or political party or employee or agent thereof” and inserting “candidate, political party, other real or fictitious political committee or organization, or employee or agent of any of the foregoing,”. 8

Conversion of Campaign Funds 

Section: 52 U.S.C. § 30114 

Recommendation: Congress should amend the Federal Election Campaign Act’s prohibition of the personal use of campaign funds to extend its reach to all political committees. 

Explanation: In 2007, the Department of Justice noted, “[r]ecent years have seen a dramatic rise in the number of cases in which candidates and campaign fiduciaries steal money that has been contributed to a candidate or political committee for the purpose of electing the candidate or the candidates supported by the political committee.” See U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Prosecution of Election Offenses , 194-95 (7 th ed. May 2007). In fact, the Commission has seen a substantial number of instances where individuals with access to the funds received by political committees have used such funds to make unauthorized disbursements to pay for their own personal expenses. 

The Commission proposes to revise 52 U.S.C. § 30114(b) to address this growing problem by prohibiting the use by any person of any political committee’s receipts for expenses that would exist irrespective of the political committee’s political activities. Political activities would include activities in connection with a Federal election, as well as activities in furtherance of a political committee’s policy or educational objectives and other legitimate committee functions and related administrative expenses. Such an amendment would provide for coherent and consistent application of FECA. 

Legislative Language: 

Section 313 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (52 U.S.C. § 30114) is amended: 

(1) in paragraph (b)(1), by inserting “or a receipt accepted by any other political committee” after “subsection (a)”; 

(2) in paragraph (b)(2), by striking “contribution or donation” and replacing with “contribution, donation, or receipt”; 

(3) in paragraph (b)(2), by striking “campaign or individual’s duties as a holder of Federal office,” and inserting “campaign, individual’s duties as a holder of Federal office, or political committee’s political activities,”. 9

Prohibit Aiding or Abetting the Making of 

Contributions in Name of Another 

Sections: 52 U.S.C. § 30122 

Recommendation: Congress should amend the prohibition of making contributions in the name of another in the Federal Election Campaign Act to also prohibit directing, helping or assisting the making of a contribution in the name of another. 

Explanation: Since its enactment in 1972, FECA has prohibited contributions in the name of another. Specifically, the statute prohibits making a contribution in the name of another person or knowingly permitting another to use one’s name to effect such a contribution. Additionally, knowingly accepting a contribution made by one person in the name of another is also prohibited. 52 U.S.C. § 30122. These prohibitions promote the important and long-recognized governmental interest in fighting corruption and its appearance by ensuring accurate disclosure of the true sources and amounts of campaign contributions and preventing circumvention of FECA’s contribution limits and source prohibitions. This section of FECA is one of its most frequently violated provisions. See U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Prosecution of Election Offenses , 166 (7 th ed. May 2007). People attempting to violate FECA’s limits on the sources and amounts of contributions often attempt to avoid detection by laundering their illegal contributions through straw donors. 

In 1989, the Commission added a provision to its regulation providing that no person shall “[k]nowingly help or assist any person in making a contribution in the name of another.” 11 C.F.R. § 110.4(b)(1)(iii) (1989); see Affiliated Committees, Transfers, Prohibited Contributions, Annual Contribution Limitations and Earmarked Contributions, 54 Fed. Reg. 34,098, 34,104-05 (Aug. 17, 1989). The Commission promulgated section 110.4(b)(1)(iii) after a federal district court held the previous year that a defendant had violated section 30122 “by 

knowingly assisting in the making of contributions in the name of another.” See FEC v. Rodriguez , Final Order and Default Judgment, Case No. 86-687-Civ-T-10 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 28, 1988) (emphasis added). In the nearly three decades since the FEC promulgated section 110.4(b)(1)(iii), the agency has consistently and repeatedly enforced section 30122 in administrative enforcement matters against respondents who knowingly helped or assisted conduit contributions. Doing so has permitted the Commission to reach actors in schemes who initiated, instigated and significantly participated in another person’s making of a contribution in the name of another. In one such enforcement proceeding, the Commission’s authority to promulgate this regulation was challenged, and a federal district court agreed with the challenger and struck down the regulation. That court found that the regulation’s prohibition went beyond the prohibitions in FECA, stating that legislation is therefore required to expand the reach of FECA in this way. See FEC v. Swallow, 304 F. Supp. 3d 1113, 1116 (D. Utah 2018). The court also issued a nationwide injunction, which makes a different court reaching a different result unlikely. 

This Legislative Recommendation would incorporate the language of the Commission’s stricken regulation into FECA, modified to include direct along with help or assist. 10 

Legislative Language: 

Section 320 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (52 U.S.C. § 30122) is amended by adding to the end the following: 

“No person shall knowingly direct, help or assist any person in making a contribution in the name of another.” 11 

Increase and Index for Inflation Registration and Reporting Thresholds 

Sections: 52 U.S.C. §§ 30101, 30104 and 30116 

Recommendation: Congress should increase and index for inflation certain registration and reporting thresholds in the Federal Election Campaign Act that have not been changed since the 1970s. 

Explanation: Most of the Federal Election Campaign Act’s contribution limits and registration and reporting thresholds were set in the 1970s. Because over twenty years of inflation had effectively reduced FECA’s contribution limits in real dollars, the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 increased most of the Act’s contribution limits to adjust for some of the effects of inflation. Furthermore, BCRA indexed these limits for inflation to address inflation in future. The Commission proposes extending this approach to registration and reporting thresholds, which have been effectively reduced by inflation since those thresholds were established in 1971 or 1979. 

Since 1971, FECA has provided that any group of persons that receives contributions or makes expenditures in excess of $1,000 in a calendar year must register and report as a political committee. 52 U.S.C. § 30101(4)(A). FECA also requires political committees to abide by the contribution limits and source prohibitions specified in FECA. Since 1979, FECA has provided that local political party organizations are also subject to a $1,000 threshold for federal political committee status. 52 U.S.C. § 30101(4)(C). The Commission recommends that Congress increase these thresholds to amounts determined appropriate by Congress, and then index those amounts for inflation to prevent erosion in the future. Raising this threshold would be particularly beneficial for local and Congressional district committees of political parties. These organizations frequently breach the $1,000 threshold. An increased threshold would permit limited spending on federal elections without triggering federal political committee status for local and Congressional district committees of political parties. 

Since 1979, FECA has required persons (other than political committees) who make independent expenditures in excess of $250 in a calendar year to report such expenditures to the Commission. 52 U.S.C. § 30104(c)(1). The Commission recommends that Congress increase this threshold to an amount determined by Congress and index this amount for inflation. 

Increasing these thresholds would take into account many years of inflation and the general increase in campaign cost and ease the compliance burdens on smaller organizations and individuals. Additionally, by increasing the thresholds, Congress would exempt some individuals and small organizations that engage in only minimal spending from the Act’s registration and reporting requirements. Increasing the registration and reporting thresholds to compensate for inflation would leave significant financial activity subject to regulation as intended by Congress when it enacted the FECA. 12 

Legislative language: 

Section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (52 U.S.C. § 30101) is amended: 

(1) in paragraph (4)(A), by striking both references to “$1,000” and by inserting a dollar amount determined by Congress; and 

(2) in paragraph (4)(C), by striking both references to “$5,000” and both references to “$1,000” and by inserting dollar amounts determined by Congress. 

Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (52 U.S.C. § 30104) is amended, in paragraph (c)(1) by striking “$250” and inserting a dollar amount determined by Congress. 

Section 315(c) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (52 U.S.C. § 30116(c)) is amended— 

(1) in paragraph (1), by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following: 

“(D) In any calendar year after 2018— 

(i) a threshold established by section 301(4)(A) or (4)(C) shall be increased by the percent difference determined under subparagraph (A); 

(ii) each amount so increased shall remain in effect for the calendar year; and 

(iii) if any amount after adjustment under clause (i) is not a multiple of $100, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $100.”; 

(2) in paragraph (2)(B)(i), by deleting “and” at the end; 

(3) in paragraph (2)(B)(ii), by replacing the period at the end with “; and”; and 

(4) by inserting after paragraph (2)(B)(ii) the following: 

“(iii) for purposes of section 301(4)(A) and (4)(C), calendar year 2018.”. 13 

Increase the In-Home Event Exemption and Unreimbursed Travel Expense Exemption for Candidates and Political Parties 

Section: 52 U.S.C. § 30101(8)(B)(ii) and (iv) 

Recommendation: Increase the in-home event exemption and unreimbursed travel expense exemption for candidates to the current contribution limit and index for inflation. Establish a separate in-home event exemption and unreimbursed travel expense exemption for each political party committee, increase the exemption to an amount deemed appropriate by Congress, and index it for inflation. 

Explanation: Under FECA, an individual may spend up to $1,000 per candidate, per election and up to $2,000 per calendar year on behalf of all political committees of the same party for food, beverages, and invitations for an event held in the individual’s home without making a contribution. FECA also permits an individual to spend up to $1,000 per candidate, per election and up to $2,000 per calendar year on behalf of all political committees of the same party for unreimbursed travel expenses on behalf of the campaign or political party without making a contribution. 

When Congress created the in-home event exemption and unreimbursed travel expense exemption in 1974, it did not limit spending under these exemptions. See Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1974, Pub. L. No. 93-443, § 102(c), 88 Stat. 1263, 1269 (1974). Congress added the current exemption limits in 1979, setting the amount for candidates as the same as the contribution limit then in effect ($1,000 per election) and setting the amount for political parties as 40% of the contribution limit then in effect for state, district, and local parties ($5,000 per calendar year) and 10% of the contribution limit then in effect for national parties ($20,000). See Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1979, Pub. L. No. 96-187, § 101, 93 Stat. 1339 (1980). Since then, Congress has doubled the contribution limits for candidates and state, district, and local party committees, indexing both limits for inflation, as well as increased and indexed for inflation the contribution limit for national party committees. 

The Commission recommends that Congress update the in-home event exemption and unreimbursed travel expense exemption on behalf of candidates to reflect the spending limit as originally intended and index these amounts for inflation ( i.e., one contribution limit or currently $2,700). With respect to political parties, sharing an in-home event exemption and unreimbursed travel expense exemption among all committees of a political party imposes significant regulatory burdens on national, state, district, and local committees to keep track of such exempt spending. Therefore, the Commission further recommends that Congress grant each political party committee its own in-home event exemption and unreimbursed travel exemption as well as increasing the increase the exemption limits on behalf of political parties at an amount deemed appropriate by Congress, adjusted for inflation. 14 

Permit Political Committees to Make Disbursements by 

Methods Other Than Check 

Section: 52 U.S.C. § 30102(h)(1) 

Recommendation: Congress should delete the reference to a “check drawn on” an account at a campaign depository as the only permissible method of making political committee disbursements. 

Explanation: The Federal Election Campaign Act requires all political committees to maintain at least one campaign depository account and to make all disbursements (other than from petty cash) “by check drawn on such accounts in accordance with this section.” See 52 U.S.C. § 30102(h)(1). Since this provision was adopted, financial payments have evolved to include credit cards, debit cards, and other well-established electronic transaction methods. 2 The Commission accordingly recommends deletion of FECA’s requirement that disbursements be made “by check drawn on” campaign depository accounts. The Commission recommends substituting technology-neutral language to require that committees make disbursements “from such accounts.” 

Legislative Language: 

Section 302(h)(1) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (52 U.S.C. § 30102(h)(1)) is amended to revise the last sentence to read as follows: “No disbursements may be made (other than petty cash disbursements under paragraph (2)) by such committee except from such accounts.”.          

> 2See, e.g., Fed. Reserve Sys., 2013 Federal Reserve Payments Study: Recent and Long-Term Payment Trends in the United States: 2003-2012, at 6-8, 12 (2013), https://www.frbservices.org/assets/news/research/2013-fed-res-paymt-study-summary-rpt.pdf (last visited Dec. 12, 2018)(noting that “fewer checks enter the banking system as paper at all” as more checks are processed electronically); Fed. Reserve Sys., 2010 Federal Reserve Payments Study: Noncash Payment Trends in the United States: 2006-2009, at 4 (2011),
> https://www.frbservices.org/assets/news/research/2010-payments-study-summary-report.pdf (last visited Dec. 12, 2018)(noting that electronic payments — whether made by debit card, credit card, or through automated clearinghouses — “collectively exceed three-quarters of all noncash payments” in U.S.).

15 

Update Citations to Reflect the Recodification of FECA 

Legislation: H.R. 2832 (114 th Congress) 

Explanation and Recommendation: On September 1, 2014, a new title in the United States Code was established for codifying legislation related to Voting and Elections. The new Title 52 includes the Federal Election Campaign Act. In order to ensure that other laws accurately reflect the new location of the Federal Election Campaign Act in the United States Code, legislation is needed to conform citations to the Federal Election Campaign Act in various other laws to its current codification. In the 114 th Congress, H.R. 2832 was a bill that would have provided the necessary updates. See H.R. 2832, 114 th Cong. (2015). The bill passed the House of Representatives on September 6, 2016, by voice vote. The Senate did not act on it. Similar legislation should be enacted in order to promote public understanding and access to the Federal Election Campaign Act. 16 

Repeal the Convention Funding Provisions Rendered Non-Operational by the Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act 

Section : 26 U.S.C. § 9008 

Recommendation : Congress should repeal the provisions of the Presidential Election Campaign Fund Act that allocate and govern the use of funds through the now-defunct public convention financing program. 

Explanation : The Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act, Pub. L. 113-94, 128 Stat. 1085 (2014) (the “Research Act”), amended the Presidential Election Campaign Fund Act, 26 U.S.C. §§ 9001-9013 (the “Funding Statute”), by terminating the longstanding entitlement of national party committees to public funds to finance their presidential nominating conventions. But the Research Act did not repeal the convention financing provisions. Rather, the Research Act implemented the termination by requiring that the funds in question be transferred to a “10-Year Pediatric Research Initiative Fund” instead of to the national party committees. 3 See Pub. L. 113-94, § 2(a), 128 Stat. 1085 (codified at 26 U.S.C. § 9008(i)). 

Prior to the Research Act, the Commission had promulgated numerous regulations implementing the Funding Statute. See 11 C.F.R. part 9008. Many of these public funding regulations no longer serve a functional purpose following the Research Act, yet the statutory provisions that they implement remain in place. These statutory and regulatory provisions, which the Research Act rendered inoperative, may confuse the public as to the state of the law. By repealing those inoperative provisions, Congress can clarify the law. 

The following statutory provisions are no longer operational and should be removed: 

• 26 U.S.C. § 9008(b)(3) — requires the Secretary of the Treasury to make payments to “the national committee of a major party or a minor party which elects to receive its entitlement”; 

• 26 U.S.C. § 9008(c) — restricts national party committees from using funds received under the Funding Statute except for expenses incurred with respect to a presidential nominating convention or to repaying loans or otherwise restoring funds that were used to defray such expenses; 

• 26 U.S.C. § 9008(d) — limits expenditures by national party committees to the amount of funds to which they are entitled under the Funding Statute, and sets out exceptions to this limitation; 

• 26 U.S.C. § 9008(e) — states the date on which the national party committees may begin receiving funds;   

> 3The Research Act did delete the statutory requirements for the Commission to report to Congress regarding payments to and expenses of national party committees for presidential nominating conventions. Pub. L. No. 113-94, § 2(c)(1), 128 Stat. 1085-96 (deleting 26 U.S.C. § 9009(a)(4)-(6)). The Research Act also removed statutory provisions that criminalized (1) a national party committee’s spending more than the limit established by 26 U.S.C. § 9008(d); (2) any person’s spending public convention funds on expenses other than a national party committee’s convention expenses; and (3) giving or accepting a kickback in connection with any convention expense. Id .§ 2(c)(2) (amending 26 U.S.C. § 9012).

17 

• 26 U.S.C. § 9008(f) — requires the Secretary of the Treasury to transfer to the Treasury any remaining funds in a national party committee’s account after the close of a nominating convention; 

• 26 U.S.C. § 9008(g) — states that any major or minor party may file a statement with the Commission designating the national committee of that party; and requires the Commission, upon verifying the statement, to certify to the Secretary of the Treasury the payment amount the national party committee is entitled to; 

• 26 U.S.C. § 9008(h) — grants the Commission the authority to require repayments from a national party committee that has received funds under the Funding Statute. 

Legislative Language :

Section 9008 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended as follows: 

(1) in subsection (b), by striking paragraph (3); and 

(2) by striking subsections (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (h). Page 1 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

441 G St. N.W. 

Washington, DC 20548 

February 3, 2020 

The Honorable Amy Klobuchar 

Ranking Member 

Committee on Rules and Administration 

United States Senate 

Campaign Finance: Federal Framework, Agency Roles and Responsibilities, and Perspectives 

Campaign finance is the raising and spending of money to influence electoral campaigns at the federal, state, and local levels. The Federal Election Commission (FEC) reported that in 2017 and 2018, candidates, party committees, and political action committees (PAC) raised about $8.6 billion and spent about $6 billion on activities associated with federal elections. 1 With such large sums of money involved, concerns about limiting the potential for political corruption and providing transparency to voters, while protecting free speech, have been at the heart of campaign finance law. 

The  Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA) as amended, regulates the raising and spending of campaign funds—including establishing limits and prohibitions— and requires the disclosure of certain contributions in federal elections. 2 Since the passage of FECA, judicial rulings have invalidated a number of the Act’s provisions. For example, in 2010, court rulings struck down (1) a prohibition on corporations using their general treasuries to make independent expenditures—that is, spending for a communication that advocates for or against a clearly identified candidate and is not made in cooperation with, or at the suggestion of, a candidate or political party; and (2) limits on contributions to groups that only make independent expenditures—known as Super PACs. 3 While Super PACs are required to disclose the names of contributors, the original sources of some contributions may not be known, raising concerns among those arguing for transparency about the range of funding sources that may support or oppose a particular candidate’s campaign. For example, a Super PAC may disclose a tax-exempt organization as a contributor, yet the donors to that organization are generally not    

> 1FEC reported that this information is based on campaign finance reports filed with the FEC that cover activity from January 1, 2017 through December 31, 2018. Not all money raised in this cycle has been spent at the time of the filing deadline, accounting for the differences between the two amounts.
> 252 U.S.C. §§ 30101-30145. Federal campaigns are prohibited from accepting contributions from certain types of organizations and individuals. For example, corporations and unions are banned from making contributions from their general treasuries to political campaigns of federal candidates.
> 3Citizens United v. FEC, 558 U.S. 310 (2010); SpeechNow.org v. FEC, 599 F.3d 686 (D.C. Cir. 2010) (en banc), cert. denied, 562 U.S. 1003 (2010). SpeechNow.org appealed portions of the case to the U.S. Supreme Court, which declined to hear the case. Super PACs are also known as independent expenditure-only organizations.

U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE Page 2 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

publicly disclosed. 4

Among other prohibitions, FECA prohibits foreign nationals from making contributions or donations of money or other things of value, or spending money in federal, state, or local elections. 5 Reports of foreign interference during the 2016 election, and concerns about future interference have focused attention on campaign finance and other election administration policies in the United States. At the federal level, the FEC is responsible for civil enforcement of FECA, while the Department of Justice (DOJ) is responsible for investigating and prosecuting criminal violations of the Act’s provisions. Additionally, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) is responsible for investigating and enforcing tax-exempt organizations’ compliance with the applicable tax provisions related to political campaign intervention. 6

You asked us to provide information on issues related to the enforcement of campaign finance law in connection with federal elections. This report provides information on three areas related to campaign finance: (1) the legal framework of campaign finance in federal elections; (2) federal agencies’ roles and responsibilities, including challenges faced, if any, in enforcement efforts; and (3) the perspectives of literature and selected organizations on key aspects of the federal campaign finance framework, including the enforcement of campaign finance laws (i.e., statutes and regulations). 

To address the first area on the legal framework, we reviewed relevant statutes, regulations, and court cases to understand the federal election campaign finance law governing contributions and expenditures, such as prohibitions, limits, disclosure requirements, and responsibilities for enforcement, as well as law governing tax-exempt organizations’ political campaign intervention. 

To address the second area on federal agencies’ roles and responsibilities in administering and enforcing campaign finance laws, we reviewed information from the FEC, which is involved in interpreting and administering federal campaign finance law and investigating violations and enforcing compliance with campaign finance law in connection with federal elections. We also reviewed information from DOJ, which is responsible for investigating and prosecuting criminal violations related to campaign finance. We also reviewed information from IRS because it oversees compliance with the tax law governing allowable levels of political campaign intervention by tax-exempt organizations. More specifically, we reviewed documentation from the FEC, DOJ, and IRS related to how they implement their respective functions and strategic objectives, and the methods they use to administer or enforce campaign finance-related law and identify and address violations, including the prohibition on foreign contributions and expenditures in federal elections. These documents include policies, procedures, and guidance, as well as existing agreements between FEC and DOJ regarding enforcement of FECA. We also interviewed officials from each agency to better understand how they carry out the  

> 4For example, certain social welfare organizations that are tax-exempt under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(4) report some donor information to the Internal Revenue Service, but that information is not subject to public disclosure. See 26 U.S.C. § 6104(b). However, after a recent court decision, if those social welfare organizations make independent expenditures, they are generally required to report certain donor information to FEC, which does publish such information on its website. Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (CREW) v. FEC and Crossroads Grassroots Policy Strategy (Crossroads GPS), 316 F. Supp. 3d 349 (D.D.C. 2018).
> 552 U.S.C. § 30121(a)(1)(A).
> 6According to law and IRS guidance, political campaign intervention is direct or indirect participation or intervention in political campaigns on behalf or in opposition to any candidate for public office. See 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3).

Page 3 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

agencies’ functions with respect to campaign finance-related law, as well as to obtain their perspectives on any challenges faced in administering and enforcing the law. For example, we met with all four FEC commissioners in July 2019, as well as FEC senior officials. We describe in this report the challenges that FEC, DOJ, and IRS officials identified that were relevant to the scope of our review. 

To describe how the FEC identifies potential campaign finance violations, we reviewed and analyzed enforcement data from FEC’s Office of General Counsel’s and Alternative Dispute Resolution Office’s Law Manager System to identify the sources of FEC’s enforcement actions for fiscal years 2002 through 2017. 7 To describe how the FEC enforces campaign finance law, we reviewed and analyzed enforcement data from the Law Manager System and the Administrative Fine Program’s Disclosure Suite to identify the distribution of the FEC’s enforcement activities, which represents the matters under review, ongoing and closed, matters resulting in dismissal or settlement, and administrative fines cases unchallenged and challenged for fiscal years 2002 through 2017. To identify the types of campaign finance violations that were enforced by the FEC, we reviewed and analyzed data from the Law Manager System for matters under review closed during fiscal years 2012 through 2017. 8 We also reviewed and analyzed data from the Law Manager System to identify how the FEC has enforced allegations of violations of the foreign national prohibition for fiscal years 2002 through 2017. To assess the reliability of FEC’s enforcement data, we performed electronic data testing for obvious errors in accuracy and completeness, and queried agency officials knowledgeable about those data systems to determine the processes in place to ensure the integrity of the data. We found the data sufficiently reliable to provide information on FEC’s efforts to enforce campaign finance law. 

To identify the number of FECA-related charges filed in cases prosecuted by DOJ, we reviewed and analyzed case management data from DOJ’s Criminal Division’s Public Integrity Section and the U.S. Attorneys’ Offices, which share responsibility for prosecuting campaign finance violations. For the Public Integrity Section, we reviewed and analyzed data for fiscal years 2010 through 2017. 9 Specifically, we obtained data from the Section on all cases that were categorized using a program code for “campaign finance” in the Automated Case Tracking System, based on the judgment of knowledgeable DOJ attorneys, as well as all cases that included criminal charges brought under FECA. To identify applicable charges, we interviewed officials from the Section and reviewed DOJ guidance on the federal prosecution of election offenses. 10  We developed a list of statutes with campaign finance offenses and provided the list to DOJ to ensure the list was accurate and complete. The Section extracted data from the Automated Case Tracking System for all cases that were opened under the campaign finance, wire fraud, or conspiracy statutes and any cases that were opened under the relevant program category codes for fiscal years 2010 through 2017. Further, the Section manually pulled court and internal documents (e.g. case opening and closing forms) and reviewed those documents      

> 7We focused on fiscal years 2002 through 2017 because FECA’s most recent significant amendment was the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 (BCRA). Pub. L. No. 107-155, 116 Stat. 81. In addition, fiscal year 2017 is the latest period for which we obtained complete data from the FEC.
> 8For the closed matters under review, we focused on fiscal years 2012 through 2017 because these data were the most complete and available at the time of this review.
> 9We selected the fiscal year 2010 through 2017 time frame to capture information on DOJ’s campaign finance enforcement efforts across multiple presidential administrations. In addition, fiscal year 2017 was the last complete year of DOJ data available at the time of our request.
> 10 Department of Justice, Federal Prosecution of Election Offenses , Eighth Edition, December 2017.

Page 4 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

to determine which cases had accompanying statutes associated with violations of FECA provisions. We also reviewed and analyzed case management data from the Executive Office for United States Attorneys’ Legal Information Office Network System, to determine the total number of charges filed for violations of FECA provisions by U.S. Attorneys’ Offices for fiscal years 2015 through 2017. At the time of our review, data on FECA charges were the most complete for these three fiscal years. 11  We assessed the reliability of the data provided by DOJ by reviewing data system user manuals and data dictionaries, identifying inconsistencies, and working with agency officials to resolve issues or identify potential limitations. We found the data sufficiently reliable to provide information on the number of FECA charges filed in cases prosecuted by DOJ. 

To describe how IRS identifies impermissible levels of political campaign intervention by tax-exempt organizations and the outcomes of the agency’s enforcement efforts, we reviewed and analyzed data from IRS’s Reporting Compliance Case Management System to identify the agency’s sources and dispositions of closed examinations as well as the types of tax-exempt organizations examined during fiscal years 2010 through 2017. 12  We assessed the reliability of these data by reviewing data system user manuals and data dictionaries and querying agency officials knowledgeable about the data system to determine the processes in place to ensure the integrity of the data. We determined that the IRS data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of providing information on IRS’ efforts to enforce compliance with provisions related to political campaign intervention. 

We also interviewed FEC and DOJ officials about guidance and procedures used to coordinate and document referrals of matters involving potential FECA violations between the two agencies, and assessed processes against the implementation of collaborative mechanisms 13 

and applicable internal control guidance on documentation and organizational knowledge retention from Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government .14 

To address the third area related to perspectives on key aspects of the campaign finance framework, we performed a literature review of scholarly publications, government reports, and publications by nonprofits and think tanks from 2016 through 2018. 15  We also conducted interviews with subject-matter specialists on campaign finance issues from a nongeneralizable          

> 11 Effective September 1, 2014, FECA (previously codified under in the United States Code under 2 U.S.C. § 431 et seq) was consolidated with other laws governing voting and elections in the new title 52 of the United States Code. Case management data from the Executive Office for United States Attorneys did not capture charges under Title 2 with sufficient precision for our purposes; therefore we restricted our analysis to charges filed under Title 52 starting with fiscal year 2015.
> 12 We requested data on closed examinations from IRS beginning in fiscal year 2010 because the Supreme Court and federal appeals court rulings in Citizens United v. FEC and SpeechNow.org v. FEC changed the campaign finance landscape, enabling corporations (including nonprofit corporations) to (1) use their general treasuries to make unlimited independent expenditures and electioneering communications and (2) make unlimited contributions to Super PACs. After these decisions in 2010, nonprofit corporations, such as tax-exempt social welfare organizations (501(c)(4) organizations) that are incorporated, could make independent expenditures, electioneering communications, and contribute to Super PACs. We recognize that some of the examinations closed in 2010 may include activity prior to this time frame.
> 13 GAO, Managing for Results: Key Consideration for Implementing Interagency Collaborative Mechanisms ,GAO-12-1022 (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 27, 2012).
> 14 GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government ,GAO-14-704G (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 2014).
> 15 We reviewed literature published from calendar years 2016 through 2018. This time frame includes the 2016 U.S. Presidential election, and extends through the end of the most recent calendar year at the time of our review.

Page 5 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

sample of research, advocacy, or practitioner organizations, selected to represent a range of views about the campaign finance framework. While the information we obtained from our literature review and interviews with specialists from selected organizations cannot be generalized or be considered representative of all views on campaign finance issues, they provided important perspectives on key aspects of the campaign finance framework, including the scope and nature of campaign finance laws, the purposes served by contribution limits, the benefits and costs of unlimited independent expenditures, and the extent to which the sources of campaign funding should be disclosed. For a more detailed discussion on our scope and methodology, see enclosure I. 

We conducted this performance audit from April 2018 to February 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. 

Legal Framework 

What is campaign finance? 

Campaign finance refers to the raising and spending of money to influence electoral campaigns at the federal, state, and local levels. Most  spending on elections is privately financed, via individuals, political committees, and other organizations such as corporations, unions, and tax-exempt organizations. 16  Federal public financing is available for qualifying candidates for President of the United States during both the  primaries  and the general election. Consistent with FECA, the federal campaign  finance-related activities subject to campaign finance laws include contributions, expenditures, independent expenditures, and electioneering communications. For example, contributions involve giving money to an entity, such as a political committee, and expenditures involve spending money directly for the purpose of influencing a federal election. There are several methods by which these activities are regulated—such as the imposition of disclosure and disclaimer requirements, setting limits on contributions to candidates’ campaigns, and providing a method for public financing of Presidential elections. Figure 1 provides an overview of these regulated activities. 

> 16 Campaigns may not accept contributions from the general treasuries of corporations, labor organizations or national banks. See 52 U.S.C. § 30118; 11 C.F.R. § 114.2. This prohibition applies to any incorporated organization, including a nonstock corporation, a trade association, an incorporated membership organization and an incorporated cooperative. A campaign may, however, accept contributions from PACs established by corporations, labor organizations, incorporated membership organizations, trade associations, and national banks.

Page 6 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Figure 1: Types of Campaign Finance-Related Activities Subject to Federal Campaign Finance Law 

What laws address campaign finance in federal elections? 

Federal campaign finance law is composed of a set of limits, restrictions, and requirements regarding the contribution and spending of money in connection with elections. FECA and its implementing regulations set forth the provisions governing this area of law and several court decisions have had a significant impact on FECA’s scope. 

FECA provides for both disclaimer and disclosure requirements and sets limits on how much certain individuals and organizations may contribute, as well as who may make campaign contributions. For example, FECA prohibits foreign nationals from making a contribution or donation in connection with federal, state, or local elections and from making expenditures, independent expenditures, or disbursements for electioneering communications. FECA also prohibits a person from soliciting, accepting, or receiving such a contribution or donation from a foreign national. 17 Since the enactment of FECA in 1971, subsequent  legislation and court rulings have further shaped the campaign finance framework. For example, the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 (BCRA) included several provisions designed to end the use of “soft money," or money raised outside the limits and prohibitions of federal campaign finance law, and prohibited corporations and unions from using their general treasuries to fund electioneering communications. 18  In 2010, the U.S. Supreme Court invalidated the longstanding prohibition on corporations using their general treasuries to fund independent expenditures and 

> 17

52 U.S.C. § 30121; 11 C.F.R.  § 110.20. Foreign nationals are prohibited from making any of the following: contribution or donation of money or other thing of value or an implied promise to make a contribution or donation in connection with any federal, state, or local election; contribution or donation to any committee or organization of a national, state, district, or local political party;  donation to a presidential inaugural committee; disbursement for an electioneering communication; or any expenditure, independent expenditure, or disbursement in connection with a federal, state, or local election.  Foreign nationals are also prohibited from directing, dictating, controlling, or directly or indirectly participating in the decision-making process of any person, such as a corporation, labor organization, political committee, or political organization with regard to such person’s federal or non-federal election-related activities. 

> 18

Pub. L. No. 107-155, 116 Stat. 81. 

Contributions                      

> Any g lfts, subscriptions , loans , advances , or deposits of money or anything of va lue made by any person for the purpose of influencing any election for federal office or the payment by any person of compensation for
> the persona l services of another person which are rendered to a po li tical committee without charge for any purpose,

Expenditures                                

> Any purchases, payments, distri butions, lo ans, advances, deposits, or gifts of money or anylhlng of value made by any person for t he purpose of influencing any elec ti on for federa l office, Including written
> contracts , promises , or agreements to make expenditures.
> Source; GA Oinaly51r5 of Federa lElec tion Ccmmt5.sion fn f0f mi1 ti0n IGA0.20-G6R

# ... .•

# ©

Independent expenditures     

> Any expenditures made by a person expressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate and not made in concert or cooperation with or at the request of the candidate, their authorized politica l committee or its agents, or a political party committee or
> its agents.

El,ctloneering 

communictions           

> Any broadcast , cable , or satellite communica ti on that refers to a
> clearly identified federal candidate that is publicly distribu ted within 30 days of aprimary or 60 days of a genera l election and is targeted to the relevant electorate . Page 7 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance

BCRA’s prohibition on corporations using their general treasuries to fund electioneering communications in Citizens United v. FEC .19  As a result, corporations may use their general treasury funds to fund independent expenditures explicitly calling for the election or defeat of federal candidates or electioneering communications, which refer to those candidates during pre-election periods, but do not necessarily explicitly call for their election or defeat. Following 

Citizens United v. FEC , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit determined in SpeechNow.org v. Federal Election Commission that contributions to PACs that make only independent expenditures could not be constitutionally limited. 20  As a result, these entities, known as Super PACS, may accept unlimited amounts of funds, including from corporations, unions, and individuals, to fund independent expenditures that advocate for the election or defeat of federal candidates. Figure 2 shows the significant legislation and court decisions related to campaign finance activities, since the enactment of FECA in 1971.   

> 19 558 U.S. 310.
> 20 599 F.3d.

Page 8 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Figure 2: Significant Campaign Finance Legislation and Court Decisions, Since Enactment of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA) 

a Pub. L. No. 92-225, 86 Stat. 3 (1972). 

b Pub. L. No. 93-443, 88 Stat. 1263. 

c424 U.S. 1 (1976). 

d Pub. L. No. 94-283, 90 Stat. 475. 

e Pub. L. No. 96-187, 93 Stat. 1339 (1980). 

f Pub. L. No. 107-155, 116 Stat. 81. 

g540 U.S. 93 (2003). 

h 551 U.S. 449 (2007). 

i558 U.S. 310 (2010); 599 F.3d 686 (D.C. Cir. 2010) (en banc). 

j572 U.S. 185 (2014). 

Who can spend and raise money in federal elections? 

Federal Electi on 

Campa ign Act {FECA) 

o f1 97 1" 

The Federal  Electton 

Campaign Act of 1971 

enhanced reporting req ui rements for  campaign 

ao ntribuUons and expendftures and created a

framework  for  the creatfon of political action committees, among other th ings. 

I l1970 

I

1975 

Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 (BCRA) 1

The Act prohibited national 

party  committees from 

soliciting  or recei111ng 

donat1ons  raised outs1de of the  limitations,  proh1bitlons. 

and reporting requirements of federal law-referred to as soft money. It also set Increa s ed contribution limits tied to  inflation ,  rmp o se dble nn ial agg regate co ntri bution limits, proh ib ited minors from making contribu ti ons , prohi bi ted 

corporations  and unions from funding electioneering communications with their general treasuries, and added new disclosure reqUirements for groups not registe red with FEC  ,funding 

el ecUo neeri ng communications,  among 

ot h er things_ 

FECA Amendments 

Of  1974b 

The Act established the Federa l Election Commission (FEC). an independent commission charged with administe ring and  civilly  enforcing FECA , among other thlngs. The law also included 

contribution  and expenditure limits. 

I

1980 1985 

Buckley v. Valeo• 

The Supreme  Court 

established  tile  framework for eva luating the constitutionality of campaign finance regu lation. While finding that both im plicated the First Amendment, the Court uphe ld FECA's contribution li mits, but held that expenditure lfmitatlons fm pose far greater restraints,on the freedoms of speech and association and were n ot constitutional. 

FECA Amendments of 

1976° 

In response to the Supreme-

Court's  decision  1n Buck ley, the 1976  amendments 

generally repealed expenditure lim1ts , The amendments also  changed 

the appointment structu re of the F EC .

I1990 

I1995 

I

2000  '200s  I ro10 

,,-----------::.:. :.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:. ::: ___ ~

McConnell  v.  FE Cfl 

The Su preme Court largely Uphe ld chal lenged pr ovisions of the  BCRA. 

including i ts reg ul ations of soft money and 

electioneering 

communications. but invalidated Its ban on contributions by minors. 

FEC  v. Wisconsin Right to 

Life  (WR  Tl.  1/ )h 

The Supreme Court li mited the ap pl ication of the BCRA's prohibition on corporate funds  for 

electioneeri ng communications to encompass only express advocacy for a partic ul ar can didate or party or its-functional  equ ivalent 

Citizens  Unffed  v.  FEC 

and SpeechNow.org v. 

FEC 

The Supreme Court invalidated the longstanding 

ban  on corporations using their treasury funds for independent expenditures and ,  overt urning  part of its verdict in McConnel l 11 .FEC , invalidated BCRA's ban on usfng such fun ds for making electioneering 

communfcations.  The D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals then held  fn  SpeechNow that contribution limits for groups that make only independent expend itures were  unconstitutiona l.          

> S011rt1t .GAO analys1!!i of the Federal Elaci.lcn Carrwaign

Act  a!i  a~ndod , -:al"td  001..11'\deor.,on.s  rela 1~ to  camps.lg,,  ri'rranco  acdvltles . I GA0 -20--MR 

FECA Amendments of 

1979" 

These amendments to 

FE::CA  simplified some reporting requirements. 

I2020 1

McCutcheon  v.  FEd 

The Su preme Court invalidated BCRA's biennia l aggregate contribution limits as unconstitutional and declared that the only compelling governmental interest for contribution or 

ex penditure  limits  is quid pro quo corru pt ion or its appearance, Page 9 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

FECA permits individuals to make contributions, subject to certain limitations, to an unlimited number of candidates, political parties, and political action committees. 21  There are also various types of political committees and organizations that are permitted to make contributions to federal candidates, as well as to other committees and organizations. 22  Federal campaign finance law contains certain restrictions on individuals and entities that may contribute directly to federal candidates. Figure 3 shows the individuals and entities allowed to make contributions to federal candidates. 

Figure 3: Individuals, Groups, Political Committees, and Other Entities That Can Make Contributions to Federal Candidates 

Note: Other political committees and organizations that cannot contribute to federal candidates may raise and spend money in other ways in support of federal elections. For example, corporations and labor organizations cannot use their general treasuries to make contributions to candidates or political committees, but may establish a separate segregated fund, known as a corporate or labor PAC, among other things. Super PACs may not contribute directly to federal candidates, but they may raise unlimited funds from corporations, unions, and individuals and spend unlimited funds in the form of independent expenditures. 

a Under FEC regulations, a separate segregated fund is a political committee established, administered or financially supported by a corporation or labor organization—also referred to as corporate or labor PAC. See 11 C.F.R. § 114.1(a)(2)(iii). 

b A nonconnected PAC is considered any committee that conducts activities in connection with an election, but that is not a party committee, an authorized committee of any candidate for federal election, or a separate segregated fund. 

21 See, e.g., 52 U.S.C. § 30116 (establishing contribution limits, among other things); McCutcheon v. FEC, 572 U.S. 185 (2014) (holding that biennial aggregate contribution limits are unconstitutional). For a summary of the contribution limits for calendar years 2019 and 2020, see enclosure II. 

22 FECA generally defines political committees as any committee, club, association, or other group of persons, which receives contributions or makes expenditures aggregating in excess of $1,000 during a calendar year. 52 U.S.C. § 30101(4). The Supreme Court held in Buckley v. Valeo that only organizations under the control of a federal candidate or whose major purpose is the election or defeat of federal candidates may be regulated as political committees. Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. at 79–80. 

~ Allowed 

Individuals 

An  i nd ividual  may  make  contnbutions  to candidates 

aGd  the ir  authorized  commiUe<as .

Political party committees 

Party  ccmmlrtees  may  suppoM  federal  candidates  in a

~ariety  of ways ,  includiAg  making  ccnt ribLJtions .

Indian tribes 

In  past  aovlsory  opinions  Md  enforcement  cases,  lhe 

Federal Election  Comml'3S 10n  ha s detem11ned  thal an 

unlnco,porated  tribal  entity  can  be  ccns,dered  a

"per,,m•  under  the  Federal  Election Campaign Act and thus  subject  to the various  contri bu!Jon 

prohibitions  and 1 1mTlalJons 

Candidates 

When  candidates  use or loan  llieir  personal  funds for 

campai on  purposes,  111ey  are  mal<ir,g  conllibulions  to 

their  campaigns,  Unli~e  oll1er  conlrlbutlons,  these candidate  contributlons  are.  nor  subject  to  any  IIml ts 

Minors 

An  i rldfvidual  who  is  under  18  _years  old  may , under certa in  circ umslances 1 make contributions to 

candidates and  polltical  committees,  subject  to limitations. 

Political action committees (PAC} 

Separate  segregated  funds•  and  nonconnecled  PACs, with  111a  e,cepbon  of Super PACs, may  make 

oontribu lions  to  candidates  and  le  their  aulho r'l zed 

commlttees _!J. 

State  PACs, unregistered local party organizations and nonfederal campaign committees 

State  PACs,  unregistered  local  party  organlz,1Uon• 

and  nonfederal  campaign  oommntees  may,  under 

certain  circumstances,  con1 1l bule 10 federal 

candidates. 

Ot her authorized committees 

A candidate's  aull1onzed  cx,mmluee  may  make  a

contr,bu~on  ofup  to S2 ,000 pet elect io n to  111e 

aull1orlzed  romm \ttee  or  anol/1et  federal  candldale_            

> Source GA Oa,1.aly:sts ot F°l!!'deral E1«1 •on Comrnl!iSlotl t11fon nai i101, ,

l GA0-20-66R 

Certain li mited liability compani es A 11mited  liabi lity company  wilh  one  or  more  members generally is  treated  as  a corpora l/ on  if  rt has  elected, 

under Internal Revenue  Service  (IRS)  rules, to  be 

trealed  as a corporation.  A limited  llabil~y  company 

with two or mo re  members  generally  i s  treated as a

partnership  ll  it  ha•  made  no  choice,  under IRS rules , 

as  lo  11.- entity  status.  A limited  llablli fy  company  with 

one member generally Is disregarded as  an  entity  for federal i ncome  ta~  purposes  If  it  ha•  made  no  choice. 

under IRS  rules,  as  to  ,rs  enli ty  stallls,  and the  s,ngle 

member is  treated  as  duectl'y  engaging  1n lhe  acl rvit1 es 

of  th<>  l1mifed  habli,ty  company. If a  limited  lfab ,loty  company rs  treated  as a 

corporation,  it  is  prohibited  from  making  cx, nt rlbu tl ons 

lo  candidate  committees,  b~t  it  C'ln  establish  a

separate segregated  fund.  It  may  also  g1Ve  m oney  to  a

Super  PAC.  1111  Is  consodered  a partner.ship,  it  ls 

s ub jec t 10  the  con1nbut,on  llm,ts  ro r partnerships.  Each 

lnd1viduel  partner may  make  CORlrlbutions  subject to 

l1m~aflons .

Alll1ob gti  contributions  made  by  llie  ,partnership as a 

whole  count  proportionalely  agarnst  each  partrc)pating 

partne~s  11/11)1 , contribulfons  111 ade  by  i ndividual 

parjners  from  \he"  own  funds  do not ccunt against  the 

partnership's  limit If a single  member  limited  loabihty 

company  has  not  chosen  corporate  tax  treatmen t.  fl 

may  make  ccntributions:  the contributions Will be 

eutlbuted  10 the  single  member,  not  the  limtted  liebili fy 

companv .Page 10 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

In addition to contributions directly to federal candidates, individuals and organizations can contribute and spend money to influence elections in other ways. Figure 4 below shows in greater detail the types and flow of contributions and independent expenditures that individuals, political committees, and other organizations are allowed to make in connection with federal elections. As discussed earlier, a contribution is anything of value given, loaned or advanced to influence a federal election. In contrast, independent expenditures refer to purchases, often for political advertising, that explicitly call for the election or defeat of a clearly identified federal candidate (e.g., “vote for Smith,” “vote against Jones”), must be made independent of parties and candidates, and cannot be coordinated with candidates or parties. Some entities, like political committees, can both raise and spend money to influence federal elections. 23  For example, PACs may make contributions to candidates and may also make independent expenditures. In contrast, corporations and labor organizations cannot use their general treasuries to make contributions to candidates or political committees, but may spend money in other ways to influence federal elections. 24  They may (1) establish a separate segregated fund, known as a corporate or labor PAC; (2) make unlimited independent expenditures and electioneering communications; and (3) make unlimited contributions to Super PACs. Super PACs may not contribute directly to federal candidates, but they may raise unlimited funds from corporations, unions, and individuals and spend unlimited funds in the form of independent expenditures. 

Under the Internal Revenue Code, certain tax-exempt organizations, such as social welfare organizations that are tax-exempt under section 501(c)(4) (501(c)(4) organizations) and political organizations that are tax-exempt under section 527 (527 organizations), may engage in activities to influence elections, to varying extents. An organization may engage in some political campaign intervention without losing its tax-exempt status under 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code, so long as it continues to be primarily engaged in activities that promote social welfare. 25  Under FECA, a 501(c)(4) organization that is incorporated is prohibited from contributing directly to federal candidates, but may raise unlimited funds and make independent expenditures, as well as make contributions to Super PACs. 26  Political organizations qualifying for tax-exempt status under section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code are formed and operated primarily to accept contributions or make expenditures for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to   

> 23 A PAC may also distribute communications that support candidates and parties, including making independent expenditures. There are several types of federal PACs—a nonconnected PAC, which is any PAC that is not a party committee, an authorized committee of a candidate for federal election, or a separate segregated fund of a corporation or labor organization; a leadership PAC formed by a candidate or officeholder; and a separate segregated fund, which is established, administered or financially supported by a corporation or labor organization.
> 24 See 52 U.S.C. § 30118.
> 25 The Internal Revenue Code provides that a 501(c)(4) organization must be operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare. 26 U.S.C § 501(c)(4). IRS regulations provide that an organization is operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare if it is primarily engaged in promoting in some way the common good and general welfare of the people of the community. The promotion of social welfare does not include direct or indirect participation or intervention in political campaigns on behalf of or in opposition to any candidate for public office. 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(c)(4)-1(a)(2). 501(c)(5) labor organizations and 501(c)(6) trade associations may also engage in limited political campaign intervention. See Rev. Rul. 2004-6. If these organizations make expenditures for a section 527(e)(2) exempt function, they may be subject to tax under 527(f). Such exempt functions include influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the election of Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, whether or not such individual or electors are selected, nominated, elected, or appointed. 26 U.S.C. § 527(e)(2).
> 26 See 52 U.S.C. § 30118.

Page 11 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the election of presidential or vice presidential electors. 27  Some, but not all, 527 organizations are political committees regulated by the FEC, 28  and 527 organizations that are not political committees may engage in issue advocacy (other than electioneering communications), if it is not coordinated with campaigns. For a summary of some of the types of political committees and other organizations that are raising and spending money in support of federal elections, see enclosure III. 

Figure 4: Overview of Individuals and Selected Political Committees and Other Organizations—Types and Flow of Contributions and Expenditures Made In Connection With Federal Elections 

a For the purpose of this figure, 527 organizations are those that are not also political committees regulated by the Federal Election Commission (FEC). 

bThe Internal Revenue Code contains an explicit prohibition on political campaign intervention by 501(c)(3) and (c)(29) organizations. The 501(c)(4) social welfare organizations, 501(c)(5) labor organizations, and 501(c)(6) trade associations may engage in limited political campaign intervention. See 26 U.S.C. § 501(c); 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(c)(4)-1(a)(2)(ii); Rev. Rul. 2004-6. 

27 26 U.S.C. § 527(e). 

28 Political committees that are registered with FEC and are also organized under section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code are subject to FEC reporting requirements and exempt from some IRS reporting requirements. 26 U.S.C. § 527(j)(5)(A). 

# •••

Individuals 

• •• •...  ... 

## ----+- Limited contribution 

# ...  Unlimited contribution 

# ••  Un limited contribution< ·••• Independent expenditure 

# CJ  Political committee 

# 1111 Other organization 

# ••••

Political party committee 

# •••

Political action committee 

(PAC) 

Candidate committee 

# •• • •-------. • -------~---·--J o;--:-• ------~ ... 

Super 

PAC 

••

T

# • •~.•  .A • •

# •-

••T

Source:  GAO analysis of the Federal  Election  Commission and Internal Revenue Service informati on . I GA0.20 -66R Page 12 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

> c

According to FEC officials while no legal provision prohibits unlimited contributions from a political party committee, PAC, or a candidate committee to a Super PAC, this is unlikely to occur because these political committees are limited to raising funds from sources permitted by the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA), as amended, and in amounts subject to FECA’s contribution limits. In contrast, Super PACs are permitted to raise funds in unlimited amounts, including from some of the sources prohibited from contributing to political committees under FECA. 

What information are contributors and spenders required to report, and to whom? 

At the federal level, political committees are required to register with the FEC and regularly file disclosure reports, generally providing information about the following: (1) contributions received; (2) expenditures made; (3) the identity of those making contributions of more than $200 per calendar year (or election cycle in the case of a federal candidate committee) along with the date and amount of the contribution; and (4) the identity of those to whom an expenditure of more than $200 is made per calendar year (or election cycle in the case of a federal candidate committee) along with the date, amount, and purpose of the expenditure. 29 

Certain organizations other than political committees that spend money on elections, such as 501(c)(4) organizations, are also subject to certain FEC reporting requirements. If these organizations make independent expenditures aggregating more than $250 during a calendar year, they must submit a report to the FEC, which includes, among other things, for each independent expenditure (1) whether the expenditure was made independently of a campaign; (2) whether the expenditure supports or opposes a candidate; and (3) the identity of each person who made a contribution to the organization of more than $200 when that contribution is earmarked for political purposes and intended to influence elections or for the purpose of furthering an independent expenditure. 30 

Organizations exempt from tax under section 501(c) or 527 of the Internal Revenue Code generally are required to report certain information to IRS. These organizations must file a Form 990-series annual information return, which includes information about revenue and expenditures. 31  Generally, as part of that information return, organizations are required to report names, addresses, and donation amounts for donors contributing more than $5,000 to the organization. 32  Tax-exempt organizations that engage in political campaign intervention on  

> 29

See 52 U.S.C. § 30104(b); 11 C.F.R. § 104.3.  

> 30

See 52 U.S.C. § 30104(c); 11 C.F.R. § 109.10(e). On August 3, 2018, the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia vacated the FEC regulation providing that such persons other than political committees need disclose only the identification of donors who gave more than $200 annually when that donation was for the purpose of furthering 

the reported independent expenditure. CREW v. FEC and Crossroads GPS, 316 F. Supp. 3d 349 (D.D.C. 2018). On October 4, 2018, following the decision, FEC issued guidance stating that it will enforce the statute by requiring disclosure of donors of over $200 annually when that donation is for the purpose of furthering an independent expenditure, as well as donors of over $200 annually when that donation is earmarked for political purposes and intended to influence elections. 

> 31

26 U.S.C. § 6033(a); 26 C.F.R. § 1.6033-2. 

> 32

See 26 C.F.R. § 1.6033-2(a)(2)(ii)(f). Such information must be reported on Schedule B (Form 990, 990-EZ, or 990-PF), Schedule of Contributors. In 2018, IRS issued Revenue Procedure 2018-38, stating that certain 501(c) organizations—including 501(c)(4) social welfare organizations, 501(c)(5) labor organizations, and 501(c)(6) trade associations, among others—are no longer required to report the names and addresses of the donors on Schedule B of the tax return, but they must continue to collect and record this information and make it available to IRS upon request, when needed for tax administration. On July 30, 2019, in Bullock v. IRS, a district court found the Revenue Procedure to be a legislative rule and set it aside because the Treasury Department and IRS did not follow the required notice and public comment procedures for a legislative rule before promulgating it. Bullock v. IRS, 401 F. Supp. 3d 1144 (D. Mont. 2019). On September 10, 2019, IRS published a proposed rule that would require only Page 13 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

behalf of or in opposition to candidates for public office are required to report information about their political campaign intervention and expenditures. 33  Section 527 organizations are also generally required to periodically file a report, which, among other things, identifies the name, address, occupation, and employer of any person that contributes, in the aggregate, $200 or more in a calendar year and the amount and date of each contribution. The report also identifies any person to whom expenditures are made that aggregate $500 or more in a calendar year, and the amount, date, and purpose of each expenditure. 34  Most of the information reported by these organizations is subject to public disclosure, including the identities of donors reported by 527 organizations. 35  However, identifying information about donors reported by most 501(c) organizations is not subject to public disclosure. 36 

Who is prohibited from spending money in federal elections? 

Under FECA, certain types of individuals and organizations are prohibited from contributing to federal candidates. For example, corporations, including incorporated 501(c)(4) organizations, and unions are prohibited from making contributions to candidates in federal elections. 37 

However, PACs established and administered by, but legally separate from, corporations and unions may contribute to candidates, parties, and other PACs. Corporations and unions may use their general treasury funds to make uncoordinated electioneering communications, independent expenditures, or both, but this spending is not considered a contribution under FECA. Foreign national individuals and entities—including companies incorporated or having principal places of business in foreign countries—are prohibited from making contributions, donations, or expenditures (including independent expenditures and electioneering communications) in federal, state, or local elections. 38  FECA also prohibits federal contractors from making campaign contributions or from soliciting campaign funds. 39  No person may make a contribution in another person's name and no person may make a contribution in cash of more than $100 to influence federal elections. 40  Figure 5 shows the individuals and organizations prohibited from contributing to campaigns in connection with federal elections.    

> 501(c)(3) and 527 organizations to report the names and addresses of certain donors on their Forms 990. 501(c)(4), (5), and (6) organizations, among others, would not be required to report such information. 84 Fed. Reg. 47,447 (Sept. 10, 2019). The reporting requirement does not apply to certain section 527 political organizations. See 26 U.S.C. § 6033(g)(3).
> 33 See 26 C.F.R. § 1.6033-2(a)(2)(ii)(k). Such information must be reported on Schedule C (Form 990 or 990-EZ), Political Campaign and Lobbying Activities.
> 34 See 26 U.S.C. § 527(j)(3). Such information is reported on Form 8872, Political Organization Report of Contributions and Expenditures. These reporting requirements do not apply to political committees that are subject to FECA reporting requirements or with respect to any expenditure that is an independent expenditure under FECA. 26 U.S.C. § 527(j)(5)(A), (F).
> 35 26 U.S.C. § 6104(b), (d). Donor information for 501(c)(3) private foundations that file Form 990-PF is also subject to public disclosure.
> 36 Id.
> 37 52 U.S.C. § 30118.
> 38 52 U.S.C. § 30121; 11 C.F.R. § 110.20.
> 39 52 U.S.C. § 30119; 11 C.F.R. § 115.2.
> 40 52 U.S.C. §§ 30122, 30123.

Page 14 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Figure 5: Federal Elections Campaign Act Prohibitions Related to Contributions from Certain Types of Individuals and Organizations 

FECA provides generally that any person who knowingly and willfully commits a violation of any provision of FECA that involves the making, receiving, or reporting of any contribution, donation, or expenditure aggregating $2,000 or more during a calendar year is subject to criminal penalties. Knowing and willful violations aggregating $2,000 or more during a calendar year are subject to a fine (up to $100,000 for each offense by an individual and up to $200,000 for each offense by an organization), or imprisonment for not more than 1 year, or both. Knowing and willful violations aggregating $25,000 or more per calendar year are subject to a fine (up to $250,000 for each offense by an individual and up to $500,000 for each offense by an organization), or imprisoned for not more than five years, or both. 41  In most instances, DOJ initiates the prosecution of criminal violations of FECA, but the law also provides that the FEC may refer an apparent knowing and willful violation to the DOJ for criminal prosecution under certain circumstances. Specifically, the FEC may refer the apparent violation to the U.S. Attorney General for prosecution if there is an affirmative vote of four commissioners that there 

41 52 U.S.C. § 30109(d). There are different thresholds for knowing and willful violations of FECA provisions regarding campaign misrepresentations and certain coerced contributions, and a different threshold and penalty for violations regarding conduit contributions. For example, for conduit contributions, a person that knowingly and willfully commits a violation involving an amount aggregating more than $10,000 shall be imprisoned for not more than 2 years or an amount aggregating $25,000 or more for not more than 5 years, fined not less than 300 percent of the amount involved and not more than the greater of $50,000 or 1,000 percent of the amount involved, or both. 

)(  Prohibited Corporations and labor organizations 

Corporalions (including  rnCDfporated  tat•exempt 

organizations), labor organizations, and national 

ba nks  may  not  f1se  their  general  treasury  Junds  lo 

make  conlrjbutlons  to  federal  candidates,  Polnrcal 

acllon  committees  (PAC),  however,  eslabllsh~ad  by 

corporatlom1 . labor  omsmzations . incorporated 

member.ship  orgaorzatlons 1 trade  asso~alions 1..  and 

national  banks  may  make  conlnb cr tions.  A professional 

corporation  Is  prohibited  from  ma~lng  any 

cont ri bution~  because  oonlribu~ons  horn  corpotalIons 

are  unlawhll , Because  contributions from  corporalions 

are  proh ib ited,  a parlner$h1p  or  limited  hob1lily 

company  w1Ih  corporate  partners  or  members  may  not 

attribute  any  portion  of  a contributi on  lo the  corporate 

partners  or  <i'lembers , Cand1dales.  polil,cal 

committees,  and  0IheF  persons  ate  also  prohlbrted 

li'om  Knowingly  accepti ng  or  receiving  any  contnbuhon 

from  1he  general  treasuries  of  corporations,  labor 

organtzalioris,  or  national  banks. 

Federal government contractors Federa l governmenl  contrac:tots  may  not  make 

conttibulfons  to  federal  candldates.  However,  federal 

contractors  that  are  corporations  may form PACs  and 

make  conlnbulions.  A partnership  o di mlled  liability company  tt,al  is  negoUaling  a oontract  wilh  tt!e  federal government or Iha!  has  not  compleled  perlonnance  of 

such  a coo1ract  is  prohibited  from  making 

contribu trons,  Funher.  aray  person is prohi bited from 

knowingly  solici~og  any  such  contribution  from  a

federa l govammenl  oontracfor ,

Compensation to a candidate employed by prohibited source 

Compensation paid to a candidate in  excess  of  actual 

hours worked, or in  consideration  of  work  not 

performed, is generally  considered  a contribution  lrom the employer,  II  lhe  employer  i s  a corporation,  federal 

government  conlractor 1 or  an o!her  prohibited  source 1

the  excess  payment would  rssuh  in  a prohibited 

conlnbutlon  under  the,  regulallons  applicable to that 

employer 

Contributions in the name of another No  person  may  make  a contribu tion  in  the  name  or 

another person or  knowingly  permit  lhelr  naone  lo  be 

used  lo  effecl  such a conlribubon  I and no  person  ruay 

knowingly  accept  a conllibutron  made by  one  person in  the  name of another person ,  Acoordingly,  an  snlfty 

that rs  prohibited  from  maki ng  contributions  is prohibited  frol)1  using bonuses or  other  mell)ods  of re i mbursing  employees  Jor  their  contnbutlons 

Foreign nationals and foreign entiti es 

Federal law prohibits contributions donations expenditures and disbursemenrs  so licited,  directed, 

rece,ved  or made directly or  indlractly  by  or  from 

foreign  na~onals  In connection  wIIh  any  election, 

SimllaM y,  because  contribullons  from  forergn  na!lonals 

are  prohibited ,  a panners hI p o,  lim it ed  liab1 111 y

company  may  not  at1nbC1te  any  port,on  of  a

co ntribullon  to a partnef  wt'io  1s  a fo rei gn  national ,

Federal  ""mpa ,gns  may  not  sohci1  or  accept 

contributions  from  foreign  nal!onals. Page 15 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

is probable cause to believe that a knowing and willful violation of FECA involving a contribution or expenditure aggregating over $2,000 during a calendar year has or is about to occur. 42 

Roles and Responsibilities of Federal Agencies and Challenges Faced 

What federal agencies are involved in overseeing campaign finance regulations in federal elections? 

At the federal level, campaign finance law is passed by Congress, and civilly enforced by the FEC, an independent regulatory agency responsible for interpreting, administering, and enforcing FECA. The FEC promulgates regulations implementing FECA’s requirements and issues advisory opinions that respond to inquiries from those affected by the law. The FEC’s functions involve (1) administering the public disclosure system for campaign finance activity; (2) providing information and policy guidance on campaign finance laws; (3) encouraging voluntary compliance with campaign finance laws; (4) promulgating regulations to implement FECA; and (5) enforcing the campaign finance laws through audits, investigations, and civil litigation. 

DOJ is responsible for investigating and prosecuting criminal violations of FECA. One of DOJ’s law enforcement priorities is election crimes—which includes enforcing campaign finance violations. DOJ’s oversight in this area—led by the department’s Criminal Division—is designed to ensure that the department’s nationwide response to election crime matters is uniform, impartial, and effective. 

IRS administers federal tax provisions related to political campaign intervention and examines organizations for compliance with such provisions. If an organization does not comply, IRS can revoke an organization’s tax-exempt status or impose excise taxes, or both. 43 

Federal Election Commission 

How is the FEC structured, and what are its operating procedures? 

The FEC is an independent regulatory agency responsible for interpreting, administering, and enforcing FECA. The FEC is led by up to six commissioners 44  and staffed with more than 300 federal employees. 45  FECA specifies two statutory staff positions for the FEC—a staff director   

> 42 52 U.S.C. § 30109(a)(5)(C).
> 43 In addition to the FEC, DOJ, and IRS, other federal agencies that have secondary responsibilities in the area of campaign finance. For example, the Federal Communications Commission administers and enforces civil aspects of telecommunications law regarding political advertising and candidate access.
> 44 The FEC commissioners are appointed by the President and subject to Senate confirmation and serve six-year terms. No more than three members may be affiliated with the same political party. By statute, the Commission’s chairmanship rotates every year. FECA permits FEC members to remain in office in “holdover” status, exercising full powers of the office, after their terms expire “until his or her successor has taken office as a commissioner.” 52 U.S.C. § 30106(a). As of August 31, 2019, the Commission is operating without a quorum. FECA requires that at least four of six commissioners agree to undertake many of the agency’s key duties. As of August 31, 2019, three of six commissioners remain in office, after the fourth remaining commissioner resigned.
> 45 The FEC includes a statutorily mandated Office of Inspector General. 5 U.S.C. app. § 8g. The Office of Inspector General independently conducts audits, evaluations, and investigations to promote improvements in the management of FEC programs and operations.

Page 16 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

and general counsel. 46  FECA also requires affirmative votes from at least four commissioners to authorize most consequential agency activity, including making, amending, or repealing rules; issuing advisory opinions; and approving enforcement actions and audits. 47  If there are not four affirmative votes at any stage of these processes, the Commission will not proceed to the next step of the respective process. 

In FEC’s efforts to enforce and administer federal campaign finance laws, the FEC relies on its internal enforcement guidance—as well as other policies and plans—to direct the core components of its enforcement process. For example, in its strategic plan for fiscal years 2018 through 2022, the FEC established one strategic goal to fairly, efficiently and effectively administer and enforce FECA and promote compliance and engage and inform the public about campaign finance data and rules, while maintaining a workforce that delivers results. The FEC has four strategic objectives: (1) to inform the public about how federal campaigns and committees are financed; (2) to promote voluntary compliance through educational outreach and to enforce campaign finance laws effectively and fairly; (3) to interpret FECA and related statutes, providing timely guidance to the public regarding the requirements of the law; and (4) to foster a culture of high performance in order to ensure that the agency accomplishes its mission efficiently and effectively. 

What methods does the FEC use to help ensure compliance with campaign finance requirements? 

Consistent with FECA, the FEC has exclusive jurisdiction over the civil enforcement of campaign finance statutes and regulations, and ensuring compliance with FECA’s contribution and expenditure limits, prohibitions, and disclosure requirements in connection with federal elections. 48  The FEC seeks to ensure compliance with FECA and related regulations by informing the public about how federal campaigns and committees are financed, interpreting FECA and related statues, promoting compliance through educational outreach, and enforcing campaign finance laws. For example, to inform the public about how federal campaigns and committees are financed, the FEC administers its internet-based public disclosure system for campaign finance activity, providing the public with data concerning where candidates for federal office derive their financial support. 49 

The FEC has statutory authority to interpret FECA through regulations and advisory opinions. 50 

Specifically, FEC initiatives, legislative changes, judicial decisions, petitions for rulemaking, or other changes related to campaign finance law may necessitate that FEC write new regulations         

> 46 52 U.S.C. §30106(f).
> 47 52 U.S.C. § 30106(c). Advisory opinions are FEC’s responses to particularized inquiries about how federal campaign finance laws apply to specific factual situations. See 52 U.S.C. § 30108; 11 C.F.R. part 112. FECA directs FEC to render a written advisory opinion in response to any person’s complete written request concerning the application of FECA or FEC regulations to a specific transaction or activity of the requester. Id.; 11 C.F.R. § 112.1. An authorized agent of the requesting person may submit the advisory opinion request, but the agent shall disclose the identity of his or her principal. 11 C.F.R. § 112.1.
> 48 FEC pursues FECA violations pursuant to 52 U.S.C. § 30109(a).
> 49 FECA requires all federal candidates and political committees to file regular reports with the FEC. 52 U.S.C. § 30104.
> 50 52 U.S.C. § 30107(a)(7), (8), § 30108.

Page 17 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

or revise existing regulations. 51  The FEC is also tasked by FECA to help answer any person’s questions about the applicability of FECA and FEC regulations to specific factual situations— referred to as advisory opinions. 52  According to FEC officials, in fiscal year 2017, the FEC issued 25 advisory opinions, in response to requests. FECA also provides authority for the FEC to make recommendations for legislative or other action the Commission considers appropriate and to transmit the recommendations to the President and Congress. 53 

According to FEC officials, due to the large number of political committees and growing number and size of financial disclosure reports filed with FEC, voluntary compliance is essential to enforcing FECA. The FEC publishes a variety of explanatory and educational materials to help filers understand campaign finance law—including campaign guides, brochures, and assistance directed at individuals, candidates, and committees via FEC’s web site. To supplement written materials, the FEC answers compliance questions from the public by telephone and email. The FEC also offers opportunities for training on federal campaign finance laws, including educational materials on its  YouTube channel , which includes playlists designated for candidates, parties, PACs, and individuals. 

How does the FEC identify potential campaign finance violations? 

As mentioned, the FEC has exclusive jurisdiction over the civil enforcement of federal campaign finance laws, and it maintains an enforcement program intended to ensure that campaign finance laws are fairly enforced. In exercising its enforcement authority, the Commission uses a variety of methods to investigate possible campaign finance violations, according to FEC documentation. The  FEC may detect potential violations through a review of a political committee’s reports by its Reports and Analysis Division or through an audit by its Audit Division, which are referred to as internal referrals. 54  Potential violations may also be brought to the FEC’s attention through the complaint process. 55  This process allows any member of the public to file a sworn complaint alleging campaign finance violations and explaining the basis for the allegations. 56  Other government agencies (e.g., DOJ) may also refer possible violations to the FEC. In addition, any person or entity who believes it has committed a violation may bring the matter sua sponte (self-reported submission) to the FEC’s attention. During fiscal years 2002 through 2017, a majority (71 percent, or 1,724 actions) of FEC’s campaign finance enforcement actions were generated from external complaints received from members of the      

> 51 The FEC promulgates regulations implementing FECA which are published in Title 11 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
> 52 52 U.S.C. § 30108.
> 53 52 U.S.C. § 30111(a)(9).
> 54 FEC’s Reports and Analysis Division reviews all federal campaign finance reports to track compliance with FECA and ensure that the public record provides a full and accurate representation of reported campaign finance activity. The Audit Division conducts audits under FECA in those cases where it appears that political committees have not met threshold requirements for substantial compliance with FECA, in addition to mandatory audits under public funding statutes. See 26 U.S.C. § 9007; 11 C.F.R. § 9007.1; 52 U.S.C. § 30111(b). The audit determines whether the committee complied with limitations, prohibitions, and disclosure requirements.
> 55 The Office of General Counsel reviews each complaint to determine whether it states a violation within the FEC’s jurisdiction and satisfies the criteria for a proper complaint. If the complaint does not meet these requirements, the office notifies the complainant of the deficiencies. Once a complaint is deemed sufficient, the office assigns it a matter under review number, acknowledges receipt of the complaint and informs the complainant that the Commission will notify him or her when the entire case is resolved.
> 56 See 52 U.S.C. § 30109(a).

Page 18 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

public. Figure 6 shows the sources of FEC’s enforcement actions during fiscal years 2002 through 2017. 

Figure 6: Sources of Federal Election Commission (FEC) Enforcement Actions, Fiscal Years 2002 through 2017 

Note: The data presented represent the sources of the FEC’s enforcement activities for fiscal years 2002 through 2017. FEC’s enforcement process resolves campaign finance violations, designated as matters under review. This process may involve an investigation, conciliation (or voluntary settlement), and civil penalties.  

> a

Sua sponte refers to self-reported submissions to the FEC.  

> b

All cases subject to an internal referral are based on information ascertained in the normal course of carrying out FEC’s supervisory responsibilities, except for external complaints received by FEC’s Office of General Counsel’s Enforcement Division that are referred to the Alternative Dispute Resolution Office. Internal referrals in this figure include those made by FEC’s Reports and Analysis Division and Audit Division. 

How does the FEC enforce campaign finance requirements? 

The FEC’s enforcement process begins when a complaint or referral is made alleging that a violation of federal election campaign laws has occurred or is suspected of having occurred. 57 

According to FEC officials, any complaint, referral, or  self-reported  submission received by the Commission is initially designated as inactive. A matter is activated when the Associate General Counsel for Enforcement assigns it to an Office of General Counsel Enforcement Division attorney. This assignment happens after the Office of General Counsel completes an intake process which involves notification of the respondents; receipt of responses from the  

> 57

FECA creates a statutory distinction between non-knowing and non-willful campaign finance violations involving any amount of money, which are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the FEC, and knowing and willful violations involving $2,000 or more within a calendar year, which are subject to both civil enforcement proceedings by the FEC and criminal prosecution by the DOJ. See 52 U.S.C. § 30109(a), (d). Criminal prosecution under FECA can be pursued before civil and administrative remedies are exhausted. 

1 % External re ferrals received (from another agency)  

> 36 actions

Sua sponte submissions  receiveda  

> 163 actions

Internal referrals receivedb  

> 502 actions

Externa l complaints received          

> 1,724 actions
> Source: GAO analysis of lhe Federal Eleclion Commission's data. IGAO-20~6R

Page 19 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

respondents; and evaluation of the complaint and response using criteria approved by the Commission under its enforcement priority system. 58  Respondents have 15 days to respond to a complaint pursuant to FECA; 59  however, a respondent may request an extension of up to 30 days. According to FEC officials, matters are activated within an average of 50 days of the date the Office of General Counsel receives the last response from a respondent. The officials added that some matters are disposed of without being activated; these cases are either transferred to the Alternative Dispute Resolution Office 60  or, if the enforcement priority system rating indicates the matter does not warrant the further use of Commission resources, the Office of General Counsel generally uses a streamlined dismissal process to recommend the Commission dismiss the matter. 

For all other matters, FEC’s Office of General Counsel prepares a report which contains recommendations for the Commission’s actions regarding the potential violations of campaign finance laws. The recommended actions may include the following: (1) find reason to believe that a violation either occurred or is about to occur; (2) find no reason to believe that a violation either occurred or is about to occur; (3) dismiss as a matter of prosecutorial discretion; or (4) dismiss with a cautionary message to the respondent regarding legal obligations under FECA or Commission regulations. The Commission reviews the Office of General Counsel’s report and recommendations and determines which enforcement method to pursue, which includes traditional enforcement, alternative dispute resolution through the Alternative Dispute Resolution Office, or the Administrative Fine Program. 61  According to FEC officials, the agency established the Alternative Dispute Resolution Office and Administrative Fine Program processes in order to resolve issues outside the traditional enforcement process. 62 

More substantive enforcement cases are handled by the Office of General Counsel through the traditional enforcement pathway and are known as matters under review. 63  Figure 7 depicts the key steps required for matters under review routed through FEC’s traditional enforcement process. Based on FEC data, the average number of days for the resolution of matters under review that were closed during each of fiscal years 2002 through 2017 ranged from 304 days to 787 days.         

> 58 FEC’s enforcement priority system uses formal, pre-determined scoring criteria to allocate agency resources and assess whether particular matters warrant further administrative enforcement proceedings. The criteria include (1) the gravity of the alleged violation, taking into account both the type of activity and the amount in violation; (2) the apparent impact the alleged violation may have had on the electoral process; (3) the complexity of the legal issues raised in the matter; and (4) recent trends in potential violations and other developments in the law.
> 59 11 C.F.R. § 111.6. A respondent is a person or entity who is the subject of a complaint, referral, or sua sponte (self-reported) submission that alleges the person or entity violated FECA, another statutory provision within the Commission’s jurisdiction such as the inaugural committee foreign national provision, or an FEC regulation.
> 60 The Alternative Dispute Resolution Office resolves less complex campaign finance violations that meet criteria approved by the Commission. The program focuses on remedial measures for candidates and political committees, such as training, internal audits, and hiring compliance staff. The Alternative Dispute Resolution Office also negotiates settlements and civil penalties.
> 61 FEC’s enforcement process resolves campaign finance violations, designated as matters under review. This process may involve an investigation, conciliation, or civil litigation. In certain circumstances, the FEC may refer matters to the Department of Justice for criminal prosecution. The Administrative Fine Program focuses on campaign finance violations involving the late submission of, or failure to, file disclosure reports. This process may also involve the assessment of monetary penalties and handles any challenges to the penalty assessments.
> 62 The Administrative Fine Program was established in response to a provision in the Treasury and General Appropriations Act, 2000. Pub. L. No. 106–58, title VI, § 640(a), 113 Stat. 430, 476 (1999).
> 63 Matters under review are FEC enforcement actions, initiated by a sworn complaint or by an internal referral.

Page 20 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Figure 7: Major Steps Required for Matters under Review Routed through the Federal Election Commission’s (FEC) Traditional Enforcement Process 

Note: The figure excludes some optional steps in the FEC’s matters under review process. 

FEC’s traditional enforcement process ends when the Commission determines either to take no action or to reach a conciliation agreement with the respondent, at various stages of the process. 64  Additionally, without an affirmative vote from at least four commissioners at each of the stages of the process, there can be no substantive action. If the Commission does not successfully conciliate with a respondent, it may file a civil lawsuit in U.S. district court. 65  In certain circumstances, the Commission may also refer a matter to DOJ for criminal prosecution under FECA. 66  Enclosure IV provides an overview of FEC’s enforcement process for non-criminal campaign finance violations. 67 

What types of campaign finance violations are enforced by the FEC? 

For the FEC’s enforcement process, FEC data showed that the FEC closed a total of 843 matters under review, consisting of a total of 1,164 alleged violations—and representing 33 different types of alleged violations—related to the violation of campaign finance laws during  

> 64

A conciliation agreement is a voluntary settlement agreement between FEC and a respondent. FEC must attempt to enter in a conciliation agreement upon a finding of probable cause to believe, and FEC may also, at its discretion, attempt to enter in a conciliation agreement before a finding of probable cause. 52 U.S.C. § 30109(a)(4); 11 C.F.R. § 111.18. The agreement generally includes, among other things, an agreement that the respondent will cease and desist from violating the relevant provision in the future and an agreement to pay a civil penalty or take corrective actions.  

> 65

52 U.S.C. § 30109(a)(6).  

> 66

52 U.S.C. § 30109(a)(5)(C). A five-year statute of limitations applies to all campaign finance violations. 52 U.S.C. § 30145.  

> 67

Enclosure V shows the number of the campaign finance enforcement matters and cases addressed through FEC’s traditional enforcement, Alternative Dispute Resolution Office, and Alternative Fines Program processes during fiscal years 2002 through 2017.       

> The Office of General Commission votes on The Office of General ComplainVreferral

~ Counsel notifies 

# + Respondent may reply  • · reason to believe' 

# + Counsel investigates received respondent of to complaint finding commencing and/or initial conciliation complaint or referral Investigati on is attempted 

## J

# +The Office of General If probable cause is Counsel files "probable Commission conducts Commission votes on found, the Office of cause· brief with  ~ Respondent files 

~ hearing with 

~ "probable cause to  ~ General Counsel re ply brief respondent and attempts to reach Commission, copy in g counsel for respondent believe· finding conciliation agreement respon dent with respondent 

## J

# + If conciliation is not FEC considers agreed to, the After resolution , matter conciliation agreement,  ~ Commission may  ~ under review is closed authorize the Office of 

if applicable General Counsel to file and publicly disclosed suit             

> Source :GAO analysis of ttwt Federal Election Convn.Jsslon 's informalioo .jGA0-20-66R

Page 21 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

fiscal years 2012 through 2017. 68  Figure 8 shows the number of matters under review closed during fiscal years 2012 through 2017, and the types of campaign violation categories addressed by the FEC in these matters under review. As shown in the figure, the top 10 violation categories represent about 89 percent (1,032) of the total alleged violations during this time period and involve violations related to reporting, other activities, 69  disclaimers, prohibited contributions, excessive contributions, contributions from corporations, exceeding contribution limitations, contributions made in the name of another, personal use, and soft money. 70 

As shown in the figure below, reporting violations represent the largest category (27 percent— 315 violations) of the alleged violations, which may involve candidates, party committees, and PACs that did not adhere to FECA’s campaign finance reporting requirements. For example, FECA requires all  political committees to report, among other things, the total amount of receipts received during the reporting period and calendar year for categories such as contributions from political party committees, contributions from persons that are not political committees under FECA, and all loans. 71  

> 68

For the closed matters under review, we focused on fiscal years 2012 through 2017 because these data are the most complete and available at the time of this review. In addition, some of the closed matters under review may involve one or multiple alleged violations of campaign finance laws.  

> 69

According to FEC officials, the “other” activities involve a wide variety of allegations that do not fit into other categories, such as alleged violations of the noncommercial air travel rules and rules about paycheck deductions from corporate or labor separate segregated funds. 

> 70

Soft money refers to donations to party committees raised outside of the limitations, prohibitions, and reporting requirements of federal law. In addition to individuals and political committees, soft money can also come from corporations and labor unions. Soft money may be used by party committees for “party-building activities” and issue ads; however, soft money cannot be used for advocating for a particular candidate during an election campaign. The national party committees are prohibited from receiving or spending soft money on any activity. 52 U.S.C.  §30125(a)(1). 

> 71

52 U.S.C. § 30104(b). Page 22 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Figure 8: Types of Alleged Violations for Federal Election Commission (FEC) Closed Matters under Review, Fiscal Years 2012 through 2017 

Note: Some of the violations in the remaining 23 categories involve allegations such as a candidate failed to timely file a statement of candidacy; illegal loans were made to committees, or legal loans were misreported; a committee disguised expenditures so as to hide the recipient; and a committee failed to report operating expenditures and debts.  

> a

According to FEC officials, the violations in the “other” category involve a wide variety of allegations that do not fit in other categories, such as alleged violations of the noncommercial air travel rules and rules about paycheck deductions from corporate or labor separate segregated funds. 

How has the FEC enforced the foreign national prohibition? 

In 2018, the FEC, in response to language in an explanatory statement, stated in a report to congressional appropriations committees that timely resolution of any enforcement matters involving allegations of prohibited activity by foreign nationals is a priority for the FEC. 72 

Allegations of noncompliance with the foreign national prohibition have been handled primarily as FEC traditional enforcement cases, or matters under review. As shown in figure 9, about 2 percent (52) of FEC’s total matters closed during fiscal years 2002 through 2017 involved allegations of violations of the foreign national prohibition, and FEC found no reason to believe a violation occurred in over half (29) of these matters.  

> 72

The explanatory statement accompanying the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2018, included a reporting requirement for the FEC, which stated: “Preserving the integrity of elections, and protecting them from undue foreign influence is an important function of government at all levels. Federal law, for example, prohibits foreign campaign contributions and expenditures. With that in mind, the [FEC] Chairman is directed to report to the Committees on Appropriations of the House and Senate no later than 180 days after the enactment of this Act on the Commission’s role in enforcing this prohibition, including how it identifies foreign contributions to elections, and what it plans to do in the future to continue these efforts.” See Explanatory Statement , 164 Cong. Rec. H2045, H2520 (March 22, 2018). 

Total cl osed matters under re view Number of closed matters under review 

> 175 150 125

# -100 75 50                              

> 25
> 0_____ ....,_._. ________ __
> 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
> Fiscal yea,
> Reporting Other'
> Dfsclaimer
> Prohibited
> contributions
> EKcesslve
> contributions Contributions by corporations Contribution limits Contributions In the name of another Personal use
> Soft money Remaining 23
> categories
> Sow01> :GAO """lyi, 1$ •flJ'le Fedo,al E~lon C•rnm lS$10J'l 's dai,t IGA0-20-&IR
> 315

Page 23 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Figure 9: Federal Election Commission (FEC) Matters under Review, including Allegations of Violations of The Foreign National Prohibition, Fiscal Years 2002 Through 2017 

Note: With regards to matters closed involving foreign national allegations, for some of the matters, the matters involved multiple respondents and the FEC found no reason to believe allegations with respect to some respondents, and dismissed pursuant to prosecutorial discretion allegations with respect to other respondents. Therefore, the number of matters reflected in the disposition categories (55) is greater than the total number of matters closed (52).  

> a

At any stage of the FEC’s enforcement process, the Commission may close the entire file or close it only with regard to some of the respondents. 

To provide clarity and awareness of the campaign finance laws prohibiting foreign nationals’ participation in elections, the Commission has issued advisory opinions in several contexts in which it has considered the foreign national prohibition. For example, as it relates to changes in nationality, the Commission has determined that when an individual’s status as a foreign national changes, so does the individual’s ability to make contributions in connection with any election. 73  The FEC is also engaged in rulemaking on potential revisions to regulations on disclaimers required for internet communications which could have implications related to the foreign national prohibition, given that disclaimers on paid advertisements are one tool to expose prohibited expenditures by foreign nationals. 74  FEC officials also stated that in efforts to promote voluntary compliance with federal campaign statutes and regulations, the FEC provides compliance guidance to the public, committees, other organizations, and candidates regarding the prohibition on foreign national contributions and expenditures in the context of advisory 

> 73

See Advisory Opinion 2016-16 (Gary Johnson 2012).  

> 74

In 2011, FEC published an Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking related to disclaimers on certain internet communications. 76 Fed. Reg. 63,567 (Oct. 13, 2011). FEC re-opened the public comment period in 2016 and 2017. In March, 2018, FEC published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that, among other things, examines two alternatives for disclaimer requirements on public communications distributed over the internet. 83 Fed. Reg. 12,864 (Mar. 26, 2018). In June, 2018, FEC held a public hearing on the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, and in June, 2019, the commissioners made two alternate proposals public as part of the agenda for an open meeting. 

https://sers.fec.gov/fosers/  (reg 2011-02). 

2% Total matters closed involving foreign national allegations (52)              

> --No reason to believe
> •--Dismissed , prosecutorial discretion
> •--Pre-probable cause conciliation
> 5--Probable cause conciliation
> >I --Reason to believe, no further action --Close the file•

Matters closed not involving foreign national allegations (2,327)     

> Source: GAO analysis or tt,e Federal Election Commission·s data.

I GAO-20-66R Page 24 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

opinions, rulemaking, and informational publications on the FEC’s public website. 75 

What challenges have FEC officials identified facing when administering and enforcing campaign finance laws? 

FEC commissioners and senior FEC officials we interviewed identified to us, and in responses to the Committee on House Administration, challenges they face in administering and enforcing federal campaign finance law. 76  The commissioners and senior FEC officials identified challenges in such areas as (1) obtaining complete and accurate information from filings, (2) managing the docket of enforcement matters, (3) completing audits in a timely manner, and (4) addressing staffing shortages. FEC commissioners have also provided varying perspectives on the meaning of and challenges presented by deadlocked, or split, votes. 

• Obtaining complete and accurate information from filings. FEC officials told us that one challenge they face is receiving complete and accurate information in filings—a report, notification, or statement submitted to the FEC by a candidate, committee, or other entity. Required filings include committee and candidate registration forms and committee reports of the amounts and sources of money they receive and the amounts and kinds of expenditures they make. In particular, FEC officials noted that committee and candidate registration forms sometimes include false or fictitious information, such as fictitious or satirical names of a candidate, committee, or a committee’s treasurer, and that the incidence of such filings has increased since the 2016 presidential election cycle. According to FEC officials, another challenge is created when frivolous filers take the next step and file a report of activity (e.g., contributions or expenditures, sometimes in large dollar amounts). FEC officials also noted that some filings contain errors or blank fields, which officials attributed to filers sometimes being unfamiliar with form requirements. FEC officials said that frivolous and incomplete filings with fictitious or missing information can reduce the accuracy of FEC’s publicly disclosed campaign finance data and can also hinder the review of filings by FEC staff. 

According to FEC officials, the Commission has been taking steps toward addressing these challenges, such as adding new steps for FEC staff to verify potentially fictitious information, including sending verification letters to filers submitting potentially fictitious information, and removing unverified filings from campaign finance data. FEC officials told us the agency is also updating its electronic filing system with automated detection to prevent the submission of filings with missing or erroneous fields. They also stated they have carefully designed the forms and instructions, and provide educational offerings on the FEC website, hold conferences, teach classes, and offer webinars that include reporting guidance. The Reports Analysis Division assigns an analyst to every filing political committee, who is available to answer any questions and provide guidance on filing instructions on a one-to-one basis. According to FEC officials, if a filer’s errors or omissions reach a certain threshold it will trigger a request for additional information from the Reports Analysis Division.    

> 75 The FEC provides general public guidance regarding the foreign national contribution ban via its website. In June 2017, FEC’s brochure on foreign nationals, which provides a general primer on the foreign national prohibition, was updated and republished on the website. Other pages on FEC’s website provide information on specific questions about foreign national activities. These pages discuss the definition of “foreign national,” how to determine the nationality of a contributor, and how to address issues such as domestic subsidiaries of foreign corporations and the provision of substantial assistance to a foreign national making a contribution.
> 76 FEC, “Responses to Questions from the Committee on House Administration,” May 1, 2019, including attachments and exhibits, available at https://www.fec.gov/about/committee-on-house-administration-april-2019-questions/ .

Page 25 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

• Managing the docket of enforcement matters. FEC officials reported that another challenge relates to managing the Office of General Counsel Enforcement Division’s docket of enforcement matters, or workload. 77  For example, FEC officials noted that the number of matters on the enforcement docket—or pending Enforcement Division review or Commission action—was 289 matters as of May 2019 and that 45 of those matters have at least some activity that has exceeded or will exceed the statute of limitations before May 1, 2020. 78  An FEC commissioner referred to this as a backlog of matters. To address the backlog, FEC officials reported that they are working to increase productivity by, for example, adopting a more aggressive meeting schedule beginning in July 2019 to address matters on the enforcement docket. FEC officials also reported that the Commission prioritizes for immediate consideration any matters imperiled by an impending statute of limitations deadline, as well as matters that allege violations of the foreign national prohibition. Additionally, FEC officials reported that, in December 2018, the FEC revised two procedures to improve efficiency (1) the Reports Analysis Division review and referral procedures; and (2) the enforcement priority system’s rating system, which the Office of General Counsel uses to prioritize and activate matters under review. According to FEC officials, these changes are intended to allow more low-priority matters to be handled through alternative dispute resolution, educational programs, or streamlined enforcement priority system dismissals, which would allow the Enforcement Division to focus its resources on more complex, high-priority matters under review. 

• Completing audits in a timely manner. The FEC Audit Division generally audits a political committee under two circumstances—when a committee participates in a publicly financed Presidential campaign or national party convention, or when it appears that a political committee has not met substantial compliance for reporting. The audit determines whether the committee complied with limitations, prohibitions, and disclosure requirements. FEC officials reported that audits of political committees can take a long time to complete, which can put the Commission at risk of having audit findings that cannot be pursued due to statute of limitations deadlines. 79  FEC officials noted that the Commission is taking steps to complete audits more quickly and that the FEC has reduced the length of time it takes to complete audits. For example, they stated that the Audit Division has implemented stricter milestones, and time-saving mechanisms, including procedures for acquiring committee records more efficiently and the development of standardized templates. According to FEC officials, the average number of months to complete an audit of political committees that are authorized by a candidate declined from 19.1 months in 2010 to 18.3 months in 2016, and the average number of months to complete an audit of political committees that are not authorized by a candidate (e.g., party committees and Super PACs) declined from 25.3 months in 2010 to 5 months in 2016. 80       

> 77 According to the FEC, enforcement matters include matters under review, Reports and Analysis Division referrals, audit referrals, sua sponte submissions, external referrals, and other internally-generated matters.
> 78 FEC, “Responses to Questions from the Committee on House Administration,” May 1, 2019. The FEC may seek civil penalties in federal district court within the 5-year statute of limitations period (measured from the time of the violation) provided by 52 U.S.C. § 30145.
> 79 FEC, “Responses to Questions from the Committee on House Administration,” May 1, 2019.
> 80 In addition, FEC officials told us that the Audit Division has faced challenges obtaining committee records for audits. They stated that records are not readily available at times and may require extensive efforts to acquire since, for example, political committees often have high attrition rates of paid personnel or are staffed by volunteers, which can lead to challenges in communication. The Audit Division has procedures in place to seek approval from the Commission for subpoena action if records are not provided.

Page 26 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

• Staffing shortages. FEC commissioners told us that the Commission has experienced prolonged vacancies among its senior leaders, which officials attributed to salary limitations established by FECA that make it difficult to attract candidates for senior positions. 81  To address the salary limitations and help the FEC to recruit from a government-wide pool of experienced and skilled leaders, the Commission unanimously adopted a legislative recommendation in 7 of the last 8 years. These recommendations asked Congress to allow the FEC to participate in the Senior Executive Service and to amend FECA to remove references to the Executive Schedule in language related to salary for the General Counsel. 82  In October, 2019, FEC officials told us they had concerns about whether the recent departure of one of the FEC commissioners (discussed below) could present an obstacle to hiring for the remaining vacant positions, as applicants could be hesitant to apply for a position with an agency operating without a quorum of commissioners, or may think that the agency has shut down. 

FEC officials also provided differing perspectives on issues related to staffing shortages below the senior leadership level. For example, according to one commissioner, within the Office of General Counsel’s Enforcement Division, from 2010 through 2018 the number of full-time equivalent staff declined from 59 to 41 (about a 30 percent decrease). 83  The commissioner noted that during this time period, the number of enforcement matters more than tripled, contributing to the backlog in enforcement matters noted above. Another commissioner agreed that the caseload per staff member has been increasing, which can put a great deal of stress on FEC staff. Three of the four commissioners believed the FEC needed to hire more staff. The fourth commissioner told us, however, that the high workload per staff could be addressed through adopting more efficient practices, rather than hiring more staff. 

Additionally, from February 2018 through August 2019, the Commission had been operating with only four of six authorized commissioners on board, which FEC officials noted had presented challenges. FECA requires a vote of a majority of the six authorized commissioners for most policy actions, and thus the Commission must have had the unanimous support of all four commissioners who were serving. One commissioner noted that this meant that any one commissioner voting against or abstaining from a vote can result in delays in Commission decisions as to whether or not to pursue an enforcement action. 84     

> 81 52 U.S.C. § 30106(f). The FEC Office of Inspector General has reported management and performance challenges with relying on acting officials. See Federal Election Commission, Office of the Inspector General, Inspector General Statement on the Federal Election Commission’s Management and Performance Challenges - 2018 (October 2018).
> 82 The FEC’s legislative recommendation states that removing the statutory references to the Executive Schedule would allow the General Counsel to be compensated under the same pay schedule as the FEC’s other senior managers. See 52 U.S.C. § 30106(f)(1). At the time of our review, FEC officials reported that the General Counsel position was filled on an acting basis since September 2016 by an experienced individual who served as Deputy General Counsel since November 2012. Under the current pay system, if the Commission were to appoint the Acting General Counsel as General Counsel, the individual would have to accept an over $20,000 pay cut, according to FEC officials.
> 83 FEC, “Responses to Questions from the Committee on House Administration,” May 1, 2019.
> 84 FEC, “Responses to Questions from the Committee on House Administration,” May 1, 2019. FEC officials also reported in May 2019 that the two commissioner vacancies posed other logistical challenges, including that all four commissioners must be present, either physically or by telephone, for the Commission to meet, and if a commissioner is recused from a matter, the matter cannot proceed until the reason for recusal is removed or one of the vacant commissioner seats is filled.

Page 27 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Furthermore, as of August 31, 2019, the FEC is operating with only three commissioners, after one of the four remaining commissioners resigned. This means the FEC is operating without a quorum and, pursuant to FECA, is unable to hold hearings and vote on most actions, including issuing advisory opinions; engaging in rulemaking; initiating litigation or defending the agency in new litigation, including appeals; 85  voting on matters under review and other enforcement actions, including whether to initiate investigations or refer matters to other agencies; and approving audit reports. 86  FEC officials highlighted that the lack of a quorum prevents the FEC from fulfilling the agency’s functions of rulemaking and enforcing campaign finance law. According to an official statement by one remaining commissioner, while the Commission cannot engage in substantive enforcement actions or rulemaking, FEC staff offices will continue their work answering questions; maintaining the FEC website; conducting ongoing audits; and processing complaints, disclosure reports, and other filings. 87  Nevertheless, according to FEC officials, when a Commission vote is required to initiate or continue an investigation or take another action, then action stops, and this is not an insignificant issue, in their view. 

Additionally, on December 5, 2019, FEC officials reported that during fiscal year 2019, the FEC made four permanent senior leadership appointments, including a permanent Inspector General. According to the officials, the FEC also made permanent selections for three senior positions and approved to be filled on a permanent basis three additional senior positions. However, FEC officials stated that, due to the lack of a quorum and in accordance with FEC policy, the Commission has been unable to approve the selections of senior level positions since September 1, 2019. 

FEC officials stated that while the current lack of quorum presents difficulties for the agency, the lack of quorum that the FEC faced in 2008 presented more significant challenges, specifically with regard to the larger number of candidates using public financing in 2008 than in recent elections. An affirmative vote of four commissioners is required to authorize payment to eligible candidates the amounts to which they are entitled, among other things. 88 

The officials stated that although not many candidates apply for public financing, media reports indicate that at least one 2020 presidential candidate may seek public financing.  

> 85 The Commission needs four affirmative votes to initiate a civil action for injunction, declaratory, or other appropriate relief and to defend against a civil action filed in federal court under 52 U.S.C. § 30109(a)(8), which provides that any party aggrieved by an order of the Commission dismissing that party’s complaint or failing to act on the party’s complaint within 120 days may file a petition with the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia. 52 U.S.C. § 30106(c). However, even without a quorum, the Commission can continue to defend previously authorized litigation.
> 86 See 52 U.S.C. §§ 30106(c), 30111(b). The FEC previously lost its quorum in the first 6 months of 2008 when it had only two on-board commissioners after expired recess appointments and during Senate consideration of several nominations. According to the Congressional Research Service report, in late 2007, commissioners amended the FEC's rules of internal procedure to permit executing some duties if the Commission lost its four-member policymaking quorum. According to this report, revisions to FEC's Directive 10 permit the Commission to continue meeting with fewer than four members to approve general public information, such as educational guides; appoint certain staff; and approve other basic administrative and employment matters. Congressional Research Service, Federal Election Commission: Membership and Policymaking Quorum, In Brief, updated September 5, 2019 (R45160). President Trump nominated a new commissioner in September 2017 (and re-nominated the individual in January 2018 and January 2019), but the Senate has not taken up consideration of the nomination as of November 2019.
> 87 Statement of Commissioner Caroline C. Hunter on Departure of Vice Chairman Petersen and Loss of Quorum ,August 26, 2019, available at https://www.fec.gov/about/leadership-and-structure/caroline-c-hunter/ .
> 88 See 52 U.S.C. §30106(c); 26 U.S.C. § 9005.

Page 28 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

• Deadlocked, or split, votes. In May 2019, FEC officials reported data on the number of matters under review that had deadlocked, or split votes, and the four, seated commissioners at the time provided varying perspectives on the meaning of and challenges presented by split votes. 89  The FEC defines “split votes” as most often 3-3 or 2-2 votes or any other combination that does not have four or more votes in the affirmative or negative. Specifically, FEC officials reported that of the 531 matters under review that were considered by the Commission in executive session after January 1, 2012 and that were closed as of April 1, 2019: 90 

o 269 matters under review—or about 51 percent—had at least one split vote among all votes taken on the matter in executive session. 91  The FEC also reported these data by calendar year, and there has been an increase from calendar years 2012 through 2018 in the proportion of matters under review with at least one split vote. In calendar year 2012, 27 of 61 matters under review considered in executive session had at least one split vote. In calendar year 2018, 51 of 86 matters under review considered in executive session had at least one split vote. 

o 84 matters under review—or about 16 percent—had split votes on all votes taken in executive session. 92  There has also been an increase from calendar years 2012 through 2018 in the proportion of matters under review that had split votes on all votes taken during executive session. In calendar year 2012, two of 61 matters under review considered in executive session had split votes on all votes taken. In calendar year 2018, 24 of 86 matters under review considered in executive session had split votes on all votes taken. 

The four commissioners at the time of our review reported varying perspectives on the meaning of and challenges presented by split votes. One commissioner reported that the high number of matters under review that have at least one split vote demonstrates that the Commission has not pursued enforcement actions against those who have violated the law. This commissioner explained that some of the commissioners had consistently voted not to take action on FEC Office of General Counsel recommendations and not to move forward on the more significant violations alleged, while approving moving forward on more minor accusations. 93  Another commissioner stated that split votes can sometimes be instructive in that interested individuals or parties can learn from the arguments the commissioners 

> 89 FEC, “Responses to Questions from the Committee on House Administration,” May 1, 2019.
> 90 The Commission meets regularly in executive sessions that are closed to the public to discuss pending enforcement actions, litigation and other matters that, by law, must be kept confidential.
> 91 According to FEC officials, some matters under review are subject to one vote in one executive session, while others can be considered in multiple executive sessions that might fall in different years. The data reported by calendar year include each matter under review considered by the Commission in executive session in each of the calendar years, so some matters under review appear more than once across calendar years.
> 92 According to FEC officials, the 84 matters under review consist of matters where the votes on all substantive issues were split votes, other than votes to close the files. These 84 “all split” matters under review were also included in the aforementioned 261 matters under review with at least one split vote.
> 93 FEC, “Responses to Questions from the Committee on House Administration,” May 1, 2019. For example, the commissioner stated that violations of the prohibition on independent groups, such as Super PACs, and candidates or their campaigns coordinating activities was difficult to prove before Citizens United v. FEC, and since then, the amount of campaign spending that could be illegally coordinated is even higher. This commissioner stated that some commissioners have blocked the Commission from investigating likely violations of the coordination prohibition, such as a candidate’s close family member setting up a Super PAC that benefits a candidate.

Page 29 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

present on an issue, and then decide how to conduct themselves accordingly, in the absence of guidance. 94  This commissioner also noted that a proposal to have an odd number of commissioners, to avoid deadlocks, brings with it the danger that some may view the “tie-breaking” voter as having partisan motives. 

The other two commissioners stated that data on deadlocked, or split votes, can be misleading and may not accurately characterize the Commission’s overall performance. 95 

For example, they stated that focusing only on the number of “deadlocked” votes in Matters Under Review considered in executive session limits the scope of such analysis to only the most complex and controversial enforcement cases addressed by the Commission. In addition, these two commissioners stated that the Commission’s structure—where no more than three commissioners may be affiliated with the same political party, and four votes are required to take enforcement and regulatory action—was designed so that no single political party or administration can dominate the Commission’s decision making, and that disagreements among commissioners are a natural consequence of the Commission’s unique structure and mandate. These two commissioners added that the FEC is unique among federal agencies in that its core mission involves regulating political association and speech. They stated that they believe overly aggressive regulatory and enforcement actions could harm individuals’ constitutional rights, and that “true deadlocks”—in which at least four commissioners cannot ultimately agree on a way forward—reflect principled disagreements on the proper interpretation and application of the law. They added that while they do not seek to dismiss the significance of disagreements over key campaign finance issues, they believed the disagreements should not overshadow the Commission’s successes in promoting legal compliance and providing the public timely, robust access to the fundraising and spending activities of candidates, parties, and PACs. 

In addition to the issues discussed above, the FEC has provided legislative recommendations to Congress seeking to clarify or amend campaign finance laws, which the FEC believes will strengthen its oversight and enforcement efforts. For example, in December 2018, the FEC submitted a recommendation for Congress to amend FECA to address the practice of PACs fraudulently soliciting contributions to support certain candidates, but subsequently disclosing minimal or no candidate support activities and using the funds primarily to pay vendors and consultants with whom the political committees’ officers appear to have financial interests. 96 

FEC officials stated they believe that enactment of the legislative recommendations would provide the Commission with additional authority to strengthen the agency’s investigation of alleged violations of FECA and related campaign finance requirements in these areas. 

What challenges have literature and selected organizations reported regarding the FEC’s administration and enforcement of campaign finance laws? 

> 94 FEC, “Responses to Questions from the Committee on House Administration,” May 1, 2019.
> 95 FEC, “Responses to Questions from the Committee on House Administration,” May 1, 2019.
> 96 In addition to PACs engaging in fraudulent behavior, FEC officials highlighted two other areas of concern for which it has developed legislative recommendations: (1) the fraudulent misrepresentation of campaign authority by individuals who are not candidates, agents of candidates, or employees of a campaign; and (2) the conversion (or theft) of campaign funds by individuals for personal use, such as paying for personal expenses that would exist irrespective of a political committee’s political activities. The FEC usually submits legislative recommendations to Congress on an annual basis; in December 2018, the FEC unanimously approved and submitted 11 legislative recommendations to Congress.

Page 30 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Through our literature review and interviews with subject-matter specialists on campaign finance from selected organizations, we identified challenges, and learned of varying perspectives, related to the FEC’s administration and enforcement of campaign finance requirements in such areas as (1) timeliness of updating guidance and regulations; (2) enforcement of campaign finance laws; and (3) the completeness of FEC data for enforcement, research, and public transparency. 97 

Timeliness of updating guidance and regulations. Some sources identified the timeliness of FEC updates to guidance and regulations to address changes in the law and technology use as a challenge. For example, various sources noted that the FEC has not issued any new disclosure requirements for corporations since the Supreme Court’s 2010 ruling in Citizens United v. FEC . According to one source, despite the Supreme Court’s emphasis on the importance of disclosure, particularly with respect to corporate contributions, the FEC has not issued disclosure rules that take account of the increase in corporate contributions, including those from incorporated 501(c)(4) organizations. Some literature and organizations also stated that federal law and FEC regulations have not kept pace with changes in use of technology, such as the rise of political advertising on the internet, which we discuss later in this report. 

Enforcement of campaign finance laws. Literature and organizations identified several challenges related to the FEC’s enforcement of campaign finance laws, including some related to the structure of the Commission, and others related to FEC’s ability to audit political committees. FECA established the FEC as a six-member body, where no more than three members from one political party may serve as commissioners, and at least four votes are required to advance rulemaking and enforcement actions. 98  However, some literature and organizations pointed out that increased ideological disagreements among the evenly-split Commission over the past decade have stalled or limited the FEC’s ability to obtain four affirmative votes. For instance, some literature and organizations stated that the FEC’s structure and ideological disagreements among commissioners have resulted in an increasing number of split, or deadlocked, votes related to rulemaking, advisory opinions, and enforcement actions. 

Literature and organizations provided differing views on such deadlocks. Some literature and organizations stated that, as a result of increasing deadlocks, the total amount of fines imposed for campaign finance violations has dropped; the processing of enforcement cases has slowed; and alternative dispute resolutions have taken longer to assign. For example, according to one source, in the 8 years from 2001 through 2008, the FEC assessed an average of $2.66 million in civil fines per year; over the next 8 years, from 2009 through 2016, the average was $561,030 in fines per year. 99  As a result of fewer civil fines in recent years, the limited risk of enforcement action may not deter candidates from noncompliant activities, such as coordinating with “independent” spenders, according to one source. However, some literature we reviewed and organizations we interviewed argued that data on split or deadlocked votes can be    

> 97 To address questions related to perspectives on key aspects of the campaign finance framework, we performed a literature review of scholarly publications, government reports, and publications by nonprofits and think tanks from 2016 through 2018, and conducted nine interviews with subject-matter specialists on campaign finance issues from a nongeneralizable sample of research, advocacy, and practitioner organizations, selected to represent a range of views about campaign finance regulation. For a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology, see enclosure I.
> 98 See 52 U.S.C. § 30106.
> 99 Potter, Trevor, “Money, Politics, and the Crippling of the FEC: A Symposium on the Federal Election Commission’s Arguable Inability to Effectively Regulate Money in American Elections,” Administrative Law Review , Spring 2017, Vol. 69, Issue 2, p. 447-466. Page 31 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance

misunderstood or misleading. For example, in the view of some sources, deadlocked votes may indicate that the Commission is carefully considering what the law does and does not prohibit. Similarly, some organizations stated that the Commission’s structure was designed to prevent political bias and the Commission is functioning as designed. 

Another enforcement challenge identified in literature we reviewed is that the FEC currently does not have the authority to conduct random audits. Audits of political committees, other than those of publicly funded presidential candidates, are only permitted for cause, that is, when the committee appears not to have met the threshold requirements for substantial compliance with FECA. 100  In the view of these sources, the ability to conduct random audits could serve as a deterrent for would-be violators. 

Completeness of FEC data for enforcement, research, and public transparency. Some literature and one organization stated that FEC’s campaign finance data from required filings is not always complete, specific, or consistently reported, making it difficult to analyze these data to uncover possible violations and describe various trends in campaign finance activities. For example, representatives from one organization told us that incomplete reported campaign finance data (e.g., missing addresses for contributors and independent groups) makes it difficult to discern whether there are connections among what are supposed to be independent groups, such as Super PACs and certain 501(c) organizations, and candidates’ campaign committees (e.g., whether the same individual may be participating in various entities’ political activities). 

Additionally, some sources noted that although the FEC records certain information about campaign contributions and contributors, it is difficult for researchers to identify the number of unique individual contributors because there is no unique identifier assigned to individual contributors. For example, according to one source, some contributors may have multiple occupations or residential or business addresses. These sources stated that not having a unique identifier assigned to contributors makes it difficult for researchers to identify individual contributors and their demographic characteristics to analyze donor occupation or industry and other trends, such as the number of individuals who have made contributions, how large those contributions are, and how often or for how long donors have made contributions. In addition, representatives of one organization stated that some groups, such as some Super PACs, that wish to keep the identity of their donors anonymous intentionally file reports after the reporting deadline for an election, so contributions and expenditures are not public until after the election. The representatives stated that the reporting deadlines were established in 1976 and asked why the requirements could not be updated to require reporting on a more ongoing basis (e.g., when or shortly after the contribution or expenditure occurs) so the public has this information ahead of elections. 

Although some sources identified areas for improving FEC data, several of the organizations we interviewed reported that the FEC has provided comprehensive data on contributions and expenditures that have been informative for federal oversight, the public, researchers, and political campaigns. For example, some of the organizations stated that FEC’s campaign finance data assist federal agencies in detecting actions prohibited under federal law and assist the public in identifying undue influence, such as elected representatives who may be acting in the interests of their donors rather than their constituents. Representatives of some organizations also stated that the FEC publishes reported campaign finance data online in a timely manner, and FEC staff are knowledgeable about the data and responsive to questions.  

> 100 52 U.S.C. § 30111(b).

Page 32 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Department of Justice 

How does DOJ identify, investigate, and prosecute potential campaign finance violations? 

According to DOJ officials, the department and its components generally identify matters involving FECA violations through referrals from political campaigns, media reports, and during investigations related to other criminal matters (e.g., mail and wire fraud schemes) not directly involving the violation of campaign finance laws. As the primary investigative agency of the federal government, within DOJ, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) has the authority and responsibility to investigate all violations of federal law (including potential criminal violations of FECA) that are not exclusively assigned to another federal agency. 101 

DOJ and FEC have parallel jurisdiction over FECA violations. DOJ is responsible for prosecuting criminal violations of FECA. The FEC’s exclusive jurisdiction over civil enforcement does not supplant DOJ’s jurisdiction over criminal enforcement. Therefore, DOJ may bring criminal campaign finance prosecutions independent of whether the FEC formally refers a case to DOJ that it has investigated and believes involves potential criminal FECA violations. At the same time, DOJ cannot waive the FEC’s jurisdiction over civil FECA violations. 

In instances when an individual or organization is suspected of criminally violating FECA, DOJ’s investigative and prosecutorial components must generally consult with DOJ’s Public Integrity Section within the Criminal Division to 102 

• conduct any inquiry or preliminary investigation in a matter involving a possible campaign financing offense (including Title 18 offenses); 103 

• issue a subpoena or search warrant in connection with a campaign financing matter; 

• present evidence involving a campaign financing matter to a grand jury; 

• file a criminal charge involving a campaign financing crime; or 

• present an indictment to a grand jury that charges a campaign financing crime. 

The Public Integrity Section oversees the federal prosecution of campaign finance and other election crimes, and assists FBI field offices and U.S. Attorneys’ Offices in the investigation and prosecution of FECA violations. This assistance includes the predicating of campaign finance allegations, structuring investigations, and drafting indictments and other pleadings. The Section’s attorneys also prosecute selected cases against federal, state, and local officials. According to Public Integrity Section officials, because of the complexity of the area for criminal prosecutions, U.S. Attorneys’ Offices must consult the Section before beginning criminal    

> 101 From an investigative perspective, the FBI does not solely focus on campaign finance violations because the bureau’s efforts involve a spectrum of threats with such violations falling under the broader umbrella of public corruption, according to FBI officials.
> 102 According to DOJ officials, in most foreign money cases, the department’s investigative and prosecutorial components must consult with the DOJ National Security Division.
> 103 For example, FECA criminal violations may be prosecuted under the false statements statute, 18 U.S.C. § 1001, and the false records statute, 18 U.S.C. § 1519.

Page 33 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

investigations or prosecutions of campaign finance activities. 104  In addition, according to these officials, the Section has discretion to require more or fewer consults or particular investigative steps, as well as discretion on charging decisions, depending on the circumstances. 

What are the outcomes of DOJ investigations and prosecutions? 

Federal campaign finance violations are subject to three types of enforcement—(1) criminal prosecution by DOJ as felonies either under FECA; federal criminal statutes addressing fraud, obstruction, and false statements; 105  or Title 26 of the U.S. Code; 106  (2) criminal prosecution by DOJ as misdemeanors under FECA; and (3) civil enforcement by the FEC. 107  FECA’s criminal penalties apply to violations involving the making, receiving, or reporting of a contribution, donation, or expenditure. 108  DOJ’s guidance for federal prosecution of election offenses lays out the following elements that constitute a criminal violation of FECA, and associated penalties: 109 

• Aggregate value. For most FECA offenses to be eligible for criminal penalties, the contributions or expenditures at issue must aggregate to $2,000 or more in a calendar year. 

• Intent. FECA violations become potential crimes when they are committed knowingly and willfully by offenders who acted with knowledge that some part of their course of conduct was against the law. According to DOJ guidance, while this is at times a difficult element to satisfy, examples of evidence that has been used to prove knowing and willful violations include an attempt to disguise or conceal financial activity regulated by FECA and proof that the offender is active in political fundraising and is personally well-versed in federal campaign financing laws. 

• Applicable penalties. Violations aggregating $2,000 or more during a calendar year are misdemeanors and subject to a fine (up to $100,000 for each offense by an individual and up to $200,000 for each offense by an organization), or imprisonment for not more than 1 year, or both. Violations aggregating $25,000 or more per calendar year are felonies and subject to a fine (up to $250,000 for each offense by an individual and up to $500,000 for each offense by an organization), or imprisoned for not more than five years, or both. 110                 

> 104 Justice Manual 9-85.210.
> 105 18 U.S.C. § 1341 (frauds and swindles); 18 U.S.C. § 371 (conspiracy to commit offense or to defraud U.S.); 18 U.S.C. § 1343 (fraud by wire, radio, or television); 18 U.S.C. § 1519 (destruction, alteration, or falsification of records in federal investigations and bankruptcy); and 18 U.S.C. § 1001 (statements or entries generally).
> 106 In addition to criminal violations of the tax code, DOJ has enforcement authority over criminal violations involving publicly funded presidential campaigns. See 26 U.S.C. ch. 95 (Presidential Election Campaign Fund), ch. 96 (Presidential Primary Matching Payment Account). According to DOJ officials, Title 26 tax offenses are overseen by the department’s Tax Division.
> 107 FECA creates a statutory distinction between non-knowing and non-willful violations involving any amount, which are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the FEC, and knowing and willful violations involving $2,000 or more within a calendar year, which are subject to both civil enforcement proceedings by the FEC and criminal prosecution by DOJ. 52 U.S.C. § 30109. Criminal prosecution under FECA can be pursued before civil and administrative remedies are exhausted.
> 108 52 U.S.C. § 30109(d).
> 109 Department of Justice, Federal Prosecution of Election Offenses , Eighth Edition, December 2017.
> 110 There are different thresholds for knowing and willful violations of FECA provisions regarding campaign misrepresentations and certain coerced contributions, and a different threshold and penalty for violations regarding

Page 34 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

If an alleged action involving campaign finance was intended to disrupt and impede the function of the FEC or other federal agency, DOJ also may pursue the matter as a conspiracy to defraud the United States. 111  Additionally, DOJ may charge false statements made in records of a federal political entity, such as a political committee, or in reports to the FEC. 112  According to DOJ guidance, the federal mail and wire fraud statutes, which criminalize the use of the mail or interstate wires to further a scheme or artifice to defraud, can provide an additional basis for prosecuting conduct that also violates FECA. 113  Further, DOJ guidance states that conduct in violation of state campaign finance laws, although not subject to FECA’s provisions, may violate other federal laws, like the mail and wire fraud statutes. Federal prosecutors may consider these statutes when evaluating possible charges for unlawful campaign finance conduct. 

During fiscal years 2010 through 2017, 114  DOJ filed 23 FECA-related charges in cases prosecuted by the Public Integrity Section. 115  Additionally, DOJ filed 10 FECA-related charges in cases prosecuted by U.S. Attorneys during fiscal years 2015 through 2017. These charges included statutes such as 52 U.S.C. § 30122 (contributions in the name of another prohibited), 52 U.S.C. § 30116 (limitation on contributions and expenditures) and 52 U.S.C. § 30121 (contributions and donations by foreign nationals). 116 

How has DOJ enforced the foreign national prohibition? 

According to FBI officials, the underlying investigation for campaign finance-related matters can be similar to other types of financial-related investigations. These officials stated that campaign finance violations can occur by the same mechanisms used in financial fraud, despite differing motives and actors. Officials from the Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys and the FBI stated that, given the strict prohibition on foreign money in campaigns at all levels, foreign nationals may use different mechanisms to conceal funding—which generally focus on funneling the foreign money through a U.S. citizen or entity that can make a legal contribution. The FBI’s Foreign Influence Task Force assists the bureau in its efforts to identify and combat foreign influence operations—specifically, threats originating in foreign countries that target U.S.        

> conduit contributions. For example, for conduit contributions, a person that knowingly and willfully commits a violation involving an amount aggregating more than $10,000 shall be imprisoned for not more than 2 years or an amount aggregating $25,000 or more for not more than 5 years, fined not less than 300 percent of the amount involved and not more than the greater of $50,000 or 1,000 percent of the amount involved, or both. 52 U.S.C. § 30109(d).
> 111 18 U.S.C. § 371.
> 112 18 U.S.C. § 1519.
> 113 Department of Justice, Federal Prosecution of Election Offenses , Eighth Edition, December 2017. 18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343.
> 114 We selected the fiscal year 2010 through 2017 time frame to capture information on DOJ’s campaign finance enforcement efforts across multiple presidential administrations. In addition, data for charges filed by U.S. Attorneys’ Offices were the most complete for fiscal years 2015 through 2017 at the time of our review.
> 115 A case is an activity that has resulted in the filing of a complaint, indictment, or information in court.
> 116 FECA charges under Title 52 were previously classified under Title 2, prior to reclassification in September 2014. The total number of FECA-related charges filed by the Public Integrity Section for fiscal years 2010 through 2017 includes charges filed under both Title 2 and Title 52. Officials from the Public Integrity Section also stated that a number of campaign finance investigations and prosecutions were jointly handled by the Section and U.S. Attorney’s offices, so the total number of FECA-related charges filed by the Section during fiscal years 2010 through 2017 (23), and by U.S. Attorneys during fiscal years 2015 through 2017 (10) includes charges that were jointly filed by both DOJ components during these time periods.

Page 35 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

democratic institutions with a specific focus on the U.S. electoral process. 117  FBI officials stated that the Foreign Influence Task Force is aware of federal campaign finance laws and, as appropriate, disseminates information regarding potential violations to the appropriate FBI field offices, which then consult with the Public Integrity Section, as appropriate. 

What challenges have DOJ officials identified facing when investigating and prosecuting potential campaign finance violations? 

DOJ officials identified several challenges related to investigating and prosecuting potential campaign finance violations, such as identifying violations; establishing improper coordination between campaigns and independent expenditure-only groups; identifying donors to tax-exempt groups for law enforcement purposes; and proving criminal intent. 

• Identifying violations. DOJ officials stated that identifying campaign finance violations is difficult because they are often concealed. For example, they stated that in a typical fraud case, the result of the fraud is clearly visible where the criminal conduct is reported by the victims. In campaign finance cases, the violations may not be readily apparent because, if the concealment is successful, there is no complaining victim or public awareness. According to DOJ officials, most campaign finance offenses involve false reporting by political committees to the FEC. For example, in certain cases, referred to as conduit contribution violations, the goal of the offender is to contribute in another individual’s name to hide one’s identity or exceed contribution limits. An individual may contribute his or her money through 50 friends or associates, who may or may not be knowing accomplices. According to DOJ officials, if the individual is successful, a campaign committee receiving these contributions does not know that one individual has contributed money in 50 other individuals’ names, and reports the names of the 50 contributors. If a knowing friend or associate does not complain to the FEC or DOJ, nothing appears to be unusual about those contributions in the view of the FEC, the campaign, the public, or DOJ. 

• Coordination between campaigns and independent expenditure-only groups, such as Super PACs. DOJ officials have stated that bringing criminal charges for potential coordination between campaigns and independent expenditure-only groups is another challenge. The officials explained that these cases require a cooperating witness who is an insider at the given campaign or Super PAC, for example. The officials stated that those witnesses are often involved in the offense and are therefore unlikely to come forward. In 2013 testimony, the then Acting Assistant Attorney General for DOJ’s Criminal Division stated that DOJ faced significant challenges in seeking to establish, in a criminal case, improper coordination between a Super PAC and a campaign or official. 118  Specifically, she stated that the FEC had been unable to reach agreement or declined to take administrative action, such as through advisory opinions, regulations, and matters under review, in several instances of possible coordination. Examples of such instances include: a candidate’s mother running a Super PAC expressly supporting the candidacy; sharing of office facilities   

> 117 The Foreign Influence Task Force is structured as a multi-division task force, including representation from FBI’s Criminal Investigative Division’s Public Corruption Unit and its Public Corruption and Civil Rights Intelligence Unit. The Public Corruption Unit is generally responsible for managing any investigations involving FECA, and personnel in the Public Corruption and Civil Rights Intelligence Unit analyze national trends in election crimes to include campaign finance violations.
> 118 Statement of Mythili Raman, Acting Assistant Attorney General, DOJ Criminal Division, before the Subcommittee on Crime and Terrorism, Committee on the Judiciary, U.S. Senate, at a hearing entitled, “Current Issues in Campaign Finance Law Enforcement,” presented April 9, 2013.

Page 36 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

by political committees and firms providing services to candidates; and candidates themselves soliciting contributions to the supposedly independent committees, among other instances. She explained that, as a result, it would be rare that the evidence could give rise to proof beyond a reasonable doubt of a criminal intent to illegally coordinate through contribution to, or expenditures by, a Super PAC. DOJ officials we interviewed explained that because there is not a consensus position from the FEC on these, and other, factual scenarios, they stated that proving willful intent in such cases can be difficult. 

• Identifying donors to tax-exempt groups for law enforcement purposes. A senior DOJ official stated that campaign finance cases are usually about finding the source of the money involved in potential violations and, for potential coordination violations, identifying who is coordinating donations. This official stated that while criminal investigators can readily identify donors to political committees in public filings to the FEC, criminal investigators face challenges with identifying the original source of funds in cases involving certain 501(c) groups that make independent expenditures. Certain classes of 501(c) organizations, such as 501(c)(4) social welfare organizations, 501(c)(5) labor organizations, and 501(c)(6) trade associations, are required to report their donors to IRS as part of their information returns; 119  however, the names and addresses of those donors are not subject to public disclosure, 120  and DOJ officials stated that the department cannot obtain donor information reported to IRS without a court order. 121  They stated that this makes it difficult to establish a case as a coordination crime or foreign contribution crime. 122  In 2013, the then Acting Assistant Attorney General identified similar challenges in her testimony before Congress. She stated that because disclosure of donors by these classes of 501(c) organizations occurs only through tax returns, it is possible for one of these organizations— one that is created during an election year and spend millions of dollars engaging in campaign activities—to ultimately disclose its donors and activities to the IRS for the first  

> 119

IRS regulations provide that organizations required to file an annual information return generally must provide the names and addresses of persons who contribute $5,000 or more during the taxable year. 26 C.F.R. § 1.6033-2(a)(2)(ii)(f). In 2018, IRS issued Revenue Procedure 2018-38, stating that certain 501(c) organizations—including 501(c)(4) social welfare organizations, 501(c)(5) labor organizations, and 501(c)(6) trade associations among others—are no longer required to report the names and addresses of the donors on Schedule B of the tax return, but they must continue to collect and record this information and make it available to IRS upon request, when needed for tax administration. On July 30, 2019, in Bullock v. IRS, a district court set aside this IRS Revenue Procedure. The court found the Revenue Procedure to be a legislative rule and set it aside because the Treasury Department and IRS did not follow the required notice and public comment procedures for a legislative rule before promulgating it. Bullock v. IRS, 401 F. Supp. 3d 1144 (D. Mont. 2019). On September 10, 2019, IRS published a proposed rule that would require only 501(c)(3) and 527 organizations to report the names and addresses of certain donors on their Forms 990. 501(c)(4), (5), and (6) organizations, among others, would not be required to report such information. 84 Fed. Reg. 47,447 (Sept. 10, 2019).  

> 120

26 U.S.C. § 6104(b), (d).  

> 121

See 26 U.S.C. § 6103(i).  

> 122

For example, according to DOJ officials, for coordination crimes, one piece of evidence that would suggest coordination is if members of an official campaign are contributing to tax-exempt entities that are making purportedly uncoordinated independent expenditures. Without information on the identity of donors to these entities, DOJ officials cannot establish the circumstantial link that someone from the campaign is funding tax-exempt organizations. Additionally, without DOJ knowing the identity of donors to certain tax-exempt organizations, it is difficult to establish whether the donors are foreign nationals, or whether foreign money is being passed through domestic conduits. Page 37 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

time a year or more after the election. This makes it difficult for DOJ investigators to obtain information in a timely manner. 123 

• Proving criminal intent. According to DOJ officials, proving intent in campaign finance cases is the most difficult element, where criminal violations of FECA require proof that the violation was committed knowingly and willfully. DOJ officials stated that a specific issue that can make campaign finance violations difficult to prosecute is that people may be genuinely unaware of the rules, and what may appear to be a knowing violation may in fact be a lack of knowledge or information. 

What challenges have literature and selected organizations reported regarding DOJ’s investigation and prosecution of campaign finance laws? 

Our literature review and interviews identified challenges facing DOJ in its efforts to investigate and prosecute campaign finance violations similar to those identified by DOJ officials. For example, similar to what we heard from DOJ officials, one source reported that prosecuting violations of federal campaign finance laws is challenging because criminal violations require proof that the violation was committed knowingly and willfully. Additionally, some sources reported that a lack of requirements for disclosing information about the sources of money for organizations, such as 501(c)(4) organizations or limited liability companies who contribute to political committees, limits DOJ’s ability to detect and prosecute prohibited contributions and expenditures, including those from foreign entities. 

Coordination between FEC and DOJ 

To what extent, if any, do the FEC and DOJ have guidance and policies to coordinate their efforts to enforce campaign finance violations? 

Both DOJ and the FEC have established guidance and policies which address how to coordinate their respective activities to enforce campaign finance violations. For example, FEC’s enforcement manual 124  and other policies 125  outline the Commission’s relationship with DOJ in the enforcement of FECA, including when to refer potential criminal violations to DOJ, 126  and procedures for processing requests for information and records submitted by DOJ. Further, DOJ’s Public Integrity Section has issued internal guidance to assist federal prosecutors in handling federal election offenses, including campaign finance violations. 127  The guidance identifies DOJ’s recommended practices for coordinating with the FEC in addressing campaign        

> 123 According to DOJ officials, the DOJ Tax Division determines which cases to pursue or refer to the U.S. Attorneys’ Offices involving tax-exempt organizations and formally oversees any tax-focused offenses charged under Title 26 or otherwise.
> 124 Office of General Counsel Enforcement Manual, Federal Election Commission, June 2013. FEC officials stated that the enforcement manual has not been approved by the Commission; however, FEC continues to use the manual as supplemental guidance in its enforcement efforts.
> 125 FEC Memorandum, Request for Records or Information from Federal, State, and Local Government Entities , June 14, 2012.
> 126 52 U.S.C. § 30109(c). FECA states that whenever the Commission refers a violation to DOJ, the DOJ shall report to the Commission any action taken by DOJ regarding the violation. During calendar years 2002 through 2017, FEC referred a total of six matters to DOJ for possible criminal investigation and prosecution, according to FEC data.
> 127 Department of Justice, Federal Prosecution of Election Offenses , Eighth Edition, December 2017.

Page 38 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

finance violations, including identifying an FEC resource that has been helpful in developing DOJ’s campaign finance cases and specifying that inquiries to the FEC should be routed through the Public Integrity Section. The guidance also notes that such practices have led to the development of good relationships between DOJ and FEC personnel, assisted prosecutors and agents in quickly obtaining the information they need from the FEC, and reduced confusion between the agencies—increasing the likelihood of a positive response from the Commission. 128 

While these coordination activities are viewed positively by DOJ and FEC officials, some of the agencies’ coordination activities are not reflected in the jointly signed Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)—entered into in 1977—which sets forth general guidelines for referring potential FECA violations to each other, as well as outlining their respective law enforcement jurisdictions and responsibilities. 129  For example, one of the FEC commissioners stated in follow-up responses to a congressional hearing that some coordination activities are not addressed by the MOU. 130  These activities include determining whether it is possible or advisable for DOJ to share investigative information with the FEC, the timing of certain investigative steps (e.g. the taking of depositions), whether to grant immunity to alleged violators, and whether to consider a global settlement. 131  FEC and DOJ officials stated that such activities are sometimes “ad hoc” and occur on a case-by-case basis since they are not documented in the MOU or other documents. 

In addition, DOJ’s guidance for prosecuting federal election offenses states that the MOU “no longer reflects current congressional intent or Department policy.” 132  DOJ officials told us that the department abrogated the MOU following the enactment of BCRA. As a result, officials said DOJ no longer considers the agreement to be binding policy, though they continue to follow the “spirit” of the agreement in coordinating with the FEC. FEC officials, however, stated that they consider the MOU to be in effect and that it is the current guidance used to coordinate the two agencies’ enforcement efforts regarding violations of campaign finance laws. The MOU has not been updated since 1977, and while the FEC and DOJ made efforts to update the MOU in 2003, 2007, and 2012, the agencies were not able to agree on proposed revisions. 

DOJ and FEC officials provided differing perspectives on the need to update the MOU or develop or update other guidance addressing coordination between the two agencies. For example, in July 2019, the FEC commissioners told us that they did not identify a need to update the MOU because, in their view, the current MOU meets the agency’s enforcement needs. They also noted that there are a limited number of staff from both agencies who coordinate with each other and understand how that coordination should work. However, DOJ      

> 128 During calendar years 2002 through 2017, DOJ referred a total of 15 matters to FEC for possible civil enforcement, according to FEC data.
> 129 Under 52 U.S.C. 30109(a)(5)(C), if the Commission “determines that there is probable cause to believe that a knowing and willful violation has occurred, the Commission may refer such apparent violation to the Attorney General of the United States.” Pursuant to that statute, in 1977, the Commission and the DOJ entered into a MOU. 43 Fed. Reg. 5441 (Feb. 8, 1978). The MOU is not intended to confer any procedural or substantive rights on any person in any manner before DOJ, FEC, or any court or federal agency.
> 130 This information reflects the written responses provided by the FEC to the U.S. Senate Committee on Rules and Administration, Hearing on Nominations to the Federal Election Commission and Responses to Post-Hearing Questions , July 6, 2007.
> 131 A global settlement is where there are multiple parties or multiple cases and all the parties reach a settlement that fully and completely resolves all outstanding disputes.
> 132 Federal Prosecution of Election Offenses , page 170. Page 39 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance

officials stated that an updated MOU would have a positive effect, reflecting the good cooperation and working relationship between the two agencies. 

We have previously reported that the implementation of collaborative mechanisms can help agencies achieve their joint objectives. 133  FEC and DOJ leadership could benefit from engaging such a mechanism in the form of an updated MOU, or a written agreement. Written agreements can also incorporate any consensus reached among the agencies regarding their coordination activity’s leadership, accountability, roles and responsibilities, or resources. 

Further, Standards for Internal Controls in the Federal Government states that periodic review of policies, procedures, and related control activities should occur to determine their continued relevance and effectiveness in achieving identified objectives or addressing related risks. In addition, documentation provides a means to retain organizational knowledge and mitigate the risk of having that knowledge limited to a few personnel. 134  Although DOJ and FEC officials noted that coordination between the two agencies works well, they provided varying perspectives on the need to document their coordination mechanisms. While the limited number of staff that coordinate between FEC and DOJ indicate that they are working together, without documentation of those mechanisms consistent with internal control standards, the agencies risk having knowledge limited just to those few personnel who could change positions or leave the agencies, taking that knowledge with them. Reviewing and updating, as appropriate, coordination practices between the FEC and DOJ, to include the MOU or other guidance, could help the agencies ensure that written guidance reflects current practices between the agencies and better ensure that coordination between FEC and DOJ occurs consistently and effectively when enforcing campaign finance law. 

Internal Revenue Service 

How does the IRS identify non-compliant tax-exempt organizations, and what are the outcomes of the agency’s enforcement actions? 

According to IRS documents, within the IRS’s Tax Exempt and Government Entities Division, Exempt Organizations is the function with oversight responsibility for organizations seeking exempt status and it also examines exempt organizations’ operations and information returns, including the Form 990-series returns. The IRS may conduct an examination to ensure that (1) the organization is organized and operates in accordance with its exempt purpose(s); (2) the organization’s information return is complete, correct, and contains all public information required; and (3) if the organization is liable for other taxes, the organization has paid the correct amount of tax. According to IRS officials, during an examination, potential noncompliance related to political campaign intervention is evaluated using a facts and circumstances analysis. If the IRS determines noncompliance, the IRS may revoke the organization’s tax-exempt status or assess excise taxes for certain types of violations. In addition, in certain circumstances, the IRS can request the Department of Justice to bring an action to enjoin political expenditures by a 501(c)(3) organization under the Internal Review Code. 135          

> 133 GAO, Managing for Results: Key Consideration for Implementing Interagency Collaborative Mechanisms ,GAO-12-1022 (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 27, 2012).
> 134 GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government ,GAO-14-704G (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 2014).
> 135 26 U.S.C. § 7409(a).

Page 40 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

According to IRS officials, the agency identifies returns for potential examinations of tax-exempt organizations’ violations of the standard for political campaign intervention 136  through sources such as data-driven analytics, referrals, and compliance strategies. 137  The officials added that determining the permissible level of political campaign intervention depends on the organization’s tax-exempt status. For example, under the Internal Revenue Code, 501(c)(3) organizations are subject to a strict prohibition against political campaign intervention, where they may not participate in or intervene in any political campaign on behalf of or in opposition to any candidate for public office. 138  These organizations may participate in nonpartisan activities that do not support or oppose candidates. In contrast, a 501(c)(4) organization may engage in some political campaign intervention, so long as it continues to be primarily engaged in activities that promote social welfare. 139  (See enclosure VI for some of the types of tax-exempt organizations and rules for political campaign intervention). 

During fiscal years 2010 through 2017, the IRS conducted and closed 226 examinations related to tax-exempt organizations’ non-compliant political campaign intervention. 140  A majority (97 percent—219 examinations) of these examinations were identified through the IRS’s data-driven analytics efforts (57 percent—129 examinations) and referrals (40 percent—90 examinations) from other entities (e.g., other federal agencies) and 91 percent (205 examinations) focused on 501(c)(3) organizations. In addition, during this period, a majority of the examinations did not result in the IRS revoking or terminating an organization’s exempt status, or imposing an excise tax for an organization’s political campaign intervention. For example, IRS reported that for 127 (56 percent) of the 226 examinations conducted, an organization was issued a written advisory and there was  no change to the organization’s tax-exempt status. 141  For 77 (34 percent) of the 226 examinations conducted by the IRS there was  no change to an organization’s exempt status or tax liability, and there were no issues for which a written advisory was warranted. 142  

> 136

Political campaign intervention includes any and all activities that favor or oppose one or more candidates for public office. See, e.g., 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(c)(4)-1(a)(2)(ii).  

> 137

Based on IRS documents, data-driven analytics use data, models, and queries to identify information returns (Form 990) for potential noncompliance. Different weights are assigned to basic information return characteristics. The weights are added together to obtain a composite score for each return, which are then ranked in numerical sequence; the higher the score the greater probability of an issue warranting examination. Referrals are complaints of exempt organizations’ noncompliance made by third parties, including the public and other parts of IRS. Compliance strategies, approved by the agency’s Tax Exempt and Government Entities Division’s Compliance Governance Board, identify, prioritize and allocate resources to address issues that are considered to be priorities within the division’s filing population.  

> 138

See 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3); 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(c)(3)-1(b)(3)(ii).  

> 139

See 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(c)(4)-1(a)(2)(ii).  

> 140

Based on IRS guidance, the objectives of an examination are to ensure that the organization is organized and operated in accordance with its exempt purpose(s); IRS Form 990 (Return of Organization Exempt From Income Tax) is complete, correct, and contains all public information required; and if the organization is liable for other taxes, the organization has paid the correct amount of tax.  

> 141

Generally, a written advisory is appropriate when there are: (1) some aspect of an organization's activities or operations, if enlarged or ongoing, may jeopardize the organization's exempt status, such as a proposed expansion of an unrelated business income producing activity that could become a primary purpose for an Internal Revenue Code 501(c)(3) organization; (2) changes to tax addressed in separate reports; (3) tax change issues that are below tolerances; (4) identified delinquencies, imposition of penalties, and whether reasonable cause was established; or (5) other compliance issues (not including status or tax change issues) which are appropriate to call to the attention of the organization. Internal Revenue Manual, 4.75.15.4(3).  

> 142

We requested data on closed examinations from IRS beginning in fiscal year 2010 because the Supreme Court and federal appeals court rulings in Citizens United v. FEC and SpeechNow.org v. FEC changed the campaign Page 41 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Figure 10 provides a more detailed description of the sources and dispositions of the closed examinations as well as the types of tax-exempt organizations examined during fiscal years 2010 through 2017. 

Figure 10: Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Closed Examinations, Tax-Exempt Organizations’ Compliance (In Connection with Political Campaign Intervention), Fiscal Years 2010 through 2017 

> a

The “No change” code is used to close an examination with no changes or adjustments (all significant return information is complete and correct) or when unable to complete a church examination within the two-year period provided by 26 U.S.C. § 7611(c)(1)(A) .

> b

The “Written advisory–no Form 5666 required” code is used to close examinations that issue written advisories. Advisories can include reference to secured delinquent returns, changes to related returns, miscellaneous civil penalties imposed and non-compliant issues of the organization. Form 5666 is the Tax Exempt Government Entities Referral Information Report. 

> c

The “other” category includes: (1) Delinquent Return Secured, (2) Delinquent Related Return Secured, (3) Change to Related Return, (4) Revocation – Agreed, (5) Written Advisory-Form 5666 Required, (6) Regulatory/Revenue, (7) Unagreed Protest to Appeals, (8) Unagreed – Without Protest, (9) Termination, (10) Unagreed Revocation – Without Protest. 

What is IRS’s role in enforcing FECA’s foreign national prohibition? 

According to IRS officials, the IRS administers and enforces federal tax law and it plays no role in enforcing FECA’s foreign national prohibition. 143  IRS officials added that examiners do not review the national origin of sources of donations reported by a tax-exempt organization on the 

finance landscape, enabling corporations (including nonprofit corporations) to (1) use their general treasuries to make unlimited independent expenditures and electioneering communications and (2) make unlimited contributions to Super PACs. After these decisions in 2010, corporations, such as tax-exempt social welfare organizations (501(c)(4) organizations) that are incorporated, could make independent expenditures, electioneering communications, and contribute to Super PACs. We recognize that some of the examinations closed in 2010 may include activity prior to this time frame.  

> 143

Federal tax law does not prohibit foreign donations to tax-exempt organizations. 

Disposition         

> No change •77 examinations I34 %
> Data driven analytics
> 129 examinations

I 57 %     

> 501(c)(3)
> 205 examinations 191 %
> 501(c)(4)
> 14 examinatio ns

I 6%      

> Referrals Compliance strategies
> 90 examlna ri ons

I 40%  7 examinations  13%     

> 501(c)(5) 527
> 1e•aminati on

I <1 % 6 e,am inations  I 3% 

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• •••••••• 

# ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 

# t tWr itten advisory-no Form 5666 requiredb 127 examina ti ons  156 %                

> Other"
> 22 examinations 110 %
> Source :GAO ana tysis of lnte<na lRevenue SeNice data .

I GA0-20-66R Page 42 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

agency’s IRS Form 990-series (Return of Organization Exempt From Income Tax) and do not assess an organization’s compliance with FECA provisions during audits. 

What challenges have IRS officials identified facing when administering and enforcing requirements related to tax-exempt organizations and political campaign intervention? 

IRS officials we interviewed identified facing various challenges when administering and enforcing requirements related to tax-exempt organizations and political campaign intervention. These officials noted questions related to the clarity of certain aspects of statute and regulation governing tax-exempt organizations and political campaign intervention. Specifically, they identified challenges related to obtaining complete, timely, and accurate information and navigating statutes and regulations in monitoring compliance, as discussed below. 

• Obtaining complete and accurate information. According to IRS officials, some tax-exempt organizations are not forthcoming or complete in reporting information on their information returns, but this is a challenge they stated they face from filers in general (e.g., individuals not reporting their full income) and is not specific to tax-exempt organizations. IRS officials also told us that the information return for tax-exempt organizations, or Form 990, is fairly detailed, and accurate completion of the form by filers partly depends on how completely the filing organization understands the terms and questions in the form. For example, the organization should understand the difference between “lobbying” (attempting to influence legislation) and “political campaign activities” (directly or indirectly participating in, or intervening in, any political campaign on behalf of or in opposition to any candidate for public office). IRS officials told us that incomplete and inaccurate information reported on information returns presents a challenge because, in general, tax administration consists of obtaining information from filers. It is a voluntary compliance system, and filers not fully or accurately reporting information (e.g., the full amount of political campaign activity expenditures) limits the IRS’s ability to carry out its basic functions. To help address filers’ confusion or misunderstanding of certain terms on the form 990, IRS officials stated that they provide education about political campaign intervention on the IRS website. 

• Navigating statutes and regulations in monitoring compliance. IRS officials told us that applying certain aspects of statutes and regulations can be challenging in their efforts to monitor exempt organizations’ compliance with requirements related to political campaign intervention. For example, they explained that, when determining whether an organization should maintain exempt status under Internal Revenue Code sections 501(c)(3) and 501(c)(4)-(6), IRS examiners apply the law to the facts and circumstances of each case and conduct a qualitative analysis using a set of specified factors to do so. 144  According to IRS officials, the IRS has published a number of revenue rulings on what is political campaign intervention, most recently Revenue Ruling 2007-41. 145  However, some IRS officials told us   

> 144 For example, according to IRS guidance relevant to 501(c)(3) organizations, during this facts and circumstances analysis, IRS examiners are to consider a variety of factors to determine whether an organization’s communications are considered political campaign intervention, including whether the communication identifies a candidate for public office, expresses approval or disapproval for one or more candidates’ positions or actions, is delivered close in time to an election, makes reference to voting or an election, and the communication is not part of an ongoing series of substantially similar advocacy communications by the organization on the same issue, among other factors. See IRS Revenue Ruling 2007-41, Situations 14-16.
> 145 IRS Revenue Ruling 2007-41 provides 21 examples illustrating the application of the facts and circumstances analysis to different factual situations relevant to 501(c)(3) organizations (Revenue Ruling 2007-41). According to IRS officials, IRS generally applies the same facts and circumstances analysis in the context of 501(c)(4) organizations. See, e.g., Revenue Ruling 2004-6.

Page 43 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

that existing guidance is not sufficiently clear about what constitutes political campaign intervention (e.g., examining a 501(c)(3) organization engaging in issue advocacy near the time of an election may be particularly challenging, as that advocacy can be very close to advocating for a specific candidate). 146 

Additionally, as discussed above, a 501(c)(4) organization may engage in some political campaign intervention as long as it continues to be primarily engaged in activities that promote the social welfare. However, some IRS officials stated that no clear and concise guidance exists regarding the extent to which organizations (other than 501(c)(3) organizations) can participate in political campaign intervention. Furthermore, IRS officials stated that a prohibition in recent appropriations acts limits the IRS’s ability to develop or issue new guidance or regulations related to the standard for determining whether an organization is operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare. 147  IRS officials stated that additional clarification of the law and the ability to issue new regulations and guidance could aid in their efforts to review organizations’ compliance with this section of the code. 

According to IRS officials, the overarching challenge is that in the absence of “bright line” rules regarding what constitutes political campaign intervention (currently a facts and circumstances analysis), or the extent to which organizations (other than 501(c)(3) organizations) can participate in political campaign intervention, there will always be challenges in applying the law to a particular set of facts. 

What challenges have literature and selected organizations reported related to the IRS’s administration and enforcement of requirements for tax-exempt organizations and political campaign intervention? 

Literature we reviewed and organizations we interviewed identified challenges related to the IRS’s administration and enforcement of requirements related to tax-exempt organizations and political campaign intervention in areas such as IRS guidance and enforcement efforts.  

> 146

Section 501(c)(3) organizations are prohibited from participating in, or intervening in, any political campaign on behalf of or in opposition to any candidate for public office. In addition, an organization will not qualify under § 501(c)(3) if more than an insubstantial part of its activities is not in furtherance of an exempt purpose. See 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(c)(3)-1(c)(1). Such exempt purposes are religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary, or educational purposes, or to foster national or international amateur sports competition, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals. 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3).  

> 147

In 2013, the Treasury Department and IRS proposed a regulation regarding 501(c)(4) organizations, more clearly defining activities that do not further the social welfare. The proposed rule would have replaced the language in the existing regulation – “participation or intervention in political campaigns on behalf of or in opposition to any candidate for public office” – with a new term – “candidate-related political activity” – and defined the term with examples of activities that would be considered “candidate-related political activity.” In this notice, IRS also requested comments from the public regarding the standard under current regulations that considers a tax-exempt social welfare organization to be operated exclusively for the social welfare if it is “primarily” engaged in activities that promote the common good and general welfare of the people of the community. 78 Fed. Reg. 71,535 (Nov. 29, 2013). IRS officials stated that the agency received over 100,000 public comments on the proposed regulation. However, recent appropriations acts have prohibited IRS from issuing, revising, or finalizing any new regulations or other guidance related to the standard which is used to determine whether an organization is operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare for purposes of 501(c)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (including the proposed regulations published at 78 Fed. Reg. 71,535 (Nov. 29, 2013)). See, e.g., Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020, Pub. L. No. 116-93, div. C., title I, § 122, 133 Stat. 2317, 2444 (2019). Page 44 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

IRS guidance. Literature we reviewed and organizations we interviewed identified challenges related to IRS’s guidance regarding tax-exempt organizations and political campaign intervention. For example, some literature and organizations noted that it can be challenging for tax-exempt organizations to understand and navigate tax law related to political campaign intervention. These sources noted that the IRS has published guidance materials that have helped inform and clarify requirements for organizations—such as continuing professional education training materials and its 2007 revenue ruling on 501(c)(3) organizations and political campaign intervention—but additional materials could aid organizations’ understanding. 148  In particular, these sources identified the need for more updated guidance on how to consider or define political campaign intervention for 501(c)(3) and 501(c)(4) organizations and on internet communications for tax-exempt organizations, such as what could be considered an issue ad or a political campaign ad. 

• For example, with regard to 501(c)(3) organizations, according to some sources, the IRS has not, in its guidance, clarified what constitutes political campaign intervention, which is prohibited for 501(c)(3) organizations, and issue advocacy, which is generally allowed for such organizations. These sources noted that this lack of clarity has caused some confusion for 501(c)(3) organizations attempting to comply with the law. For example, a 501(c)(3) organization that promotes helping the homeless may engage in issue advocacy by encouraging its supporters to fight homelessness and to consider this issue when deciding how to vote. However, the 501(c)(3) organization risks entering into political campaign intervention if it is seen as supporting a particular party or candidate, which may jeopardize its status as a charitable organization under 501(c)(3). 149 

• Some literature and organizations also noted that it can be challenging for organizations to understand IRS guidance regarding the extent to which 501(c)(4) organizations can participate in political campaign intervention because the IRS has not clearly defined aspects of this guidance. More specifically, as mentioned above, under the Internal Revenue Code, organizations that operate “exclusively for the promotion of social welfare” are eligible for 501(c)(4) tax-exempt status. Some literature noted that a Treasury Department regulation regarding 501(c)(4) organizations defines “exclusively” in a lenient manner, by stating that a 501(c)(4) organization may engage in political campaign intervention as long as the organization continues to be primarily engaged in activities that promote the social welfare. 150  In addition, according to some sources, the IRS has not clearly defined what it means to be “primarily engaged” in social welfare activities or, as IRS officials stated above, the extent to which organizations (other than 501(c)(3) organizations) can participate in political campaign intervention.     

> 148 IRS Revenue Ruling 2007-41.
> 149 As noted earlier, IRS issued Revenue Ruling 2007-41 which is intended to help 501(c)(3) organizations distinguish issue advocacy from political campaign intervention, among other things. The guidance includes 21 examples illustrating the application of the facts and circumstances analysis to different factual situations. Rev. Rul. 2007-41. However, representatives of one organization stated that applying IRS’s guidance can be difficult for nonprofits. They stated that advocacy is a spectrum, and it can be difficult for organizations to figure out where the lines are between issue advocacy and political campaign intervention. They stated that navigating complex campaign finance and related internal revenue statutes, regulations, and guidance to ensure nonprofits are not in violation may require hiring lawyers and accountants that smaller, grassroots nonprofits often cannot afford. In their view, this can deter smaller nonprofits’ advocacy and engagement in the democratic process.
> 150 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(c)(4)-1(a)(2)(i). According to IRS officials, the regulatory interpretation of “exclusively” as “primarily” originates from Better Business Bureau v. United States, 326 U.S. 279 (1945). See Contracting Plumbers v. United States, 488 F.2d 684 (2d Cir. 1973); Commissioner v. Lake Forest, 305 F.2d 814 (4th Cir. 1962).

Page 45 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

IRS enforcement efforts. Some sources identified challenges in IRS’s enforcement efforts, particularly related to (1) regulating tax-exempt organizations described in section 501(c) that engage in political campaign intervention; (2) examining exempt organizations to determine whether they are violating regulations; and (3) revoking exempt status of organizations that primarily engage in political campaign intervention. For example, according to some sources, in recent years IRS has conducted more limited enforcement on tax-exempt organizations that engage in political campaign intervention because of prior questions about how IRS was selecting and reviewing certain organizations’ exempt status applications based on the organization’s name, among other things. 151 

In addition, representatives of organizations we met with held varying views on the role they believed the IRS should have in regulating exempt organizations’ political campaign intervention. Some stated that the IRS should not regulate exempt organizations’ political campaign intervention because it is not its mission, and the IRS does not have the subject matter expertise and it would be a misuse of its resources to take on responsibility for overseeing such requirements. Some stated that IRS’s attempts to address various issues related to tax-exempt organizations’ political campaign intervention through proposed rules are issues that should be left for Congress to handle. 152  However, representatives of another organization stated that IRS should continue to have a role in regulating the political campaign intervention of tax-exempt organizations because many of the groups spending money during campaigns, particularly 501(c)(4) and 501(c)(6) organizations, are registered with the IRS, not the FEC, and without an IRS role in regulating them, their political campaign intervention would be mostly unregulated. 

Perspectives of Literature and Selected Organizations on Key Aspects of the Federal Campaign Finance Framework 

We obtained perspectives from literature and selected organizations on key aspects of the campaign finance framework, including the scope and nature of campaign finance laws; how the framework has addressed developments in technology and foreign influence in elections; the purposes served by contribution limits and how these limits are enforced; the benefits and costs of unlimited independent expenditures; and the extent to which the sources of campaign funding should be disclosed. To obtain the perspectives, we conducted a literature review of scholarly publications, government reports, and publications by nonprofits and think tanks from 2016 through 2018, and conducted interviews with subject-matter specialists on campaign finance     

> 151 In 2013, The Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration reported that IRS used inappropriate criteria that identified for review certain organizations applying for tax ‑exempt status based upon their names or policy positions instead of indications of potential political campaign intervention. Specifically, the report found that ineffective management 1) allowed inappropriate criteria to be developed and stay in place for more than 18 months, 2) resulted in substantial delays in processing certain applications, and 3) allowed unnecessary information requests to be issued. The report made nine recommendations to address these issues. Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA), Inappropriate Criteria Were Used to Identify Tax-Exempt Applications for Review , May 14, 2013, Reference Number: 2013-10-053. In a follow-up audit, TIGTA found that the IRS had taken significant actions to eliminate the selection of potential political cases based on names and policy positions, expedite processing of 501(c)(4) applications, and eliminate unnecessary information requests. TIGTA, Status of Actions Taken to Improve the Processing of Tax-Exempt Applications Involving Political Campaign Intervention , March 27, 2015, Reference Number 2015-10-025.
> 152 As discussed above, in 2013, IRS proposed a regulation regarding 501(c)(4) organizations and activities that do not further the social welfare. 78 Fed. Reg. 71,535 (Nov. 29, 2013). In subsequent years, appropriations acts have prohibited IRS from issuing, revising, or finalizing any new regulations or other guidance in this area. See, e.g., Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020, Pub. L. No. 116-93, div. C, title I, § 122,133 Stat. 2317, 2444 (2019).

Page 46 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

issues from a nongeneralizable sample of research, advocacy, and practitioner organizations, selected to represent a range of views about the campaign finance framework. 153  The literature and organizations provided a range of perspectives about these aspects of the campaign finance framework, presented below. 

What are the perspectives of literature and selected organizations regarding the scope and nature of campaign finance laws? 

Literature and organizations reported various perspectives on the scope and nature of the current campaign finance statutory and regulatory framework. The campaign finance framework rests on two major laws enacted in 1974 and 2002, and Supreme Court and lower court rulings that have invalidated portions of those laws in intervening years. The FEC has further interpreted these laws through rulemaking, advisory opinions, and enforcement actions. Given these developments, literature and organizations reported a range of perspectives regarding (1) federal statutes and regulations on campaign finance requirements; (2) how campaign finance statutes and regulations address changes in technology; and (3) how campaign finance statutes and regulations address prohibited foreign influence in U.S. elections, which we discuss below. 

Perspectives on federal campaign finance statutes and regulations. The literature we reviewed and organizations we interviewed presented various perspectives on federal campaign finance statutes and regulations. For example, some literature and organizations stated that campaign finance and related tax statutes and regulations are overly complex, and some definitions of activities within the campaign finance framework—such as political campaign intervention, major purpose, and coordination—are vague and need to be clarified or simplified. As one example, some literature we reviewed and organizations we interviewed stated that the FEC’s definitions for determining whether an organization is a political committee are not clear, which can contribute to confusion for organizations, such as tax-exempt organizations, as to whether or not they are a political committee that should register with the FEC. FECA defines a political committee as any committee, club, association, or other group of persons which receives contributions or makes expenditures in excess of $1,000 in a calendar year. 154 

Additionally, the Supreme Court held in Buckley v. Valeo that only organizations under the control of a federal candidate or whose major purpose is the election or defeat of federal candidates may be regulated as political committees. 155  However, according to some literature and organizations we interviewed, neither federal law nor the FEC have clearly defined how to measure an organization’s major purpose. 156 

One article noted that because the FEC has not defined a numerical threshold of expenditures for determining an organization’s major purpose, some practitioners have interpreted the      

> 153 We reviewed literature published from calendar years 2016 through 2018. This time frame includes the 2016 U.S. Presidential election, and extends through the end of the most recent calendar year at the time of our review. For a more detailed discussion of our scope and methodology, see enclosure I.
> 154 52 U.S.C. § 30101(4). Under FECA, political committees must raise and spend money in accordance with contribution limits, source prohibitions, and disclosure requirements.
> 155 Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. at 79–80.
> 156 FEC uses a case-by-case analysis of an organization’s conduct to determine whether it has the major purpose of engaging in federal campaign activity. FEC’s approach is described in its 2007 Supplemental Explanation and Justification on Political Committees. 72 Fed. Reg. 5,596 (Feb. 7, 2007). In 2007, the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia held that the FEC decision to use a case-by-case approach, rather than rulemaking, to apply the major purpose test was not arbitrary and capricious. Shays v. FEC , 511 F. Supp. 2d 19 (D.D.C. 2007).

Page 47 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

threshold to be 49 percent, so that certain organizations, such as 501(c)(4) organizations, can spend up to 49 percent of their total expenditures on federal campaign activity without satisfying the major purpose test and becoming subject to FEC requirements for political committees. Representatives of some organizations stated that unclear FEC definitions create uncertainty regarding whether some politically active organizations, such as some 501(c)(4) organizations, should be registered as political committees and subject to FECA reporting and disclosure requirements, as discussed earlier. As noted above, in order to qualify for their tax-exempt status, 501(c)(4) organizations must satisfy a primary purpose test; they may engage in some political campaign intervention provided that they continue to be primarily engaged in activities to promote the social welfare. However, according to IRS officials and other sources, the IRS has not issued clear and concise guidance regarding the extent to which 501(c)(4) organizations can engage in political campaign intervention. Furthermore, some sources noted that some 501(c)(4) organizations have taken advantage of the vague major purpose and primary purpose criteria to avoid registering as political committees and being subject to disclosure requirements. 

Perspectives on how campaign finance statutes and regulations address changes in technology. The literature we reviewed and organizations we interviewed presented various perspectives on how campaign finance statutes and regulations have addressed changes in the use of technology over time. According to some sources included in our review, campaign finance statutes and regulations have not kept up with the rapid expansion of campaign spending on the internet and do not regulate online political ads to the same extent as television, radio, and print ads. According to these sources, this creates disclosure and disclaimer gaps, which can exclude a large amount of campaign spending from regulation. For example, some sources highlighted that BCRA’s definition of regulated electioneering communications applies to “broadcast, cable, or satellite communications,” but not to internet communications. 157  As a result, some sources stated that voters do not have information about the sponsors of many internet communications that refer to a candidate, which could help voters identify whether communications are real, or potential sources of disinformation. 158  Some literature, on the other hand, noted that, while expanding the definition of electioneering communications to include internet communications would be helpful, it would not provide transparency on ads that do not mention a candidate’s name. Some sources discussed other proposals that have been put forward to provide more information about sponsors of internet ads, for example proposed legislation that would require that technology companies maintain a “political file” (or public, searchable database) of online ads, as television and radio broadcasters are required to do. Currently, contracts for television ad purchases are made public through the Federal Communication Commission, but contracts for internet ad purchases are not. Representatives of one organization stated that while legislation that specifically regulates online political communications has not been enacted, many of the FEC’s rules that apply to broadcast media are not statutorily confined and therefore could be updated to apply to new media.   

> 157 52 U.S.C. § 30104(f)(3)(A)(i).
> 158 Although the definition of electioneering communications does not include internet communications, certain internet communications, such as those that meet the definition of public communication, are subject to disclaimer requirements. As discussed later in this report, the definition of public communication includes communications that are placed for a fee on another person's website. See 11 C.F.R. § 100.26. FEC regulations also require that all internet websites of political committees available to the general public include disclaimers. 11 C.F.R. § 110.11(a). See also Advisory Opinion 2017-12 (Take Back Action Fund) (finding that the 501(c)(4) organization that requested the advisory opinion was required to include disclaimers on paid Facebook image and video advertising that expressly advocated election or defeat of clearly identified federal candidates).

Page 48 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

According to some sources, current FEC regulations also do not sufficiently address requirements for disclaimers for political communications made on the internet. For example, some sources noted that FEC regulations related to online ads only apply to ads that are “purchased for a fee,” which often excludes political communications through YouTube and other online platforms. Other sources noted that under FEC regulations, certain internet ads, such as those in games on mobile devices, may be exempted from disclaimer requirements through exceptions in the regulations referred to as the “small items” and “impracticable” exceptions for disclaimers. More specifically, these exceptions state that if the size of the ad is small (such as the length of a phrase on a bumper sticker, or a small online ad) or a disclaimer cannot be “conveniently printed” on the ad, a disclaimer is not required. 159  According to one article, some major internet companies have argued that their ads should not be obligated to have disclaimers because of their small size. 160  However, the FEC has not taken an official position on the application of these exceptions to small online ads. 161  Some sources also reported that FEC regulations have not considered the changing landscape of political advertising and thus have not developed requirements for things such as “native ads” (ads that match the editorial content of media or technology platforms, also known as sponsored content) or bots, which automatically generate political ads. 

The FEC expanded disclaimer requirements to internet communications in 2006 by amending the definition of public communication to include paid internet advertising placed on another person’s website. 162  Since 2011, the FEC has sought comments on several issues related to technology and disclaimers on public communications distributed over the internet. 163  Most recently, on March 26, 2018, the FEC published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking related to the definition of public communication to determine whether to include paid internet advertising placed on another person’s “internet-enabled device or application” and examining two alternatives for disclaimer requirements on public communications distributed over the internet. 164  The FEC has held public meetings and a public hearing to inform the rulemaking, but has not yet finalized the rule. 

According to some literature and organizations, some technology companies have started to regulate online political speech through transparency requirements, such as requiring political advertisers to confirm their identity and location before purchasing ads, but varying definitions of political speech across platforms and between platforms and the FEC can cause confusion. Additionally, according to some sources, the fact that technology companies are willing to self-       

> 159 See 11 C.F.R. § 110.11(f).
> 160 See Advisory Opinion 2010-19 (Google); Advisory Opinion 2011-09 (Facebook).
> 161 The Commission has, however, stated in an advisory opinion that the 501(c)(4) organization that requested the advisory opinion “must include all of the disclaimer information specified by 52 U.S.C. § 30120(a) on its proposed Facebook Image and Video advertising.” While the Commission unanimously agreed to that conclusion, Commissioners relied upon different rationales to reach it. Advisory Opinion 2017-12 (Take Back Action Fund).
> 162 71 Fed. Reg. 18,589 (Apr. 12, 2006).
> 163 Specifically, in 2011, the FEC published an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking related to disclaimers on certain internet communications, and re-opened the issue for public comment in 2016 and 2017. 76 Fed. Reg. 63,567 (Oct. 13, 2011). On November 2, 2016, FEC published a notice seeking comment on several technology-related proposals, including updating the term “public communication” to include communications placed for a fee on another person’s “internet-enabled device or application” in addition to communications placed for a fee on another person’s “Web site.” 81 Fed. Reg. 76,416 (Nov. 2, 2016).
> 164 83 Fed. Reg. 12,864 (Mar. 26, 2018).

Page 49 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

regulate does not mean that it will always be in their interest to do so, that they will do so effectively, or that it obviates the need for the federal government to take steps to regulate online campaign-related speech. For example, according to some literature, technology companies may have conflicts of interest in promoting increased transparency (i.e., requiring more transparency may negatively affect their profits), and they could be susceptible to unintentional political bias in how they regulate. 

Perspectives on how campaign finance statutes and regulations address prohibited foreign influence in U.S. elections. The literature we reviewed and organizations we interviewed presented various perspectives on how federal campaign finance laws address prohibited foreign influence in U.S. elections. As previously mentioned, based on federal campaign finance laws, foreign nationals are prohibited from directly or indirectly making contributions or donations of money or other things of value, or making an express or implied promise to make a contribution or donation, in connection with a federal, state, or local election. FECA also prohibits a person from soliciting, accepting, or receiving such a contribution or donation from a foreign national. 165  According to some literature and organizations, federal campaign finance laws related to prohibited activities for foreign nationals are sometimes unclear and do not fully address the types of activities that foreign nationals may engage in to hide their influence in U.S. elections. For example, these sources stated that the federal campaign finance laws and FEC regulations have not clearly defined “other things of value” and whether certain activities—such as providing opposition research or negative information about an opposing candidate to a campaign—by foreign nationals constitute an “other thing of value.” 166  Some literature also stated that the FEC has not clearly defined how two exemptions—the volunteer services exemption and media exemption—may affect activities by foreign nationals. 167  Specifically, according to one article, the FEC has inconsistently defined the scope of volunteer services in its advisory opinions and has found an increasing range of election-related activities by foreign actors to be covered by the exemption. 168  Some literature  

> 165

52 U.S.C. § 30121; 11 C.F.R. § 110.20. Foreign nationals are prohibited from making any of the following— contribution or donation of money or other thing of value or an implied promise to make a contribution or donation in connection with any federal, state, or local election; contribution or donation to any committee or organization of a national, state, district, or local political party; donation to a presidential inaugural committee; disbursement for an electioneering communication; or any expenditure, independent expenditure, or disbursement in connection with a federal, state, or local election. Foreign nationals are also prohibited from directing, dictating, controlling, or directly or indirectly participating in the decision-making process of any person, such as a corporation, labor organization, political committee, or political organization with regard to such person’s federal or non-federal election-related activities.  

> 166

FEC regulations define a “thing of value” to include all in-kind contributions, and, unless specifically exempted, the provision of any goods or services without charge or at a charge that is less than the usual and normal charge for such goods or services is a contribution. 11 C.F.R. § 100.52(d)(1). The FEC has also issued advisory opinions and approved legal analyses in enforcement and compliance actions that further define a “thing of value.” For examples of advisory opinions and matters under review regarding FEC’s definition of a “thing of value,” see Commissioner Weintraub’s and Commissioner Hunter’s responses, dated October 18, 2019, to a request for information from Senator Klobuchar, Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on Rules and Administration.  

> 167

According to FEC regulations, the definition of contribution does not include the value of services provided without compensation by an individual who volunteers on behalf of a candidate or political committee and any costs incurred in covering or carrying a news story, commentary, or editorial by any broadcasting station, website, newspaper, magazine, or other periodical publication, unless the facility is owned or controlled by a political party, political committee, or candidate.11 C.F.R. §§ 100.73, .74.  

> 168

For example, according to one article, in 1981, the FEC prohibited a foreign artist from donating an original work of art to a campaign fundraiser (FEC Advisory Opinion 1981-51); in 2015, the FEC, superseding the 1981 Advisory Opinion, allowed foreigners to develop website code, logos, and trademarks for a political action committee on an “ad hoc, continuous basis” given that the foreigners would use their own equipment, pay their own out-of-pocket Page 50 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

also noted that the FEC has not clearly defined what constitutes a “press or media entity,” especially online, and has applied the media exemption broadly, including to some foreign media entities. 169  Furthermore, some sources noted that although the prohibition on foreign contributions and expenditures in U.S. elections is broad, current law is not definitive regarding whether foreign actors are prohibited from engaging in issue advocacy, such as purchasing social media ads that do not expressly advocate for the election or defeat of a candidate. 170 

What are perspectives from literature and selected organizations on the purposes served by contribution limits and how these limits are enforced? 

Literature and selected organizations reported a range of views about the purposes served by contribution limits in the current campaign finance system and their enforcement. FECA established limits on contributions to candidates and political committees. In the years since the enactment of FECA, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit has struck down limits on contributions received by some groups, such as Super PACs, but the courts have kept intact contribution limits for candidates, political parties, and most political committees. 171  Given these changing circumstances, literature and representatives of selected organizations expressed a range of views about the value and implications of contribution limits for candidates and political committees. For example, some literature and organizations reported that contribution limits help prevent corruption and its appearance by limiting the amount of money individuals and organizations can give directly to candidates and political committees. Other sources reported that contribution limits hinder individuals’ First Amendment rights to give to candidates and parties that represent their views and restrict political parties’ ability to support candidates and nominees. Additionally, some sources stated that contribution limits have not alleviated public concerns about the appearance of corruption, as demonstrated by declining confidence in political institutions. For example, one report cited a 2015 poll that found that 84 percent of Americans believe that money has too much influence in political campaigns, and 85 percent believe that politicians enact policies favorable to campaign contributors. 172 

Moreover, according to some sources, contribution limits force candidates and political parties to spend increasing amounts of time and resources on fundraising to compete with independent expenditure groups, which may receive and spend unlimited sums of money. As a result, one        

> expenses, would not be compensated by anyone, and would not participate in any of the PAC's operational decisions (FEC Advisory Opinion 2014-20).
> 169 For example, one article noted that the FEC applies a two-part test to determine whether an organization is a legitimate press entity, but the criteria do not include whether the materials are produced by trained journalists, whether the organization employs a fact-checker or employs fact-checking functions, or any other typical indicators of a legitimate media organization.
> 170 See Bluman v. FEC, 800 F. Supp. 2d 281, 284, 292 (D.D.C. 2011), aff’d 565 U.S. 1104 (2012) (“This statute [52 U.S.C. § 30121] as we see it, does not bar foreign nationals from issue advocacy, that is, speech that does not expressly advocate the election or defeat of a specific candidate.” “They similarly express concern that Congress might bar them from issue advocacy and speaking out on issues of public policy. Our holding does not address such questions, and our holding should not be read to support such bans.”)
> 171 See SpeechNow.org v. Federal Election Commission, 599 F.3d 686 (D.C. Cir. 2010) (en banc).
> 172 The New York Times (in a poll conducted with CBS NEWS), “Americans’ Views on Money in Politics,” June 2, 2015, https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/06/02/us/politics/money-in-politics-poll.html , cited in Secret and Foreign Spending in U.S. Elections: Why America Needs the DISCLOSE Act, Center for American Progress (July 2017).

Page 51 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

source stated that politicians running for re-election spend less time working on substantive issues, which undermines the legislative process. In addition, some sources reported that contribution limits for candidates and political parties weaken the power of political parties by limiting how much they can raise, and encourage donors to contribute to independent expenditure groups, such as Super PACs. This can shift control of traditional party functions (such as developing the party platform, building consensus around and selecting party nominees) from political parties to Super PACs and other groups that may accept and spend significant amounts of money, such as 501(c)(4) organizations. Some literature asserted that political parties are more regulated by the FEC and accountable to voters, while Super PACs and 501(c)(4) organizations are less regulated by the FEC, and less accountable to voters; and are required to disclose less information about their original sources of funding. 173 

Finally, one article noted that uniform contribution limits for all Presidential and congressional elections do not recognize that candidates for President may have a need to raise more money than congressional candidates, in order to reach voters nationwide. For example, the article noted that the cost of presidential campaigns has skyrocketed in recent years, relative to increases in contribution limits. It also cited that contribution limits in presidential elections are lower than many state-level contribution limits for gubernatorial candidates. 

What are perspectives of literature and selected organizations about the benefits and costs of unlimited independent expenditures? 

Literature and representatives of organizations identified various perspectives on the benefits and costs of unlimited independent expenditures. For example, some literature noted that, in 

Buckley v. Valeo , the Supreme Court recognized that restrictions on campaign contributions and expenditures both have potential First Amendment implications, but that limitations on expenditures constituted "significantly more severe restrictions on protected freedom of political expression and association than do [FECA’s] limitations on financial contributions.” 174 

Additionally, some organizations stated that associations of citizens have a right to engage in political advocacy and the removal of contribution limits for groups that are able to make independent expenditures has helped foster citizens’ participation in the political process. 

Other literature and organizations noted that since the 2010 court decisions, spending on independent expenditures in federal elections by organizations that are allowed to accept unlimited contributions from individuals, corporations, and unions, such as Super PACs, has increased dramatically, raising debate about the role of these organizations in the political system. Some sources also noted that changes in campaign finance law have resulted in a disproportional increase in the political speech and representation of a small group of wealthy individuals and organizations through groups such as Super PACs over ordinary citizens. According to some literature, unlimited spending by certain individuals and groups distorts policy outcomes by pressuring candidates and politicians to adopt their preferred policies.    

> 173 For example, a Super PAC must report to the FEC the names of its donors--which may include a 501(c) organization--but does not have to report the names of the donors to the 501(c) organization.
> 174 424 U.S. at 23. Then, in 2010, Citizens United v. FEC invalidated the prohibition on corporations from engaging in independent expenditures, so that corporations were able to make unlimited independent expenditures. 558 U.S. 310. SpeechNow.org v. FEC held that contribution limits to independent expenditures-only organizations also violate the First Amendment, allowing for the rise of Super PACs. Because Super PACs make only independent expenditures, they could accept unlimited contributions and contributions from prohibited sources for other political committees, such as corporations. 599 F.3d 686.

Page 52 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

In addition, according to some sources, despite the Supreme Court’s finding in Buckley v. Valeo 

that independent expenditures did not pose the same threat of corruption as large contributions because the “absence of prearrangement or coordination…alleviates the danger that expenditures will be given as a quid pro quo,” 175  concerns about coordination and the influence of independent expenditure groups on politicians’ behavior remain. Specifically, the FEC has issued regulations defining coordination, including a three-pronged test to determine whether an expenditure is coordinated. 176  However, some literature and organizations stated that the FEC’s definition of coordination between campaigns and groups that are prohibited from making contributions, such as Super PACs and corporations, is not sufficiently clear, which raises the possibility for coordination between such groups and candidates and campaigns. For example, a representative of one organization stated that regulatory language regarding coordination does not take into account the sometimes close relationship of organizations making independent expenditures to candidates. 177  He stated that this allows organizations making independent expenditures (e.g., Super PACs) to be run by former staff of candidates who understand what will help the candidate and make expenditures intended to help the candidate, such as funding events about more general issues that feature the candidate. 178 

Finally, some literature highlighted that spending on Presidential and congressional elections has significantly increased in recent years, with independent groups, such as Super PACs, outspending candidate and party committees. Some literature stated that the rising influence of outside groups relative to political parties has contributed to increased political polarization and gridlock because political parties traditionally support candidates that can connect a broad range of interests, while outside groups tend to amplify the views of more narrow and special interests. 

What are perspectives of literature and selected organizations regarding the extent to which the 

sources of campaign funding should be disclosed? 

Literature and selected organizations reported various perspectives about the extent to which the sources of campaign funding should be publicly disclosed. Since the 2010 Citizens United 

ruling which invalidated a restriction on corporations, including certain 501(c) organizations, from using their general treasures to make independent expenditures, there has been increased attention and debate about the extent to which sources of campaign funding should be disclosed. While some sources see increased transparency as creating a better-informed     

> 175 424 U.S. at 47.
> 176 According to FEC regulations, if a communication meets the standards for the three prongs of the test, which are (1) the source of payment, (2) the subject matter of the communication (content standard), and (3) the interaction between the person paying for the communication and the candidate or political party committee (conduct standard), then the communication is considered coordinated. 11 C.F.R. § 109.21.
> 177 FEC regulations provide that independent expenditures are expenditures by a person for a communication expressly advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate that are not made in cooperation, consultation or concert with, or at the request or suggestion of, a candidate, a candidate’s authorized committee, or their agents, or a political party committee or its agents. 11 C.F.R. § 100.16. When a committee, group or individual pays for a communication that is coordinated with a campaign or a candidate, the communication is either an in-kind contribution or, in some limited cases, a coordinated party expenditure by a party committee.
> 178 FEC regulations provide that, by itself, the involvement of a former staff person will not cause a communication to meet the conduct standard, which is one of the three prongs of FEC’s test, discussed above, so long as that person has not been an employee or independent contractor of the candidate, the candidate's authorized committee, the candidate's opponent, the opponent's authorized committee, or a political party committee for the previous 120 days. 11 C.F.R. § 109.21(d)(5)(i).

Page 53 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

electorate and helping to prevent corruption, other sources see disclosure requirements as oppressive or stigmatizing to those who may support unpopular candidates or organizations. For example, some sources highlighted that FECA established, and the Supreme Court has consistently upheld, disclosure requirements in part on the grounds that knowledge of a candidate’s financial supporters may be an important aspect informing voters’ views of a candidate. 

Some literature and organizations stated that current disclosure requirements do not provide enough information to the public regarding the original sources of funds spent in elections, such as donors to 501(c) groups; owners of limited liability companies; and foreign actors. For example, 501(c)(4) organizations have historically not had to publicly disclose the identities of their donors, except in some limited cases. 179  According to some sources, because these groups can accept unlimited contributions for and have been shown to spend significant amounts on election-related activity, they should be required to register with the FEC and report the sources of their funding, as do political committees. Similarly, some sources stated that source disclosure requirements should apply to organizations based on the amount of political campaign expenditures the organization makes, rather than on the basis of whether the organization is a political committee. 

Some sources also highlighted that individuals and organizations, including corporations and foreign entities, that seek to keep their political donations private or anonymous may use 501(c) organizations or other organizations, such as limited liability companies, to contribute to Super PACs. These organizations can contribute unlimited sums to Super PACs. Super PACs are required to disclose the names of the 501(c) organizations or limited liability companies that contributed to them, and not the original sources of funds, such as the contributors to the 501(c) organizations or the owners of the companies. According to some sources, Super PACs frequently work together with 501(c)(4) organizations because some donors are more likely to contribute to these tax-exempt groups with less disclosure requirements than to Super PACs. Finally, some sources reported that they believed that FEC penalties against individuals or organizations that establish 501(c) organizations or limited liability companies to hide political spending have been rare or in some cases much after the fact, and thus may not deter major spenders from using these methods. 

Other sources offered the view that disclosure requirements infringe on rights to free speech and privacy, and are complex and burdensome. For example, according to some sources,      

> 179 501(c)(4) organizations are required to report to IRS and, in some instances, to the FEC. They must file with IRS a Form 990-series annual information return for tax-exempt organizations, including information about the organization’s political campaign intervention on Schedule C of the form, which may be made publicly available. Under current regulations, donors that contributed at least $5,000 to the 501(c)(4) organization for any purpose (not only political campaign intervention) must be reported to IRS on the form’s Schedule B, but identifying information about the donors is not made publicly available, pursuant to section 6104(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. Tax-exempt organizations generally are required to file the Form 990 annually, and sometimes this occurs months after an election. Certain 501(c)(4) organizations that make independent expenditures are also required to disclose the identity of certain donors to FEC. Under FECA and FEC regulations, persons other than political committees that make independent expenditures aggregating in excess of $250 with respect to a given election in a calendar year must report certain information about those independent expenditures. On August 3, 2018, a court vacated the FEC regulation providing that persons other than political committees that make independent expenditures aggregating in excess of $250 with respect to a given election in a calendar year need report only the identification of donors that contributed to further the reported independent expenditure. CREW v. FEC and Crossroads GPS, No. 15-0259 (D.D.C. 2018). On October 4, 2018, following the decision, FEC issued guidance stating that it will enforce the statute by requiring disclosure of donors of over $200 annually who contribute for the purpose of furthering an independent expenditure, as well as donors of over $200 annually making contributions earmarked for political purposes and intended to influence elections.

Page 54 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

disclosure requirements can stigmatize those who may support unpopular candidates or organizations and deter them from engaging in the political process. Some organizations stated that the thresholds for reporting the names of donors ($200) are too low and questioned the governmental and public interest in knowing the names of everyone who contributed $200 to a political party or 501(c)(4) organization (for the purpose of furthering an independent expenditures) compared to individuals’ rights to free speech and privacy. 180  They suggested that, as a way of protecting privacy for donors who give relatively small contributions, disclosure requirements should be indexed to inflation, much like contribution limits are. 

Some literature and organizations also stated that disclosure requirements are complicated and often require attorneys to decipher them, which grassroots organizations may not be able to afford and which can limit their ability or desire to engage in the democratic process. They explained that low campaign finance monetary thresholds for triggering registration as a political committee with the FEC ($1,000), and thus, compliance with disclosure and reporting requirements, may overly burden nonprofit groups that seek to participate in the political process. 

Conclusion 

Although DOJ and FEC officials noted that coordination between the two agencies works well, they provided varying perspectives on the need to document their coordination mechanisms. While the limited number of staff that coordinate between FEC and DOJ indicate that they work together, without documentation of those mechanisms consistent with internal control standards, the agencies risk having knowledge limited just to those few personnel who could change positions or leave the agencies, taking that knowledge with them. Reviewing and updating, as appropriate, coordination practices between the FEC and DOJ, to include the MOU or other guidance, could help the agencies ensure that written guidance reflects current practices between the agencies and better ensure that coordination between FEC and DOJ occurs consistently and effectively when enforcing campaign finance law. 

Recommendations for Executive Action 

We are making two recommendations to the FEC and DOJ. 

• The FEC, in consultation with DOJ, should review guidance addressing coordination with DOJ, to include the MOU, and once a quorum of commissioners is in place, update that guidance as appropriate based on the review. 

(Recommendation 1) 

• The Attorney General, in consultation with the FEC, should review guidance addressing coordination with the FEC, to include the MOU, and once a quorum of commissioners is in place, update that guidance as appropriate based on the review.   

> 180 As discussed earlier, political committees must identify any person who contributes more than $200 during a calendar year and any person to whom an expenditure or disbursement of more than $200 during a calendar year is made. 52 U.S.C. §30104(b). Not-political committees, such as 501(c) organizations, who make independent expenditures in an aggregate amount of more than $250 in a calendar year must file with the FEC, disclosing whether the expenditure was made independently of the campaign, supports or opposes a candidate, and the identity of each person who made a contribution in excess of $200 for the purpose of furthering an independent expenditure, as well as donors of over $200 annually when that donation is earmarked for political purposes and intended to influence elections. 52 U.S.C. §30104(c). Page 55 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance

(Recommendation 2) 

Enclosure I: Scope and Methodology 

Enclosure II: Contribution Limits for Calendar Years 2019 and 2020 

Enclosure III: Political Committees and Organizations Spending and Raising Money in Support of Federal Elections 

Enclosure IV: Overview of the Federal Election Commission’s (FEC) Enforcement Process for Campaign Finance Violations 

Enclosure V: The Federal Election Commission’s (FEC) Campaign Finance Violation Enforcement Activities, Fiscal Years 2002 through 2017 

Enclosure VI: Certain Types of Tax-Exempt Organizations and Permitted Political Activity 

Enclosure VII: Comments from the Federal Election Commission 

Agency Comments 

We provided a draft of this report to the FEC, DOJ, and IRS for review and comment, and incorporated technical comments, as appropriate. DOJ indicated via email that it did not have formal written comments on the draft report. The FEC provided written comments, which are reproduced in enclosure VII and summarized below. In its comments, the FEC noted that, as recognized by our recommendation, its current composition of three commissioners leaves it with less than a quorum and currently unable to act on our recommendation. The FEC noted that once a quorum is restored, a freshly reconstituted FEC could consider our recommendation to review and update the guidance that addresses coordination between the FEC and DOJ. 

- - - - -

We are sending copies of this report to the Commissioners of the FEC, the Attorney General, the Commissioner of the IRS, appropriate congressional committees and members, and other interested parties. In addition, the report is available at no charge on the GAO website at 

http://www.gao.gov .

If you and your staff have any questions concerning this report, please contact me at (202) 512-8777, or  gamblerr@gao.gov . Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Major contributors to this report were Tom Jessor (Assistant Director), Jennifer Bryant, Colleen Candrl, Dominick Dale, Eric Hauswirth, Tracey King, Frederick Lyles, Jr., Amanda Miller, Jan Montgomery, Erin O’Brien, Maria Psara, Janet Temko-Blinder, and Jeff Tessin. 

Rebecca Gambler 

Director, Homeland Security and Justice Page 56 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Enclosure I: Scope and Methodology 

This report provides information on three areas related to campaign finance: (1) the legal framework of campaign finance in federal elections; (2) federal agencies’ roles and responsibilities, including challenges faced, if any, in enforcement efforts; and (3) the perspectives of selected organizations and literature on key aspects of the federal campaign finance framework, including the enforcement of campaign finance laws (i.e., statutes and regulations). 

To address questions on the legal framework, we reviewed relevant statutes, regulations, and court cases to understand the federal election campaign finance laws governing contributions, expenditures, prohibitions, disclosures, and responsibilities for enforcement, as well as rules governing tax-exempt organizations’ political campaign intervention. 

To address questions on federal agencies’ roles and responsibilities in administering and enforcing campaign finance law, we selected the Federal Election Commission (FEC) for review because it is substantially involved in interpreting and administering federal campaign finance law and investigating violations and enforcing compliance with campaign finance requirements in connection with federal elections. We also reviewed information from the Department of Justice (DOJ), which is responsible for investigating and prosecuting criminal violations related to campaign finance. We reviewed information from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) because it oversees compliance with the tax code governing allowable levels of political campaign intervention by tax-exempt organizations. We reviewed documentation from the FEC, DOJ and IRS related to how they implement their respective functions and strategic objectives, and the methods they use to administer or enforce campaign finance-related laws and identify and address violations, including the prohibition on foreign contributions and expenditures in federal elections. These documents include policies, procedures, and guidance, and existing agreements between FEC and DOJ regarding enforcement of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA), as amended. We also interviewed officials from each agency to better understand how they carry out the agencies’ functions with respect to campaign finance laws, as well as to obtain their perspectives on any challenges faced in administering and enforcing the laws. For example, we met with all four FEC commissioners in July 2019, as well as senior FEC officials. We describe in this report the challenges that FEC, DOJ, and IRS officials identified that were relevant to the scope of our review. 

To describe how the FEC identifies potential campaign finance violations, we reviewed and analyzed enforcement data from the FEC’s Office of General Counsel’s and Alternative Dispute Resolution Office’s Law Manager System to identify the sources of FEC’s enforcement actions for fiscal years 2002 through 2017. 181  To describe how the FEC enforces campaign finance requirements, we reviewed and analyzed enforcement data from the Law Manager System and the Administrative Fine Program’s Disclosure Suite to identify the distribution of the FEC’s enforcement activities, which represents the matters under review ongoing and closed, matters resulting in dismissal or settlement, and administrative fines cases unchallenged and challenged for fiscal years 2002 through 2017. To identify the types of campaign finance violations that were enforced by the FEC, we reviewed and analyzed data from the Law Manager System for  

> 181 We focused on fiscal years 2002 through 2017 because FECA’s most recent significant amendment was the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 (BCRA). Pub. L. No. 107-155, 116 Stat. 81. In addition, fiscal year 2017 is the latest period for which we obtained complete data from the FEC.

Page 57 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

matters under review closed during fiscal years 2012 through 2017. 182  We also reviewed and analyzed data from the Law Manager System to identify how the FEC has enforced allegations of violations of the foreign national prohibition for fiscal years 2002 through 2017. To assess the reliability of FEC’s enforcement data, we performed electronic data testing for obvious errors in accuracy and completeness and queried agency officials knowledgeable about those data systems to determine the processes in place to ensure the integrity of the data. We found the data sufficiently reliable to provide information on FEC’s efforts to enforce campaign finance law. 

To identify the number of FECA-related charges filed in cases prosecuted by DOJ, we reviewed and analyzed case management data from DOJ’s Criminal Division’s Public Integrity Section and the U.S. Attorneys’ Offices, which share responsibility for prosecuting campaign finance violations. For the Public Integrity Section, we reviewed and analyzed data for fiscal years 2010 through 2017. 183  Specifically, we obtained data from the Section on all cases that were categorized using a program code for “campaign finance” in the Automated Case Tracking System, based on the judgment of knowledgeable DOJ attorneys, as well as all cases that included criminal charges brought under FECA. To identify applicable charges, we interviewed officials from the Section and reviewed DOJ guidance on the federal prosecution of election offenses. 184  We developed a list of statutes with campaign finance offenses and provided the list to DOJ to ensure the list was accurate and complete. The Section extracted data from the Automated Case Tracking System for all cases that were opened under the campaign finance, wire fraud, or conspiracy statutes and any cases that were opened under the relevant program category codes for fiscal years 2010 through 2017. The Section manually pulled court and internal documents (e.g. case opening and closing forms) and reviewed those documents to determine which cases had accompanying charges associated with violations of FECA provisions. We also reviewed and analyzed case management data from the Executive Office for United States Attorneys’ Legal Information Office Network System, to determine the total number of charges filed for violations of FECA provisions by U.S. Attorneys’ Offices for fiscal years 2015 through 2017. At the time of our review, data on FECA charges were the most complete for these three fiscal years. 185  We assessed the reliability of the data provided by DOJ by reviewing data system user manuals and data dictionaries, identifying inconsistencies, and working with agency officials to resolve issues or identify potential limitations. We found the data sufficiently reliable to provide information on the number of FECA charges filed in cases prosecuted by DOJ. 

To describe how IRS identifies impermissible levels of political campaign intervention by tax-exempt organizations and the outcomes of the agency’s enforcement efforts, we reviewed and analyzed compliance data from IRS’s Reporting Compliance Case Management System to      

> 182 For the closed matters under review, we focused on fiscal years 2012 through 2017 because these data were the most complete and available at the time of this review.
> 183 We selected the fiscal year 2010 through 2017 time frame to capture information on DOJ’s campaign finance enforcement efforts across multiple presidential administrations. In addition, fiscal year 2017 was the last complete year of DOJ data available at the time of our request.
> 184 Department of Justice, Federal Prosecution of Election Offenses , Eighth Edition, December 2017.
> 185 Effective September 1, 2014, FECA (previously codified under in the U.S. Code under 2 U.S.C. § 431 et seq) was consolidated with other laws governing voting and elections in the new Title 52 of the U.S. Code. Case management data from the Executive Office for United States Attorneys did not capture charges under Title 2 with sufficient precision for our purposes; therefore we restricted our analysis to charges filed under Title 52 starting with fiscal year 2015.

Page 58 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

identify the agency’s sources and dispositions of closed examinations as well as the types of tax-exempt organizations examined during fiscal years 2010 through 2017. 186  We assessed the reliability of these data by reviewing data system user manuals and data dictionaries and querying agency officials knowledgeable about the data system to determine the processes in place to ensure the integrity of the data. We determined that the IRS data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of providing information on IRS’s efforts to enforce compliance with provisions related to political campaign intervention. 

We also interviewed FEC and DOJ officials about guidance and procedures used to coordinate and document referrals of matters involving potential FECA violations between the two agencies, and assessed processes against the implementation of collaborative mechanisms 187 

and applicable internal control guidance on documentation and organizational knowledge retention from Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government .188 

To address questions related to perspectives on (a) challenges regarding the FEC’s, DOJ’s, and IRS’s administration and enforcement of campaign finance laws and related tax law, and (b) key aspects of the campaign finance framework, we obtained perspectives through a literature review of publications from calendar years 2016 through 2018 and from interviews with subject-matter specialists on campaign finance issues from a nongeneralizable sample of nine research, advocacy, and practitioner organizations. To identify relevant publications, we took the following steps: 

1. A GAO research librarian conducted a literature search of various research databases and platforms including ProQuest, HeinOnline, Harvard’s Custom Think Tank Search Engine, PolicyFile, and WestEdge, among others, to identify scholarly and peer reviewed publications, including law journal articles; dissertations; government reports; conference papers; and publications by nonprofits and think tanks published from 2016 through 2018, a period chosen to include the 2016 U.S. Presidential election through the end of the most recent calendar year at the time of our review. We excluded books, trade journal articles (except law journal articles), and news articles from the literature review. Our search terms and formulas included “campaign finance” and related terms, such as “contribution,” “expenditure,” “disclosure,” “prohibition,” “Federal Election Commission,” “Department of Justice,” “Internal Revenue Service,” and “foreign,” among others. Multiple abstract, title and keyword searches were conducted in iterations from August 2018 through February 2019. 

2. To select the publications that were relevant to our research areas of (a) challenges regarding the FEC’s, DOJ’s, and IRS’s administration and enforcement of campaign finance laws and related tax law, and (b) key aspects of the campaign finance framework, two reviewers started by independently assessing the abstracts for each publication and, if          

> 186 We requested data on closed examinations from IRS beginning in fiscal year 2010 because the Supreme Court and federal appeals court rulings in Citizens United v. FEC and SpeechNow.org v. FEC changed the campaign finance landscape, enabling corporations (including nonprofit corporations) to (1) use their general treasuries to make unlimited independent expenditures and electioneering communications and (2) make unlimited contributions to Super PACs. After these decisions in 2010, nonprofit corporations, such as tax-exempt social welfare organizations (501(c)(4) organizations) that are incorporated, could make independent expenditures and electioneering communications, and contribute to Super PACs. We recognize that some of the examinations closed in 2010 may include activity prior to this time frame.
> 187 GAO, Managing for Results: Key Consideration for Implementing Interagency Collaborative Mechanisms ,GAO-12-1022 (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 27, 2012).
> 188 GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government ,GAO-14-704G (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 2014).

Page 59 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

necessary, reviewed the full text of the publication, to determine if they met the following criteria: 

a. The publication identifies one or more challenges (i.e., problems) related to the campaign finance framework. 189 

b. The article focused on campaign finance for U.S. federal elections (not state, tribal, or other countries’ elections). 190 

Any differences in the reviewers’ determinations about whether the article was relevant and should be included in the review were discussed and reconciled. 

3. For the 126 publications that met the above two criteria, we reviewed the full text of the publication. We evaluated each publication using a data collection instrument. The data collection instrument captured information on the challenge(s) related to the campaign finance framework identified in each publication in the following categories, based on the scope of our review: 1) FEC oversight; 2) DOJ oversight; 3) IRS oversight; 4) other agency oversight; 5) contribution limits; 6) expenditures; 7) disclosure; 8) new technology/the internet; 9) foreign national prohibition; 10) legal critiques; and 11) other category. We further categorized the publications into sub-categories under each category, based on emerging themes from our review of abstracts and full articles, described in step 2 above. For example, under the FEC oversight category, sub-categories were identified for challenges related to FEC’s regulations, FEC’s enforcement, and FEC’s structure. The data collection instrument was initially filled out by one GAO analyst and then verified for accuracy by another analyst. For law journal publications, a separate data collection instrument was initially filled out by one GAO analyst and then another analyst verified for accuracy a subset of the above identified challenges. One GAO analyst then reviewed each of the individual challenges recorded in the data collection instrument by category and sub-category and summarized the major themes of challenges, in a separate record of analysis. For example, the analyst sorted all the challenges that fell under the “new technology” category, reviewed them, and summarized the major themes of challenges related to “new technology.” 

We obtained additional perspectives through interviews with subject-matter specialists on campaign finance issues from a nongeneralizable sample of nine research, advocacy, or practitioner organizations, selected to represent a range of views about the campaign finance framework. The nine organizations included the Alliance for Justice, Bipartisan Policy Center, Campaign Finance Institute, Campaign Legal Center, Cato Institute, Center for Responsive Politics, Institute for Free Speech, Institute for Justice, and Republican National Committee. 191 

To select the nine organizations, we first researched organizations whose mission, primary work, or a portfolio of work focused on campaign finance research or advocacy and campaign     

> 189 For the purposes of this review, the campaign finance “framework” includes the statutes; regulations; and agency roles, policies, and procedures related to overseeing contribution limits, expenditures, disclosure requirements, and prohibitions, including those for foreign entities, in connection with federal elections.
> 190 We also excluded articles that did not primarily discuss campaign finance (e.g., referred to campaign finance as an example for a different issue); did not identify challenges related to the campaign finance framework (e.g., tested a hypothesis or analyzed data, but did not identify a challenge); and were outside of our scope (e.g., debated corporate personhood).
> 191 We also attempted to obtain the perspectives of the Democratic National Committee but did not receive a response. Page 60 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance

finance practitioners, such as national political parties and a national association representing politically active nonprofit organizations and identified a total of 21 organizations. We selected the nine organizations to interview to obtain a balanced range of perspectives on federal agencies’ oversight of campaign finance laws and key aspects of the campaign finance framework, including the scope and nature of campaign finance laws, the purposes served by contribution limits, the benefits and costs of unlimited independent expenditures, and the extent to which the sources of campaign funding should be disclosed. We analyzed the information that each of the above organizations provided during interviews by the same main categories we used for the literature review. While the information we obtained from our literature review and interviews with specialists from selected organizations cannot be generalized or be considered representative of all views on campaign finance issues, they provided important perspectives on key aspects of the campaign finance framework, including the scope and nature of campaign finance laws, the purposes served by contribution limits, the benefits and costs of unlimited independent expenditures, and the extent to which the sources of campaign funding should be disclosed. 

We conducted this performance audit from April 2018 to February 2020 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Page 61 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Enclosure II: Contribution Limits for Calendar Years 2019 and 2020 

The Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA), as amended, specifies the contribution limits for the amount that an individual, party, or political action committee (PAC) can contribute to a single candidate (per election) or to a party or PAC (per calendar year). 192  The limits on contributions to candidates apply separately to each federal election in which the candidate participates. A primary election, general election, runoff election and special election are each considered a separate election with a separate limit. T able 1 shows contribution limits for donors and recipients for calendar years 2019 and 2020. 193 

Table 1: Contribution Limits for Calendar Years 2019 and 2020 

Amounts in Dollars 

Donors  Recipients 

Candidate Committee in Dollars 

Political Action Committee (PAC) (Separate Segregated Fund and Nonconnected) in Dollars a

National Party Committee in Dollars 

State, District, Local Party in Dollars 

Additional National Party Committee Accounts in Dollars b

Individual  2,800 per 

election 

5,000 per year  35,500 per year  10,000 per year (combined) 

106,500 per account, per year 

Candidate 

committee 

2,000 per 

election 

5,000 per year  Unlimited transfers to party committee 

Unlimited transfers to party committee 

PAC 

Multicandidate 

5,000 per 

election 

5,000 per year  15,000 per year  5,000 per year (combined) 

45,000 per account, per year 

PAC Non -

multicandidate 

2,800 per 

election 

5,000 per year  35,500 per year  10,000 per year, (combined) 

106,500 per account, per year 

State, district, 

local party committee 

5,000 per 

election (combined) 

5,000 per year (combined) 

Unlimited Transfers 

National party 

committee 

5,000 per 

election c

5,000 per year  

> Source: GAO analysis of Federal Election Commission data. | GAO-20-66R
> Note: These limits are indexed for inflation in odd-numbered years.
> a”PAC" here refers to a committee that makes contributions to other federal political committees. Independent expenditure-only political committees (sometimes called "super PACs") may accept unlimited contributions, including from corporations and labor organizations. A nonconnected PAC is considered any committee that conducts activities in connection with an election, but that is not a party committee, an authorized committee of any candidate for federal election, or a separate segregated fund. A separate segregated fund is a political committee established, administered or financially supported by a corporation or labor organization— also referred to as corporate or labor political action committee. See 11 C.F.R. § 114.1(a)(2)(iii).
> 192

52 U.S.C. § 30116. 

> 193

A contribution is defined as a gift, subscription, loan, advance or deposit of money or anything of value given to influence a federal election; or payment by any person of compensation for the personal services of another person if those services are rendered without charge to a political committee for any purpose. 11 C.F.R. §§ 100.52(a), .54. Page 62 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

> b

The limits in this column apply to a national party committee’s accounts for: (i) the presidential nominating convention; (ii) election recounts and contests and other legal proceedings; and (iii) national party headquarters buildings. A party’s national committee, Senate campaign committee and House campaign committee are each considered separate national party committees with separate limits. Only a national party committee, not the parties’ national congressional campaign committees, may have an account for the presidential nominating convention.  

> c

Additionally, a national party committee and its Senatorial campaign committee may contribute up to $49,600 combined per campaign to each Senate candidate. Page 63 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Enclosure III: Political Committees and Organizations Spending and Raising Money in Support of Federal Elections 

Federal campaign finance laws permit various types of political committees and organizations to conduct campaign finance related activities. 194  Some entities, like political committees, can both raise and spend money to influence federal elections. For example, political action committees (PACs) may make contributions to candidates and make independent expenditures. In contrast, corporations and labor organizations cannot use their general treasuries to make contributions to candidates or political committees, but may spend money in other ways to influence federal elections. 195  They may (1) establish a separate segregated fund, known as a corporate or labor PAC; (2) make unlimited independent expenditures and electioneering communications; and (3) make unlimited contributions to Super PACs. 196  While Super PACs may not contribute directly to federal candidates, they may raise unlimited funds from corporations, unions, and individuals and spend unlimited funds in the form of independent expenditures. 

Under the Internal Revenue code, social welfare organizations that are tax-exempt under 501(c)(4) and political organizations that are tax-exempt under section 527 may engage in activities to influence elections, to varying extents. An organization may engage in some political campaign intervention, without losing its tax-exempt status under section 501(c)(4), so long as it continues to be primarily engaged in activities that promote social welfare. 197  Under FECA, such organizations that are incorporated are prohibited from contributing directly to federal candidates, but may raise unlimited funds and make independent expenditures, as well as make contributions to Super PACs. Political organizations qualifying for tax-exempt status under section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code are formed and operated primarily to accept contributions or make expenditures for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the election of presidential or vice presidential  

> 194

The Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, as amended, generally defines political committees as any committee, club, association, or other group of persons, which receives contributions or makes expenditures aggregating in excess of $1,000 during a calendar year for the purposes of influencing any federal election. 52 U.S.C. § 30101(4). The Supreme Court held in Buckley v. Valeo that only organizations under the control of a federal candidate or whose major purpose is the election or defeat of federal candidates may be regulated as political committees. Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. at 79–80.  

> 195

52 U.S.C. § 30118.  

> 196

A Super PAC is a political committee that makes only independent expenditures and may solicit or accept unlimited contributions from individuals, corporations, labor organizations and other political committees.  

> 197

The Internal Revenue Code provides that a 501(c)(4) organization must be operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare. 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(4). IRS regulations provide that an organization is operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare if it is primarily engaged in promoting in some way the common good and general welfare of the people of the community, and the promotion of social welfare does not include direct or indirect participation or intervention in political campaigns on behalf of or in opposition to any candidate for public office. 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(c)(4)-1(a)(2). 501(c)(5) labor organizations and 501(c)(6) trade associations may also engage in limited political campaign intervention. See Rev. Rul. 2004-6. If these organizations make expenditures for a section 527(e)(2) exempt function, they may be subject to tax under 527(f). Such exempt functions include influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the election of Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, whether or not such individual or electors are selected, nominated, elected, or appointed. 26 U.S.C. § 527(e)(2). Page 64 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

electors. 198  Some, but not all, 527 organizations are political committees regulated by FEC. 199 

Section 527 organizations that are not political committees may engage in issue advocacy (other than electioneering communications), if it is not coordinated with campaigns. Figure 11 identifies the types of political committees and organizations that raise and spend money in support of federal elections. 

Figure 11: Political Committees and Organizations That Raise and Spend Money in Support of Federal Elections 

a Under section 527 the exempt function means influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the election of Presidential or Vice-presidential electors, whether or not such individual or electors are selected, nominated, elected, or appointed. 26 U.S.C. § 527(e)(2). 

bThe term "financially supported" does not include contributions to the political committee, but does include the payment of establishment, administration or solicitation costs. 

198 26 U.S.C. § 527(e). 

199 Political committees that are registered with FEC and are also organized under section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code are subject to FEC reporting requirements and exempt from some IRS reporting requirements. 26 U.S.C. § 527(j)(5)(A). 

Candidate committee or  principal  campa i gn committee 

An  authorized  co1J1mlttee 

designaled  by  a candidate 

as  the  principal  committee 

to  rarse  oonlrlbutlons  and 

make  e,pend il ures  for  their 

campa,gn  for  federal  office. 

Party committee 

A po litical  committee 

estab li shed and ma nta ln ed 

by  a nalional, state. or local political  pany 

Who can spend and raise money on federal elections? 

Political action committee (PAC) A polltlcal  committee  that conducts  activities  in connection  wrth  a federal 

elect,on.  but  ••  neither a 

party  committee nor an 

aW,orizad  committee  of 

any candidate for federal 

office , There are several 

lypes  of PACs, including. 

527  organizations 

(other than federal political committees)• 

Polttical  organ,zatl o/15 

organized  and opera ted prim arily for the purpose of 

directly  or indirectly 

accepting  contributions  or 

mak,ng  e•P<!ndi tures,  or 

bolh,  lor an  exempt 

function . For  ihe  purposes 

of this  figure , 527 

organl.?aUo ns  are  those 

that have  r89 l ste ,ed  a; 

political  organizations  with 

the  lmernal  Revenue 

Service  (I RS ),  bU1  do  not 

meet  the  Federal  Electi on 

Campaign  Act's  (FE.CA) 

definition  of a polllical 

oomrn lttee .

Section  501(c)(4) 

(social welfare organizations) , 

Section  501 (c)(S) (labor organizations), 

and 

Section  501 (c)(S) (business leagues) Under IRS  rules,  these 

organizations  may engage 

1n  lim~ecl  pol iti cal campai gn 

mtervent lon 

Corporations and labor organizations 

Under  fECA  and  Fede ral 

Elecuon  Commission  (FEC) 

regulations.  corporations, 

Includi ng nonprofit 

corporation$ ,  and labor 

o rg an izations  may 

establish  a separate 

S89r89ated  fund ,  known  as a corporate  or labor  PA C, 

make unlimited In dependent  expendnures 

and elect lon eenng 

communications;  and  ma ke 

unllmrted  oont,;butlon•  to 

Sup,!r  PACs, 

Separate  se9regatecl  rund•  Nonconneeted committee Leadership PAC  Multicandldate  comm ittee Super PAC 

A PAC  U,at  ••  directly  or  i ndirectly 

estab li shed , lild,n i nlstered , or 

f,nanclally  supported  by  a

corporation  or  labor  organization .

A PAC tha1 does not have a 

"connr~cted  organization •-that 

1s . no corpora on  or  labor 

organization  eslabhshes, 

administers. or  ,a.ses  money  ror 

a nonoonnepted  committee. 

A pol iti cal committee  that  is 

d<rec tly  or  indirectly  established, 

finanoed 1mainta ined  or 

controlled  by  a candidate or an Ind ividual  holding  federal office, but Is not an  authon?ed 

committee of  the  candidate or officeholder and 1s not affiliated 

wtth  an  authorized  committee  of 

-a  candidate  m officeholder. 

Sou""'  GAO  anal,. ..  of  lhe  feoa.-al  Socti on  C0111"1$SIOO  •nd  l f'lernat  Revenue  $e<yj<)O  tnlorm ,Uon , I G~0--20-S8R 

A PAC  thal  has been reglstered with  the  FEC  (or for  Senate 

commhtees,  the  Secretary  of lhe Senate) for at  least  SO<  months, 

hes  received  federal 

contrlbu~ons  from  more  U,en  50 people, and  has  made 

contributions  to at  le ast  five 

federal  cand idate•-

An  independ ent  e XJ)endi\ ure--0nty 

pom i cal  committee  that  may 

acoept  unlimited  contributions. Page 65 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Enclosure IV: Overview of the Federal Election Commission’s (FEC) Enforcement Process for Campaign Finance Violations 

Under FEC regulations, the enforcement process begins when a complaint or referral is made alleging that a violation of federal campaign finance laws has occurred or is about to occur. 200 

Respondents are notified of the filing of a complaint or referral and have an opportunity to respond in writing. 201  The FEC’s Office of General Counsel reviews and analyzes complaints, referrals, and sua sponte submissions; respondents’ responses to FEC notifications; and publicly available information to formulate a recommended course of action for the Commission. The Commission then reviews the Office of General Counsel’s report and recommendations and the associated complaint, referral, or sua sponte submission and responses from respondents. The Commission can find that there is no reason to believe a violation occurred, or it may otherwise dismiss a complaint, referral or submission at any point during its consideration of the matter. If the Commission finds reason to believe a violation occurred, it is to conduct an investigation to determine if there is probable cause that a violation has occurred or may proceed—prior to a finding of probable cause—to negotiations to reach a conciliation, or voluntary settlement agreement, which may include a monetary penalty. 202  If the Commission finds probable cause to believe a violation occurred, it must attempt to reach a tentative conciliation agreement with the respondent, 203  and if the Commission fails to conciliate with a respondent, it may authorize a civil lawsuit in U.S. district court. 204  In certain circumstances, the Commission may also refer a matter to the Department of Justice (DOJ) for criminal prosecution under the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, as amended. 205  Figure 12 provides an overview of the FEC’s enforcement process for campaign finance violations.         

> 200 See 11 C.F.R. §§ 111.3, .4, .8. Office of General Counsel Enforcement Manual, Federal Election Commission, June 2013. According to FEC officials, the enforcement manual has not been approved by the Commission as of July 2019; however, the FEC continues to use the manual as supplemental guidance in its enforcement efforts.
> 201 11 C.F.R. §§ 111.6, .9.
> 202 11 C.F.R. §§ 111.10, .18(d).
> 203 11 C.F.R. § 111.18(a).
> 204 11 C.F.R. § 111.19.
> 205 Under 52 U.S.C. § 30109(a)(5)(C), if the Commission determines that there is probable cause to believe that a knowing and willful violation has occurred or is about to occur, the Commission may refer such apparent violation to the Attorney General of the United States.

Page 66 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Figure 12: Overview of the Federal Election Commission’s (FEC) Enforcement Process for Campaign Finance Violations 

a 52 U.S.C. § 30109. 

b 52 U.S.C. § 30109(a)(1), (4). 

c52 U.S.C. § 30109(a)(2), (4)(i), (6)(A). 

Enforcement/compliance actions can be initiated by :

External  complaint 

A,  complain\  from  an  indfvid ua l or 

grol,lp  (e,g • an  opposfn.g  campaign). 

Eitterh al  referral A referral from  .mother  government agency  (e,g ,,  Department  of Justice). Internal referral 

A referral from  the  FEC  Audit  Division or Reports Analysis  Division 

Volun ta ry  referral A vio!allon  111a1  fs  self-reported  by  a

pol~ical  commmee  or other  regulated 

entity (a sua sponle submission). The Federal  Eleotlon  Campa  gn  Aot 

dictates  much  or  how  llie  process  must 

unfold."  In  particular,  the  Federal 

E:lection  Campaign  Act  specifies how compla in ts must be  filed  ~nd ,  except  for 

Admh1 istra1lye  Fine  Program  ~sas , th11t 

U,e  Commission must  seek  110 .luntary comp liance before imposing a  pei,alty,b 

The  Commission  nolifies. 

the  respondent  (the 

subJecl  of the  complar nt 

or  referral)  or the  receipt 

or  referral, 

The respondent has an 

opportunity  to  reply  to  tl'le 

complaint and may choose to be represented 

by  an  attorney .

Enforcement/compliance actions can be pursued through : 

Tradltional Enforcement Program  by 

the Office of General Counsel's Enforcement  Dlvlsion --M atters  Under 

Review 

Resolves  compjex  campaign  finance  violabons, 

designa,l!!d  as  Matters  Under  .Review.  This 

process  may  i nvolve  an  irwesllgal lo n, 

concmatl on , and  civil  penalti es ,

A lt er t1 atl ve  Disp ute Re solution Office 

Resolves  less  comple~  campaigri  finance 

vi olallons  that meet  criteria  approved  by  the Commission.  The  program focuses on  remedial 

measures  for  candidates  and  political 

committees.  such  as training , internal  audits , 

a!'ld  hiring  compliance  staff.  The Alternative 

Dispute  Re.solution  Office  also negotiates 

settlements  and  crvn  penalties. 

Adm inistrative Fine Progra m 

Focuses on  campaign  finance  violations i n11ol lli ng  lhe  late subm ission  of  or  failure  to  file 

disclosure reports,  This  program  may  also Involve the  assessment  of monetary penalties and handles  any  ctiaOenges  ~o  the  penalty 

assessments_ 

The Federal Election Campai gn  Act 

also  requires  commi ss ioners  to  vole 

on  key  enforcement  decisions 

ttiroughcut  the  process. In particul ar ,

affirmative  votes  from  at  least four 

comm,~ ioneri.  are  requ ir ed  to: 

• find  reason to  belfeve"  thai  a vlolauon  has 

occurred  or Is about to  occur,  wh ich 

wmmences  addrtional  aciion  (e.g .,  an 

i nvestigation); 

• llnd probable  cause  that a  violation  has 

occurred  or  ts  aboul to  occur; 

• resolve  s mal1er  (e,g .,  en1er  Irita a cond l! at i on 

agreement,  penalties ,  elc , );  and 

• authorize  mi ng  e l aws!J ,t  ti  II  matter  c:.innot 

otherwise be  resolved.· 

Soure<1  GAO  analyse;  of  Feder1>I  Ele,tll0n  Ct>mmisslon  info,matlon  I GAO , 20.ooR 

Outcomes 

If  the  Comm~ ion  determines  that 

there  is probable cause to  believe  that 

knowing  and  w1111ul  vlolattons  occurred 

or  will  occur , it  may  rerer  such 

violations  to the Department  of  Justice 

for  possible  criminal  prosecution , 

If an  enforcement  matter  1s not 

resolved through conciliation  during  the 

administrative process , the Commission may aulhorize suit  in 

district  court ,  where  the  matter  is 

lransferred  to  Office  of General Counsel's  Litigation  Division , 

A five-year  _/t,Ma  ar llm/lDl1ons  pp/1e s

ro  ,;;arnps/gn  bmmce  f>nforc,mJBnl 

matlam. 

Withou1  an affirmative  vote  from at least lour  commissioners  m each  of these 

instances,  substantive  acllon  stops . Page 67 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Enclosure V: The Federal Election Commission’s (FEC) Campaign Finance Violation Enforcement Activities, Fiscal Years 2002 through 2017 

For the traditional enforcement process, the FEC received a total of 2,444 matters under review and closed a total of 2,379 matters under review during the time period. 206  On average, the traditional enforcement program received about 153 matters under review per fiscal year— ranging from 85 to 235 matters under review received annually—and closed about 149 matters under review per fiscal year—ranging from 86 to 239 matters under review closed annually. A majority of the FEC’s Alternative Dispute Resolution Office’s matters resulted in settlements during this period. The Alternative Dispute Resolution Office total matters consisted of 568 (79 percent) settlements and 148 (21 percent) dismissals, totaling 716 matters adjudicated. 207  Amajority of the FEC’s Administrative Fine Program’s enforcement related cases were not challenged during this time period. The Administrative Fine Program’s case load was comprised of 2,095 (76 percent) non-challenged cases and 662 (24 percent) challenged cases, totaling 2,757 cases. 208  Figure 13 shows the distribution of the FEC’s enforcement activities for fiscal years 2002 through 2017.     

> 206 FEC’s traditional enforcement process resolves campaign finance violations, designated as matters under review. This process may involve an investigation, conciliation, and civil penalties.
> 207 The category for dismissal includes matters in which the Commission approved the Alternative Dispute Resolution Office’s recommendation that a matter be dismissed.
> 208 The Commission has established procedures permitting respondents to challenge the imposition of an administrative fine based on specific defenses. Specifically, a challenge must explain the factual basis for the challenge and demonstrate at least one of the following (1) the reason to believe finding was based on factual errors, (2) the civil penalty amount was improperly calculated, or (3) the committee could not file because of unforeseen circumstances beyond its control, and when those circumstances ended, the committee filed the late report within 24 hours.

Page 68 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Figure 13: The Federal Election Commission’s (FEC) Enforcement Activities, Fiscal Years 2002 through 2017 

Note: The FEC’s Reports Analysis Division and Office of Administrative Review administer the Administrative Fines Program. Under the program regulations, if the Commission finds reason to believe that a committee violated the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, as amended, the Commission sends a letter to the committee containing the factual and legal basis for its finding and the amount of the proposed calculated fine, among other things. 11 C.F.R. § 111.32. The Reports Analysis Division administers this part of the process. Unlike enforcement matters handled through the Office of General Counsel or the Alternative Dispute Resolution Office, the penalties assessed through the Administrative Fines Program are not subject to negotiation. As stated, the Commission has established procedures permitting respondents to challenge the imposition of an administrative fine based on specific defenses. 11 C.F.R. § 111.35. The Office of Administrative Review handles the challenge process and forwards a written recommendation to the full Commission and to the respondent. After reviewing the respondent’s written response and the recommendation from the Office of Administrative Review, the Commission makes a final determination. 11 C.F.R. § 111.37. 

FEC's matters under review ongolng and closed Number of  matters 

> 500
> 400

3D0 200 100    

> 0
> 2002 2003
> Fseal year

2004 2005 2006  2007  2008 

## CJ  Mailers  ongoing  atootset  11111 Total ma tters  rece1ved 

2009 2010 2011 2012 2013  2014  2015  2016 2017      

> -To tal ma tters dosed

FEC's Alternative Dispute Resolution Office: matters resulting  in  dismjssal or settlement for fiscal years 2002 through 2017 Number of  matters 

> 100
> BO
> 60 40
> 20
> 0

2002 2003   

> Fl scal year

~ D! sm ,ssa1   

> 2004 2005 2006

# 11111  SeWeme nt         

> 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

FEC's Administrative Fine Program cases: nonchallenged and challenged for fiscal  years  2002 through 2017 Number of cases 

> 500 400 300 200
> 100
> 0

20D2  2003   

> Ffscal yea,r
> 2004

2005 2006  2007  2008 2009 2010 2011  2012   

> Nonchallenged Reports Analysis D Msion

# 11111  Ch al lenged  cases  Office  ol Administrative  Revi ew            

> Sou i:.e :GAO a"alysis-ofFederal El ecllan Commie;, Ion data ,

I GA0-10--ti6R     

> 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2016 2017

Page 69 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Enclosure VI: Certain Types of Tax-Exempt Organizations and Permitted Political Campaign Intervention 

The Internal Revenue Code imposes limitations on the amount of political campaign intervention in which certain 501(c) groups may engage. For example, 501(c)(3) charitable organizations (including churches and other houses of worship) are prohibited under the Internal Revenue Code from engaging in political campaign intervention. However, these groups are permitted to take policy positions and engage in an insubstantial amount of lobbying. 209  Other types of 501(c) organizations—such as 501(c)(4) social welfare organizations, 501(c)(5) labor unions, and 501(c)(6) trade associations—may engage in limited political campaign intervention. 210  In contrast to organizations established under section 501(c), an  organization that is tax-exempt under section 527 is a party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) organized and operated primarily for the purpose of directly or indirectly accepting contributions or making expenditures, or both, for an  exempt function .211  An exempt function is the function of influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the election of Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, whether or not such individual or electors are selected, nominated, elected, or appointed. 212  Figure 14 provides an overview of some of the types of tax-exempt organizations allowed under the Internal Revenue Code, and the type and extent of political campaign intervention these organizations may conduct without losing their tax-exempt status.      

> 209 26 U.S.C. §501(c)(3) refers to organizations “organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary, or educational purposes, or to foster national or international amateur sports competition ... or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals.” Among other things, “no substantial part” of the organization’s activities may be attempting to influence legislation, and it may “not participate in, or intervene in ... any political campaign on behalf of (or in opposition to) any candidate for public office.” Id .
> 210 The Internal Revenue Code provides that a 501(c)(4) organization must be operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare. 26 U.S.C § 501(c)(4). IRS regulations provide that an organization is operated exclusively for the promotion of social welfare if it is primarily engaged in promoting in some way the common good and general welfare of the people of the community, and the promotion of social welfare does not include direct or indirect participation or intervention in political campaigns on behalf of or in opposition to any candidate for public office. 26 C.F.R. § 1.501(c)(4)-1(a)(2). 501(c)(5) labor organizations and 501(c)(6) trade associations may also engage in limited political campaign intervention. See Rev. Rul. 2004-6.
> 211 26 U.S.C. § 527(e)(1).
> 212 26 U.S.C. § 527(e)(2).

Page 70 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Figure 14: Select Types of Tax-Exempt Organizations and Permitted Political Campaign Intervention  

> a

An exempt function is influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the election of Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, whether or not such individual or electors are selected, nominated, elected, or appointed. 26 U.S.C. § 527(e)(2).  

> b

Section 527(f) of the Internal Revenue Code provides that a Section 501(c) organization is subject to tax if it spends any amount for an exempt function. The tax is imposed on the lesser of the organization’s net investment income or its section 527 exempt function expenditures. 

527 organization 

Section  -527  of the Internal Revenue Code provides for  the 

exemption of political organiza ti ons . A 527 organizati on is a party, 

committee,  association, 

fund , or other 

organizaUon  organized 

and  operated primarily for the purpose of  directly  or 

indirectly  accepti n.g 

contributions  or making expenditures, or both . for an exempt  functfon.• 

501(c)(3) 

orgaJ\IZatio"    

> A 501 ( c) (3 )

organization 

is  organl zed  and operated exclusively for charitable, religJ ous, educational,  scfentific, 

testing for public  safety, 

llterary  or educational purposes, to foster national or 1nlernaUonal amateur sports competition, or for the prevention of  cruelty  to children  or  animals. 

Charllabte  organizations under  secti on  501 ( c) (3) are prohibited from 

participating  or intervening in a  po lit1cal 

campai gn on behalf of or in oppositlon to any 

candldate  for publ fc office.       

> Sou rce :GA O~Mly~ts

or  !n t.;1 nal  R~v,,oue  Sefvice  in r01m~U011  J GA0-20-66 R

501(c)(4) organization  

> A 501(c)(4)

organization is a ciVlc  league or 

organTzalfon  not organi zed 

for  profit  but  operated 

ei,;clusiVe ly  fo r the promotion of  social  welfare, 

or a local association of employees, the membership of  whfch  is li mited to  the  empl oyees- of a designated person or pe rsons  11'1  a partlcufar 

municipality, and the nel earn fngs  of whic:h  are devoted  e.xclusive ly  to 

char tl able,  educati ona, , or recreational purposes. 

501(c)(5) 

orga1"1izc1tion    

> A501 (c)(S)

organization is a labor,  agricultural,  or hortlcultural  organizatron. 

501(c)(6) 

organization  

> A 501

(c)(6) organization 

i sa  business  leag ue, chamber of  commerce, 

r ea l estate  board , board of tr ade , or professional footba ll league, which  is 

not organized ror profit . 

Unli ke sec/ion 501(c)(3)  organiza!ions.  //Iese  orga11 /zalions  may  engage  in  limited  political 

campaign  i11tervenl io n.  ff they  make  expenditures  for  a se c /ion  527(e)(2)  exempt  function, 

they  may  be subject lo  ta x under  section  527(() .0Page 71 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

Enclosure VII: Comments from the Federal Election Commission 

FEDERAL  FLrCTI()  < < >MMI S. 10         

> WA~Hll',ClUN IH _>11011\
> 111< Il/1 IIll rHAik.

Ms. Rebecca Gambler Director, Homeland  Security  and  Justice Government Accountability Office 44 I G Street, NW Washi ngton, DC 20548 January I 0, 2020 Re : Drafi  GAO Report  Campaign  Finunce  (Engagement Code l 02707) Dear Ms. Gambler: 

Thank  you for providing  the  Federal Election Commission  (PEC)  with the opportunity to review and comment on the draf1 Government Acco untability Office (GAO) Rcpott on its 

Campaign  Finunce  engagement. The F C thoroughly cooperated with GAO  a.  it worked on this review, which  began  for the FilC with an entrance conference in July 201 8. Under the supervisi on of the  foEC 

Commissioners, a large team of agency staff drafted responses to  mort:  i.han 200 written questions from GAO and prepared more than 1,200 page of supporting documents requested by GAO. GAO also met with a ll four of the then-serving  FEC  Commissioners in Ju ly 2019  as  noted in the draft Report, in addition to meetings wi th many agency staff  membet-s. 

GAO has prepared a lengthy Report on  its  Campaign F in ance engagement which pro ides information on three aspects of federal campaign finance: (I) the legal requirements 

and  prohibi tio ns that apply to campaign finance ; (2) the roles and responsibilities of federal agencies in enforcing campaign finance la ws; and (3) the  per-pectives  of other organizaiion on the enforcement of campaign  finance  laws.  Based  on its analysis, GAO recommends that the EC and the U.S. Department of  Justice  (DOJ) shou ld review and update  guidance  that addresses coordination between  th e two agencies, once a quorum of FEC comm is. ioners has been restored. While the  FEC  has exclusive jurisdiction over  civil  enforcement of  federal  campaign finance laws, DOJ has jurisdiction over criminal enforcement of those law s.  Thus,  the FEC and DOJ have parallel jurisdic ti on over  facts  that present potential civil and criminal violations of FECA. The FEC and DOJ entered a Memorandum of Under. landing (MOU) that, along wi th other guidance from both agencies, sets forth basic principles of cooperation. These principle continue to animate an ongoing collaboration between the agencies.  In  fact, bo th DOJ and FEC Page 72 GAO-20-66R Campaign Finance 

> (102707)

Ms. Rebecca Gambler, GAO January I 0, 2020 Page 2officials noted that coordination hetwecn the two agencies works well, as stated in GAO' draft Report.  This  reflects the importance  that  current  FEC Commissioners and staff place on maintaining tl1e agency' relation hip with DOJ . As recognized by GAO's recommendation, the FEC's  current  c:omposition  of only three Commissioners leaves it with less than a quorum and currently unable to act on GAO's recommendation. Once a quorum is restored  to  the  F C by the appointment of  at  least o ne new Commissioner , a freshly reconstituted FEC can consider GAO'· recommendation to review and update  the  guidance that addresses coordination between the FEC and DOJ . 

Th FEC appreciates the work of the entire GAO team on this review particularly the efforts of Frederick T. Lyles, Analyst-in-Charge, who coordinated GAO's interaction with this agency, as well as the opporiunity to comment on GAO s draft Report. If you have any que Lions , please contact me or Duane Pugh, the FEC's Director of Congressional, I ,egislative and lntergovernmental Affairs at  dpugh@ fec- .gov  or (202) 694-1002. On  beh alf  of  tbe  Commission ,Caroline C. Hunter 

Chair 

> cs.<.

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. 

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through GAO’s website ( https://www.gao.gov ). Each weekday afternoon, GAO posts on its website newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. To have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products, go to  https://www.gao.gov 

and select “E-mail Updates.” 

The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO’s actual cost of production and distribution and depends on the number of pages in the publication and whether the publication is printed in color or black and white. Pricing and ordering information is posted on GAO’s website,  https://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm .

Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077, or TDD (202) 512-2537. 

Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card, MasterCard, Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional information. 

Connect with GAO on  Facebook , Flickr , Twitter , and  YouTube .Subscribe to our  RSS Feeds  or  E-mail Updates . Listen to our  Podcasts .Visit GAO on the web at  https://www.gao.gov .

Contact: 

Website:  https://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm 

Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470 

Orice Williams Brown, Managing Director,  WilliamsO@gao.gov , (202) 512-4400, U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7125, Washington, DC 20548 

Chuck Young, Managing Director,  youngc1@gao.gov , (202) 512-4800 U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149 Washington, DC 20548 

James-Christian Blockwood, Managing Director,  spel@gao.gov , (202) 512-4707 U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7814, Washington, DC 20548 

# GAO’s Mission 

# Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony 

## Order by Phone 

# Connect with GAO 

# To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs 

# Congressional Relations 

# Public Affairs 

# Strategic Planning and External Liaison 

Please Print on Recycled Paper. F E D E R A L E L E C T I O N 

> C O M M I S S I O N

ELLEN L. WEINTRAUB, CHAIR 

CAROLINE C. HUNTER, COMMISSIONER 

STEVEN T. WALTHER, COMMISSIONER 

TESTIMONY BEFORE THE 

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION 

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

HEARING: OVERSIGHT OF THE FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION 

SEPTEMBER 25, 2019 2

Introduction 

The Federal Election Commission (“FEC”) appreciates the opportunity to provide this report to the Committee on House Administration. On September 1, 2019, the FEC began working without a quorum of four Commissioners. Although certain Commission actions require an affirmative vote of four Commissioners, the FEC remains open for business, and much work continues to further the agency’s vital mission. The three currently serving Commissioners and the FEC staff look forward to continuing to work with the Committee on House Administration as it performs its oversight function. 

As you know, the Federal Election Commission was established by the Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1974. 1 Congress created the Commission to strengthen the integrity of the federal campaign finance process under the Federal Election Campaign Act. 2

The Commission is also responsible for administering the public funding program for Presidential campaigns under the Presidential Election Campaign Fund Act and the Presidential Primary Matching Payment Account Act. 3 The Federal Election Campaign Act, which is the foundation of federal campaign finance regulation, reflects Congress’s efforts to ensure that voters are fully informed about the sources of candidates’ financial support. The Act also imposes amount limitations and source prohibitions on contributions received by federal candidates, political party committees and other political committees. Public confidence in the political process depends not only on laws and regulations to ensure transparency of campaign finance, but also on the knowledge that noncompliance may lead to enforcement proceedings. 

The Federal Election Commission’s mission is to protect the integrity of the federal campaign finance process by providing transparency and fairly enforcing and administering federal campaign finance laws. The FEC’s strategic goal of fairly, efficiently and effectively administering and enforcing the Federal Election Campaign Act encompasses four strategic objectives: 

• to inform the public about how federal campaigns and committees are financed; 

• to promote voluntary compliance through educational outreach and to enforce campaign finance laws effectively and fairly; 

• to interpret the FECA and related statutes, providing timely guidance to the public regarding the requirements of the law; and 

• to foster a culture of high performance in order to ensure that the agency accomplishes its mission efficiently and effectively.    

> 1Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1974, Public Law 93-443, 88 Stat. 1263 (1974).
> 2Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, Public Law 92-225, 86 Stat. 3 (1972), as amended (FECA or the Act). FECA is codified at 2 U.S.C. §§ 431 to 455.
> 3Presidential Election Campaign Fund Act, Public Law 92-178, 85 Stat. 562 (1971), codified at 26 U.S.C. §§ 9001 to 9013; and Presidential Primary Matching Payment Account Act, Public Law 93-443, 88 Stat. 1297 (1974), codified at 26 U.S.C. §§ 9031 to 9042. 3

To accomplish its legislative mandate, the FEC is directed by up to six Commissioners, and the three currently serving Commissioners all appear before the Committee today. Currently, 304 employees (which includes the Commissioners) support the agency in accomplishing its mission. The Commission maintains its newly redesigned website at 

www.fec.gov  and, in March 2018, moved to its new offices at 1050 First Street, Northeast, in Washington, D.C. The Federal Election Commission received an appropriation of $71,250,000 for Fiscal Year (FY) 2019. 

FECA  requires an affirmative vote by four Commissioners to make decisions in many areas, including regulations, advisory opinions, audit matters and enforcement. Currently, documents recommending actions can be prepared for Commission consideration, but decisions must be delayed until a quorum is restored when new Members join the Commission. Nonetheless, FECA’s requirements and Commission regulations remain fully in effect, and political committees and other filers must continue to disclose their campaign finance activity to the FEC on the regular schedule. Agency staff remains ready to help committees and the public understand and comply with the law, process and review committee reports, including issuing Requests for Additional Information, and provide public access to campaign finance data. While the Commission cannot take action on many legal matters, FEC’s Office of General Counsel staff continues to litigate ongoing court cases, process new enforcement complaints and responses, and investigate matters previously authorized by the Commission.  Furthermore, the FEC’s Reports Analysis Division, Information Division, Information Technology Division, and Office of Compliance, among others, are still on the job, answering questions, maintaining our website, conducting ongoing audits, and processing and reviewing disclosure reports and other filings. Despite the lack of quorum, Commissioners expect to be occupied fully, reviewing case files and preparing for new Members to join the Commission. 

FEC Directive 10, Section L sets forth the rules of procedure to be followed when the Commission has fewer than four sitting members and includes a list of matters on which the Commission may still act. 4 These include notices of filing dates, non-filer notices, debt settlement plans, administrative terminations, and appeals under the Freedom of Information and Privacy Acts. The Commission intends to comply with the statutory requirement set forth in section 306 of FECA that the Commission meet at least once each month.    

> 4See FEC Directive No. 10, Rules of Procedure of the FEC Pursuant to 2 U.S.C. § 437c(e) (Dec. 20, 2007);
> available at https://www.fec.gov/resources/cms-content/documents/directive_10.pdf .4

I. FEC’s PERFORMANCE AND OPERATIONS 

A. CAMPAIGN FINANCE INFORMATION 

1. Engaging and Informing the Public About Campaign Finance Information 

Disclosing the sources and amounts of funds used to finance federal elections is one of the most important duties of the FEC. Full disclosure of the sources and amounts of campaign funds and fair enforcement of federal campaign finance laws allow the public to make informed decisions in the political process. Transparency requires that information is not only kept by the FEC, but also provided to the public in an easily accessible way. The campaign finance reports are accessible to the public through the FEC’s website at https://www.fec.gov/data/. By making disclosure reports available online, the FEC provides the public with up-to-date information about the financing of federal elections and political committees’ compliance with campaign finance laws. 

The table immediately below presents the Total Receipts and Disbursements Reported to the FEC by all entities that disclosed to the FEC over the last four completed election cycles. For each election cycle, it also includes a count of the number of transactions reported to the FEC. This count shows dramatic increases due to new fundraising and contribution sharing techniques that have resulted in voluminous reports to be processed at the FEC. 

Total Reported Receipts, Disbursements and Transactions 

Election Cycle  Total Receipts  Total Disbursements  Transaction Count 

2012  $8,884,594,132  $8,795,764,278  45,246,781 

2014  $5,976,582,396  $5,815,419,284  55,976,477 

2016  $10,926,836,244  $10,729,954,205  122,147,807 

2018  $10,333,084,467  $10,010,442,497  269,306,129 

Over the past several years, the FEC has made significant progress to modernize its IT systems and processes. These efforts include the redesign of the FEC website and the migration to a cloud environment of the FEC’s campaign finance database, which contains over forty years of transaction-level campaign finance data reported to the agency. Handling the surge in transaction counts would have been extraordinarily difficult and expensive, if the database had not migrated to a cloud environment. Moreover, as a result of the migration, the FEC was able to shut down one of its four physical data centers during FY 2018 and realize reduced future costs. To continue to mitigate an anticipated steep rise in future cost, the FEC is pursuing a modernization plan now and over the next several years to continue cloud migration and improvement IT processes. 5

The graph below presents Total Receipts and Disbursements Reported to the FEC by all entities since 1980. 

Total Reciepts  and  Total Disbursements 

$12,000,000,000 $10,000,000,000 $8,000,000,000 $6,000,000,000 $4,000,000,000 $2,000,000,000 

# 111 11 1111 11 1 II 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 

• Total  receipts  • Total  disburseme nts  •6

The following graph shows the recent dramatic increase in the number of transactions reported in campaign finance disclosure reports. 

Transparency requires that information is not only kept by the FEC, but also provided to the public in an easily accessible way. In order to make certain that campaign finance disclosure information is quickly available and easily accessible to the public, the agency has made a number of improvements to modernize its campaign finance disclosure database and public interface. Specifically, the FEC has developed application programming interfaces (APIs) and other tools to improve access to campaign finance data. 

2. Protecting Campaign Finance Information 

Protecting information technology systems and data has never been more vital than in the current environment, particularly for the campaign finance information reported to the FEC. The Commission has taken strategic steps to implement a platform of security and privacy. FEC recognizes that perfect security is not feasible; it is a continuing process of detecting risks, process improvements and hardening defenses. For that reason, the benchmark of the FEC’s approach to cybersecurity is practicability and continuous improvement. Our cybersecurity strategy outlines an approach of securing our infrastructure and preventing intrusions through a 

Transaction Count  

> 300,000,000 250,000,000 200,000,000 150,000,000 100,000,000 50,000,000
> 0

# I I1980198219841986198819901992199419961998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 20102012 20142016 2018 7

holistic cybersecurity program led by the Chief Information Security Officer. In partnership with the United States Department of Homeland Security and cybersecurity partners, the agency continues to evaluate emerging threat vectors and focus on efforts to enhance both defenses and mitigation strategies as potential intrusion attempts occur on a regular basis. 

The FEC has adopted a four pillared approach to security and privacy. The four pillars are to (1) adopt National Institute of Standards and Technology Cyber Security Framework; (2) implement a robust security architecture; (3) adopt Cloud First Initiative; and (4) build a cybersecurity culture. 

Adopt National Institute of Standards and Technology Cyber Security Framework 

The first pillar of the FEC’s overarching strategy to protect security and privacy is to adopt the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cyber Security Framework (CSF). The FEC is exempted from the Paperwork Reduction Act’s requirement that federal agencies adhere to the NIST standards for information technology security. In FY 2014 the agency contracted with an IT security consultant to perform a comprehensive review of implementing further NIST guidelines at the FEC. During FY 2015, the Commission voted to adopt the NIST Risk Management Framework and NIST IT security control “best practices.” Adoption of the NIST CSF was included as a strategic objective in the agency’s IT Strategic Plan, FY 2017-2021. The FEC’s cyber security strategy, which encompasses the NIST CSF and industry best practices, outlines an approach of securing our infrastructure and preventing intrusions through a holistic cybersecurity program. 

Implement a Robust Security Architecture 

The second pillar of our strategy is to implement a robust security architecture. In partnership with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, the OCIO has collaborated with FEC stakeholders and technical experts to identify, protect, detect and respond to the impact of known and unknown threats, continuously assessing security controls and addressing the remaining residual risks. The FEC has also entered into an inter-agency agreement with DHS to participate in the Federal Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation program. By partnering with DHS, the FEC is able to leverage that agency’s cybersecurity resources, which would be cost prohibitive for an agency of the FEC’s size to procure independently. 

Following NIST guidelines and the Commission’s own prioritization and resources, the first wave of projects undertaken to enhance to FEC’s security architecture focused on the “protect” function to hinder threat actors from gaining access to FEC IT assets and data. The initial project included strengthening the FEC’s perimeter defenses using Software Defined Perimeter and protecting users from inadvertently infecting their systems by using a robust end-point solution. The FEC has additionally implemented tools and services that: 

• Detect and/or identify malicious behavior activities. 

• Continuously log the entire FEC network flow, which allows OCIO staff to track and identify egress and ingress traffic. 

• Identify critical, high and medium vulnerabilities to update/patch for mitigating FEC computer systems. 

• Implemented email controls to filter and deliver only trusted emails. 8

Adopt Cloud First Initiative 

The third pillar of our strategy is to adopt a cloud first initiative for security, accessibility and recoverability. Hosting systems and data in a cloud environment allows the FEC to utilize our cloud service providers’ significant resources that are dedicated to maintaining the highest level of security. In addition, by utilizing the cloud service providers’ robust disaster recovery solutions, the FEC eliminates the need to maintain physical disaster recovery sites, which are costly to maintain and secure. The FEC has already completed the migration of its largest database, the campaign finance database, and its website to a cloud environment. The FEC’s new website, launched in May 2017, uses FedRAMP Authorized cloud services, which  provides a standardized approach to security assessment, authorization, and continuous monitoring for cloud products and services. 

Build a Cybersecurity Culture 

The fourth pillar of this strategy is to build a cybersecurity culture. For this comprehensive cybersecurity strategy to be successful, the OCIO will partner with Federal agencies and industry leaders to leverage best practices for our IT workforce. The first line of defense in maintaining the protection and integrity of the agency’s network is the ongoing education of employees about their role in identifying and preventing malicious activities. The Commission’s main target will be recruiting and training talent with cybersecurity expertise. In April 2019, the FEC entered into a partnership with the Partnership for Public Service to participate in the Cybersecurity Talent Initiative. This selective, cross-sector program, which provides loan forgiveness to top bachelors and masters graduates around the United States in exchange for at least two-years’ service at a federal agency, addresses the immediate cybersecurity talent deficiency faced by federal government agencies by attracting service-minded individuals to government who might not otherwise have applied. 

B. PROMOTING COMPLIANCE WITH THE FEDERAL ELECTION CAMPAIGN ACT 

1. Encouraging Compliance Through Education 

Helping those subject to the Commission’s jurisdiction understand their obligations under federal campaign finance laws is an essential component of voluntary compliance. The FEC’s education and outreach programs provide information necessary for compliance with campaign finance laws and give the public the context necessary to interpret the campaign finance data filers disclose. The FEC maintains a toll-free line and public email accounts to respond to inquiries regarding campaign finance data disclosed to the public and questions about how to comply with campaign finance laws and its reporting requirements. The FEC’s Public Disclosure and Media Relations Division and Congressional Affairs Office also respond to inquiries. 

One way the Commission encourages voluntary compliance is by hosting conferences across the country, where Commissioners and staff explain how FECA applies to candidates, parties and political action committees. These conferences address recent changes in the law and focus on fundraising, methods of candidate support and reporting regulations. 9

The FEC also devotes considerable resources to ensuring that staff can provide distance learning opportunities to the general public. The Commission’s website is one of the most important sources of instantly accessible information about FECA, Commission regulations, and Commission proceedings. In addition to viewing campaign finance data, anyone with Internet access can use the website to track Commission rulemakings, search advisory opinions, audits, and closed enforcement matters, view campaign finance data, and find reporting dates. The Commission places a high emphasis on providing educational materials about campaign finance laws and its requirements. Toward this end, the FEC has moved its focus away from the printing and manual distribution of its educational materials and instead looked for ways to leverage available technologies to create and disseminate dynamic and up-to-date educational materials through the website. While the Commission continues to make available printed copies of its educational brochures and publications, transitioning to primarily web-based media has allowed the agency to reduce significantly its printing and mailing costs and use of resources while at the same time encouraging new and expanded ways of communicating with the public via the website. 

As part of this broad effort to improve its Internet communications and better serve the educational needs of the public, the Commission maintains its own YouTube channel, which can be found at  http://www.youtube.com/FECTube . The YouTube channel offers a variety of instructional videos and tutorials that enable users to obtain guidance tailored to their specific activities. 

The agency’s educational outreach program has been significantly enhanced with the addition of an online training service that enables political committees, reporters, students and other groups to schedule live, interactive online training sessions with FEC staff. This on-demand service allows the FEC to provide tailored, distance learning presentations and training to the public in a manner that will significantly increase the availability of FEC staff to serve the public. The service also offers an efficient and effective way for alternative dispute resolution and other enforcement respondents to satisfy the terms of their agreements with the agency. 

2. Enforcing FECA’s Requirements 

a. Enforcement and Compliance Processes 

The FEC has formed strategies for ensuring that its enforcement and compliance programs are fair, effective and timely. The Commission’s statutory obligation is to administer, interpret and enforce the Federal Election Campaign Act, which serves the compelling governmental interest in deterring corruption and the appearance of corruption in financing elections. In doing so, the Commission remains mindful of the First Amendment’s guarantees of freedom of speech and association, and the practical implication of its actions on the political process. 10 

The FEC has exclusive jurisdiction over civil enforcement of federal campaign finance laws. 5 Commission enforcement actions, which are handled primarily by the Office of General Counsel (OGC), originate from a number of sources, including external complaints, referrals from other government agencies and matters generated by information ascertained by the Commission in the normal course of carrying out its supervisory responsibilities. Enforcement matters are handled by OGC pursuant to the requirements of FECA. If the Commission cannot settle or conciliate a matter involving an alleged violation, the Commission may initiate civil litigation by filing and prosecuting a civil action in Federal district court to address the alleged violation. Closed enforcement matters are available via the FEC website. 

To augment OGC’s traditional enforcement role, the Office of Compliance manages several programs that seek to remedy alleged violations of FECA and encourage voluntary compliance. These programs include: 1) the Alternative Dispute Resolution Program, 2) the Administrative Fine Program and 3) the Audit Program. The Commission’s Alternative Dispute Resolution Program is designed to resolve matters more swiftly by encouraging the settlement of less-complex enforcement matters with a streamlined process that focuses on remedial measures for candidates and political committees, such as training, internal audits and adopting compliance and internal control measures. Violations involving the late submission of, or failure to file, disclosure reports are subject to the Administrative Fine Program. This Program is administered by the Reports Analysis Division (RAD), which assess monetary penalties, and the Office of Administrative Review (OAR), which handles challenges to the penalty assessments. The Audit Program conducts “for cause” audits under the FECA in those cases where political committees have failed to meet the threshold requirements for demonstrating substantial compliance with the Act , and conducts mandatory audits under the public funding statutes. Subject to limited redactions, program review requirements approved by the Commission and used by RAD and the Audit Division are public documents. 

The Office of Compliance’s Reports Analysis Division (RAD) reviews an ever-increasing volume of reports to track compliance with the law and to ensure that the public record provides a full and accurate representation of reported campaign finance activity. If the FEC’s review identifies an apparent violation or raises questions about the information disclosed on a report, RAD sends a request for additional information (RFAI letter) to the filer, affording an opportunity to take remedial action or correct the public record, if necessary. If the filer is able to resolve the FEC’s concerns, it may avoid an enforcement action. If not, the Commission has several tools available to it, such as the Administrative Fine Program, Audit Program, the Alternative Dispute Resolution Program and the traditional enforcement program. In addition, RAD devotes a significant amount of resources assisting filers with compliance, handling phone calls on a daily basis, and electronic inquiries through a new web portal system. 

The Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Program was implemented in FY 2001 with the primary objective to enhance the agency’s overall effectiveness through more expeditious resolution of enforcement matters with fewer resources required to process complaints and internal referrals. A case is closed when the Commission votes on the recommendation made by  

> 5It consults with the U.S. Department of Justice, as appropriate, on matters involving both civil and criminal enforcement of FECA. 11

the ADR Office (ADRO) as to what final action should be taken. The ADRO has closed 830 matters from the inception of the program through August 31, 2019, assessing $2,018,897.34 in civil penalties. 

In response to a legislative mandate, an Administrative Fine (AF) Program was implemented in July 2000 to address late and non-filing of disclosure reports in a more efficient and effective manner. The AF Program is administered by RAD and Office of Administrative Review (OAR), which are within the Office of Compliance. Since the Administrative Fine Program’s inception in July 2000 through August 31, 2019, the Commission has closed 3,278 cases and assessed fines of $4.8 million. Most importantly, the Administrative Fine Program continues to succeed in reducing the number of late and non-filed reports, thereby increasing campaign finance transparency through the timely disclosure of campaign finance activity. The Committee on House Administration was instrumental in the bipartisan passage of a bill extending the Administrative Fine Program through reports covering 2023. 

The Commission generally conducts audits when a committee appears not to have met the threshold requirements for substantial compliance. The audit determines whether the committee complied with the limitations, prohibitions and disclosure requirements of FECA. In addition, the Commission is required by law to audit Presidential campaigns that accept public funds. The Commission has completed a total of 1,036 audits since 1976, these reports are available for review on the FEC website, and searchable by election cycle, committee/candidate name and by overall finding and/or issue. 

b. Recent Enhancements to the Processes and Procedures 

In 2016, the Commission updated its policy regarding the types of enforcement case file documents that are made public on conclusion of an enforcement matter. Significant additions to the types of documents released included all General Counsel’s Reports, and not just those that recommend dispositive actions; all draft Factual and Legal Analyses that are subject to a Commission vote; and agreements with respondents to toll the statute of limitations. The Commission also clarified that it would not release to the public sua sponte submissions, or external referrals from other agencies and law enforcement sources in cases where the Commission declines to open a Matter Under Review. In the same Federal Register notice, the Commission announced a policy of releasing a wide variety of administrative materials, including various statistics about its enforcement docket. Files of closed enforcement cases, as well as the administrative materials, can be found on the Commission’s web site. 

c. Status of FEC Enforcement 

Between January 1, 2012 and September 20, 2019, the Commission closed 947 Matters Under Review (MURs) through the ordinary enforcement process described in section 309 of FECA. 6 It also closed an additional 32 Matters Under Review on OGC’s docket by  

> 6Matters Under Review are a type of administrative enforcement matter handled by the Commission’s Office of General Counsel pursuant to section 309 of FECA. External complaints filed with the Commission are designated Matters Under Review (MURs) and assigned a MUR number upon receipt. MURs may be designated by

12 

referring them to ADRO for resolution. 250 matters are currently pending at the FEC. 199 of those matters are active and 51 are inactive. 

The following chart shows the election cycle that pertains to the matters currently pending at the FEC. 

Election Cycle  Active  Inactive  Total 

2012  1 0 1

2014  3 0 3

2016  78  6 84 

2018  106  31  137 

2020  11  14  25 

199  51  250 

(As of Sept. 20, 2019) 

In September 2016, the Commission directed the agency to prioritize foreign national prohibition matters. In response, the Office of General Counsel has taken a number of steps to do so. Along with cases that are statute-of-limitations imperiled when OGC receives them, foreign national prohibition cases are assigned to OGC staff attorneys before any other class of cases. OGC has also modified its Status of Enforcement reports to the Commission so that the Commission is provided with complete data on every foreign national prohibition case on a quarterly basis. Further, OGC has revised its procedures so that it may more efficiently track the progress of all foreign national prohibition matters through the enforcement process. Finally, for foreign national prohibition matters that are not resolved by tally votes, the Commission has prioritized the placement of these matters on Executive Session agendas for faster Commission consideration. 

As of September 15, 2016, the Commission had 14 enforcement matters in house that included alleged violations of the foreign national prohibition. All 14 of those have been closed. 7

the Commission itself; for instance, if the Commission determines to sever an allegation or a respondent from an existing MUR and pursue a case separately, it will open a new MUR, sever the portions of the case from the existing MUR, and transfer them to the new MUR. There are also preliminary types of enforcement matters that may also become MURs and are assigned MUR numbers if the Commission determines to “open a MUR” and pursue the matter. These case types are RAD referrals, Audit Referrals, and Pre-MURs ( sua sponte submissions or external referrals), and other internally-generated matters.  

> 7

See FEC Report to the Committees on Appropriations on Enforcing the Foreign National Prohibition, 8-9 and n. 36 (Sept. 18, 2018), copy enclosed and available at https://www.fec.gov/resources/cms-content/documents/Foreign_National_Report_To_Congress.pdf (“Appropriations Report”) (discussion of MUR 7035 (Australian Labor Party, et al. )); id. at 8 and n. 35 (discussion of MUR 7081 (Floridians for a Strong Middle Class)); id. at 9 and n.39 (discussion of MURs 6962 and 6982 (Project Veritas, et al .)); id. at 9 and n. 38 (discussion of MUR 6944 (Farias)); id. at 9 (discussion of MUR 6976 (City Council Committee for Johnny W. Streets, Jr.)); id. 

at 11 and n.46 (discussion of MURs 7094, 7096 and 7098 (Donald J. Trump for President, et al. )); MUR 7122 (Right to Rise USA),  https://www.fec.gov/data/legal/matter-under-review/7122/ ; MUR 6959 (DNC and Nava), https://www.fec.gov/data/legal/matter-under-review/6959/; MUR 7059 (Human Rights for Vietnam PAC, et al .), 13 

Subsequent to September 15, 2016, and as of September 20, 2019, the Commission received an additional 46 enforcement matters that include alleged violations of the foreign national prohibition. Of those 46, 11 have been closed 8 and 35 remain open. Of the remaining 35 matters, 33 are active and assigned to OGC Enforcement attorneys, while two were recently received by the Commission and are inactive. 

C. INTERPRETING AND DEVELOPING THE CAMPAIGN FINANCE LAWS 

The Commission responds to questions about how the Federal Election Campaign Act applies to specific situations by issuing advisory opinions (AOs). In addition, Congressional action, judicial decisions, petitions for rulemaking, Commission initiatives, or other changes in campaign finance often necessitate that the Commission update or adopt new regulations. 

The Commission has recently issued several noteworthy AOs. 

In 2018 and 2019, the Commission issued several advisory opinions concerning provision of low- or no-cost cybersecurity services to candidates and political committees. The Commission concluded in each instance that provision of such services would not result in prohibited in-kind contributions and would be permissible under FECA and Commission regulations. 9

Since 2017, the Commission has issued key clarifications about FECA’s restrictions on personal use of campaign funds in the areas of childcare expenses, protection of the security of the personal devices of office holders, and the home security of Members of Congress. FECA and Commission regulations prohibit personal use of campaign funds,  which occurs when campaign funds are used to fulfill any commitment, obligation, or expense that would exist irrespective of a candidate’s campaign or an individual’s duties as a federal officeholder.  In each of the circumstances presented, the Commission determined that the proposed use of funds was permissible under FECA and Commission regulations and was not a prohibited personal use. 10              

> https://www.fec.gov/data/legal/matter-under-review/7059 ; MUR 6865 (Azano),
> https://www.fec.gov/data/legal/matter-under-review/6865/ ; MUR 6932 (Clinton),
> https://www.fec.gov/data/legal/matter-under-review/6932/ .
> 8See Appropriations Report at 8 and n. 33 (discussion of MUR 7141 (Beverly Hills Residents and Businesses to Preserve Our City)); id. at 10 and n.43 (discussion of ADR 822 (Arteaga)); id. at 7 and n. 30 (discussion of MUR 7205 (Jill Stein for President, et al. )); MUR 7144 (Jacobs, et al. ),
> https://www.fec.gov/data/legal/matter-under-review/7144/ ; MURs 7430, 7444 and 7445 (Unknown Respondents),
> https://www.fec.gov/data/legal/matter-under-review/7430/ ; MUR 7232 (Party of Regions),
> https://www.fec.gov/data/legal/matter-under-review/7272/ ;MUR 7314 (NRA),
> https://www.fec.gov/data/legal/matter-under-review/7314/ ; MUR 7414 (Doyle for Congress),
> https://www.fec.gov/data/legal/matter-under-review/7414/ .
> 9See AO 2018-11 (Microsoft); AO 2018-12 (Defending Digital Campaigns); and AO 2019-12 (Area 1 Security).
> 10 See AO 2019-13 (MJ for Texas); AO 2018-06 (Liuba for Congress); AO 2018-15 (Wyden); and AO 2017-07 (Sergeant at Arms). 14

D. ADMINISTERING THE PRESIDENTIAL PUBLIC FUNDING PROGRAM 

The Commission’s responsibilities also include administering the public funding of Presidential elections, as provided in the Presidential Primary Matching Account Act and the Presidential Election Campaign Fund Act. Through the public funding program, the federal government provides matching funds to candidates seeking their party’s Presidential nomination and grants to Presidential nominees for their general election campaigns. 

The program is funded by taxpayers who voluntarily check off the $3 designation for the Presidential Election Campaign on their income tax returns. The percentage of taxpayers who check off the designation for the Presidential Election Campaign Fund continues to decline. Recent statistics from the Internal Revenue Service show the following check off rates: 

Calendar Year  Percent of Tax Returns with PECF Designation 

2018  3.9 % 

2017  4.1 % 

2016  4.4 % 

2015  5.4 % 

Thus far in the 2020 Presidential election cycle, no candidate has applied for matching funds for the 2020 Presidential primary elections. In 2016, two primary candidates participated in public funding programs, and their campaigns received a total of $1.5 million in public funds. 

The balance in the Presidential Election Campaign Fund as of July 31, 2019, is $353,074,995, according to the U.S. Treasury. This amount is unusually large for this program account, due to reduced candidate participation in the Presidential public funding programs. 

E. THE 2018 FEC LEGISLATIVE RECOMMENDATIONS 

The Federal Election Campaign Act authorizes the Commission to make recommendations for legislative action. In December 2018, the Commission most recently approved 11 Legislative Recommendations. The Recommendations are: 

• Electronic Filing of Electioneering Communication Reports 

• Authority to Create Senior Executive Service Positions 

• Prohibit Fraudulent PAC Practices 

• Fraudulent Misrepresentation of Campaign Authority 

• Conversion of Campaign Funds 

• Prohibit Aiding or Abetting the Making of Contributions in Name of Another 15 

• Increase and Index for Inflation Registration and Reporting Thresholds 

• Increase the In-Home Event Exemption and Unreimbursed Travel Expense Exemption for Candidates and Political Parties 

• Permit Political Committees to Make Disbursements by Methods Other than Check 

• Update Citations to Reflect the Recodification of FECA 

• Repeal of Convention Funding Provisions Rendered Non-Operational by the Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act 

The Commission’s 2018 Legislative Recommendations can be found at 

http://www.fec.gov/law/legrec2018.pdf  and are also attached. 

F. FEC’s ALLOCATION OF STAFF 

In order to accomplish its mission and meet the requirements of other legislation, the Federal Election Commission has arranged its employees into various mission-related or support offices. The organizational chart below depicts that arrangement and has been annotated with the number of employees in each of the organizational units. 

FEC’s Organizational Structure and Employees’ Distribution 

304 Employees as of September 25, 2019 

The Office of Compliance includes the Reports Analysis Division (59), the Audit Division (28), the Alternative Dispute Resolution Office (3), and the Office of Administrative 

# •COMMISSIONERS 

r-

# 8 ~ ontt  G UIIII  0,..,c.HIMA,110',  Ulflt  1R 1

# LJ  LJ  0

# 0 0

# ~ G

# ·0  0

# GJ         

> 1lll!ff'.PQ"illh,1n Oil •llMK,mt.-l~On rnorrn.1lt)•rp~r l~iH lottK-!t-i:iiffOW~o,'1'ho.m1ium. 1,>pc,rhfOlh

tC1mm1,  110n•h  It  ,\lpr  11th  \+"ii•r , tJU>                             

> .... ,n i;rllJ"'lfJ~• ~,, n,~ 10 lh It pot,tUf;)rl lh •St-ltl Oirvt. tor ilill'd 11-.o po,tfk>t\ollh OtM•f b,1Qfll'Mti041 ii r, ~Uf U,Jl'II t Q ,\fl Ylhvt"il.-4fktf1

bi,  11  ' CJm •        

> ml): ooik1iJb,;tw,d,M1J') .. r\~;.V1Ml'\i11'1C•dtcitlOfl fr1J1T1d ~omplrot r

oil  .;wdr•\'\,:~1hP~l1,A IIOf\.lr1 1  rttvtl  I bo t t,~Ukln  th  , l illlO lr  •             

> 1ut 1ld1h•t.:h, 1l 11,tt.>rm-i111un t11 r -rep,i;> ttln,,t1hr 1",a1u1h• Otrlm
> lThp Ollllt"to o s

1h11  1r,._..,~1or  nieor-.a,  ( IG t  •11rt"P""oJ.;,,n1~  «)lldll(1  •ud•  f!l\'ahJdtllt)rtt.  ,,t11t~  h • ,1 o;lj,  OIG  ~•"f'~  th/ii            

> r~tdllll( nl~ liO' I'" rirli•lr.lptnr(I. .._,."(K,, JINI WUh ,t1rlr lo'I. Qtlt..
> J

lheO..c  Qrtu-rlqkUIWphJ  m n10ppo,tun11  tvflO r b.lOlh  W101n.!'  rvn,c.hnln~t•M  ees._.t,  b1fthd  dfN  f'i.lpor'1jng.1 01h Pf'lh't01M>Cntnr n!"-o1lun ~

llleO• •• " ...  "'~c ·1~1.1•  1<urb 1..i 16 

Review (1) (which reviews the challenges within the Administrative Fine Program). The Office of Communications includes the Information Division (15), the Public Disclosure and Media Relations Office (9) and Congressional Affairs (2). 

In addition to the positions shown above, the Commission approved posting vacancy announcements for up to 25 additional positions: 13 in the Office of Staff Director, 10 in the Office of General Counsel and two in Office of Inspector General. 11 

II. FEC’s BUDGET 

The chart below presents the appropriations the Federal Election Commission has received in FY 2016 through FY 2019, the amounts provided in the bills passed by the House of Representatives and pending before the Senate for FY 2020, as well as the amount the FEC requested for FY 2021 in its September 2019 submission to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). Excluded are amounts for lease termination expenses of $5 million and $8 million for FYs 16 and 17, respectively. The Federal Election Campaign Act requires that, whenever the FEC submits any budget request to OMB, the Commission must concurrently transmit a copy of the budget request to Congress. 

Fiscal Year  Source  Amount for Operational Budget 

FY 2016  Enacted  $71,119,000 

FY 2017  Enacted  $71,119,000 

FY 2018  Enacted  $71,250,000 

FY 2019  Enacted  $71,250,000 

FY 2020  House Bill  $71, 497 ,000 

FY 2020  Senate Bill  $70,537,500 

FY 2021  FEC ’s OMB Budget Request  $72,653,625 

The Commission is well aware of the constraints on federal spending generally, and although the FEC’s appropriation is a small portion of discretionary spending, the Commission appreciates the support of its mission that Congress has shown by maintaining these appropriation levels in this budget climate. 

While funding amounts for the FEC have been generally level, the Commission faces rising costs. Personnel costs rise with increased costs for benefits. Non-personnel costs increase as well, including some by contractual provision. The Commission is continually reviewing its operations and processes for opportunities to enact cost-saving measures. Over the past decade, the Commission has critically analyzed every position vacated through attrition to determine whether the agency could absorb the loss of that position by using existing staff resources. Senate electronic filing continues to permit the FEC to avoid expenses as well.  

> 11 These figures do not include the vacancy announcement for the fellow in the Cybersecurity Talent Initiative, described above in part I.A.2. 17

As discussed above, the FEC is also implementing a multi-phase plan to reduce reliance on physical servers and migrate appropriate systems and data to a cloud environment. In conjunction with the redesign of the agency’s website, the FEC successfully migrated its largest database, the campaign finance database, to a cloud environment and shut down one physical data center during FY 2018. Cloud hosting offers a number of benefits for the FEC’s campaign finance database and website. The agency’s Internet traffic is variable, with many more visitors accessing the website during election years and near reporting deadlines. With a cloud-hosted application and database infrastructure, the FEC only needs to pay for the actual usage, rather than constantly maintaining the capacity to support peak usage, even during periods of reduced usage. Website downtime is minimized and server maintenance is managed by the cloud computing provider. During FY 2020, the FEC will conduct a study to determine how best to migrate other appropriate systems and databases to the cloud, allowing the agency to realize greater efficiency and performance in future years. 

Conclusion 

The Commission appreciates the interest of the Committee on House Administration in the FEC. This document, together with the materials the Commission provided to the Committee in its preparation for this hearing, provide a thorough review of the Federal Election Commission. The Commissioners would be happy to respond to any questions you may have today or in further written submissions. U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON :For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512–1800; DC area (202) 512–1800 Fax: (202) 512–2104 Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC 20402–0001 72–282 2012 

# FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION: REVIEWING POLICIES, PROCESSES AND PROCEDURES 

# HEARING BEFORE THE 

## SUBCOMMITTEE ON ELECTIONS 

OF THE 

# COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS FIRST SESSION Held in Washington, DC, November 3, 2011 Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration 

# (

Available on the Internet: 

http://www.gpoaccess.gov/congress/house/administration/index.html 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 5011 Sfmt 5011 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING      

> AUTHENT ICATE ~
> U.S. GOVERNMENT .
> INFORMA TION

GPO (II) COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California, Chairman 

GREGG HARPER, Mississippi PHIL GINGREY, M.D., Georgia AARON SCHOCK, Illinois TODD ROKITA, Indiana RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania, 

Ranking Minority Member 

ZOE LOFGREN, California CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas PROFESSIONAL STAFF PHILIP KIKO , Staff Director & General Counsel 

J AMIE FLEET , Minority Staff Director 

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ELECTIONS GREGG HARPER, Mississippi, Chairman 

AARON SCHOCK, Illinois RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida TODD ROKITA, Indiana CHARLES A. GONZALEZ, Texas ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 5904 Sfmt 5904 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

----(1) 

FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION: REVIEW-ING POLICIES, PROCESSES AND PROCE-DURES THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 2011 

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ,SUBCOMMITTEE ON ELECTIONS ,COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION ,

Washington, DC. 

The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in room 1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Gregg Harper (chair-man of the subcommittee) presiding. Present: Representatives Harper, Nugent, Schock, Rokita, Lun-gren (ex officio), and Gonzalez. Staff Present: Phil Kiko, Staff Director and General Counsel; Peter Schalestock, Deputy General Counsel; Kimani Little, Parlia-mentarian; Joe Wallace, Legislative Clerk; Yael Barash, Assistant Legislative Clerk; Salley Wood, Communications Director; Bob Sen-senbrenner, Elections Counsel; Karin Moore, Elections Counsel; Jamie Fleet, Minority Staff Director; Matt Defreitas, Minority Pro-fessional Staff; Khalil Abboud, Minority Elections Staff; Thomas Hicks, Minority Elections Counsel; and Matt Pinkus, Minority Pro-fessional Staff. Mr. H ARPER . I will now call to order the Committee on House Administration’s Subcommittee on Elections for today’s oversight hearing on reviewing the policies, processes and procedures of the Federal Election Commission. The hearing record will remain open for 5 legislative days so that members may submit any materials that they wish to be included therein. A quorum is present, so we may proceed. I want to thank everyone for being here today. Certainly we are all busy and so, I thank you for taking this time to be here. We believe this hearing is long overdue. In fact, the last FEC oversight hearing before this Commission was in 2004. Seven years is a long time to go without an oversight hearing on an agency with such great consequence to political discourse. There has been a break-down in this committee’s oversight responsibility and it has been a bipartisan one, and it is now time for that to change. This past summer, the committee presented the FEC with ques-tions pertaining to agency operations, regulations and litigation. Putting partisan conflicts aside, we want to explore the practical functionality of the agency. How it works can impact political speech and overall disclosure.         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

2It was a long list of questions. We had a great deal of catching up to do, and I appreciate the FEC’s responsiveness to our inquir-ies. There have been some positive accomplishments, particularly in providing more due process for those dealing with the FEC. However, I found some of the answers to be troublesome and others that perhaps just led to more questions. For instance, why is the agency continuously pursuing litigation based on legal principles that have been rejected in case after case? This constant pursuit to litigate losing cases again and again I be-lieve is an indefensible waste of taxpayers’ money. Or, why hasn’t the Commission updated regulations that are un-constitutional after a ruling by the Supreme Court in January of 2010? Federal general elections are just 12 months away. Campaigns and independent groups are in full operation and the Commission’s regulations are not up to date. How much will candidates spend figuring out what rules to follow and what to do? And finally why, when asked by this committee, did the Commis-sion refuse to provide a copy of several enforcement documents? Why is the Commission withholding its RAD review and referral procedures, its enforcement manual and updates and its penalty formulas? From what I understand the enforcement manual is similar to, for instance, the SEC’s enforcement manual for staff in-vestigations, the Department of Labor’s manual that explains its investigative authority and procedures, the U.S. Attorney’s manual outlining the Justice Department’s enforcement policies, the DOJ’s Antitrust Division’s manual, and the U.S. Parole Commission’s manual to name a few. And there are more. They are similar in that they all provide their respective staffs with guidelines and thresholds necessary to enforce compliance with Federal laws and regulations. But there is one major difference. Theirs are public and yours are not. Instead, you deem yours as a sensitive internal document and I have to ask how you can justify that. Just this past January during the Commission meeting, Commissioner Weintraub noted that promoting transparency is essential to the Commission’s mis-sion. She said, and I quote, we don’t believe in doing things in se-cret. And I have to ask what is the definition of secret. Unlike the FEC, other agencies rightfully make their manuals public to help those trying to comply, understand the standards and thresholds that they will be held to. Shouldn’t everyone subject to your inves-tigation penalties have those same rights? Your unwillingness to release these documents contradicts and ultimately hinders your agency’s core mission. And I think it puts us in a situation of are we really going to be transparent. It is unacceptable and I believe it needs to change, and that is why I am going to ask again. This committee is requesting that you provide us with your RAD manual, your enforcement manual with all updates and your penalty formulas for regular and administra-tive fines proceedings all within 10 business days. Furthermore, we request that you establish agency procedures to make all of them publicly available. To be clear, this is the second time that we are asking and I be-lieve it is the last time that we will ask. The third request will be         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

3in the form of a congressional subpoena and we know we don’t want to go there unless we just have to. But we will. I understand that there are policy disputes over some of the regulatory progress at the agency. But what we are talking about here today are oper-ational failures. What disservice is the Commission providing when it doesn’t even update its regulations to reflect current law? And how can we trust an agency to enforce disclosure when it lacks disclosure? As I mentioned, this agency’s actions are of great consequence. The laws it enforces are limitations on political speech protected by the First Amendment, which is why it is imperative that they be enforced in a fair, consistent and transparent fashion. Again, I do thank you for being here and I look forward to dis-cussing these issues. I would like now to recognize my colleague, Congressman Gonzalez, for the purpose of providing an opening statement. Congressman Gonzalez. Mr. G ONZALEZ . Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. And good morning to one and all and welcome. I do have two serious con-cerns on which I hope this hearing will shine some light on. The majority’s sole recommendation to the so-called supercommittee was eliminating the Election Assistance Commission and transfer-ring some of its duties to the FEC. I am pleased that the minority members under Ranking Member Brady’s leadership suggested other, more effective suggestions, but I also want to know if the FEC can handle the new responsibilities as proposed in the legisla-tion. The value of EAC to local election officials should by now be obvi-ous. One Texas county will save $100,000 per year from a single EAC suggestion. I was pleased to see articles from former FEC Commissioner von Spakovsky and from Eric Ebersole, who the ma-jority called as an expert earlier this year, praising the EAC’s re-port on the 2010 elections. It is not wholly clear to me whether such reports would have survived under H.R. 672 and I am certain that the reports would not have received the same priority. Regulating campaign finance is FEC’s reason for existence and requires the Commissioners’ full attention. This year has seen a host of disturbing reports of financial shenanigans and I am eager to hear what the Commission is doing about them. Let us turn first to the strange career of W Spann, LLC, which was created solely to disguise a $1 million donation to the super PAC of former Massachusetts Governor, Mitt Romney. That donor was shamed into confessing that there were at least two other mys-tery million dollar donations to Mr. Romney’s super PAC. Mimi Swartz in the New York Times later quoted, quote, one influential Houston Republican said of a recent Romney fundraising event, I had someone else pay for me to go because I didn’t want people to know I was there. I believe that paying someone else to donate for you is illegal and with this proven disclosure loophole, how do we know that foreign nationals haven’t illegally contributed too? Nor was Mr. Romney alone in this. From Christina Wilkie we hear of teenagers maxing out their donations to the campaign of my Governor, Rick Perry. Just this week, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported that Herman Cain’s campaign may have received illicit contributions from two Wisconsin corporations created solely         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

4to funnel money to him. I am not asking the Commissioners to comment on any specific allegation, but I want to know what steps are being taken to ensure that our laws are enforced and any loop-holes are indeed closed. These disturbing stories make the record setting level of obstruc-tion and deadlock votes in the FEC all the more troubling. There has been a stunning increase in split deadlock votes at the FEC on enforcement votes. It is up more than 1,100 percent. As former FEC Chairman Trevor Potter said recently of the misguided Citi-zens United decision, quote, the Supreme Court upheld the disclo-sure requirements resoundingly. It is inaction in Washington that has given us no disclosure. The FEC is now deadlocked 3–3. Con-gress is deadlocked. In the first presidential election since Citizens United and SpeechNow, a fully functioning FEC is more important than ever, as shown by these chilling words spoken a few words again. Quote, groups like ours are potentially very dangerous to the political process. We could be a menace, yes. Ten independent expenditure groups, for example, could amass this great amount of money and defeat the point of accountability in politics. We could say whatever we want to say about an opponent of a Senator Smith and the Sen-ator wouldn’t have to say anything. A group like ours could lie through its teeth and the candidate it helps will stay clean. Those words came from Terry Dolan, National Conservative Po-litical Action Committee founder. Commissioners and fellow mem-bers of this committee, it is up to you and to us to make sure that Mr. Dolan’s menace is defamed and that proper disclosure require-ments keep accountability in politics. And, Mr. Chairman, at this time, if appropriate, I would ask for unanimous consent to enter into the record testimony in written form from Common Cause, as well as from Democracy 21. Mr. H ARPER . Without objection. [The information follows:]         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

5

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 13 here 72282A.001 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

# ,> __ 

-~ COMMON  CAUSE     

> ,, JI, -rt

••,f'1i••"-' 

Common Ca u se T estimony to the Subcommittee on .El ec tions of the Committee on House Administration Hearing on th e federal El ec tio n Co mmi ss ion: Re viewing  Polkie s,  Processes and 

Procedures 

November 3, 201 J

Submitted  by  Bob  Edgar 

President and Chief Executive Officer Common Ca use Com mon  Cause  is a national nonpartisan advocacy  organization  foundt'd in 1970 by  John 

Gardner as a vehicle  for ordinary  citb.cns  to make th eir  voices  heard  ln the  political  process.  On 

behalf of our 300,000 members  and  supporters, we appreciate the opportunity to submit this testimony to this Subcommittee regarding tho  Federal  Election Commission. 

The  Supreme Court's  5-4  decision in  Citizens  U11i111d  v_  FEC  overtumed decades  ofwell-

seltled  law  and  opened up  the  floodgates to unlimited  c:orpornte  and  union  spendjng  in our electoral  process.  In the most recent 2010 elections, over $3.6 billion in po litical  .spen ding 

influeneed  the  vote• · a bistoric  blgh  for  a TT\idtenn  election. 1 Of that  sum.  S 133  million  funded independent  cKpenditures  and  electioneering  commwiicntions  by groups  that  never disc losed the source and/ or doaors of  their  money. 2 With the 2012 presidential election well underway, Super 

PACs  and ot her so -called  indt.-pen<lent  groups have announced their plans to shatter outside spend ing records. For example, American Crossroads announced  its  goal to raise and spend  $240 

million,  doubling  irn  original  aspirations.J  A fonner political operative of President Obama  is 

leading a Super PA C that  hopes to  rai se  close  to  S100 million .' 'Distressingly, at precisely the time when a deluge of  $CCrct  money  is  inundaring our political  system,  inaction at the  Federal  Election Co mmission has resulted in a vacuum around the enforcement  nnd  n.dm1nistration  of  cnmprugn  finance  la111s.  The  2010 mldtenn elections provided a mere gli mpse of a new and  rapidly  changing  canwaign  finance  regime  that  is  riddled with loopholes and flush with secr et  cash . Shadow  politic~L  organizations headed by candidat es ·well-known po litical  associates  nre  cKploiting weak coordination  ru les . directly threatening contribution limits  a nd  dismantling the  confidence  of  t he  Ame rican people in their representative democrac y. While an individual may lawfully contribute up  to  $2,500  to a cand id ate per electi on -- those  same  i n div iduals,  al on.g  with corporations  and  unions,  are  now free lo  contrib ut e an           

> 1See Center for Respons ive Politi cs, OPENSECRm.oRG ,"The Money Seh,nd the ttectlo ns ,"
> ht1p://www.opensecrets,org/bigpkture/index, php .
> 2

See  Center  for  Re ;p on sive  Politics.  OPENS ECJtE  IS .OPG , ·12 010  Out;lde  Spending  by  Noo- Disc l o,i ng  Groups,'' 

http;//www.opensecr ets .org/outsidespending/summ.php?cycle=2010&chrt =V&d1sp=O&type=U .

'Nkho la s Co11fessore,  Outside Groups  Eclipsing  G.O . P. OS Hub of Campaigns,  N.  Y. TIM[S,  Oct.  29,  20Ll  at  Al .        

> 'Jeanne Cu mm ing s, New Democratic Money Group

to  Ta~e  on  Repu bli caM,  POUT tCO , Apr.  29,  2011. 6        

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 14 here 72282A.002 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

w11imited amounr of money to  p3111llcl  bu!  ••independent'"  Super PA Cs, which are  thea  entitled  to spend  an  unlimjte<l  sum  of money su pporting or opposing  candidates. 

This new system gravely mocks contribution limits and is a  carte  blanche  invitation  to 

corruption  and  the  appearance  thereof. This new  ·'W ild  West" style of c.ampaigning, the likes of which Americans  have  nor witnessed s ince pre-Watergate, undcnnincs the integrity  of  ou rgovernment and severely challenges longstanding campaign finance law. The  FEC  has foiled to act in accordance with its mission. Three-three votes, often 

fragmented  by party,  result  in deadlock and prevent the  agency  from acting. Although the law mandates that the FEC cannot  exceed  three commissioners from  the  same party,  stalematt"s  were 

not  as frequent as they  have  become  ill  rcee.nt  years. Over  I.he  past decade. deadlocks have increased  substontially, 5 blocking enforcement actions and causing regulatory paralysis. The inability to administer the  law  materially  alll-r,  the electoral playing  f-idd  and  keeps 

voters  in the dark. For example, although  promulgating  robust disclosure  mies  is squarely within the FE C's  purview,  nearly  two  years  after (he Supreme Court  upheld  disclosure  requirements  by 

an  8- l vote in  Cithe11s  United,  the  FEC  remains  gridlocked over the issue, and the secret spending  continues  unabated.  Th.rec  commissioners have repeatedly sought  to  open the already inadequate disclosure rules  to  fublic  comment, only 10 be  met  with stiff opposition hy the remaining three commissioners.' There are sped fie  acrion  steps  that  could  begin  in  oddress FEC  dysfunction.  Ftve of  the 

six  current  commissioners  have  outlasted  their tenn appointments, and yet  they  still remain seated on the FEC. Given the sudden  influx  ofsecrcn  money and an FEC at its most anomic, the President  ml.ISi  name new commissioners  who  will enforce  the  law  before the crisis of confidence drags our elections even  further  into the shadows. The Senate must act  swiftly  on the 

nominations.  end refrain from past practices of undermining the  President's  authority  by  pressing 

for  nominees  that  merely  advance  parti~anship.  When the President names  new  commissioners, it will restore some . confidence in the  system,  provided that  the  new  commissioners  are 

demonstrably  committed to the nonpartisan administration of election  and  campaign finance laws. Moreover, Congress must address the  fF,C's  cumbersome  enforcement  capabllities  lliat 

fail  to  deter,  on  a consistently  1,mcly  hasi~,  candida tes  ancl  other  entitie..~  rrom  flouting  the  law. An  agency  with  a rnbusl  adjudicatory function is one possible solu1ion to this problem, Our democracy and its legitimacy  demands  transparency and accountability. The  FEC  is 

in place to guard against the corrosive influence of money in our electoral  process,  which destroys sound policy and  drowns  out the voices of American  citizen~.  While U1e  fundra1sing   

> arms race

continues  unabated  in a aew  em  of unlimited secret money, now is  precisely  the  time that  commirmcnt  to our campaign finance laws is most  critical.              

> 'T.W. Farnam, fECSti/1 Hasn't Issued New Campaign Spending Ru/ es, WAS~. POST. Mar. 2S, 2011.

• Jonathan o.  Salant,  U.S . Federal  Election  Commission  Deadlocks  on Greater  '12  Donor  Disclosure.  Bcoor.,arnG.  Ju~e 

15.  2011 http:/ /www .bloomberg.com/news/2011-06  -15/u+federal  -electlon-oan  el-considers-lncreased-donor·   

> disclosure for

2012.htmt 7

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 16 here 72282A.003 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

# Testimony of Campaign Legal Center &Democracy 21 

# Submitted to the Committee on House Administration; Subcommittee on Elections "Federal Election Com1nission: Reviewing Policies, Processes and Procedures" November 3, 2011 8        

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 17 here 72282A.004 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Mr . Chairman, distinguished committee members,  thank  you  for  this  opportunity to provide our views on the Federal Election  Commi~sion  (FEC)---its  policies, processes  nnd  procedures. 

The  Campaign  Legal Center (CLC)  is  a nonpartisan. nonprofit  organization  founded in 2002 that works in the  areas  of  c.impaign  fU1ance.  elections aod government ethics, The Legal  Center 

offers  nonpartisan analyses of  issues  and  represents the public interest in administrative, legislative and legal proceedings. The Legal Center also participates in generating and shaping our  nation' s  policy debate about  money  in  politics, disclosure,  political  advertising, and enforcement issues  before  the  Congress.  the  FEC , the  Fe(leral  Communications  Commission (FCC) and the lntemal Revenue Service (IRS). The  Legal  Center's President is Trevor Potter, fom1er Chair of  the  Federal  Election  Commission, and our Executive  Director  i~  Gerry  Heber t. 

former  acting  head  of the  Voting  Section  ofthe  Civil Rights Division at the Depanment of .Justice. Democracy 21 is a  nonpartisan,  nonprofit organization that works to strengthen our democracy and protect against govemmenl corruption by promoting campaign finance  refoCTT1s  and  other 

government  integrity  measures. The organization undertakes efforts to curb the role of 

influence-mone}'  in American politics and to provide  for  honest  ai,d  accountable elected officeholders and public officials. Democracy  21  hus  playeJ an  active  ro.le  in  FEC  matters, iocluding frequent participation in  rulemakings,  advisory opinions and enforcement matters. More than  a decade  ago,  Democracy 21 President Fred  Wenheimer  convened the Project FEC Task Force, a bipanisan blue-ribbon  citizen  Task.  Fom:  composed of some of the nation's mog1 

experier1ced  and respected  campaign  finance and law enforcement  experts.  Trevor Potter, President of the Campaign Legal  Center  and  fonner  FEC  Commissioner. served as a Senior Advisor to the project and a member of the  Task  Force. Donald Simon, general counsel to Democracy 21 , served as a Senior  Advisorsnd  a principle editor  ofthc  Task Force repon. 111 

2002,  the  Task  Force  produced a detailed report entitled  No  Bark, No  Brte , Na  Poinr . The  Cas., 

for  Closing  the Federal Election  Commission  and Eslablishing a  New  System  for  Enforcing  ihe. 

Nation 's Campaign  Fi11ance  Laws. 1

The  repo11,  at  neady  150  pages,  exhaustively detailed  fundamental  problems with the FEC and the central role  the  agency had played in  crea1ing  and  perpetuating campaign finance problems during its first nearly-three  decades  in existence. Given the  enonn,ous  failures  of  the FEC in its 

first  three  decades  of existence, the  Task  Force called for a complete overhaul of the agency-replacing the six-member. deadlock-prone commission with completely new  agency  headed  by~ 

single  administrawr  and  dramatically  strengthening  tlJe  agency"s  enforcement powers. Unfortunately, the FEC has  Qhly  gotten  worse-much  worse - in the decade  since  No  Qa, ·k.  Na 

Bite,  No Point  was  published. Today the FEC is  more  dysfunctional than ever.  The  agency's 

persistent 3-3 deadlock votes on imponant  matters-enforcement  actions,  advisory opinions, 

rulemaking  proceedings-have all but nullified the FEC in recent years. As the most expensive election in this nation' s history kicks into high gear, fueled by corporate and union dollars injected into the system by the Supreme Court's  Ci!izens  Uniled  decision.  the  likelihood of  any 

meaningful campaign finance law enforcement is  slim-to-none.  Furthennore, because of adisclosure loophole created by the FEC in 2007 that today's Commissioners  refuse  to fix, 

1Available  at  ftnp: i /Www. d croocracy'.!  I .o,g1vcnical/ Si1e, 1% 7B3D66FA  FE-2697-446F-B839-

g5f8BBAS  781 1 %70 luoloads i %7884BE.5 C' 1 4-65 f. A::4910-974C • 7596~4EC090  I% 70.pdf. 

29        

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 18 here 72282A.005 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

American  voters will  h.ive  less  informari on  than ever  before  about the  identity  of  wealthy  donors and corporare interests spending tens and perhaps hundreds of mi II  ious  of dollars to sway their 

votes.  2012  wi ll  be a money-in-politics wild  west  and corruption scandals will  inevitably  follow. The Supreme  Court  has  made  the  campaign finance system bad, but the PEC's failure to enforce 

what  law remains on  the  books. and its  crearion  of  unnecessary  loopholes that undermine the disclosure  that  even  the.  Supreme  Court  appmved  of,  makes  a bad situation very much  worne. 

Consequently,  Democracy  21 and the Campaign Legal  Center  renew our longstanding  call  for replacement of  the  FEC with a new, we ll -funded, independent campaign finance regulatory and 

enforcement  agency. 

Exam pl es  of FEC De adl ock D ys function 

Sti I!  'No  Post-Citizens United  Rulemaking  

> {n

January 2010, the Supreme Court issued its landmark decision in  Citizens  U Hited.2  striking down restrictions on  the  use  of  corpo,dte  and , by extension, labor union treasury funds to influence federal elections through express advocacy political ads  (e .g.,  ·'Reelect  Obama,"  '' Vote 

Romney").  The  five-ju.st ice  Citizens  United majority  assured  us all that we  need  not worry about corruption resulting from th is  new  unlimited corporate and union money  in  polilics because voters would have full-disclosure of the sources of this money. In  fac. t,  eight of the Court·s nine 

justices  upheld against First Amendment challenge disclosure  provision!>  enacted as part of  the 

Bipartisan  Campaign Reform Act of 2002 (BCRA). Justice Kennedy wrote on  behalf  eight 

·members  of the Court: 

A campaign finance system tl1 at  pairs  c-0rpora1e  independent  expenditures with effective disclosure has not  existed  before  today,  It must be noted,  furthermore, 

that many of Congress' findings in  passing  BCRA were premised on  a system without adequate disclosure. With  rhe  advent of the  Internet,  prompt  disclosure  of expenditures  can  provide share.holders and citizens with the information  needed  to hold corporations  and  elected officials accountable for  their  positions  and 

supporters,  Shareholders can determine whether  rheir  corporation's  political 

~pccch  advances  the  corporation's interest in making profits, and citizens  can  see whether elected officials  are  '" in  the pocket' of  so-called  moneyed  interests." 

l'hc  First Amendment protects political  speech;  and disclosure permits citizens and shareholders to  react  to the speech of corporate entities in a proper way.  'fbis 

transparency enables the electorate to make informed decisions  and  give  proper 

weight to different speakers and messages. 3

Apparently,  the  C1tize11s  Unt'tedCourt  was  unaware of the  fact  that the FEC. in  a 2007 rulemaking. had  eviscerated  the BCRA "electioneer ing communication" disclosure  requirement.-. 

praised  by the  Court  as  "enablc(ing)  the  electorate to  make  informed decisions  and  give proper weight to different speakers and messages ." Whereas BCRA  requires  every person or group t ha1 spends more  than$  I 0, 000  on  "electioneering  communication''  to  disclose the names and addresses of a ll contributors  who  gave $1.000 or more 1.0 that person or  group.  the FEC took  it 

>Ct li:em  United•  f-£c,  130  s. Ct.  &76  (201 0) 

' /,lat  916  ( i)lfemal  citatio"s  omitted). 

310         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 19 here 72282A.006 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

upon  itsctfto  gut  this disclosure requirement by  "i nstead  , , . requirling]  corporations a.nd labor 

organizations  to disclose on ly the identities of those  persons  wbo made  a donation aggregating $1,000 or more specifically for the purpo se of  furthering  ("electioneering communication"] made 

by  that corporation or  labor  organization ...  i" 

Despite the fact that Congress in BCRA required disclosure of the identity of large  donors  to 

groups  running  election ads, the FEC decided not to  enforce  that requirement  and  instead  it onlv requires disclosure if  the  donor specifically designated the funds to  be  used for electioneering communication. Of course it  W'<iS  entirely  predictable  that  th ose wishing to evade disclosure would si mply refrain from  designating  their funds for electioneering communications and, 

instead,  would give for no designated  purpose  at all.  Thus,  under the FEC's  rule,  there  is no disclosure of who runds the electioneering  communica1ions. 

fn  short..  the FEC had  legalized  money laundering,  Consequently,  donor disclosure by  groups 

spending tens of millions of  dollars  on ·'elecrioneering communication·• plummeted  in  2010. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, for  example,  spent more t han S30 million on ''e lectioneering communication" in the 20 IO elections and did not disclose  i1s  donors; similarly the  Americ.an 

Action  Network  spent more than  $20  million on "ele ctioneering communication" in the 2010 

elections  and  did not disclose  its  donors. 5

So  what  is  tlle  FEC  doing  about the loophole it  created  in  federal  disclosure law- a loophole that guts the disclosure  required  by  Congress  in  BCRA and directly undennines  the  Citizens  United 

Court's  assurances  that voters will have the information necessary  "to  make  informed  decisions and give proper weight to  different  speakers  and  messages"?6  lt is doing nothing. The FEC is  so  dysfunctional that it cannot muster the necessary four votes lo even begin a post •

Citizens  United rulemaking to  address  this and other issues.  Twice  this year the  FEC  has deadlocked 3-3 on vot es to  approve  a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking  (NPRM),  which is merely 

the  first  step of inv it ing public comment  about  what  issues the Commiss.ion should and should not address through promulgation and/or  repeal  of  regulations, The purpose of an NPRM  is  to 

announce publicly the full  scope  of  issues  that might be addressed by the Commission  in  a

rulecnaking  proceeding. along with descriptions of various ways the Commission might address those  issues. 

Rather than  invite  public  i nput  on whether the FEC should revisit the  disclosure  loophole it 

created  in 2007.  Vice  Chair Hunter, together with Commissioners Petersen and  McGahn,  have 

twice  this year vo1ed against  approving  an NPRM that contemplates amendment  of  the Commission's disclosure rules, resulting  in  3-3 deadlock votes with  Chair  Bauerly and Commissioners Walther and Weintraub. Consequently.  the  donor disclosure loophole created by the FEC in  2007  will undoubtedly be exploited even more extensively in 2012. Incorporated nonprofit entities including  the  U.S. Chamber  ofCommerc,e,  Republican-supporting Crossroads GPS,  Democr<1t-supporting  Pr iorities 

• FEC,  Electioneering  Communications,  Final  R.ulcnnd  Explana tion and  Justification,  72  Fed. Reg. 72899,  7'.911 

l De c.  26, 2007). 

For  more  information  on  outside  group  "<iectioneeling  communication;'  without  disclosing  donors , $ee  Center  f~r 

Rc,ponsive  Politic .s,  Outside  Spending  2010,  11Vaiiable  at 

bttp·llwww  opensecre1S.org lou1sidespend  ingl inde~_php 7c.ye1e~20  IO&  v1~w:A&chan~i... 

• Citizens  lh1ited  v F£C,  130  S.  Ct.  at  916. 411         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 20 here 72282A.007 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

USA  ancl  many  more like  lhern,  aU  of which  are  permitted  to spend  n;1oney  on election ads  as  aresult of Citizens  United,  will legally  launder  hundreds of millions of undisclosed special interest dollars into the  2012  elections while the FEC stands by idly. (Rep. Chris  Van  Hollen has  Ii  Jed  a

lawsuit to challenge  the  legality of the  FEC's  deficient  disclosure  regulations.  That lawsuit is 

pending  in  the  U.S. district  court  in Washington. DC. where the FEC is  defending  its loophole-

creating  rule.) Another sticking point in  the  initiation of a post-Citizens  Uni red  rulemaking  i~  whether  or not  \(I 

invite public comment on the Commission' s rules penaining to  forclgn-owned  domestic corporations. The Court concluded in Citizens  United  that  it  '' need  not  ren~h  the question whether the Government has a compelling interest in preventing foreign individuals or 

~ssociations  from influencing our  Nation"s  political  process.'' 7 This  means that the federal law ban on political expenditures by foreign nationals remains in  eJTect. 8 What  remains  unclear  rs 

whothcr  or how  a U.S.-based corporation with some degree of foreign  ownership  can make political  expendltures  now allowed  by  the  Citizens  United decision, For example. what percentage of foreign ownership would render  a Delaware-based corporation a foreign national prohibited from making pol itical  expenditures?  Three FEC Commissioners propos ed  including 

these issues in a post-Citizens  United  NPRM,  v1hile  thre~  refused  to allow  it. 

We  cannot stress strongly  enough  the absurdity of this predicament the FEC has  created.  The 

Citizens United decision has created ambiguity in numerous areas of campaign finance law and highlighted  enormaus  deficiencies in the Commission's disclosure regulations.  Yet  the Commission  is  unable lo even begin a rulemuking proceeding to address these issues. Inaction equals  non-enforlltlment  and  non-enforcement  is wholly  unacceptable. 

Refu~al  to Penalize Clear  Violations  of  the  Law 

The FEC' s dysfunction-by-deadlock is not limited  to  critical rulemakings. The  FEC  also freq uently deadlocks on important enforcement actions. Earli er this year in In Re  Steve  Fine.he, ,

for Congress  (Matter  Under Review (MUR) 6386), the Commi ssion was presented with acomplaint that revealed  a clear violation of federal disclosure laws. A candidate  admittedly 

misreported a $250,000 bank loan as a loan  of  his  personal funds to his campaign committee. All  six  Commissioners agreed with the  Office  of General Counsel's conclusion  that  the law had been broken. However,  the  Commission deadlocked 3-3 on the General Counsel's recommendation that  a significant  civil  monetary  penalty  be imposed. Chair Bauerly, together with  Commissioners  Walther  and Weintraub voted  to  impose  the  recommended civil  penalty. 

while Vice Chair  Himter,  together  with  Commissfoners  McGahn  and  Peterson voted against imposition of a monetary  penalty for the violation.  Bec:1use  any Commission action requires four  aflirmative  v0tes,  the three Republican  Commissioners  blocked  pcn ali;eation  of a clear, admitted violation of  federal  law, Deadlock party-line  votes  on enforcement actions- with the Republican Commissioners voting  to 

dismiss  enforcement  actions and the Democratic Commissioners  voting  to investigate  and 

enforce the  law-have  become all-too-common  nt  the  FEC in recent years. Since  the  beginning  (If 

20 IO alone, the Commission  has  deudlocked  on  party  lines in the following MU Rs:  In  Re 

Ari.llotle  International, Inc . (MUR 5625) 3-3 vote; In  Re  BASF Corporat/011 (MUR 6206)  3,3           

> 'Ciii,ens United v_ Hr . 110 S. Ct. a, 91 1.
> 'See 2U.S,C.

§ 441e_  -

s12         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 21 here 72282A.008 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

vole; in  Re  Freedom  '5  Watch , Inc,  (MUR 6002)  2-3  vote  (Waltl:ler  recused);  ln  Re  Jahn  Gomez 

(Ml.JR  6320)  2-3  vote- (Bauerly  absen1);  In Re  David  Schweikert  for  Congress  (MUR 6348)  3-3 

vote;  In  Re Friends  of Christine  O'Doumdl,  et  al . (MUR  6371)  3-3  vote;  In  Re  Yoder  for 

Congress  (MUR 6399)  2-3  vote (Walther did  not  vote): In Rt  Unknown  Respondents  (M UR 6429)  2-3  vote (Walther  did  not  vote ). The  Commission's  Vice Chnir Hunter, together  with  Commlssloners  l>etersen  and McGahn,  have 

basioal  ly  shut down the FEC enforcement  operation.  Enforcement of campaign  finance  laws  is 

essential to comp liance.  The  FEC  refuses  to do its job  because  of intransigence by the Republican Commissioners. The Republican Commissioners' refusal  to  faithfully  execu1e  the 

powers  of the ir office is not  a question of  disagreement  over the finer points of  law  but, ra th er.  is 

a calculated  effort  to  impose on  1hc  agency  their ideological goal of deregulation of campaign 

finan ce . Put  simply, they  fundamenta ll y disagree with the laws they  are  swom  lo uphold  and 

enforce.  And so  they  refuse to  1iphold  and enforce  them. 

Reco mm en dat ions for  th e Com mitt ee on  House  Ad mini str a tion The FEC has  com •incingly  demonstrated  over  its  nearly-four  decades in existence that it  cannot 

and  will not do  its  job.  The  FEC  is  a failed  agency. We urge the commi11ec to scrap  the 

Commission and  replace  it  with  a new,  well-funded, independent  campaign  finan ce  regulatory 

and  enforcement agency.  Ten  years  ago,  Dcmocrac.y 21,  the  Campaign Legal Center and the Project FEC Task  For ce  provided  Congress  with  n blueprint for such a . new  agency  in  its  report 

No Bork , No Bite, No  Point . The creation of such a  new  agency  should rest  on  Jive foundational 

principles: 

I. The new agency with responsibility for the civil enforcement of th e federal  campoign 

finance laws should  behc~dcd  by  a single odministrator. 2. The new agency should be  independent  of  the  executive  branch. 

3.  The  new agency should have the  aulhority  to  act  in a  timely  and  efTeotive  manner,  and  to 

impose appropriate pena lties on violators,  inclt,ding  civil  monetary  penalties and  ce-dSC-

and-desist  orders,  subject  to  judicial review. A system of adjudication before 

administrative  law judges should be  inc.orporsted  into  the  new enforcement agency in order  to  achieve  1he.se  goals. 

4. A means  shou ld  be  established to help ensure that  the  new age ncy receives adequate resources to  carry  out  its  enforcement responsibilities. 5 . T he criminal enforcement process should be s1rcngtheoed and a  new  limited  private  right 

of action should  be  established  where the agency chooses not to  acL 

The se  pr,ociples  are detailed in the report and served as the basis  oflegislalion  introduced in  the 

1 l o•h  Congress. 9 If campaign finance  laws  arc  to accomplish rheir goals of preventing  corruption 

and maintaining a well-informed electorate. it is  essential  to  establish  a new  system  for  enforcing 

these laws.           

> •H.R. 42 1(tIll'~ Cong., l~Ses~.J.
> (1

13 Mr. G ONZALEZ . Thank you. And I yield back, sir. Mr. H ARPER . Does any other member wish to be recognized for the purpose of making an opening statement? I would now like to introduce our witnesses. Commissioner Cynthia Bauerly is cur-rently Chair of the Federal Election Commission. Previously she served as legislative director for Senator Charles Schumer and as counsel on the Senate Judiciary and Rules Committee. And we thank you for being here. Commissioner Caroline Hunter is the Vice Chair of the FEC. She has been a Commissioner at the Elec-tion Assistance Commission and has worked in the White House, the Department of Homeland Security, and as deputy counsel for the Republican National Committee. Welcome. Commissioner Donald McGahn previously served as the head of a Washington based law practice specializing in election law. He was also general counsel to the National Republican Congressional Committee in the late 1990s, as well as counsel for the Illinois Re-publican Party. Commissioner Matthew Petersen was the Republican chief coun-sel to the Senate Rules and Administration Committee and counsel to the Committee on House Administration. I would like to wel-come Commissioner Petersen back to the committee for his first ex-perience on the other side of the witness table at this committee. Commissioner Steven Walther was Vice Chair of the FEC in 2008 and the Commission’s Chair in 2009. Prior to serving at the FEC, Mr. Walther practiced law for 35 years at his Nevada law firm. Commissioner Ellen Weintraub has been a member of the Com-mission since 2002. She has worked in private practice and was counsel to the House Ethics Committee where she was editor and chief during the creation of the House Ethics Manual. We thank you for a thankless job. Chair and Vice Chair, Commissioners, we thank you for all of you being here today. The committee has received your written tes-timony. And I will recognize the chair and vice chair each for 5 minutes to present a summary of your submissions. To help you keep that time, of course you know we have a timing device near the witness table. The device will emit a green light for 4 minutes and then go to yellow with a minute to go. And at red, your time will have been over. And we will start with the Commissioner Bauerly. And we will start and we welcome you and please proceed. 

STATEMENTS OF THE HON. CYNTHIA L. BAUERLY, CHAIR, FED-ERAL ELECTION COMMISSION; AND THE HON. CAROLINE C. HUNTER, VICE CHAIR, FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION STATEMENT OF THE HON. CYNTHIA L. BAUERLY 

Ms. BAUERLY . Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Harper, Ranking Member Gonzalez, members of the subcommittee. I am pleased to be here on behalf of the Federal Election Commission to discuss the Commission’s operations and procedures. I appreciate the Subcommittee on Elections’ invitation to appear and the oppor-tunity to present a few moments of opening remarks to highlight         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

14 certain aspects of the Commission’s longer written submission to you. I would like just for a moment, if I might, to introduce Mr. Tony Herman, Mr. Alec Palmer, our statutory officers at the Commis-sion. Mr. Herman joined us recently and Mr. Palmer was recently our permanent Staff Director. I know your staffs have met with them and we appreciate your courtesy to them. When I was appointed to the FEC in 2008 along with the Vice Chair, Commissioners Petersen, Commissioner McGahn and Com-missioner Walther who as you know had previously served a recess appointment, the Commission had lacked a quorum for approxi-mately 6 months. When we joined Commissioner Weintraub at the Commission in July of 2008, my colleagues and I found ourselves with a significant backlog of enforcement audits and alternative dispute resolution matters waiting for us. Through a lot of hard work by everyone at the agency, particularly in the Offices of Gen-eral Counsel and Compliance, we have returned to our appropriate processing times for such matters. As you know, a good share of the Federal Election Campaign Act is aimed at disclosure of Federal campaign activity. Following cases like Citizens United and SpeechNow, many new speakers and many recent speakers have become engaged in new ways. With this additional activity, the public increasingly relies on the disclosure provided by committees through the FEC in order to effectively re-spond to and participate in the political debate. Accordingly, the Commission strives to make campaign finance information readily available and useful to the public. Our Website provides disclosure of committee reports and independent expendi-tures and election agency communications in nearly real time as we receive that information. We have also improved the navigation of our Website to make the information easier to find. Of course, to be useful, the information needs to be accurate as well as timely. Accordingly, the FEC devotes a considerable portion of its staff to reviewing all reports. This is not a small task. In fis-cal year 2011, the FEC reports analyst reviewed over 72,000 docu-ments filed by committees. These same analysts work very closely with committees to answer their questions, assist them with filing before the deadlines occur and to resolve problems as they arise. In the last fiscal year, they answered 14,000 phone calls from com-mittees to offer them assistance. They also work extended hours on filing deadlines to make sure they are there when committees need them most. The Commission also works hard to provide informa-tion and training to those who file with the FEC. To better serve filers, the Commission is developing a dedicated Web page that will answer questions our communications specialists also fielded over 11,000 phone calls. The FEC also continues to hold regional conferences so we may get out and provide education and information to those who are complying. I find that participating in these conferences is an im-portant way for me to get to know and meet treasurers and report-ing personnel for committees. And the FEC continues to innovate in ways to reach more com-mittees and filers with this information. For example, in order to provide more cost effective training for grass root organizations and         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

15 candidates, the FEC has instituted a series of lower cost 1-day seminars and workshops focused for a particular group or a legal issue. In addition to disclosure and education, the Commission’s major responsibilities surround the administration and interpretation of the FECA. Public confidence in our elections depends not only on transparency but on the assurance of those who participate in our Federal election system do so within the rules established by Con-gress. In recent years, the Commission has made significant progress in processing enforcement cases and audits more timely. For certain reporting violations, the FEC’s alternative dispute reso-lution program and its administrative fines program has been very effective. And we appreciate this committee’s work on the adminis-trative fines program and hope that the committee will again work to extend or make permanent that program in 2013. We anticipate a very busy election cycle in 2012 and we are pre-pared for it. The FEC has invested in our infrastructure at the Commission to ensure that our servers can handle both the volume and the number of reports that we expect in 2012. And of course all of this is taking place in a time of quickly changing legal land-scapes. And where we can, the Commission is providing its infor-mation as soon as we can without going through the full process of a rulemaking. Recently, the Commission issued some guidance in response to a court settlement in the Carey v. FEC decision. Obviously additional rulemakings will be necessary to update forms and provide full guidance, but we were able to issue specific guidance to committees who want to follow that court decision and we did the same thing following the Citizens United in 2010. I see my time has expired. I look forward to answering all of your questions, and we stand ready to assist the committee in any of its future requests. [The statement of Ms. Bauerly follows:]         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

16 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 29  72282A.009 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

F E DERAL ELECTION COMMISSION    

> WASHINGTON ,D , C , 20463-

CYNTHlA L. BAUERLY, CHA IR OPENING STATEMENT  BEFORE  Ti-IE 

SUBCOMMlTIEE  ON ELECTIONS 

OFTHE. 

COMMITfEE  ON HOUSE ADMrNISTRATION 

U.S. I  fOUSE  OF  REPRESENTATIVES 

HEARtNG:  FEDERAL  ELECTION CO.MM!SS!ON: 

REVIEW.ING  f'OUCIES,  P!WCESSES  AND  PROCIWURES 

NOVEMBER  3, 201 1 17         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 30  72282A.010 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Good afternoon  Chainnnn  Harper, Ranking  Member  Go!IZlllei..  and  Members  of the Subcommittee. I  am  pleased to be here on  behalf  of the Fedeml Election Co mmission 10  discuss 

the Comrnission·s  operations  and procedures. I  nppreciare  the Committee's invitation to  appear 

and to provide  a few  minutes  of opening  remarks  to  highli~t  certain  aspects of the Commission's longer, written  .submission. 

When 1 was appointed to the  l'EC  in 2008,  along  with the Vice Chair, Commissioners Petersen,  McGalm  ru1d  Walfher  - who  as  you know had previously served a recess appoinlmeol 

- the Commissi on had  lucked  a quorum  for approximately 6  mon1hs.  During that  time, 

Committees  continuL'<i  to  file disclosure reports  and  FEC staff continued to receive  and  review those reports. Commission staff continued to provide infonnation  to  committees  and  the public. Without  a quorum,  however,  important  aspects  or  the agency'5  operations  were put  on  ho ld .

Accordingly,  when  the  quorum was  reconsti tu ted  in July of 2008, my  colleagues  and I found ourselves with  a significant  bnckJogofEnforccment.  Audit  and  Alternative  Disp11te  Resolution matters waiting  for  us. Through  a lot  or  hard  work by everyone in  the  agency,  particularly in the 

offices  of the General Counsel and  Compliance,  we gol up to  speed  and  in the  three  yean;  since, the  Commission  hns  achieved more appropriate rates of processing these types of  matters.  What 

never  lagged,  however, was  the  fine  quality  of work  perfmmed  by  the  dedicated staff of  the  FEC .A good  share  oftbe  Federnl  Election  Campaign  Act - the  primnry  Act  the  Commission is responsible for  - is  aimed  at  disclosure  of federal  campaigp  activity.  following  cases  like 

Citize,rs  United  nnd  Speech  Now,  many  new  spenkers- and new types of  speakers  bec~me 

engaged in n ew  ways.  With  this  additional  activity,  th e public  increasingly  rel ies on  the 

disclosure provided by committees  through  the  FEC  to infonn  itself,  and effectively respond  to 

and  pa rticipate  in the political debate. 

With  that  important  gpal  in  mind,  the  Commission strives to make  campaign  finan ce 

infonnation readily  available  and useful lo  the  public,  Our  website  prnvidcs  disclosure of 

committee  rel?orts  and indcpendonl expenditures  and  electioneering communications in nearly 

rea l time  as the  informaiion  is  received.. We  have  improved  the  navigation  of  our website  to 

make infom1ntioo  easier  to find  and  11se . Vi~itors  to the  PEC's  homcp~c  may view  Campaig11 18         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 31  72282A.011 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Finance Maps that provide immediate  access  lo information  regarding  candidates  in  the  20 12 

Prcside.ntinl  and  House  and  Senate  elections.  fa  order  to meet the public's  growing  demand  for 

campaign finance information  via  the website, the Commission this  year  invested significant 

resources  in our webs ite  and  in the  capacities  of ou r electronic  filing  servers,  These  necessary 

upgrades will ensure that the FEC's electronic filing system can accept both the voluminous and 

very  large  number of  report~  we  anticipate receiving in 20 12.  These  upgrades will also 

accommodate  the huge  spikes  in web  traffic  seen around filing deadlines,  without  creating delays in di sclosure. Of course, to be  useful , the  infomiation  the FEC provides to the public m usi be accurate as well  <1s  tim ely. Accordingly, the  FEC  devotes  a considerable po1tion  of  its  staff  to  reviewing 

all filed reports for  accuracy,  completeness  and  compliance  with the law, on  a daily  basis , This 

is not  fl  small  task , In  l'Y  201 1. the  J-EC  reviewed over  72,000  documc11ts.  These sa me analysts work closely with  conunittecs  to answer  questions,  ass ist  with  the  filing  process,  .and  resulve 

problems  as  they arise. They work  extended  hours on  Ii  ling deadlines, to bo  there  when filing committees  need  them the most. 

New te ch nology enables the  PEC  to commu nic ate with its muny  .stakeholders  in  faster, 

more cost effective ways. In  re.,;ponse  to  committee requests, the Reports Ana lysis Division  has 

recently initiated  I\  program  by  which  Requests  for  Additional lnfonnation will be sent to committees via email, to ensure  more  timely notification of potential  disclosvrc  problems  at  11 reduced  cosL  In  addilion ,  the  Commission  has  established a Twitter account. providing  another 

fost  and  efficient  means to disseminate infonnation. These are just some  examples ,

The Commission  al,o  works  hard  10 reach out to  th ose  who file  with  the  FEC  and  to provide assistance so they  c3n  comply  wi th  the  law . In PY 2011, the lnfonnnt ion  Division' s 

Communication Specialists  fielded  over 11 , 000 phone calls and Reports Analysts fielded over 

t 4,000 calls. To better  serve  filers, the Commission  is  developing  a dedicated  web page  that  wi11 conta in answers to  frequently  asked questions and resource material on  ftling  and disclo sure 

requ irements. 

219         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 32  72282A.012 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

The FEC  con\inμes  iLS  regional  conferen ce  progr,1m  to  ~-i~l  in  educating  those  who  have 

reporting obligations. The  feedback  from  these  conferenc~s  is unifonnly positive.  1 have bee 11

participating in conferences since I was  appointed to the Commission and I find that they provide an impor1anl Ojlportunity lo internet with  and  learn from those  who  are  treasurers  or  filing 

personnel for committees. The FEC con t in ues  lo  innovate to  reael1  more committees and filers. Fo r example.  in  order  to  provide  more  cost-effective  trai.nings  for  grass-roots  organizations  and 

candidates, the FEC  has  instituted  a series  of lower-cost,  ooc-day  seminars  and  workshops 

focused  for a particular group or on a legal issue. The FEC  also  offers  livo,  interactive  webinars. 

and  trainings on  YouTube  a11d  hus  recently  publi$hed  on-line  &n  updated  Campaign Guide for Congressional  Candidnlcsnnd  Committees.  

> fn

addition  to disclosure and education, the Commission's other  major  responsibilities 

surround the  ;idministratlon,  1n\crprelation and enforcement  of  the  FECA. Public  confidence  in 

o t1 r elections  depends  not only on transparency. but on the  assurnuce  that  those  who  p:irticipnte 

in our  federal  election system do so within  the  rul es  established  by  Congress.  In recent years, the Commission has  made  significant  progress  in processing enforcement cases and audits more 

timely.  forcc11ain reporting violations, the  l'EC's  Altemativc  Dispute Resolution  Program  and 

i ts  Adminislrarive  Fine  Progro.rn  have  beeQ  very  eITee(ive.  The FEC  appri;,<.:i~tes  thal  U1e 

Committt'.e  on  House Administrution was instrumental in securing an extension of the Administrative Fines Program in  2008.  and  we  hope  that  this  Committee  will  again  act to extend or make  pennanent  the  Program  in 2013. The  !'EC  ru,ticipates  this  upcoming  2012 election cycle to  be  its most active one in history. And  tbc  FEC  is preparing for it. Already in  20  IO a record  level of fundraising  by 

congressional  committees,  po litical  action  committees and poli tic al  party  committees was reported. In addition, spending on  independent  cxpendirures  by  PACs,  groups  andindividu1tls 

jumped from $43.6 million in 2008 to $204 million in the 2010  !.'Yclc ; an  increase  of-nearly  five -

fold. This increase in activity  hus  very  practical  implications  for  our  filing  system  ond  our website. The  FEC's  recent  investments  in technology  and  server  capacity  will ensure that U1e public  will  have  immediate  access to  fil ings  and  reports  of campaign activity and  that  the 

Commission  can receive  large  and  numcro\1 s filings on  h.,avy  ftl,ng  dates. 

J20         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 33  72282A.013 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

All of this activity  is  taking  place  during  a time  in  which  campaign  finance  laws  am 

rapidly  changing. The  issues  are  comple~  and  U1ere  arc  genuine  disagreements  amongst  my 

fellow Commissioners on  some  of these  matters.  Where we  can,  we$lrive  to pro v ide  what 

infonnation  we can to filing committees even before we  are  able  to  complete  a rn lemaking 

process.  Forc1uu 11 ple,  in  response  to  a consent judgment entered in  Care)'  v.  FEC.  the 

Commission last  week  released  guidance for non-connected politicnl  committees  looking lo operate consistent with the court 's decision. We took  a simihtr  approach with  Cilize11s  United  in early 20 I 0. While this guidance is an interim measure, it  provides  as  much information as  we 

can prior to  the  completion  of  the  rulenrnking  process. 

I wish that I  ccn1!cl  tell  you that the.Commission  had  comp leted a rulcmnkin,g  to 

implement the  decision  ,n  Ci1be1L,  Ulrited,  but  it  has not.  8111  not  for the lack of trying.  Twice, 

the  Commission  has  considered  d,dft  Notices of Proposed  Rulcmaking  on the  topi c,  and  both 

Gmcs,  disagreements over the proper  scop~  of  the  endeavor  prevented us  from  issuing t he NPRM . Given ou r inabil ity to begin  a comprehcnstve  rulcr nak;ng  to  ~cldress  Citizens  UJ1ited,  the 

Commission has  put  out  for  public  comment two  po1itions  for  rulemaking addressing  issues 

arising  from  the  uecision.  We anticipate the Commission may he able to  take  action  on  these 

petitions  in  the  next  month  or  so.  Several  oth~-r  rulemakings  are on  our  plate  including a rulemuking to  address  the  Carey  case,  as  well  as  the  court  ridings  in  Si;eechNow  and  EM/Ll"s 

List.  Our  c11rren t expectation is that we will  be  able  tl>  put  an  Nl'RM  out  for public comment by the end  ol'the  ca lendsr  year. Finally, in  ncldition  to  tht:  changing legal  l and scape,  the  fEC  recognizes I hat  it musl  mt:cl 

the  challenge  of  providing  guidance  in  n11  age  or  evcr -cvolvi. ng technological innovations. 

Camp,1igns.  political  committees.  voters  and  grnssroots  advocates  ;ire  u~ing  U1e  lntcmet  and 

mobile  npplications  to communicate  wi th  voturs  and  disseminate electoral infonnation. Keepi ng 

up  with  this  change  plalfomi  by  platform  is  not  somethi ng  I think the Commission  ca n,  or should.  do,  Rather,  we  should  provide  guidance  on how to  take  advantage  of  innovat ions  while being mindful of the  requirements  found in the Act  and  Regulations.  Recently,  the  Commis$ion 

published  illl  Advance  Notlcc  c:>r  Propo~cd  Ri~emaki ng  concerning  disclaimers  nn  Internet 

421         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 34  72282A.014 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

communicotions,  which  developed  out  of  1wo  advisory  opinion requests  reg.ir ding  Internet advertising  by  committees.  The  FEC  invites  and  welcomes  comments from the public on our regulations and revisions we may make to  accommodate  cmorging  technology. 

In closing, l would like to recognize our agency's  sta~.  who  are  direcfly  responsible, on  il 

daily basis, for the  succt.-ssful  operations  of the FEC. Much of the  news  reports and commentary 

on  the  world  of  campaign  finance  and  the  fEC ' s  role  in  it  ceottrs  on  the  ra~idty  changing  na ture 

of the  law.  But the devotion  and  the  hard  work of our agency  staff  is a corn;t~11t,and  they all 

de~erve  to be acknowledged for the role they  play  in ensuring that our  country's  elections  are  fair and transparent. I would also like to thank  Commission  staff, particularly Duane Pugh and Amy 

Pike  in our Office of Cong ressional Affuirs.  who  worked so hard to  assist  us  in preparing for  th1s 

hearing  and  in  so U1oroughly  and  1hottghtfully  responding lo I.his Committee's questions. 

We  appreciate  the  opportunity to provide information to the  Commi1tee  on House Administration and this Subcommittee on Elections. 1am  happy  to  answer  any  questions the Members  may  have 

522 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 35  72282A.015 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

FEDE R AL ELECTION COMMISSION      

> WASHlNGTO._, ,DC' 20 .tS:J.

CYNTHIA  L.  BAUERL  Y,  CHATR 

CAROLINE  C. HUNTER, VICE CHAIR DONALD F. McGAHN JI, COMM ISS I ONER MATTHEWS. PETERSEN, COMM ISS IONER STEVEN T.  WALTHER,  COM MISSIONER 

ELLEN  L.  WEINTRAUB, CO MMISSIONER 

TESTIMONY  BEFORE THE 

SUBCOMM l TTEE  ON  El.-ECTrONS 

OFTHE 

COMMITTEJ~  ON HOUSE ADMINTST!lAT ION U.S. ROUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES HEAR ING:  FEDERAL  ELECTION COMMISSION: REVl£WI NG POLlCIES, PROCESSES AND  PROCEDURES 

NOVt:MBER  3, 2011 23         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 36  72282A.016 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Introduction 

The Fede ra l Election Commission  appreciates  this  Subcommittee  hearing,  and welcomes the feedback from its oversight  committee.  The Commissioners and staff look forward  to 

conti nuing to work  with  the Subcommittee on Elections and the Committee on House Administration as each  performs  its oversight function. As you  know,  the Federal Election Commission  was  established by the  Federal  Electio11 

Ca111paig11  Ac/  Amendme11ts  of/974 .1 Congress created lhe Commission to strengthen the integrity of the federal campaign finance  procegs  under the  Federal  £/ectio11  Campaign  Act. 2

The Commission is also responsible for  administering  the public funding program for Presidential  campaigns  and nominating conventions under the Presldentfal  Elec1io11  Campaig11 

Fund  Act  and the  Presidential  Primary  Matching  Pa_vme111  Acco1111t  Act. 1 The  Federal  £/ectio11 

Campaig 11  Act,  which is the foundation of federal campaign finance regulation, reflects 

Congress's  effor rs  10  ensure that  vorers  are  fully  infofl]'led  about ihe sources of candidates· 

financinl  support.  ihc//c1  nlso imposes amount limitations nnd source prohibitions  on 

contributi ons received by  federal  candidates,  political party committees  aad  other political 

commiltcos.  Public  confidence  in  the  po litical  process  depends not o nly on laws  a11d  regulations to ensure  transparency  of campaign  finance.,  but also on  tho  knowledge thal noncomplia nce may 

lead  to enforcement proceeding.s. The  Pedcral  E lec tion  Comm ission ·s  mission is to prevent  COJT\lption  or the appearance of 

con-uption  i11  federal campaign  finance  by administering  and  enforcing federal campaign finance laws. Th e primary  nbjectives  of the FEC  are: 

• to  facilit~te  transparency  through public disclosure of  campaign  finance  aclivity: to encourage  voluntary  compliance with the  Federal  Election  Cw11paig,1  Act  by 

providing  in fonnmion  and  policy guidance to  tbc  public,  media.  political commi tte es  anti  elec ti on  oflic ials  on  the  1k t and Commission regu lations  and  to 

enforce  the  statute  through  audits, investigations and civil lit igation; and 

• lo develop the law by administering and inte rpret ing the  Federal  Election 

Campaign Act  as  well as the  Pre.~id e11tial  El ect/on  Campaign  Fund  11cr  and the 

P,· es idc111ial  PrimalJ'  Mo1c/li11g  Payment  Accow,1  Act. 

To accomplish  it s legislative  mandale,  the  FEC is directed by  six  Commiss ioners, all of whom appear before tbe Subcommittee on Elections  tod~y.  Currently.  346  employee!:  (which includes  the  Commissioners) support the  agency  in accomplishing its mission. The Commissi on 

Ft-der"I  Elec •tion  Callij}{lig,1  Acr  Ame11dme11t<  of  I V7 4,  Publi~  La,v  93-443.  88  Stal.  1263  (1974).  

> Fed~r1,l

E'"crion  Camrx1ig11  Ac/  of 197 1.  Public  [.;1w  92-225.  86  Stat.  3 (  1972),  as  amended  (FECA  or  th~     

> Ac/). F£C1 is codified~(

2 U.S.C.  §§  431 lo  455. 

Presirlemio/  6. le c 1io11  Ca mpnign  F1111d Ac!.  Public  L;iw  92-17&.  R5  SlaL  562  ( 1971).  codifi~rl  c1t26  U.S.(  

> §§

90011090 13 ; ond  Pr,sld£'11tir1/  Prim111yMfllrlri11g  P<1ymen/AccorwAct,  Public  Law 93-443,  8S  Slat.  1.29 7 

> ( t

974).  codi/il'd  11116  U.S.C.  ~*  9031  !Cl  9042.. 

124         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 37  72282A.017 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

maintains  a website at  www.fec.gov  and its  otlices  at 10th and E Streets,  Northwest, in Washington, D.C. The  Federal  Election Commission received an appropriation  of$66 ,367, 000 

for  Piscal  Year (FY) 2011 . 

I.  FEC's  PERFORM AJ.'ICE  AND OPERATIONS 

A. DISCLOSING CAMPAIGN  FINANCE  INFORMATION Disclosing  the  sources  and  amounts of funds used to  finance  federal  elections  is  one  of the most .important duties of the  FEC.  The  campaign finance reports are  accessible  to  the  pub lic through the FEC's website  at  hnp: // www.fec.g ov /disclosure.shtml. By making disclosure reports available  online,  the  FEC  provides  the  pub lic with up-to-date information about the financing of federal elections and political comminces' compliance with campaign finance law.  ·nie  table immediately below presents the  Total  Recei pts and Disbursemcnls Reported to the FEC by all entities that d isclosed to the FEC over the  last  four completed election cycles. The number of 

reports  filed  in connection with Presidential elections and Congressional elections  are  presented  iJJ 

a graph further below, along with  the  number of  pag_es  in tl1ose reports. 

Total Receipts and Dis burse ments Reported 

Election Cycle  Total  Receipts  Total Disbursements 2004 $5 ,576,832,000 S5,482,785,000 2006 $4,157, 020,000 $4,351,136, 000 2008 SS,383,471, 000 88 , 414 , 847, 000 2010 $4 . 945.8 I 7,000  $5,095,153,000 25 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 38  72282A.018 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

160,000 140,000 120,000 100,000 80,000 60,000 40,000 20 ,000 012.000,000 10,000, 000 8,000,000 6,000,000 4,000,000 2.000.000 

Reports Filed with the FEC 

Number of Reports and Statements 

2004 2006 2008 2010 

Page Counts 

2004 2006 2008 2010 4

All  Othel  Filings 

..  Electioneering  Communication 

• In dep endent  Expenditures • PACs & Parti es 

• Pr<'side!llial 

• House & Sena te 

• Statem en t s  or  Candidacy 

• Statements  of  Organiza tion 

All  Ot her  Filings 

[lcctioncering  Communication 

• Independent  Cxp cnd itur<'s 

• PACs  & Parties 

• Presidential • House  & Senate 

• Statc m<'nls  of  Candidacy 

• St,,tcments  or Organizat ion 26 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 39  72282A.019 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

While cam paign  ftnance  activity  reported  \O  the  I:'  EC  has ri se n s te ad ily over the past several cycles, majo r co urt decisions  after  the 2008 election cycle ha ve changed the  re gulatory 

environment by removing  re~t1ictions  on th e use of financial resources.  No tably  in Citizens 

United  v.  FE C, 4 the Supreme Cow t held in January 20 IO  that  corporations and unions may use their general tTeasury  funds  lo pa y for electioneering communica tions  and  ind epend ent expenditures. Subsequently, the U.S. Cou rt  of  Appeals  for the D.C. Cir cuit he ld in 

Speech Non> .org  v.  F'EC 5 th at certain political  co mmitte es  1hat  make  on ly fndcpcndenl expenditures, but do not  mah  any contributions to federal candidates,  may  accept  funds  in unlimited  amounts.  These com mitt ees  have.come  to be known  as  "IEOPCs"  or  .. Super  PACs.'' 

Previously,  FECA imposed a $5,000 contribution  limit  on  co ntributi ons  received by all political com mi ttee s. An increase in "o utside  sp end ing"  ~th;it  is , spending by oth er  thati  candid ates and 

parties)  in co nne ct ion  ,vith  C'ongressional races,  csμccial!y  in independent expend itur es made by 

polilic al  act ion  commi tte es  (PACs),  other  gl'Qups  and individuals,  was  al ready ap parent in the 2010 cycle. As  detailed  in the ch arts below, inde pen dent expenditures made by  traditional 

PACs.  Super PA  C's,  and  "ot hers,"  which includes individuals and other groups that are  not 

political  committees, sh owed a more than  four-fold  in cr ease  between  the 2008  flnd  2010 elections. Typically, election-related spen ding is lower  in  non-Presidential election cycles. 

----·-- --· · .,_,.  - ·-····----- ------------------

Outside Sp ending in Congressional Race s

$500,0  T

$450.0 

S400.0 S350.0 

$300 ,0  +---------, 

Mil lion; of  Dollar~  S2S0.0 

$200.0 

51 50 .0 

S l00 .0 

sso.o 

so.a 

2004  2006  2008  2010     

> •tl vclf onccnnJ;'. Co rn mL 1nic.itions

• l11deJl{' 11 denl  Cxp~11<m urc,  by 

Parlles 

• 1ndcpcnd~11\  Cxp ~n<lilUrcs  by   

> PACs, Groups

., 11d  l n< liv i duals 

Citi,e, ,s  Uuit<'<lv.  FEC,  558  U.S .... . 130  S.C~  R76(Jan.  21.  2010). 

Sp i:t ·cl,No u· .nrg  v. FIX.  599  T'.Jd  686  (D.C.Ci ,.  Mor.  26,  20t 0)(e11  hm1c). 

527 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 40  72282A.020 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

Breakdown of Inde pend ent  Ex,p enditur es  by 

Spend er 

nso .o  ----------------

> -$.1MD

u'°.a  I 

> S.UJ<JU -------------

s~uJJ  -------------- • i,ooe  2<)10 

"'""" ll!l ~PM,. 

e tf-clo'IIONI  t>A ,O 

Outside Spending in Pre sidential Rac es 

S300 ,000))0M  ---

2004  2008 

> E~i~

COmmuntcaliof\S. 

• ~f'W~t  t.l:Pl'Y!d it ur('j  by' 

> hrtitS
> e1~ 1EXptf!diMt-sby

m,  Grou ps ""'  lnd M<hJdb 

The Commission iook a number of steps during FY 201 l to ensure that it will be fully 

successful in  its  mission to  rt.-ceive  reports and make public reports filed in connection  wi th  the 2012 elections, and il has augmented i ts programs  to  he lp make data from these reports, and other campai gn finance information, available to the public in new and more accessible formats. First, the FEC continues to make information ab out  independent  expenditures  and  electioneering communications available in nearly real time as the information is received. Second, the FEC has also  initiated  a project to provide a  portal  for summary presentations of information for PA Cs and party committees. These new presentations offer improved navigation and display data through charts, graphs and other  visualizations  that help provide context for the information so that users will be able to design their own  dat11  queries. Third, the Commission also expanded the federal campaign finance disclosure platform, which includes both the data ca talog and the federal campaign finance maps, by adding information covering multiple election cycles. These enhancements  make  it  easier  for publ ic  visitors  to www.fec.gov to view, research and understand the complex and growing universe of campaign finance information disclosed to the Commission. 

628 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 41  72282A.021 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

In addition to  the  overall increase in d isclosure activit y, Lhe FEC's website and electronic filing systems are also subject to "spikes" of increased use. For example, in a single week-between October I a nd October 8, 2010- individuals reported $3.8 million and PACs reported $15.5 million in independent expenditures. Similarly, while the FEC's website averaged 45,000 hits  per  day in FY 20) I, on t he July 15 reporting deadline lhe site received I 08,981 hits in one day. The Commission has taken steps to ensure that it can accept both very large reports and a very large number of elec tronically filed reports, while accommodating spikes in web traffic without creating delays in disclosure. This year the FEC initiated  a project to improve t he website's perfonnance. The Commission has  also  upgraded its electronic filing systems with more powerful servers to handle heavier l oads and made changes to the way it allocates its processing rcsoarces to separate the receipt of reports  fr()m  the initial processing of those filings. This change allows more filings to pass through the process at any one time and speeds overall processing by reducing compet ition for computer resources. The public's inter es t in campa i gn finance information found on the FEC's website is illustrated in the figure below, which shows a continued high number of hits on the FEC's websi te by users seeki ng campaign finance data and  o t he r information.  Di1ring  FY 2011, the website received approximately 1 17 million hits. 

"' C

.2 

~

.!: 

~

::c 

GI 

!t: ., 

..0 

# ;: 

225 - - - - - ----------------

200  t--------------------------

175 150 125 100  _, 

# :: ··J 25 

0 2001 2002 2003  2004 

Fiscal Year o zrlO;::  d

2005  2006  2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 

• _,  P,esidential  Election  Yea, 

In FY 2011,  U1e  FEC made I 00  -percent  of t he financial disclosure reports and statements avail able to the public within 48 hours of receipt by lhe Commission. The infonnation on tho se reports and statements  is  then  coded for entry into Lhe FEC database. The  «gency's  goal  is to code and enter data  about  reported transactions for 95 percent of the reports within 30 days of 

729         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 42  72282A.022 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

reccipl For FY 2011, the  FEC  was ab le to process 71  percen1  or all reports  within  30  days  of 

r eccipl In addi tion to making campaign finance reports available to  the  public, the FEC works to ensure  tl1a1  the infonnation disclosed  is  accurate  and  complete.  The  Office  of  Compliance' s Repons Analysis Division (RAD) reviews  all  filed statements and financial  reports  to track compliance with the law and to ensure that the public record provides a fu ll  und  accumte 

representation  of  campaign  finance  activity.  Analysl~  provide  frcqu enl  telephone assistance  to 

co mm lttce  officials who have reporting questions or compliance problems. JfRAD  1der1tifies  an  error,  omissioo. need for additional  clarification  or possible prohibited activity, a request for additional infonnation  (Ri=AI)  is  sent to the committee, affording the committee  ;m  opportunity to correct the  publio  record, if  necessary.  Jftl1e committee is able lo  r~olve  the FEC's  concerns,  it  may avo id  funher  Commission  action. Should the committee  not  address  the  FEC's concerns  sufficiently,  the FEC may initiate an 

audit,  begin  an  enforcement action or utilize  alternative  dispute  resolution  (ADR) to remedy the 

apparent  violation. 111 FY  20!  l, RAD  reviewed  72,790  out  of77,58S documents filed during FY 2011  and  is well on its way to evaluating 1 00 percent of the documents  received.  As part ofan ongoing 

effort  to assist  I.he  filing  comrn,tnily  ,vith  compliance, RAD continues  to  offer  e1ttended  phone coverage on filing due dates and  has  initiated a  program  to send  RI' Als  via  e-mail, to  reduce 

costs  and  to ensure timely notification to  committees. 

B.  PROMOTING  COMPLfANCE  WlTH  THE 

FEDERAL ELECTION  CAMPAIGN  ACT 

I. Encouraging Compliance Through Education 

Helping  those  subject  to  the  Commission's  jurisdktion  understand their  obligations 

under federal  campHign  finance  laws  is an  esset1tial  component of  voluntary  comp liance.  The 

FEC, through its  Oflice  of Communications,  pl accs,i  si gn ificant  emphasis  on  encouraging 

compliuncc,  The  OtJice  of Communicati ons consists  of  the  fo llowing offices: 

• the Information  Division, 

• the Public Disclosure Division, 

• the  Press Office und 

• the  Office  of Congressional  A/fairs. 

The Commission's website is  its  most  important  source  ofinstanlly  accessibll! 

infonnation about complying with the  Federal  Elec1io11  Cnmpnign  Ac:1  and  Comm iss,orl regulations. Political participants and the general public can  use  the website to search Commission  rulemakfogs.  advisory opinions,  completed  audits and closed  enforcement  matters. 

During  FY 20 1I,  the  FEC made  a number of significant  enhancements  to  the  website's  search 

cnpabil ides.  For example, it  laμnched  a Searchable Electronic Rulemaking System that  allows 

users lo senrch  public  documents  developed  in the course  ofthe.Commission·s  ruleinaking 30         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 43  72282A.023 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

process.  The Cum  mission  also completed work on its Audit Report Search System, which provides a searchab le  database  of audit reports approved by the Commission since 1976. As  it  prepares for the 2012  elections,  the FEC continues lo provide comprehens ·ive educational materials  via  the website  ns  well, to help the regulated community better  understam l

new regulations. and requirements under the campaign  finance  law. For  e)(ample,  the Commission now provides information about changes in the law on  a "Recent  Developments" 

web  page.  The  FEC also continues to provide enhanced and expanded  ins!Tl.!ctional  Videos available  through  the  site's  E-Lcaming  cent-er  and  a ''Cornp\iance  Mapn  that provides  easy 

access to  State-by -state  information  detailing  filing deadlines and the  tlmcframes  for certain  pre--

election obligations under  the  Ac!. 

T· he  Commission also  encourages  voluntary compliance through outreach  progrnms. 

The  FEC  hosts instructional  oonfcrence-5  and  seminars  in  Washington, D.C.,  and  in other  dtics 

across the  country,  where Commissioners  and  slaffcxplain  the.Ac/  ·s  requirements 10 candidates and political committees. These conferences specifically  address  recent changes  i.n  the 

campaign  finW1ce  laws  and  focus on  fundraising  and  reporting regulations. Additionally, Commission staff  meets  with  political  committees upon  request  and responds to telephone inquiries and  wrinen  requests from t· hosc seeking infonnalion about the  Law  and assistance in filing disclosure reports. This year,  the  Commission  roade  a number  of  changes  to  its  outreach 

program to  make  ll1e  program  more  cost effective for the agency  and  more affordable for candidates and committees that attend conferences  and  seminars. ln  PY  2011, the FEC held  six 

lower-cost one-day seminars at the  FEC's  offices in Washi11gto11, D.C. The FEC also held one regional conference in Minneapolis, Minnesota. All ofthc Commission's conferences  and 

.seminars have  Ileen  consistently highly  rated  by attendee evaluations, ln FY 2012,  regional 

conferences  will  be held  in  San  Diego,  California  and Miami,  Florida,  and five one -day seminars will be held  at  the  FEC.  Mnny Committee staff members have previously participated iu these educntionnl  events,  and  that opportunity for  the  e/tchange  of ideas is always welcome. The Commission  h.is  also taken steps in the  past  year to  augment  its  educational outreach programs to provide more  cost•effoctive  access to information. For example, the Commission has  l1iunchcd  a You Tube channel and  E-Leaming  page to  allow  the  public  the convenience of 

participating  in  trajnlngs  wiU1out the costs  oftrave'I.  The agency  has  also  initiated  a program to provide live, interactive webinars  lo  prnvidc  additional distance learning opportunities to the public. 2. Enforcing FECA  ·s  Requirements 

"·  Enforce mcJtt  1,md  Complia11ce  Processes 

The Commission's statutory obligation  is  to administer , interpret and enforce the 

Federal  El11Clio11  Campaign  Act , which serves the compollinggovcmmental  ia1erest  in  deterring 

corruption  .and  the  appearance  of corruption in financing elections. In doing  so,  the Commission  must  remain  mindful  of  the  First  Amendment's guarantees  of  freedom  ofspciech 

and association, and the practical  implfoation  of  its  nctions on the political process .31         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 44  72282A.024 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

The  FEC  has  exclusive  jurisdiction  over  civi.1  enforcemenL  of  fed1mll  campaign  fin ance 

laws  aod  cons u lts with the U.S. Department of Justice, as appropriate, on matters involving both civil  an.d  criminal enforcement of the Ac/.  Commission  <.i1forcement  actions,  wh ich are handled primarily by  the  Office of  General  Counsel  (OGC), origi nate from a m1mbcr of source.,, 

including  external  comp laints, referrals from other government agencies and internal referrals from the Audit or Reports  Ana lysis  Division5. 

To  augment  OGC's  traditional enforcement role , the  Office  of Compliance manages 

several  programs that  seek  to remedy alleged vio lat ions oft he  Act  and  encourage volunta1y compliance. These programs include: 

• the  Allemat]ve  D ispute Resolurion  Program, 

• the Admin istrative Fine  Program  and 

• the Audit Division. 

The  Commission 's  Altemat i ve  Dispute Resoluti on Program is designed to  resolve  matters swiftly by encouraging (he settlement ofless-complex enforcement matters using a sti-caml ined 

process  that  focuses on  remedia l  1neas ur cs  for candidates and pol itical committees. such  as 

training,  internal  audits and  hi ring  compl iance  stiuT.  Violations involving  the  fate  submissio11 of, or failure to  file,  disclosure reports  are  subject to t he Administrative Fi ne  Program.  Unde r t his program.  the  Commission  assesses  mone tary  penalties  and considers challenges to the penalty assessments. Finally, t he Audit Divisi on co n ducts mandatory audits under the publ ic funding 

sta t utes  and  performs  "for  cause•·  aud its  under  the  Federal  El ec1 ion  Cmnpoign  Act  in  U,ose  cases 

where  political  committees do not appear to be in  substantial  compliance with the Act. 

Jfthc Commission cannot settle or conciliate  a ma tt er involving an alleged violation of t he feder al  campaign  finance statutes,  i. he  Commiss1on  may  initiate  dvil  litigation..  and  will  file 

and  prosecute a civil ac tion in  federal  district court lo address the  alleged  v i ola tion. Depending on t he s i ze  antf  complexity  of the lawsuit, such  Cllses  may be resolved quick ly or may require  11 

significant  amount  of resources for several years. 

b.  Recent  £11honcemenis  10  the  P,·ocesses  and  Ptoce((ures 

In recent years, t he Commission focused significant  attention  on fonnalizing  cxisllng 

practices  and  ensuring  that  enforcement  and  compliance  procedures  are  fair,  efficient  and 

t ransparent. Most significantly,  the  Commission  hus  revised its procedures to pcnnil  respondents 

to request a hearing  prior  to  a probable  cause  determination in enfo r cemen t proceed ings."  In 

addition,  the  Commission  has  c~tabl  ished  an  agency procedu re to  de fi ne  fonnally  the  scope  of 

documen~  th at  will be provided to respondents at certain  stages  in enfo rcement proceedings  in 

order to  ensure  that  respondems  are  given  rc l eva11l  infonnatio1i  ascertained  by  the  Commi$sion 

dur ing  an  investigation.'  Additional improvements  include:  provi ding  additional notice  and 

oppor tuni ty lo request  to  n::spond  to  new  facts  and  arguments  in  probable  cause  briefing;  placi ng 

In  October  2009,  tho  Con\111i3,;1on  n,v1oed  Ihes•  proc~durcs.  FEC.  Ame11dmem  ofAgcncy  Procedures  far    

> Prl)bable Ca11se licllfillg.1.

74  frd.  Reg,  55443  (Oct.  28,  1009)  w • i.1il1g  FEC . Prol'ed111-c,I  Rul ~:r for  Prol>n/,/e  Cmt\·c 

J/earing.,;  72  Fed.  Reg,  64919  (Nov.19.2007).  

> FEC,

Agency  Pnu:t 1r/11 1-e  ftJr  o, :,· cla..\W'C  qf  DuCUnlE'lll\·  mul  ln,(ormQtifJn  ;,,  1ht:1  c:nfon• ~f1W-nt  Proct,sJ,  76  l-ed. 

Reg.  J4986{June  15.  ZQI  11 

lo 32         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00034 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 45  72282A.025 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

First  General Counsel's Reports  on  the public  n::cord;  publishi ng  an  F.11/orcement  Guidebook  that 

e1Cp !Rins  the enforcement process; and providing notice and an opportunity to be heard to non -complaint  genl•rated  respondents.  R

The Com mi ssio n has  also added procedures to the audit process. In July 2009, the Commission  revised  its audit procedures to permil  audited  committees lo reque st to appear before the Commission prior to issuance of a Final Audit  Rcport. 9 In August 20 I I, the Com mis sion  made  permanent  a program  that allows committees to  have  legal questions considered by the Commission earlier in the review and audit  processes,  1° In April 2011, the 

Commission  revised  its  Oiroctive  on Processing Audit  Reports  to help achieve a greater degree of consistency, both  in  process and  result,  in the final audit reports issued by  the  Commlsslon. 11 

c.  Cornpliance  and  enfo rc eme,a  Results  for  t'istal  Ye111·  20 11 

For FY 2011, !be Conunission processed 145 enforcement  cases  in an average of l 0.1 months, which included $527,125  in  negotiated civil penal  tie$.  Tb e Commission closed 1 29 of 

these  i..-ases  (or  89%)  within 15 months. The  Commission  is  currently  pur.ming  five  lawsuits  that 

it iaitiat ed  and  that arise from enforcement actions.  One  of  these  cases is in activeJiligation, and the other four are cases in which final judgment has  been  entered and the Commission is seeking to co llec t civil  pena lties. The Commission is presently defending  four  lawsuits that challenge  it!t 

disposi\1011  of enforcement  actions.,  including one  seeking  review of  an  administrative fine. During FY 20 l l. the Commission's AOR Office processed 25  cases  lo ck1surc and negotiated S43,9 50 in civil penalties.  The  Commission  met  its 155-day processing  benclunark  in 84 percent of AOR cases, exceeding the goal of meeting  this  benchmark  in  75 percent of eases-. 

The  Administrati, 1e  Fine  Program is administered by  theCommiss i~n's  Office  of 

Administrat ive  Re view (OAR)  and  Reports Analysis Division. For FY 2011, RAD  processed 

100 perccut of the  mison  to believe recommendations  within  60 days of the  su~ject  report's due 

date.  During FY 201 I, OAR reviewed 60 challenges  submit11:ld  by committees  in  re sponse  to  an 

RTB finding or civi l money penalty. OAR reviewed 100 percent of  these  challenges within 60 days of reccipi. 

Since  the Administrative Fine Program's inception  in  July 200()  !!tr ough  September 30, 201 J, the Commission has  closed  2,350  cases  and  assessed  fines of$4.I million. Most 

FEC,  Ai,;e11cy  l'r0<,edure  Following  1t, eS11bmfssion  of Probab(r;>  Cnure  Brief<  by  the  Qjfke  of General 

Cow"'"'  {forthcoming),  avai/o/J/~  al  htrp ·//www.fec.gov/agcnd;\/201  J/mtgdoc  l l53a.pdf:  FEC.  Smrmie/11  of Poll (')• 

Regarding  Pla cing  Fi,·st  General  Co,m.<rl  '.<  Repor1.,  011  the  Public  RecQrd.  74 Ped,  Rtg , 66 tJ2  (Dee.  14,  2009): 

f'EC,  G11idehoolrfar  CL>mpln inanr. , ond  Respo11denc , Oil  the  FEC  £nf arce me11/  Process  (Dec.  2009),  aw,ilahle  al 

ht!p)Jwww.fec,gov/em/respondont  guide.pelf:  PEC,  Agency  Procedure  for  Notice  lo  11espomlent ,,  111  No11 -Comp/r,/nl 

Ge11erutcd  Mnllers,  74  Foo.  Rc .g,  3R6l7  (Aug.  4,  2009) .

FEC,  Proccd11rq/  R11/e~Jor A11dft  H ,'tl rfn.~.<.  74  'Fed.  Reg,  33140 (July 10, 2009). 

"'  FEC,  PQ/icy  Stntem,111  Regarding"  Program  for  Requesting  Co11sidero1io11  of Legal  Q11,.,1ion.,  by  the 

Commiss/011,  76 fed , Reg.  45798  (Aug,  I.  20 11) ,11  !'EC.  Direc/fre  tJn  Processi11gA11dit  Repo rts, Dir . No.  70  (April  26, 201 I),  ctvailahle  or 

l1ttp:1 fwww.(ec.g9v/directivc•/ d1recliye  70. pdf 

II 33         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00035 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 46  72282A.026 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

importantly, the Administrative Fine Program continues to succeed in  reducing  the number of late and non-filed reports, thereby iucreasing  campaign  finance  transparency  through  the timely 

disclosuce  of  campaign  finance activity. The Committee on House Administration  was 

instrumental in the  bipart-isan  passage  of a bill extending the Admin istrative Fine  Program 

through reports covering 2013. The Commission urges the Committee to make this cost-effoctive,  successful  program pennancnt. As discussed above, the Commission recently  adopted  procedures that provide additional 

opportullities  for audited committees  to  respond to  potential  findings,  as  woll  as more opportuniti es for the Commission to review audit reports prior to approval. The most significant of the changes provides audited  committees  an opportunity to request  a he&riog  bclb rc  U1e 

CommissioR  prior lo  final  approval of the audit  report.  The  perfom1ance measures related to 

ai1dits  have not been  revised  to reflect these changes the audit report  processing  system. The Commission will cont i nue to review  the  effect these procedur es have on perfonnance measures related to audits. 

hl  FY 2011, the Commission approved 22aud1t reports  ofnon-Presidcnti1Jl  committees. 

Five  of the  audits  witn  findings  were completed within  an  average  of ten months. The average processing time of the 19  audits  with  findings  was  approximatoly  25 months. Two audits with no findings were completed  witni  n an  a vcragc of 90 days. The  average·  processing lime for  the 

tnrcc  auditS  ,v;1,h  no  findings  was  143 days . Of  the  14 Presidential  audtts  related  to  the 2008 ejection  cycle,  11 we recornpletod by the end of FY 2011. 

C. INTERPRETING AND DEVELOPING  THE  CAMPAIGN  FINANCE  LAWS The Commission responds to questions  from  the  various  persons  about  how the  Federal 

Election Campaign Act applies to  specifi.c  situations by issuing advisory opinions  (A Os).  fn 

addition.  Congressional  action, judicial  decisions, petitions  for  rulemaking,  Commi ssion initiatives, or other changes in campaign finance  often  ncccss.itatc  that  the Commission update  or 

adopt  new  regulations. 

The  Commission issued  s~veral  A Os addressing the implications of  the  Citi.ens  U11iled. 

SpeechNaw.org.  and  EM!LY's  List  1•.  FEC  decisions. 1~ During  FY  2011,  the  Comm ission completed  within  the deadlines  I 00% of the 28  AQs  considered_ iJ  t he  Commission  completed 

work  011  two  20-day  AO request and  three  30-day AO requests  during  FY 2011. While  FECA 

provides  for  20-day and 60-day AOs, the Commission also issues A Os within 30 days for  timu-

sensilive.  highly significant AO  reques ts. 

During FY 201 I,  the  Commission  did not issue any final  regulation$.  Two interpretive rules  ofcyisting  Comm ission  regulations were issued  in  FY  2011: one on clcctroniccontribuuon 12  £Mill' '.,  li5't  ,,.  FE C.  581  F. 3d  I (2009).  The  Advisory  Opinions  were  AO  2011-12  (MsjorityPAC); AO 2011-11  (Colbeit );  AO  2010 -10  (C ommonsense  Ten)  sml  AO  2010-09 (Club  for  Growi.h).  

> I\

four  60-day  advisory  opinions  undone  20-d~y  ad Vi sory  opinion  had  es1endcd  deadlme. , .  and  1he  remainder 

were  completed within the  stnt\llory  deadlines  of20  or 60  days  or  I.he  JO-day deadline under the  Commission 's 

ilti1iat ivc 

12 34         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00036 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 47  72282A.027 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

redesignations  and the other on reporting independent  expenditures.  14  The Commission  has 

continued to work on  a number of  significant  rulemaking pr ojects during FY 2011, including 

rulcmakings  to comply  with  the court  dec is ion~  in  Citizens  Vniled,  SpeechNow.org,  EA,f/LY's 

Li.st,  and  Cctrey  v.  FEC. 1J In  this  regard, tl1c Commission published two Notices of  Availability 

of petitions for rulemaking submitted sep ar ately by  Reprt!S entati ve  Chris Van Hollen, which 

concerns  reporting independent expenditures, and the James Madison  Center  for Freedom of Speech, which Co ncerns the  Ci tizens  Vni1ed  v. FE C de cision,  16  Comments have been received on both notices. In  addition,  fhe Commission issued additional  i:;,u idaace  for issu es related lo 

Car ey  v,  PEC, and  lheSpeechNow .o rg  and EMILY's  l,ist  c.ases.  Recently,  th e Commission approv ed  an  Advanca  No ti ce of Proposed Rulcmaking regarding disclaimers appearing on 

lniemet  ads. 18  Lastly, together with  the  Office of Government Ethics, the Cornmission  recently 

completed final rules on standards of conduct  for  FEC  Commissioners  and employees. D. ADM1NISTERJNG THE  PRESIDENTlAL  PUBLIC FUNDJNG PROGRAM The Commission 's  respousibilitics  also  include  administering the  public  fundi ng of 

Pr esidential  electrons,  as provided in  the  Presidential Prima,y  Matching  Acco 1111t Act a nd the 

Presirlentia/  Elec,ion  Campnign  Frmd  Act. Through th e public funding  program,  tho federal govemment provides: (i) matching funds 10 candidates seeking their party's Presidential nomina ti on, (ii} grants to Presidential nominating conventions and (iii) grants  10  Pre~fdcntlnl 

nominees for their gene ral election campaigns. The program is  fonded  by taxpayers who voluntarily check off the  S3  designation for ll1e Presidential Election Campaign on their income tax  ret1Jms.  The  percentage of  taxpayers  who 

check  off the  dcsi!,.rnation  for lhe  l'resi denli&I  Election  CiUllpaign  Fund  continues lo  decline. 

Recent  statistics  from  the Internal Revenue Service show the following  check  off  rates: 

Ca lendar Year Percent of  Tax 

Returns  with PBCF Des ignation 2007 8.2 8 %2008 7 .3 8% 2009 7. 28% 2010 6.59% 

" FEC,  /ntf!rpretive  Rull!  R~8<1rtlin,g  R/octrnnic  Co11mb111or  R~i}e.,ig11t11101ts,  76  Fed.  Reg.  16233  (Mar.  23, 

2011) and  f EC: , lnt;,1prf!1ire  Rt1/e  0 11  IV/,e,i  Cf•'l<lill  lnd ~pen<knt  lfxpentliwres  Are  "Publicly  Dusemi110 1erl"fo1· 

Reporting  P,11poses , 76  frd.  Reg,  61254  (001.  4,  2011). 

" Carey  ,·,F£C,  Civ.  No . 1 l-259 -RN IC  (0 .D.C.  Aug,  19, 20 11 ).  

> 1•

fF.C,  R11lemaking  Petition:  lndepem/eltl  Expendi1un1  Reporting.  76  Fed.  Reg.  36000 (J une  21 , 20 11);  ff:C .        

> Ruli!nt(tki,ig PmititJn. Jndt•p,mdenc £.xpr.nd itur f.'S m1d £/ectivntt!ring Co mnum icafions

by  Corporations  apd  L~bo,· 

Orga11i,mio11 s.  76 fed.  Reg.  3<,UO  l (June  21 , 20 ll ).  

> 11

H:C , Statemenl  an  Carey, •.  FEC,  Reporling  Gi1itloncefor  Political  Colllmit/e< \<  1/1111  MtJiJ11ain  a No1t-

Con1rib11/1011  Act·u,1111  (forthcoming),  01'1Jitoble  or:  hrrp :l/ \1 •1\f\ v.fec.gov/prcss/Pr o-'S20l  l/ ZO)  l l 00Gpo,m1rey .$ htrnl.    

> 11 FEC ,./nlem et

C,,mmu11imtitm  Di< clttimcrs  {forthcoming).  available  t!t ; http: // ww,11.fec .gov/agend:i/20 11 /

mtgdoc  l 158a.pdf. 

13 35         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00037 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 48  72282A.028 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Tims  fa r in the 2012 Presidential election cycle, no  candidate  has  yet  a pp lied for matching funds  for  the 2012 Presidential primary elections. The 2012 general election  grant  for  

> the

major pany  C<Jmmincc  candidates is estimated to be  $91,604,607.  The Republican Na tional Co mmittee and Democratic  National  Commi t1ee were each paid S 17,689,800 in public fu nds for their  20l2  Presidential Nominating Conventions. (The payments  were  made to the Committees on July I and September 22,  20  l 1, respectively. Additional payments based on final  inflation 

adjustments of approximately  $600,000  for  each convention are  scheduled  for  ea rl y 2012.) The balance  in  fhe  Presidential  Elect io n Campaign Fu nd as of September 30, 201 1,  ,s 

S 197,)39.691, according to the U.S. Treasury. This amount is unusually large for  this  program account, due to  reduced  candidate participation in the Presidential public funding programs in the 2008 election cycle. With this level of funding at this  point  in  thi$  cycle. a temporary shortfall of public funding  that  has  occurred  in prior e le ction cycles is not  gofog  to be an  issue  in the 2012 

Presidentinl  election  cycle. In 2008, eight primary  candidates  participated in public funding.programs, and  their 

campaigns  rece.ivcd  S22 million of public  funds.  The two major Presidential  nominati 11 g

conventions received  a net amount of$30  million.  (The Republican National Convention returned $3.8 million of the S16.8 million it received due to the cancellation of one night of its convention.)  Scoamr  McCain 's Pre!iidcntial campaign received S84 mil li on in public funds  for 

the 2008 gener al election  campaign. 

E.  THE  20 11 FEC LEGISLATJVE RECOMMENDATIONS The  Federal  Elec/io11  Ca.111paig11  Act  authorizes  the Commission to make 

recommendations  for  legislative action. Oa  March  16, 20 l l, lhe Commission approved four Legislative  Recommendations  for  20 11 . The  Recommendation~  arc: • Electronic Fi ling ofSeuate  Reports 

• Fraudulent Misrepresentation ofCampa[gn Authority 

• Co nversion of  Campaign  Funds • Pay Levels for the  StafT  Director and General  Counsel  and Authority to Create  Senior 

Executive Service Positions 171c Commiss1on  's  20 I l Legislative  .Re commendations  can  be  found al 

htt p: //www. foc.gov/ 1aw /lel?T ec 20  I l .pdf  and  are also attached. 

F. FEC's ALLOCATION OP  STAFF 

In order to  accomplish  its  mission and meet the requirements of other legislation, lhe Federal Electi on Commission has arranged  its  employees into various mission-related or support offices. The  organizational  chart below depicts that arrangement  and  has  been annotated with tl1e number of employees in each of  the  organiz;:itional  units. 

l ~36 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00038 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 49  72282A.029 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

FEC's Organ izat ional St ruc t ur e and  Emp lo yees' Distribution 

346  Emp loyees  as  of Nove mb er  1,  2011      

> GEN~l!Al 1.AW _
> &AIWt<.E,
> llllG,ATIQN
> l'OUcY
> C:OM PlA WB DWlllNATIOl'I(
> &_UGI:'-.. D~W!SfJtA,l)Or,,.

COMM ISSIONERS                          

> •~Dit«tor k» ((\O.'lt (~oy~n\ 0pportu,a i1 yn:pot'b IO thG Suff Oir«1CII' (11ft
> ~dml f'i~r,11it, •e fJ. Hlfi buc h.u: dt,~ rq»rt lng .iuth.ot"ity to 1t..! C~mS.ssion. on .al lEEO man~JS .

The Office of Compliance includes the  Reports  Analysis Division (50), the Audit Division (34), the Alternative Dispute Resolution  Office  (2), and the Office of Administrative Review ( 1) (which conducts  part  of the Administrative Fine Program). The Office of Communications includes  the  Public Disclosure Division (23), the Jnformation Division (l4), the Press Office (5) and Congressional  Affairs  (2). In addition to the posi tions shown  above,  the  Commission  has posted vacancy am1ouncements for 15 additional positions: six in the Office of General Cou nsel, six in the Office of Staff Director, two in the Office of Chief lnfonnation Officer and one in the Office of Chie f Financial  Officer_ 

JI . FEC 's BUDGET 

A. GENERAL INFORMA TION The chart bel ow presenls the appropriations the Federal Election Commission has received in FYs 2010 and 2011, the amounts provided in the bills pending before the House of Representatives and Senate for FY 20 12, the amount provided in the current continuing resolution and theamouat thefEC requested  fo rFY20l3  in  its  September 201 I submission to 

the Office of Management and Budget (0MB). The Federal Election  Campaign  Act requires 

15 37         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00039 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 50  72282A.030 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

that, wheocver the  FEC  submits any  budget  request to  0MB,  the  Commission must  concurrently 

transmit  a copy of  the  budget request to Congress. 

Fi scal  Yea r Souree  Am ount 

FY 20!0 Enacted $66,500,000 

FY2011  Enacted $66,367,000 

FY  2012  !louse  Bill $66.367,000 FY2012 Senate Bill  $66,367,000 

FY 2012  Conti1111i11g  AppropriaJions  Act.  2012'"  $65,369,504 

FY  2013 Budget  Request  to  0MB $67,998,561  ' 0

As this chart shows, the  FE  C's appropriation  was  slightly  reduced  from FY 2010 to FY 2011. Both  Apprnpriatfuns  Committees  hHve  approved level fund ing  foT  FY 2012. and the  F6C 

has requested only a two percent increase for  FY  2013. The Commission is well  aw11re  of the constraints on federal spending generally,  and  al thougb theFEC ' s appropriation is  a small 

portion of discretionary spending, the Commission  appreciates  the support of its mission Ihat 

Congress  has  shown by  maintaining  these  appropriation  levels  in  this climate. Whi le funding amounts for the FEC have been  foi.rly  level, the Commission faces  rlslng 

costs.  even  with  salary  freezes, personnel costs rise with increased costs  for  benefits.  Non -

personn el  costs increase as well, including some by contractual provision.  ihe  Commission is continually  reviewing  its operations  and  processes for opportunities to enact cost-saving measures. Over the  pai;t  two  years,  the  Commission  has  critically  an&lyzed  every position vacated  through  attrition to de termine whether the agency could  absorb  the  loss  of  that  posltio11 

by  using  existing  staff  resources.  Similarly, the  FEC  has  also reduced its spending for  travel  and training,  making  djfficult decisions  n.,garding  discretionary spending and operating within decreased  fonding  levels. The agency  has  al so  modified  a number  of  processes  10 reduce or eliminate  tbe  need for paper copies, saving the  agency  both  pa per  and  printing  cliarges. 

In  FY  10 12,  the  f,EC  will  look to  modeniize  key disclosure  applications  like FECFlLE. The current  FECFILE  software  was  developed i11  a non-web  environment  and  is  overdue to be modernized to a web-based architecture to allow for  more  efficient and  user-fi-iendly  fil ing of 

financial  reports. The agency anticipates reducing contract support costs related  to  FECFILE  by 

rnovillg  this work in-house. In  additi911 , in 2010 the agency canceled its  Employee  Express        

> Public L,iw 112 -36 ,12.5 Stat. 380(2011).
> lO

This  was  the  ~moun1  or  the  FEC'~  FY  20)3  lludsc1  Requ est to  OMB..  In accordance with 0MB  guidance, 

in  lbol  requcsl  the  FEC  also  described  budgets  witb  funding  levels  reduced  fi:o,n  the  FY  2012  busc1in t by  tive  and   

> 1e11 percent.

whi ch  equates  10 S63,175.000  snd  $j9 ,850.000.  respectively .

16 38         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00040 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 51  72282A.031 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

co{ltract  because the  infonnation  available  through that  contract  was  also available  to  all emp loyees through the U.S. Department of Agriculture,  N11tional  Finance Center,  via  the Employee Personal Page. ln 2011,  the  Office of General Counsel  reviewed  its use of both 

Lexis/Nexis  and  Westlaw  and was able  to  reduce those costs  as  well. Both of  these  cbanges 

provided pennanent 1 long-tenn  savings  lo the agency. As part ofthe Commission's  long-tertn 

plaMing  efforts,  it  has  undertaken  the development of a Strategic Human  Capitlll  Man~gcment 

Plan and the revision of its Strategic Plan. Both of these  initiatives  will identify  opportunitie,  for 

reducing cos t s, streamlining procedures and improving efficiency. B. fNFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PROJECTS 

l.11formauon  technology  provides a  criticnl  means  for the Commission \o achieve its missi on, and  consequently  the Commission devotes considerable resources to Jnfonnation Technology program. 21  ln  fact, during FY 2011, approx i mately45%  ofthc  FEC 's  non-

personnel budgot was  spent  on information technology  costs.  The Commission is in the  mids!  of several multi-year in it iatives, and  it  plans  to continue theseeffons for several  addit-ional  years. 

Typically, these initiatives have-three stages: research  and  selection oflhe best solution; development  und  testing of prototypes: and development, dep loyment and training of  final 

versions of  the  project.  Whtie  previous  years  investments in the various initiatives  have  already 

hegun  to provide benefits to the  agency's  Infomiation  Technology  program,  and  therefore  to the public users of that system as well, the full benefit of  these  investments will not be achieved  llJltil 

the initiatives are completed. I.  Data  Warehouse The FEC's data warehouse  fi-amcwork  allows FE C staff  and  the pub lic to retrieve infonnation stored  across  a range of systems by providing  a single source of  reliable,  time• oriented and subject-oriented data in  an  easy-to-access. flexible fonn. In FY 20 I I, the FEC 

team,  including  a technical team  and  subject matter  experts.  worked closely  with  a data warehouse  contrado(  to  successfully implement the data warehouse prototype. In FY 2012,  lh~ 

agency intends to beg in taking advantage of t he  data  warehouse infrastructure currently being implemented  in  the  data warehouse prototype. For  example,  the FEC intends lo replace the existing campaign finance search processes currently available on  tlu:  Commission's  website. 

'The  current  proceSscs  are limited by the amount  of  data available for searches  (e .g_ , including 

contributions  from  individuals only if the amount is  nt  least $200, and with oo ability to search committee  operating  expenditures) nnd  also  by narrow sea rch  criteria  and  an  antiquated  fonnat 

for  displaying results. Th ese  processc.~  remained  uncha11ged  for more than  a decade and thus 

req uired  investments  in  stqfftime  and resources for improvement. The  FEC  began  its data warehousing project in  FY  2009. The prototype was completed 

in  FY 2011, and implementation of the FEC data warehouse  is  t.>xpectcd  to  span  FY 2012 to 

FY  20 14. 

21  AddirinoaUy,  Jnfom1atioo  Technology  s~curity  is  11  partfcular  concern  for  the  f'oderol  f:lroUon  C~mmis.;;ioll 

due to  the  confidential  ;ispe~ts  Qf  lht  "nforcerne111  and  compliance  programs, in  addition  to lhc  intcrc-~t  in  protecting 

personal  irlentifocatloo  lt1form111fo~ 

17 39         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00041 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 52  72282A.032 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

2.  Enterprise Content  Managei11cnt  System 

Following  a study in FY 2009, the PEC launched  an  agency-wide Enterprise Content Management (ECM) system for sharing and storing documents in a way that fosters 

collaborntion  between  FEC  offices,  maximizes  efficiency and supports compliance with agency document policies and records management.  Follow1ng  the initial deployment with an initial user  group,  in  FY 2010 lhe PEC  began  transitioning  additional staff to its ECM  system. 

Although the system  has  only  been  live for FEC staff for  a short  time-,  the agency  ha;;  already begun to realize efficiencies in automating work flow processes through ECM. All of tho 

ageocy·s  staff will use the ECM  5Ystcm  by FY 2014, and the ECM  system  will  also form ll1c 

l:)ase  for the  initiation  of En terprise Search  Cap11bility. 

3. Enterprise  Search  Capability Agency-wide Enterprise Search Capability will  allow  FEC staff and the publ ic to search multiple  and  disparate  content sources  with  one query.  With  Enterprise  Search, a user  can 

perfonn  searches  of  multiple data sources  and  receive results  that  nrc sorted and  a1rnnged  into  n

useful  form. In the FEC' s context, this capability would permit  a website  user,  for  example,  tn 

perfonn  a single topic  search  to find Commission regulations. advisory opinions, audit reports, 

and  eoforcement  documents  that  address  a particular  topic,  instead of requiring  separate  scarche.s 

in  each of those  databases.  This project was begun  in  FY 201 l, and the first phase of implementation will begin in  FY  2012. This  phase  focuses on Enterprise  Search  tool selection and the  enhanremtmt  of  existing  website  search functionalities.  la  the-future,  the  :igency  intends to expand the Enterprise Search  ,infrastructure  to search across  ECM  and  FEC  e-mail  databases 

as well  and  expect~  to complete this  praject  by FY 2015. 4. Website Improvement 

The  Commission  places  a high  priority on ensuring the  effective  use of technology and intemul  procedure~  to  optimize  its  communication  with  the public. During FY 20 I l, the Commission continued to take  advanlage  of the data  catalog  platform implemented during the previous year to expand the range of federal campaign finance  infomiation  provided to  the  public through sean:hable,  sortabh:  and  downloadable data  technologies.  The FEC also enhanced its data catalog and the federal  campaign  finance maps  available  on its homepage  lo  provide data across multiple  election  cycles.  As  p:ut  or  this  commitment  to  making  C11111paign  finance 

information  easier to  access  and  tuore  complete, the Commission began  a project to provide  a

portal on the FEC website  for  summary  prescJJtat ion  of PAC  and  party  activity.  The  portal  will 

offer better navigation and  enhanced  visWl 1 presentations  !)fthe  data  to  lielp  put the infonnation into  a larger  context  and  al low  users  Co  better understand  campafgn  finance trends. The Commission is equally committed to  responding  to trends in how  users  access infonnation  oo 

www .fec.gov. ln  order  to serve the increasing number of  people  accessing  1hc  FEC website  via 

mobile devices, the Commission  has  begun work to ensure that the most  popular  web  content is 

formaued  for mobile  device  user s. 

I~ 40         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00042 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 53  72282A.033 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

5. Server Improvements ln  r-y  2011,  the agency a)so invested significant funding in improving its  lnfornrntion 

Technology  infrastructure--including  hardware and software. These improvements are  a.n 

investment to provide  the  necessary support for the initiatives  described  above,  as well as enhancing  website  architecture lo  ensure  that the PEC website  can  handle  a high volume of traffic, especially  during  a website  tr.iffic  spike.  As  noted previously. the lnfom1ation Technology  infrastn!cture  investments  will provide the capacity to accept  \•cry  large electronically  filed  report~  lllld  to accept a very  large number of such reports, without delaying disclosure of the reported information. 

C.  HUMAN  CAPITAL AND STRATEGIC PLAN NING INITIATIVES In June 2009. the  Office  of Personnel Management  lOPM)  performed an evaluation of the  PEC's  human  capital management. With new staff on board since that evaluation. the FEC developed  a new approach to  uddressing  its human capital challenges and obtained  OPM's 

concurrence with its new approach in January  201  L. Since then, the FEC has made  considerable 

progress  in  implementrng  this pion.  The  Commission filled several  lcadersl;tip  positions during the  year,  including  the  Staff Director, General Counsel and the Deputy  Staff  Director for 

Management  nnd  Administration. 

As  reCQmmended  in the OPM evaluation,  the  FEC  is also  drafting  a Strategic Human Capital Management  Plan  to initiate succession planning; to ensure the agency  acquires, 

develops and maintains  U1e  best  talent:  to improve Human Resources policies  and  procedures 

and  to  measure individual employee performance effectively. Additionally, the Commission will critically  evu l uate  the distrihution of  its  workforc11  and identify any mis5ing sk ills and competencies required for  effect ive  and efficient delivery of the  Commission's  new  strategic 

direction and priority initiatives. Two-thirds of  the  Federul  Elt!ction  Com m i ssion's employees are  in  a collective bargaining unit and are  represented  by the Natio nal Treasury  E111ployecs  Union (NTEU). The 

Commission  will  work cooperatively with  the  NTEU  in  developing its  Stn1legic  Human Capital 

Management  Plan. In addition.  the  FEC  chancred  a Labor Mana_gement  Forum  under  the authority of  Executive  Order 13522,  Creating  Labor-Management  Forums  10  Improve  Delivery, 

of Govemme11/11/  Serv{ces.  22  The  Forum  is intended to promote improvements in  overall  FEC efficiency and effectiveness,  improve  employee  saris  faction,  assist in  the  development  of cooperative  and  productive  labor-mam1geme ntrclation s and  encourage  (be  involvement  of employees  in  workplace issues through their union  representative.. ~.  In FY 2011,  the  Forum identified  its  members and goals. along with  menic  for  measuring  its su ccess  at  1necling those goals.  

> l2

Th~  Pre.<ident.  Cr<'ating  lnbf/r-,1,[a11ogeme111  ro1w11 J IQ  l,r,ptOl' I!  Dcl{ve1y  of  Oo,'CJ·nm~ 111nl  se.,'i n?.S,  E~tc. 

Order  13522 , 74  Fed.  Reg.  66203  (l)ec.  14 , 2009). 

19 41 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00043 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 54  72282A.034 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

The Commi ssion  has  also begun developing a new Strat egic  Plan,  as  required by the 

GPRA  Modemizarion  Ac, of 2010. 11  The Commission will seek input  from  the  Committee  on 

House Administration on its revised Straregic Plan, along with input from other cxtcma ls takeholders. 

Conclusion 

The  Commissfon  appreciates  the  interest of  the  Subcommittee  in  the  FEC's  policies, processes  and  p r ocedu res.  This document together  with  the materials  the  Commissi on provided to  tbc  Suhcommitlec in its preparation  for  this  he;u-ing  provide a  thorough  review  of the Federal Election Commission's po licies, processes and procedures. The Commissioners would be  h appy 

to  respond to any  questions  you  may have today or in  further  writlen  suhmis~i on,. 

Cl'HA  Mmlv,•11/w1im1  A, •lufW/1/  1'111>,  Law  1 11 -352,  124  Slot.  3866(20 1!) .

20 42 Mr. H ARPER . Thank you very much. I will now recognize the vice chair, Caroline Hunter, for 5 minutes. 

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CAROLINE C. HUNTER 

Ms. H UNTER . Thank you. Chairman Harper, Ranking Member Gonzalez, members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me here today to speak with you about the Federal Election Commis-sion. Since members of the Commission last appeared before Congress several years ago, there have been significant changes in campaign finance law. Courts at all levels have stricken down laws regu-lating political speech, most notably in the landmark Citizens United decision. I would like to use this opportunity to supplement the agency’s joint testimony by updating the subcommittee on the FEC’s efforts to comply with these significant rulings. Additionally, I would like to share some updates on the new processes and proce-dures we have implemented at the Commission in recent years. In Citizens United, as you know, the Supreme Court struck down the Federal Election Campaign Act’s prohibition on corporations making independent expenditures in electioneering communica-tions. In response, the FEC released a statement in February 2010 confirming it would no longer enforce the statutory provision and the agency’s regulations prohibiting IEs and ECs by corporations and labor organizations. The FEC also announced it intended to initiate a rulemaking to address various other regulatory provi-sions implicated by the decision. At two FEC open meetings in January and June of this year, the Commission considered an alternative draft notice of proposed rule-making. I regret we have yet to remove the regulations related to the statutory provisions stricken by the Supreme Court; however, I anticipate the Commission may be able to initiate a formal rule-making in the near future. Following Citizens United, the D.C. Circuit Court held in SpeechNow that FECA’s source prohibitions and amount limita-tions on contributions were unconstitutional as to those political committees that make only independent expenditures. In two advi-sory opinions, the FEC confirmed it would act in accordance with the SpeechNow decision. Subsequently, the National Defense PAC asked the FEC for an advisory opinion confirming that as a political committee that made direct contributions to Federal candidates, it could also ac-cept unlimited corporate funds to make independent expenditures if it establishes a separate bank account for such purposes. After the Commission deadlocked on this issue and the PAC sued the agency in Carey v. FEC, the District Court recently ruled in NDPAC’s favor and the FEC agreed to a stipulated judgment and consent order. As the Chair mentioned, last month the FEC issued a public statement confirming this posture applies to all similarly situated political committees. Just as the FEC was created to ensure more transparency in the political process, we believe it has also been beneficial for the agency to operate with more transparency. To that end, the Commission has implemented several new reforms over the past 3 years in the enforcement and policymaking func-        

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00044 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

43 tions. On the enforcement side, we have put in place a procedure for committees that are the subject of inquiries from our Reports Analysis Division or audit proceedings to raise unsettled legal questions directly with the Commissioners. We also passed a direc-tive allowing for RAD and the Audit Division to raise those ques-tions on their own to the Commission. By having these Commis-sioners resolve these issues on the front end, we believe we can avoid lengthy proceedings that are expensive for both the com-mittee and the Commission. In the audit process we have also implemented hearings for com-mittees to present oral arguments and to respond to questions from the Commissioners prior to the approval of final audit reports. Be-fore the Reports Analysis or Audit Divisions refer matters to the office of general counsel for enforcement, we have also required the basis of such referrals to be provided to respondents and to allow them an opportunity to respond. The FECA requires respondents to be notified when a complaint from outside the agency is filed and to be given a chance to respond. And we thought it was only fair that the respondents in internally generated matters also be informed of the charges against them. On the policy side, we have also implemented a procedure whereby requesters and advisory opinions are given the opportunity to appear before the Commis-sion to answer our questions about the issues they have presented. The fairness and efficiency interests running through all of these procedural reforms reflect our concern that the campaign finance laws and the FEC’s processes should not be unduly burdensome on those Americans who are engaged in the most basic of civic activi-ties. I appreciate the Chair’s remarks this morning, and while we think we have made significant accomplishments in this end in re-sponse to the hearing that was held here several years ago, we do have other things we can do. And we appreciate your bringing the spotlight to the enforcement process and look forward to talking to you about that and other matters. Thank you. [The statement of Ms. Hunter follows:]         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00045 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

44         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00046 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 59 here 72282A.035 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

FEDERAL  ELECTION  COMMISSION   

> WASIIINOTON. O, C. 10463

St a te me nt of C arolin e C.  Hunt e r• 

V ic e C hair , Fc d e rnl  £ 1 ec ti on  C ommi ss ion Hou se Admini s tr a tion,  S uhcom.mitt ce  on E l ect ions 

H ca .-ing  on th e Fede ral  Ele cti on Co mmi ss ion: 

" Rc , • iew in g Policies,  Pro cesses  a nd  Pr ocedur-es" 

Novc n1her 3,  1 0  ll 

I NT RODUC TIO N

Chai r man  Harper, Ranking Member  Gonzal ez,  1111d Members of the Subcommitlcc: Thank you for inviting me he re today to speak with  you  about the Federal  Election  Commission. 

Since members  ortl 1c  Commi ssion  la.st  appeared  before Co ngress  severnl  years ago.  then~  have 

been  signitic;rnt  cha nges  in campaign finance law ..  Courts  al  all  levels have stricken down  laws 

reg ul atinf  polftical  speech, most notably in the landmark  Citizens  Ui1it ed  Supreme  Court 

decision.  Accordingly, I  \VOuld  llkc  to  U$e  lhis  opportunity to supplement the agency' s joint testirnouy  by  updating  the  Subcommittee on the  FEC's  efforts  lo comply wilh  Citizens  United,  as 

well as ot her significant  rnling.s.  Add itionally, 1 would  like  to  share  some  updates on  the  new 

processes  and procedures  we  have  Jmplemen:ed  al  the  Comn1issfon  in  recent years. 

L. FEC POLI CY IN  LIGHT  OF  RECENT  LE GAL  DEVE LOP MENTS 

A. Citizens United and  Corpornte  and  Labor  Organization  Activity 

In  Citize n,  United,  the  Supreme Court struck down the  Federal  Election  C.ampaign  Ac t' s 

(''FECA'")  prohibition on  corporuti ons  mulling  independen t  expenditures  ("IEs")  and 

electioneeli ng  comnmnications  {''ECs" ).~  In  response to the Court's decision,  the  FEC  released 

a statement in  Fcbrnary  2010 confinning it would  no  longer  enforto  the  ~talut ory  provisions  and 

the  a_gcncy·s  tegul(ltions  proh1bitin,g  lEs  and  ECs  by  corporations  and  labor  organizations.l  Tho 

FEC  also  11nnounucd  it intended to initiate  :1  rule1ua.l,.--ing  to  address  vaiious  0U1cr  regulatory 

provisions  implicat~d  hy  Cit/:ze11s  Unired. 

At two  PEC  open meetings on January 20  and  Jtme 15 this  ye3r,  the  CommissiC>n 

considered  allemativc  draft  Notices  of Proposed  Rulemaking.  Generally,  U1ese  drafts,  consistent 

wiOi  Lhc  FEC's publ ic  stafeITJe • t la.st  year , proposed  rcnwving  the regulations proh ibiting corporate  aod  labor  organ izntion !Es and ECs. ln add ition,  tJ1c  drnfts  asked  whe t her  l he  agency 

.should remove the prohibition  against  all  corporate  nnd  labor  orgc1niz111ion  expenditures 1 Cit/um,t  United, ..  Ni "C.  130  S. C'I . R76  (2010).  

> 2

Id ,

' "' r;EC  Sta tement  on  the  Supreme  Court's  Decision  in  Citizens  United  v,  FE.C ,11 Fcd..?.rnl  F..ltct.i on  Comn ti..; sion,  Feb .

S,  201 0.  1woil11blt · 111  bllt>: 1/ www,  foc .gov(prcsslpl'ess20  I0/20 I00205Ci'tizeusUntto(l.>hhnl. 45         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00047 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 60 here 72282A.036 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

(including, for  eJl/.lmple,  voter  registration and  gd -ou!- lhc -v ote  activities)  - so  long  as  t hey  arc 

not coordinated with  any  candida te  or  political  party  - as  opposed to rem ov ing only  t11e  speci fie prohibitions on !Es  a nd  ECs.  ~ The drafts  also  as ked  about certain other provis ions  of  the  PEC ' s 

so -called  "corpo rate facilitation" regulations. l regret  we have yet to remove the regulations 

related  lo the statutory provis ions stric ken by the  Supreme  Court: however. l  rcmaln  hopeful there may yet be  agree ruent  to  in itiate  a fo nnal rulemaking in  the  near future. Pendi ng  a

rulcmaking. the pub l ic  111ay  co ntin ue to rely on the Co mmission 's public statement from l ast  year 

as well as the  11g ency 's  advisory opinion process to  obtain  guidance on  spocifio  questions  that may arise. B.  EMILY's  List,  SpeechNo.-,,  and Jndcpcndcnt Politicnl Spending In 2009,  the  D.C. Circuit Court o f Appe a ls  invalidated  th e FEC ' s  regulations requiring 

en ti ties  such as  EMIL Y's List. which engaged in both independent  expenditures  and  dire c t 

co ntrihl1tions  to candidates . lo  s plit  th e ir  adminlstl'ati ve  expenses  eve nly  betwee n their  direct 

co ntributions accounts (which are subject  to  the federal  so urce  prohibitions and amount limitation s) and  their  exp enditures  accounts. 5 1n effect, to the ex tent s uch organizations engaged 

in  mnre  independent political  aclivitie.s  than th ey did in making  direct  contributions, th e

invalidated rule required s uch organizations lo alloca te a portion of  their  federally regulat ed funds 10 subsidize the  administrative  costs  for  their  independent  sl.)en din g.  No tably, the  O. C. 

Circuit held that  " n on •profit  entities  are entitled  to  rmtke  their expenditures-such as 

advo1ti sc m en t ,,  get-out-tho-vote.efforts,  and voter r eg istrat io n dr ives  - out  of a soft-money or 

general  treasury  ac ,count  that  is n ot subject to source and  amount  limits." 6

Following  Cit ize11s  United, the D.C. Circuit expan ded on its  £Mll>"s  lis1  rull ng , ho ldi ng in  SpcechNow  th at the FECA 's source prohibiti. ons and  amount  limitations on con tributions to ·political committees  were  un co nstitutional  as  10 th ose  commiuces  that  make  only independent 

expenditures.7  ln  hvo  a dvi so ry  opinions, the  f'EC  confirmed it would act in accordance with the 

Specc/zNo\V  decisi0t1.  8 

> 4

An  c:xpendifure  is  dcti ni:d  gene rall y n. ~ H~my  purchas e,  payment.  distribution , loan.  advance,  deposiL  or  gift  of 

money  or  aJ1ythiog  of value,  made  by  any person for  lhc  purpose  of influencing  any  ekcli0n  for  federal  office:·  See       

> 2U.S .C, §43 1(9)(A). An

indcpcndcnl  cxpcndil'llrC,  in  relevant  part.  is  defined  as  a .. Communication  expressly 

advocating the  election  or defeat of  a Clearly  idc ri1ified  cand1da1e  that  is  nol  made  in  c(!()pcn\tion,  consultation,  or  

> conce rt

wi th . or  at  the  request  or  sugges:1io 1,  of,  a candidate.  a cand1datc:'s  aut hori,.c d co mmitte e._  or  lh~ir  agenlli . or  a

political  party  commitlcc or  its  a£ en ts ."  See  I l  C.F.R.  § I00. l6(a):  5ec  al,o  2 U.S.C.  § 431(17). An  otcct io nccriog 

co mmunicati~n,  iu  rcleva nl  part,  is  do{ined  gene ra lly"~  "any  br oa dcast,  cable,  or  satellite  commun[cation~  tha t

"refers  to  a clea rl y identi  tied  candfdaie  for  Fcdtral  oJ1ioc:•  is  "p ublitl ,y  di,tributed  w it hin  liO  days  before  a general 

ckotfon"  or  " Withi n 30  day~  before  a primary or preference  election,  or a convention or caucus of a pofiucal  pany 

tliat  has  authoriiy  to nominate  a candidate,"  ""<l  "{ i] s targeted  to  the  relevam  ell'ctO rM e.' ' Sue  11  C.l'.K  ~ l00 .29(a);     

> .<ee also 2U.S .C

§ 434(f)(3)(A). 

' c.Ml lY's  Lisr  •~ FlfC.  581  F, 3d I (D.C. Cir.  2009).  

> 6

Iii,  at  16, T he D.C.  Cir~uit  also  suggested  thal if  ,l,n//n  , •.  Michigan  Clun nber  of Commerc e.  494  U.S.  652  {1990)          

> were overruled, suc hgroups co uld arJc~p tuntin11tc.d dC1nations from

fm -profit  corptm1 1i on.._  or  labor  organizat.ion-s  ,o 

th eir  ooo -contr ibu llons  accoun ts . See  i1l.  al  16  n.l ! , In  Ciri : e1L,  United,  tl1c  Sup rM>e  Court  twtrru ted  A11sii11 . U0 

S.C t. at 885. 

'Speecli/\/0•1• .0 1-g  v,  FEC. 599  l' .3d  686  (D .C.  Cir, 2010)  (ell  bane). 

• AdyismyOpinion~  2010 09 (C lub  for  Growth)  and  20 10-11  (Commonsense  Ten). 

246         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00048 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 61 here 72282A.037 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Subsequently, the National Defense PAC asked the FEC for an advisory opin i on 

confirming  that.  as  a political committee  that  made  dir ect contributions to federal  candidates,  it 

couhl  also accept unlimited corporate funds to make  ind<.j)endent  expenditur t.-s  if it  established  a

separate  bank account for such  purposes. 9 Ailer  the Commission deadlocked on an affirmative 

response.  NDPAC  suctl  the  agency  in  Carey"·  FEC. 10 The D.C. District  CoUTt  recently ruled in 

favor  of NDPAC's motion  for  a prel iminary injunction} 1 and the FEC agreed to a stipulated judgment and consent order under which it would not enforce the FECA 's source  frohibitions 

and amounl I imitations  with  re~-pect  to NDPAC's independent spending account. 1 Furtht.'fTllore, 

the  Fll.C  last week issued a p ublic sta tement confirming this posture  applies  not only to  NDPAC, 

but to all  similurly  situated  political  committees  that  maintain separate  bank  -accounts  for  fonding 

direct candidate contributions and independent political  activitics. 13 

Even  witho ll t rulernakings  on  Citizens  United.  EMJLY"s  List,  SpeechNow,  and  Carey.  the public  has  not  waited  to act on these decisions. Immediately  following  the  Clti.ze,u  Uni1ed 

decision, we saw roughly  a four-fold  increase  in  spendit1g  on independent expenditures  reported 

to the FEC  in  t he 2010 election cycle (a  total  ofrnore  than  $300 mi llion),  a~  compared  witJ1  the 2008 cyc l e. Over  that  same  period, independent-expenditure-only  committees  established pu rsuant to  Speech  Now  and other ou tside groups (including  corporatiuns,  labor organizations, and non-profit  organizations)  outspent tradition-al PACs by roughly 2: l on independent expenditures reported to the FEC. Meanwhil e.  spending  by the political party committees remained roughly the same. For the 2011-2012 election cycle, a ll  indtcotions  po i nt to tl 1is trend continuing and  expanding.  Already, more  new  independent-expenditure committees  have 

registered this cycle than  in  the previous cycle. 

The  FEC has been able to acconunodate this shift in po litical spending on  its  reporting fonns, bu t rulemakings  may  still be useful to  clarify  some questions  rclHting  to the  mechanics  of handling oo ntribulions,  di~bursemonts,  and reporting, and al so the  full  range  ofpennissib)c 

activities for groups engaged in independent political  Spending, 

Tho recent court decisions  and  rise  in  ou1$ide  spending have also  affected  the Commission's enforcement  dC\cket.  Already, we have received several  complnints  for this election cycle alleging  thot  certain outside groups not currently  registered  with the FEC have 

triggered  political  commi ttt."C  status  by virtue of their  spet1ding  on  indt!pendcnl  cxpendltures. 14 

These  cases,  whlch  ore  currently  pending, involve some of the more legally  significant  issues  un 

our  enforcement  docker. 

• Advisory  Opinion  2010•20  (Nat i, ,oal  Defense  PAC), 

> 1

°Ct1rey  ,.. FEC , Ci~.  No. l  1-259  (D.  D.C.  ffied  Jan.  31. 201 I).  

> 11

C<1,.•>·  v.  FEC , Civ. No.  11-259,  Memorandum  O11inion  oo  Motion  fur  Preliminary  In j unction  (D , D, C. Jun.  14. 

20 11 ).  

> 11

Cor~y  ,..  FEC.  Civ.  No.  l t-259. Stipulo1ed  Order  and  Consent  Judg1tJcnt(O.  D.C, Aug. l 9. 20ll) .

"'"FEC  Sialement oo  CareJ'  ,..  Ft:C,  Reporting  Guidance for Politi-al  Committees  l!ML  Maintn in  a Non •

Contribution  Account ."  Oc~  5,  2011,  nw,iloble  01  http://www.fec.govlprcss/l'u:ss20l  l/20 11 1006postcarcy .s html 

14 The  complainanl$  in  these  mailer$  hove  publicized  tbeir  complain,s,  and  thus  ii  does nol  violslc  lhc  confidc1 HinH t)' 

provision of2 U.S.C.  § 437g(a)(l2)  10  describe  the  basi.ofthc,;eromp1ainl~. 

347         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00049 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 62 here 72282A.038 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

IL  A ge nc y Processes,  Prnceclures,  and Mission 

Just  as  the  Federal  Electi on Commission was created  to  ensure more 1ra nsparency in the po licical  pwccss,  wc  believe  it has al so been beneficial for the agency to operate  with  more 

transparency.  Not on ly does grea t er  agency  rransparency  benefit  the  parties  who  inter act  with  \he 

agency, but  it  also he lps the  a_gency  operate more eq uitably  and  more efficiently. By receiving more input from interested pnrties in its decision-making processes, th e agcucy  benefits  from 

more  info1mc<l  decision-making. To  that  end,  the Commission  has  implemented several new r efonns over  the  past three years in its enforcement and policymaking functions. On the enforcement  side,  these  refom1 s

have  started with  th e initial stages. Many of the agency' s  enlbreemem  proceedings are iniJiated by  our  Repocts  Analysis Division  ("RAD"),  which reviews the repor ts filed by  political 

committees, party committees, and candidate  commi ttee"- . If RAD no tices enough  discTCpancics 

in  a committee's reports, RAD  may  refer  the committee for an audit  and ./  or to  the  Office  of General Counsel for  enforcemcn!.  RAD also may ask  comm ittcos  to take corrective action by explaining themselves on the public record or suggcsl that committees amend their reports. In  audir  proceedings,  agency  aud itors also frcq uc nlly ask committees ro take  various 

corrective actions when the interim aud it is  completed.  However, oftentimes alleged 

discrep,mcies  in  a commit tee's reports or recor ds wi ll hinge on uncertain legal qu est i ons tl1at  am 

open for interpretation.  Accordingly,  we  have  put  in  placeu  procedu re for  committees  that are the subject of  RAD  inq uirics  or  audil  proceedings  lo raise  unsuttl ~-d  legal questions d irectly  wi th 

the Commissioners. We also  passed  an  internal directi ve  allowing  for RAD  and  lhe Au dit 

Division  to raise  those  questi()ns  on t heir own initiative  t()  the  Comrnission,  By  having  the 

Comm issioners resolve these issues on the front end,  we  be lieve we  can  avoid lengthy lega l

proceedings  that are  e1'.pensive  for both the comm itt ees  and  t he Commission. Tn the  nudit  process,  we  h ave al so  itn plemented  hearings for  committees  to present oral 

arguments  t1nd  to respond to questions from the  ConunissionCl'S  prior to the Commissioners' 

approval  of fi nal audit reports. Audi ts frequently invol ve significant issues of  lawns  they relate to a committee's activities. and may also  serve  as  the  basis for additional enforcement 

procecdiogs.  Thus.  it is critically important  to  gel  the audit reports  right,  and  a ll owing the 

Comm issioners  to int eract  directly  with  audited  committees he lps  ensure  lhat we fully understand all of  the  legal  ,md  factual  nuances  i nn  given  audit. Before the  ReporlS  Analysis or Audit Divisions refer  mattcrs  over to the Office of Gene ral Counsel for enfor cemen t.  we  have  also  requir ed the  bash  of such  referrals  to be provided to  responclerits,  and to allow them  anoJ)portunlty  to  respond .  The FECA rcqu[rcs respondents  to  be  noti  li ed  when a complaint from outside the agency is ti led  agninsl  them an d to be given a chan ce lo respond, 11 and  we  thought it  was  only  fair  th al responde rt ts in  iatcnrnlly 

generated  matters  also  be informed of the  charges  against  them. Moreover, having  a truly  t\vo-

sidod  adversarial  p roceeding furthers  the  Commissioner,'  fact-fi1 1ding  role by allowing  tliem  to 

hear  bo th sidei;  of  a matter  in the earliest stnges. 

"See  2 V,S.C.  §4J7g(a)(  IJ .48         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00050 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 63 here 72282A.039 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

On the poli cy side, we have also implemented a procedure whereby  requesters  of 

advlsory  opinions  are  glven  an  oppo rt1mity  to  iippear  before the Commission to answer our 

questions  about l11e legal issues they have presented, and the facts of their proposed  activities  as 

they relate to the  legal  issues. Because 11dvisory opinions set forth  the  Commission's interpretation of the FECA and its regulations,  and  any similarly  situated  parties  arc  entitled to rely  on  those opinions, 16 we believe  the  opportunity 10 clarify the  issue,~  with requesters leads to more  informed  decision-making by the Commission. The  fairness  and efficiency interests  running,  through  all of these procedural  refonns 

reflects  our  concem  thal  the campaign finance laws  and  the FEC's processes shou ld not be unduly burdensome on those Americans who  are  engaged in  the  mo st basic of  c1vic  activities, As thcSupreme  Coun  has reminded us, in this  area  of the law , we  must  employ "mi nimal if  any 

discovery, to allow parties 10 resolve disputes quickly without chilling  speech  th.rough  the  threat 

of burdensome  litigation  ... eschew 'tl 1e open -ended rough-and-tumble of  factors,'  which 'invit[es1 complex  argument  in  a trial  court and  a virtually  inevitable appeal' ... [a nd) give  t]1e 

benefit of any doubt to protecting  rather  than s tilling speech." 17 

Mosr  of the enforcement respondents who appear before the Commission tend to be 

inexperienced participants in the political process, or even otherwise  experienced  participants 

who  nonetheless got  caug,ht  up in the complexities of  campaign  finance  law  inadvertently. Moreover, we believe the  ngcncy's  enforcement  process  is not the appropriate place for making new  law  or otherwise clarifying  ambi~1ous  la w, and, in faol, we  are  prohibited by  law  from doing so in enforcement  proceedings.  g

On the subject of enforcement, there  has  been some discussion on trends in the Commission's  civil  penalties. Thcslatute  pcnnils  the agency to seek conciliation agreements with respondents involving civil penalties, but the agency itself does not  have  I.he  authoritr  to impose  iL~  own penalti es other  tluhl  through the rniaistcrial administrative lines program. 1

Having said that, ii is  not  a secret that our  average  conciliation amounts  have  gone down  iu 

recent years. However. simply looking  at  the numbers is 1101  particularly  illuminating, since  they 

flucruate  depending on the types of  cases  on  th~  enforcement  docket  tn  any given  yea r.  For 

example, In 2006, the average conciliation  penally  was  $179,000, but that  induded  a.$3.8 

million  settlement  with Freddie  Mac.  involving prohibited  Cllrporale  fondrnising  activity. 20  In 2007, the  average  dropped  to  $73,427,  and  then  ti okcd back up  tO  $103,000  in  2008,  When  the current Commission  was  constituted. Since then, the  average  has dropped lo five figures. 

There  are  a number  of  reasons for this decline.  First,  as  discussed before, recent court decisions  have  hwalidated  several  statutory  and regulatory provisions  and,  accordin_gly, 

respondents can no  longer  be found  in  vi olation of those provisions. Secondly,  we  have  placed  a. 

••  See  2 U.S,C.  *437f.  

> 11

Wiscon.rin  Rir,/11  to  life  v.  FEC, 551 U.S.  449,451  (2007) (internal ci tations  omitted). 

"See  2 U.S,C.  § 437f(b)  (' ·Any  rule of  law  which  is  riot  staled  in this Act  o,  in  chopl~r95  orehnpter  96 of Ii lie  26  

> may

be  inilinlly  P")posed  by the  Commission  only -15  ~ ml,  or  regulation  pursuant  ro  procedures  establisl,ed  in 

scclion43 R(d)  oflhis  tiUe.").    

> 19 2U.S.C.

§*  437g(a)(4)(CJ  nnd  (aJ(S)(A ). 

w MUR 5390  (Delk). 

549 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00051 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 64 here 72282A.040 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

greater  emphasis on the  statute'~  mandate  rhat  the  Ff.C  "e nco urage  voluntary  compliance,'' 21  as 

opposed to  sceldng  hefty penalties  from  grassroots  non-profit  groups and  campaign  co mmit tees 

that  lend to rely on volunteers  and  staff who are  assc1nblecl  on  110  ad hoc basis, Thank you again for  the  opportunity lo  update  the  Subcommittee on the  flEC's  policies, 

processes, and procedures. I  am  happy to  answer  a11y  questions you  m(ly  have.  

> 21

1 U.S.C  ~ 437d(a)(9). 

fl 50 Mr. H ARPER . We now have time for committee members to ask questions of the witnesses. Each member is allotted 5 minutes to question the witnesses. Obviously we have the timing device there to help us keep track of that and we will alternate between the ma-jority and the minority. To begin with, I will recognize myself for 5 minutes, and I will start with some questions dealing with the transparency and the manuals, of course, that we are very inter-ested in. At a January 20, 2011 Commission meeting, Commissioner Weintraub said we don’t believe in doing things in secret. Each of you please tell me if you think the FEC should release its enforce-ment manuals and penalty guidelines to the public. And if not, why not, and we will start with you, Commissioner Walther. Mr. W ALTHER . Thank you very much. And thank you for having us here today. I think this is a very helpful process for all of us. And it is overdue. Since I have been on the Commission, we have not had an opportunity to have an exchange like this and I think it is good for us and it is hopefully helpful. I fully support, fully support making public the RAD review policy, enforcement policy and a penalty schedule. I am completely in favor of that. I think it has been overdue. Mr. H ARPER . Thank you, sir. Commissioner Weintraub. Ms. W EINTRAUB . Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. H ARPER . And I hope I pronounced your name at least some-what close. Ms. W EINTRAUB . Weintraub. It isn’t that hard. Mr. H ARPER . Okay. Good. Ms. W EINTRAUB . Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for the shout-out. I appreciate your quoting me on the values of trans-parency. I am a firm believer in them. I actually have been advo-cating for years that we should disclose our penalty schedule. I think one complication is that we don’t always agree on what that penalty schedule should say. We have had many debates in execu-tive session when we are trying individual cases where Commis-sioners are not agreed on what the penalty levels really ought to be. I have long advocated that we ought to have a penalty schedule and that we ought to make it public. And then when the Commis-sion departs from it, it ought to have to justify those departures in terms of mitigating and aggravating factors that would justify that departure. I think there may be some confusion about what the enforcement manual is. The document that I think of as the enforcement man-ual is a large, cumbersome, rather out of date collection of memo-randa that are not—a number of them have been superseded. I think it might actually be more confusing than helpful to disclose that particular document. It is not actually in its current form being actively used. It is sort of a historical document, but doesn’t necessarily reflect what we are doing today. I think that one effort that Commissioner Walther spearheaded, which is far more useful, is that we did create a description of our enforcement process and that is posted on the Website and it does go into the different stages of the process. And I think that actually is much more helpful than to put on the public record something that is outdated and not really in use.         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00052 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

51 Mr. H ARPER . Thank you, Commissioner. Chair Bauerly. Ms. B AUERLY . Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our microphones are automatic. So forgive me. I agree with Commissioner Weintraub that the effort that we undertook a couple of years ago to put onto the Website a comprehensive guide for our enforcement process ac-tually reflects the most current documented enforcement guide that we do have. We do as I understand have a document that hasn’t been updated that existed in the Enforcement Division prior, cer-tainly prior to my arrival at the Commission. But again just a few years ago, we did undertake a documentation of our current proc-ess so that people who are going through could understand all of the different nuances. I also would support making our penalty guidelines public, but I do think that we would need to, again as Commissioner Weintraub pointed out, there are some disagreements over what that penalty guideline should look like. In addition, of course, the Commission is required by the statute to conciliate with people who are in the enforcement process. So of course the end result in a con-ciliation agreement may not be reflective of the schedule at the out-set. So I think that that, unlike some other enforcement agencies who do not have the requirement to conciliate for civil penalties but could actually issue and impose a fine on someone in their process, we are differently situated in that way. So I would just want to make sure in whatever form we did that we didn’t cause confusion over different penalties that were resulting in concilia-tion agreements because the Commission is required to conciliate under the act. Mr. H ARPER . Thank you. Vice Chair Hunter. Ms. H UNTER . Thank you. As my colleagues have pointed out, there is some disagreement with respect to the amounts in the pen-alty schedule. And I think this would be a good opportunity for us to revisit the amount and take an opportunity to determine what is the best penalty for whatever violation and perhaps we could provide a range to accommodate for the conciliation portion that the Chair mentioned. In addition, I think it is important that we maintain some discretion to depart from the schedule. And I agree with Commissioner Weintraub, we should be able to explain when we do that departure. But I think we should maintain the ability to do so. Mr. H ARPER . Commissioner McGahn. Mr. MC GAHN . Thank you. To answer your question directly, there is no reason why at least parts of the RAD manual could be public and at least part of how the penalties are done could be more public. And if I could take a minute to elaborate on what I mean, because it is a question that raises many, many issues and issues I encountered when I was first appointed to the Commission. As a practitioner who represented a number of politicians, parties, vendors, everyone perhaps members of this committee from time to time, when I was appointed to the Commission, I really wanted to see these secret books. RAD does have a manual. RAD is the Re-ports Analysis Division. I apologize for speaking in Beltway acro-nym, but I have fallen into that habit. And there are parts of it that I think are part of the enforcement processes of the Federal         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00053 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

52 Election Commission. As part of the enforcement process, I think that is something that ought to remain confidential. There are parts that may constitute a form of secret law. If there is secret law, that ought to be public. Right now the current man-ual I think is a hybrid of the two. So to simply turn it over in total I think would cause some issues because I think we would be giv-ing away some of the internal deliberative process privilege or some of the enforcement triggers. The penalty schedule is something I have heard about before I was appointed and I wanted to see the penalty schedule and I envi-sioned there was this magic chart on the wall, sort of a sentencing guideline. There really isn’t. It depends on the case. It depends on the history of the issue. And it depends on a number of frankly fac-tors as to what penalty applies. The Commission has even before I was appointed to the Commission, has done quite a bit to make it a little bit more public in certain ways. For example, there is a policy for sua sponte submissions. If you know you have a problem, you can turn yourself in and this policy says you will get a discount on the penalty. What the penalty will be, what the starting point is, you really don’t know, but you can get 50 percent, 75 percent. Increased activity. There is a policy on that from 2007, again before I was appointed, that talks about what the penalty would be and gives a sense of the formula. Congress has put in the administrative fines program so you know in certain issues what the fine will be. One thing that has happened, however, is there have been cases where it just doesn’t seem fair to impose that penalty on a first-time candidate or what not. The Commission through regulation has taken the position that they are somewhat handcuffed and they don’t have a choice in the matter. It would be nice legislatively if we were told, yes, we do still have discretion in admin fines. But there have been things that have made penalties public. What I think would help making public is not some magic chart because there really isn’t a magic chart, but the method used to calculate some of these penalties. Is it 10 percent of the amount at issue, is it 20 percent, is it 50 percent? The counterargument that I have heard, which is somewhat persuasive, is people may think that it is a cost of doing business; and if they can predict the fine, it may encourage them to not comply. I am not sure I buy it be-cause frankly I found most people try to comply. Certainly you are going to have some bad actors that intentionally try to funnel money to campaigns through a back door and what not. But my concern has always been the first-time candidate, the unsophisti-cated political player getting caught up in the processes of the FEC and they get caught up on this fine calendar chart. And my final point with the penalties, and the Vice Chair talked about this a little bit, the idea of discretion. There are really ways to do penalties. One is on sort of a sentencing guideline mentality where everyone gets treated the same once you have decided there is a violation. But sometimes the same is not really fair. To me I think the Commission needs to maintain some discretion in what the penalties are, to look at the totality of the circumstances. Is it a first-time candidate? Is this someone who is a sophisticated play-er or not a sophisticated player? What is the governmental interest         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00054 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

53 in the problem? If it is corporate money to a campaign, every court in the land from the supremes on down has said the law is at its most urgent application there because it gets at the heart of cor-ruption or the appearance thereof. If it is a one-time report from a political committee that has already disclosed the information but forgot some technicality on a subsequent report, that really shouldn’t be treated the same even if it is the same dollar amount. So that is my long-winded explanation, is I am sort of in favor of in public, but it is not as easy as just handing you a book. Mr. H ARPER . And Commissioner Petersen. Mr. PETERSEN . I agree with what most of my colleagues here have said. I think that the method by which the Commission deter-mines its penalties should be more transparent. And I think that this exercise as has been pointed out, there would need to be some agreement as to what those methods are. There has at times been disagreement amongst us. But whatever we did release would have to acknowledge the fact that there does need to be flexibility built into the process. And as to the issues regarding the enforcement and the RAD manual, I do think that more can be disclosed by the Commission with the understanding that there are certain parts of the process that are interwoven into our enforcement program that under the statute need to remain confidential. Mr. H ARPER . I thank you. And now I will yield to the ranking member, Mr. Gonzalez, for his questions. Mr. GONZALEZ . Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Excuse me. The question will be to the chairwoman, Chair Bauerly. The rank-ing member of this committee wrote to you back on March first re-garding the proposed bill where you basically assumed the respon-sibilities of the EAC, and you responded—I want to make sure— yes, it was signed by you—responded in a letter dated March 16th in which you obviously say you have looked at the bill, you could assume the additional duties, some of which were under your juris-diction in years previous. And you go on to say in your letter that you would determine which of the responsibilities could be assigned to current or new employees of the FEC and which would be carried out under con-tracts with private entities, outsourcing. Any strategy—and I will read from the letter. Any strategy to meet these new responsibil-ities would require additional resources. Do you have a specific—at this time, could you tell us specifically in the way of expenses, additional expenses that would have to be met requiring additional funding for the FEC, if, in fact, it took over some of the duties? Ms. B AUERLY . Thank you, Ranking Member Gonzalez. We have not undertaken any comprehensive—— Mr. G ONZALEZ . If you could get closer to the microphone. Thank you. Ms. B AUERLY . My apologies again. We have not undertaken a comprehensive examination of the EAC’s current budget to deter-mine what their spending versus what we—but obviously if there were—there are significant EAC responsibilities, some of which were established in its original legislation, some of which have been added over time, including in 2009, important obligations under the MOVE Act. So there are certainly important programs         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00055 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

54 at the EAC and, as I understand the legislation, would continue should the transfer to the FEC happen. I understand the CBO has prepared an estimate based on their review of the current EAC budget. I don’t have any basis with which to quibble with the CBO’s estimate. I do assure the com-mittee, were we to be charged with these responsibilities, we would of course conduct them in the most cost effective manner. But again, there certainly are significant obligations, including some contracts that exist at the EAC that I understand would need to continue given the programmatic requirements, and I believe the CBO has estimated approximately 20 individuals would be needed to accommodate some of those obligations. Again, to the extent we could find some space within our own current personnel, we would certainly do that. But we would cer-tainly not want to shortchange any of those important responsibil-ities that exist currently at the—— Mr. G ONZALEZ . But you are not in a position today to say with a specific number what it would take for you in the way of addi-tional funding so that we can determine if there are really any sav-ings which is the objective of us proposing things to the supercom-mittee. I mean, you can’t do that today? Ms. B AUERLY . I cannot. Mr. G ONZALEZ . Thank you. The next question—and it really is a yes or no and maybe we can expand on it in a minute. But a couple of remarks regarding transparency and the concern this committee has on the workings of the FEC. I think it is important for the sake of trust just in government and the election process and such that what you do to the extent that can be public is transparent. But I also believe of equal or greater importance is what you are con-sidering. Do you have sufficient data, do you have sufficient information, are there sufficient disclosure requirements that allow you to make measured determinations as far as who is spending the money, how they are spending the money, is there a violation? I think that Commissioner McGahn said, you know, people coming in through the back door. Well, with Citizens United and such and the relax-ation in my opinion based on judicial decree, we don’t have to come, a lot of people don’t have to come through the back door anymore. They just come through the front door. The question is can we at least figure out and identify who is coming in through the front door. In my opinion, you don’t have that information presently before you and I think it is going to require some sort of legislation. The question would be yes or no to the individuals, starting with Com-missioner Walther, and that is if disclosure is important, how is it best effectuated, are current disclosure requirements sufficient to carry out the FEC’s mission? Mr. W ALTHER . Thank you. I don’t think—I am not too sure ex-actly what you meant by us getting the information. If you are sug-gesting that we collect information to be able to assist where the money is coming from, where we see violations, that probably would be helpful and that is something that we have not really done.         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00056 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

55 Secondly, no, the statutory and the regulatory framework does not in my opinion begin to provide the kind of transparency that we should have in the aftermath of Citizens United. The very fact that for all of these decades we have had regulation based upon the statute that we have upheld to the best of the—I think that should have been upheld to the best of our ability—is now gone. There is a huge vacuum there that raises questions that we have discussed and that Congress obviously has discussed and has been unable to reach agreement on. But I do think that we have fallen down on what we could have done with respect to our regulations. We have had—at least pre-pared—two drafts amongst ourselves on what kind of information we thought would be necessary for transparency, for corporations that do not have foreign control, and to take a look at what we now have to look at to see how we can make sure that foreign invest-ment to—in our political system—is prohibited. We need to do a lot of that. One draft is much more specific than the other, and I think the very least we could have done is to make both of those avail-able for public comment and we have not been willing to do that yet. Mr. G ONZALEZ . And I am going to ask with the chairman’s indul-gence, I am just going to restrict the question to a yes or no and it is going to be whether current disclosure requirements are ade-quate or do we need to improve on those. And maybe we will have another go round and you will be able to again expand on your re-marks. Yes or no, is it sufficient presently given Citizens United? Ms. W EINTRAUB . No. Ms. B AUERLY . No, I don’t believe so. Ms. H UNTER . Yes, in order to accomplish—sorry. The laws are sufficient in order to follow the mission of the agency as it is. Obvi-ously it is at the discretion of Congress to amend the laws. Mr. M CG AHN . Yes. Mr. P ETERSEN . Yes. Mr. GONZALEZ . Thank you. I yield back. Mr. H ARPER . Thank you, Mr. Gonzalez. And I ask unanimous consent to allow Mr. Lungren, the chairman of the full committee, to participate in this subcommittee hearing. Without objection, it is so ordered. At this time I will recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Schock, for questions. Mr. S CHOCK . Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the Com-missioners for being here today. First let me state in reaction to the chairman’s question and your responses that I support the chairman’s request for full disclosure of this manual and while I can appreciate that each of the Commissioners may not want for their deliberations behind their decision making to be made public, let me assure you as a candidate for office who becomes a victim of your decision or at least the recipient of your decision, we want full disclosure. And as uncomfortable as that might be for you to allow the public and for every candidate for Federal office to under-stand that, I can assure you that our constituents make no bones about the fact that they expect us to know the rules and, quite frankly, do not understand why if in a case a Member of Congress         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00057 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

56 or a candidate for Congress would not be following the rules or would receive some kind of statement suggesting otherwise. Second, I have a whole host of questions. So I hope that we will get a couple of rounds if possible. First I would like to find out within the FEC who decides which cases the FEC litigates. Ms. BAUERLY . Thank you, Representative Schock. The FEC’s Litigation Division makes recommendations to the Commission. If I might step back for a moment. Much of the litigation comes to us. The FEC is often the defendant in lawsuits. In terms of initi-ating lawsuits with respect to perhaps an enforcement action, that is the decision of the Commission. Mr. S CHOCK . So the Commission actually votes? Ms. B AUERLY . Yes. Mr. S CHOCK . Based on the litigation department’s recommenda-tion? Ms. B AUERLY . Yes. Mr. S CHOCK. Okay. Back in 1999, the FEC adopted a policy that the Commission would enforce section 100.22(b) of its regulation in every circuit except the First and Fourth where it was found to be unconstitutional. I found that a bit puzzling. And my question is simply whether or not there should be a difference for the First Amendment rights depending on whether you live where the FEC has lost a case and what the thinking was behind your judgment on partially enforcing that section of your code. Ms. B AUERLY . Representative Schock, I was not at the Commis-sion at that point in time, so I cannot speak to—and actually none of us were, so we couldn’t speak to the specifics of what those—that set of Commissioners were thinking. In general, Federal—— Mr. S CHOCK . Let me ask you. Is that still the Commission’s posi-tion? Ms. B AUERLY . Post the McConnell decision, that is no longer the Commission’s view of that, as we indicated in our submissions to you. Mr. S CHOCK. Okay. You stated that the Commission does not be-lieve it is appropriate to request information beyond what is re-quired by law. If this is the Commission’s policy, I would ask why the Reports Analysis Division continues to send out requests to candidates asking for information entities are under no legal obli-gation to provide. Ms. B AUERLY . The Commission seeks further information from committees through what is called the request for information, an RFAI, when reports analysts on the face of report have questions on what might appear on the face of that report in terms of a need for additional information or for some clarification. So reports are only sent where there is a legal basis to do so. And in those letters, the legal basis for seeking this information is provided in the letter sent to the committees. So we only ask for information that is re-quired. And again RFAIs are sent where on the face of the report there seems to be some discrepancy, some mathematical error, per-haps contributor information is not provided. We ask the commit-tees for additional information. Mr. S CHOCK. So if you ask for additional information, I under-stand you are asking—I guess the follow-up question to that would         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00058 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

57 be what are the due process rates the reporting entities have when an RFAI is sent to them. Ms. B AUERLY . If I might use—make sure I understand your ques-tion, there wouldn’t be I don’t think any technical due process rights that—because there are no consequences of not filing—not responding to the RFAI itself. There may be further—there may be—to the extent that if there are problems that are not able to be resolved, then perhaps there might be some additional process within the agency down the line. But the first—the first thing that will happen is the analysts and the committee may discuss any issues. If, for example, what is missing is contributor information and the committee lets our analysts know that they have used their best efforts to collect that information from their contributors, contributors simply did not want to provide it, then that is all that the Commission would require, is the best efforts to collect that type of information. So many of these issues are resolved very easily in terms of just making sure. It may be that something got reported on a line that was incorrect. The vast majority of these letters are based on dis-crepancies on the face of the report that are very easily either amended or resolved in that way. If a committee would like to ask for the Commission to get in-volved in a potential legal question that is raised, the Commission fairly recently adopted a procedure where it may do so. So if a com-mittee receives a letter and it thinks that it does not have an obli-gation to provide that information, it may file a request with the Commission for the Commission’s determination of that. It may present its arguments to the Commission in terms of what it thinks its reporting obligations might be. So it does have an opportunity to address those issues directly with the Commission. Mr. S CHOCK . Okay. Thank you. Mr. H ARPER . I will now recognize the gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Rokita, for 5 minutes. Mr. ROKITA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank ev-eryone for their testimony here today. I want to start off with what Commissioner McGahn was talking about where he said it was not as simple as handing over a book. I want to make sure I under-stand your testimony the right way. Is that because no document exists or is it because, the discretion you and Commissioner Hunter and others talked about, you can’t just hand over a book of these penalties? Mr. M CG AHN . If I could ask you a question. Mr. R OKITA . No. It is our hearing. Mr. M CGAHN . Which one are you talking about? Are you talking about the RAD manual, the enforcement manual or the penalties? Mr. R OKITA . Both. Real quick. Mr. M CG AHN . Okay. There is an enforcement manual. As others have said, it is somewhat out of date. Mr. R OKITA . The penalties—— Mr. M CGAHN . Right. And if it was up to me, I would hand it to you right now, but I don’t have it with me. And it would probably take four votes to give you the enforcement manual. Mr. R OKITA . So you say it is not as simple as handing over?         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00059 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

58 Mr. M CGAHN . The RAD manual is the one that is not as simple as handing over because the RAD manual includes essentially— part of it is directives to the staff, that if there is an issue over a certain dollar amount, refer to the Commission, the Commission wants to see it. It doesn’t mean you have broken the law. It just prioritizes what the Commission wants to see and when it wants to see it. Mr. R OKITA . Then why is it so secretive? Mr. M CGAHN . Well, because the dollar amounts at issue—the ar-gument that I have heard is that the dollar amounts will let people know, well, if your mistake is less than 50 grand or 10 grand, ev-eryone will have $49,000 mistakes so they won’t get referred. I don’t really buy it. I think at the end of the day people have better things to do at their campaign headquarters than to reverse engi-neer their FEC reports to avoid referral. Mr. R OKITA . I would agree with that. Mr. M CGAHN . But there are other things in the RAD manual that I think are part of the enforcement process and you get into a situation where there is the confidentiality of a specific enforce-ment matter and there is also the protection that the agency has of its enforcement priorities. So right now it is all in one book. Mr. R OKITA . Let me respond to that. I used to run an agency, both an election agency and a securities agency. So I understand the need to—as others on this panel may want to comment on. I understand the need to protect investigative material and the pub-lic policy behind that. That is different than how you intend to en-force something. And it is different for this reason. Are we going to be a country of laws or are we going to be a country of men? Meaning are we going to be consistent? Are the people in this coun-try, including the candidates of this country, going to have a fair hearing? Discretion or not, or are we going to be a country of men where discretion can be used, over used and abused? This is especially important when you are talking about a bu-reaucracy that is unelected. It is ultimately important when we are talking about the business that each of you and your staffs are in, which is protecting a free and fair election. And so I think the atti-tude that I am hearing from this agency as a whole, as represented by each of you, and I say this, Mr. Gonzalez, in the most bipartisan way possible, none of you are that important that you can’t disclose what you are doing as a public business. And I think we all ought to get over that. I will yield back the rest of my time and expect a second round. Mr. H ARPER . Thank you. Mr. SCHOCK. If the chairman would yield, I just want to respond to Mr. Rokita’s request for the rest of us to weigh in on this. Mr. H ARPER . Certainly. Mr. S CHOCK . My only response would be this. Many of you were involved with FEC election law in some form prior to coming to your Commission spot. Assuming that your Com-mission term expires and you go back into the private sector, you may or may not choose to go back into that profession. Why should you be privy to information on the process in which this Commis-sion has made decisions that your peers and competitors in this in-dustry are not privy to?         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00060 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

59 Taking us as candidates and officeholders out of this, I would suggest that it is only fair that the people who represent us and the industries that many of you were involved with prior to your Commission service be given the same information that many of you will have when your term of service is up. Mr. H ARPER . At this time I will recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Nugent, for questioning. Mr. NUGENT . Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I do appreciate the Commission, all of your attendance here today. I am a little troubled. My past experience has been in law en-forcement for 36-plus years, and I understand protecting investiga-tive techniques and how you go about investigations. I clearly un-derstand that. But what I don’t understand is the way you are guarding as it relates to enforcement measures or RAD or pen-alties. Because what I keep hearing across the board from many of you is that the enforcement manual is out of date. So I don’t under-stand how you even operate if your enforcement manual is out of date. I don’t understand that you don’t have at least a penalty manual at least describing what the penalties are. And I certainly do understand discretion, and you need to have that, particularly as you related, Mr. McGahn, as it relates to a first-time candidate. Somebody who has made a simple mistake I don’t think rises to the same level. I think you need to have discre-tion. So I guess I am troubled by the fact, and so what I want to hear—and I will let any member answer this. How do you—what is your plan on rectifying the fact that the manual is out of date and that there is—doesn’t sound like there is a clear penalty man-ual at all? Any one of you would—Mr. McGahn. Mr. M CG AHN . I will start, I guess. First, I want to make clear I don’t want to be portrayed as an apologist for hiding documents. On the contrary, I have been, I think, one of the prime movers in much of what has been made public. I am merely articulating the arguments that I have heard in defense. It has been the position of the Commission forever and a day that these things are secret. Same questions you are raising are the same questions I have raised. I am not sure I am convinced of the answers I have gotten, either. But as a deliberative body of six commissioners where it takes four to change what has been a long-standing practice, you know, I am a commissioner, so I have to give you the Commission long-term view. As far as the enforcement manual, Commissioner Walther, it has already been talked about his initiative to at least make that more public and at least have a summary of how the process works I think is a good first step. Second, my understanding is our recently hired new general counsel is looking into this to at least update it, and then from there I would certainly support making something public. You know, as the chair rattled off, DOJ, most law enforcement have some sort of prosecutor’s manual. Mr. N UGENT . Right.         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00061 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

60 Mr. M CG AHN . And even if there is—the problem ultimately is when you keep these things secret. Not only does it give people who have worked at the agency an edge, quite frankly, who then go off and do other things, but it creates a problem in the eyes of the public where you think there is maybe something secret. And even if there isn’t, you feel like there is some hidden process or some hidden rule that you don’t see. Mr. N UGENT . Right. Mr. M CGAHN . There is a lot of legal advice that goes on between the general counsel’s office and the reports analysis division and the audits division when these letters go out. That is something that is not particularly public. In fact, when I asked for it as a com-missioner, I had trouble getting it, because it is not the sort of thing that an agency that has been around for decades thought to keep in one place. So we are making a lot of strides to get it together. It is just these sorts of questions hadn’t been asked in years. The FEC some-times becomes a little insular and doesn’t really think about some-times how the public views what it does. And there is a number of commissioners at this table today committed to trying to correct that, and we have gone a long way to doing that, but there is a lot more work to do. So I don’t have a good answer as to why this stuff is secret. I am just giving you the answers I have been given. Mr. N UGENT . Okay. The chair, I believe you wanted to—— Ms. B AUERLY . I think that as Commissioner McGahn pointed out, this set of Commissioners has changed some of the processes and procedures. And, again, the enforcement guide that we did put on the Web site was an attempt to start to update some of that so that there is something that would be more useful to the public, frankly, than handing out documents that are outdated. With respect to—your other question I think was about civil pen-alties. I think that there is a lot of agreement about putting out the formulas that go into it. But, again, as Commissioner McGahn pointed out earlier, there are different types of violations. Every enforcement matter looks a little bit different because there may be three or four violations in one matter and there might be one in another. And so if we were to take that step, I think we would just want to make sure that we are not creating any confusion amongst the public or those who are working on committees to ensure, and I think that can be accomplished. That would just be the caveat that we would need to make sure that we explain that, and every-one understands the parameters of what that formula would look like and that the Commission does retain the discretion in certain instances to make changes from that. Mr. N UGENT . Thank you. I see my time has expired. Mr. H ARPER . And I will now recognize the gentleman from Cali-fornia, the chair of the full committee, Mr. Lungren. The C HAIRMAN . Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Let me thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having this hearing. Maybe one of the reasons we haven’t had these issues come up as to why you should disclose or not disclose is that we haven’t had an oversight hearing in this committee since 2003. Maybe if these         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00062 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

61 questions had been asked, we might have had some decisions, and we might have found out why. So I thank you for this. I try and look at this from the standpoint of an average Amer-ican who wants to run for office, and the first thing now we know is the tremendous hurdles in terms of the cost of running for office. And one of the costs is, first of all, you have got to hire an account-ant; and, secondly, you have got to hire an attorney to make sure you don’t run afoul of the laws. That is a burden we accept as a result of Supreme Court decisions on either corruption or the ap-pearance of corruption and money. But if done improperly, it chills political speech and chills political participation. It is daunting for someone who decides they want to run for of-fice to all of a sudden say, oh, my Lord, I have to figure out what the Federal Government laws are; I have to go find out what the FEC stands for. And so I would just say to you, I think disclosure ought to be—you ought to resolve doubt in favor of disclosure as opposed to nondisclosure. And on the idea of a manual that governs your enforcement, I do not see how you have a leg to stand on, frankly, for not dis-closing. In one of the most difficult decisions you have to make as a prosecutor on the State level, that is a capital punishment case, the guidelines are set up, it is reviewed by every DA, and every DA’s office in California has a manual as to how they do it. It is known to people. Now, the internal discussions on a specific case are not, but the manual with respect to how you go about making that decision as to whether you are going to seek the death penalty or not is known. It is known to everybody. We allow murderers to know what it is they are facing. Shouldn’t we allow Members or prospective Members of Congress to know what they are facing from an enforcement standpoint? I mean, I appreciate what you are saying, but can anyone give me a valid ar-gument, not about the internal discussions with respect to a spe-cific case but the enforcement manual, that is that component of it which is similar to the Justice Department and similar to the U.S. Department of Labor as to why you should not allow that in-formation out. Yes, you say to the public, and I understand that broad word, but how about to average members of the public who are thinking about the possibility of running for office and thinking about what they are going to face and thinking about how do I make sure I don’t make a mistake. And one of the ways I figure that out is I look at their enforcement manual to see how they make their deci-sion with respect to enforcement. Can any of you help me out as to why that should not be made public as soon as possible? Madam Chair. Ms. B AUERLY . Mr. Chairman, if I might, I don’t want to speak for my colleagues, but I think what you are hearing from us is that we agree that this should be—that information about our enforce-ment process should be made public, and we have taken the first step in that in putting the enforcement guide on the Web site. I think what is also important to note is that the regulations, the statute that governs what the agency does in terms of what can-didates or committees need to do in terms of their filing, of course,         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00063 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

62 is very public. This one aspect of our process has been less public in the past than it is now. We, again, as Commissioner McGahn pointed out, we are work-ing towards updating all of this so that we can make something public. The Commission in terms of we—the enforcement manual that I think we refer to in our submission to you is not the thing that holds the penalty guideline. The calculations for the penalties, that is a separate set of documents. The C HAIRMAN . Well, I would hope—— Ms. B AUERLY . That is something that we—— The C HAIRMAN. Okay. I would hope that the manual that is as similar to or comparable to what the Department of Justice has and the Department of Labor has, I would hope that you would make it as transparent as they do. Now, let me ask you about the RFAIs. In terms of the Commis-sion, do you make those requests public or are those requests made only to the campaign of the candidate? Ms. B AUERLY . The RFAIs that are sent to committees are also put onto the Web site. The C HAIRMAN. So you see no problem with putting that out there and getting that information out, which could potentially taint a candidate’s reputation, but, at the same time, you have dif-ficulty making as transparent the decisionmaking rules that you use in terms of enforcement. See, I don’t understand that connec-tion. Look, I have never been mistreated by the FEC. I have no bone to pick with you folks. Luckily, I have been able to hire good attor-neys to keep me ahead of the game and to not have any problems. But the impact of actions taken by the Commission can be very deleterious to the reputation of a candidate and his or her com-mittee just by virtue of the fact that you have made a request. And I am not telling you don’t make requests. I am just saying I hope you understand that from the standpoint of a candidate who is standing out there and all of a sudden some press guy says, hey, I know you have just had this RFAI—they don’t say that—they just made this request for additional information. And you look at it and you say, gee, that is not information required by law, and all of a sudden you are already digging yourself out of a hole where you may have done nothing wrong. So all I am saying is I hope you appreciate the tremendous im-pact you have on people who may be doing nothing other than try-ing to express their First Amendment rights in a way that allows them to at least run for office as a means of articulating their point of view. And I thank you for your work because I know you prob-ably don’t get a whole lot of people patting you on the back for your work. So thank you. Mr. H ARPER . I ask unanimous consent to enter the following doc-uments into the record: three letters submitted by lawyers who fre-quently appear before the Commission describing the impact of the FEC’s failure to disclose materials governing its enforcement proc-ess, an editorial from the Wall Street Journal regarding the FEC, a list of enforcement manuals made available to the public by other Federal agencies, the list of questions that this committee sent to the FEC and its written responses.         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00064 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

63 Are there any objections? Without objection, it is so ordered. [The information follows:] 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00065 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 64 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00066 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 97 here 72282A.041 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

# •l1 ] ti  IC  SlREEl  tfW                 

> W''5tffl1C i1 0N ,OC. 10005"
> 'PttDPO 20 1, 11.9 ,1 000.
> f.V: 20 t, 1U ,704 9
> 711 2', .)QN[S !lt.Mil tw O:IUI/E
> Mitt.EAi' ,VA ?l .lO l.
> f'HOtilE 10 1. to S, 2& 00
> fAX 70'1,90 S,i 9l<I

October  27,  2011 

CongresSJ11an  Gregg  Harper 

Cbairm. an  Subcommittee  on Elections Committee  on  House  Adtninistration 

1309  Longworth  House  Office  Building Washington, O.C . 20515 Re: Federal  Election  Commission Oversight 

Dear  Chainnan  Harper: 

caleb  P. Burns 

102.719.7151 

cburns@wOeyr eJn. com 

l gmatly  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  comment  in  oonnection  with the  upcoming 

oversight  hearing  of  the  Fedcml  Election Commission  ("FEC")  by the  Committee 

on  House  Administration,  S11bcommittee  on Elections.  The  fEC  regulates  "the  very 

heart of  the  organism  wbich  the  first·  amendment  v.,as  intended to nurture and 

protect,  political  expression  and association  concerning  federal elections  and 

oflicehold!ng ."  FEC v. Machinists  Non-l'artisan  Polilical League, 655  F.2d  380, 388  (D. C.  Cir.  1981). Vigilant  oversight  ofan administrative  agency  with a  cb.argc 

that  so  closely impacts our political freedoms is critical and  J Ill)')  pleased to  assist  by 

o!ferj11g  these  COl)llOents. 

By way of  background,  I am  -a partner in  the  Election  Law  8lld  Government  Ethics 

group  al  Wiley  Rein LLP . I have over  a decade of experience  counseling  clients and  _representing  fuem  before  the FEC in  rulemaking,  advisory opinion, and 

en forcement  proceedings . TI1e  focus  of my  comments  will  be  on the  lack  of 

transparency  afforded to  parlicipaats  att empting  to  settle  enforcement  proceedings, 

111e  views  expressed  in  these  comrnc.-nts  are  mine  alone an d do not reflect the  views 

of Wiley Rein  LLP  or  any  of its clients. 

l.  FEC  Enforce ment  Process 

The FEC  may  initi ate  enforcement  proceedings  based  on  o complaint alleging  a

violation  ofth"  campaign  finance  laws  or on the  basi s_  of other infoanatio.n the FEC 

obt:iins  in the course of  carrying  out  ilS  regulatory  duties. 2 U.S.C , § 437g(a)(l)· (2). The FEC mu s! determine by a vote of  at  least four of  its  commissio11ers  lhat 

there is  "reason  to believe"  that  a violation of the campaign  fin,mce  laws  wru,,  or will be, committed before proceeding  with  an  investigation.  Id. § 437g(a)(2), 

At  an y time  during  an  investigation,  the  FEC  and the respo ndents to  -the 

enforceJOent  proceeding may attempt  to  set Uc  the  matt et. I J C.F .R.  § I I l. I S(d). lf 

after  the  investiga(ion  the  FEC detennines by  a vote  of at least four of its 65 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00067 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 98 here 72282A.042 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

# • Congressman  Gregg  Harper 

Cbl\irman  Subcommittee  ou  Elections Commiltee on  Hou,;e  Administration 

October 27,201 I

Page2 

commissioners  that  there is  "probable  ca use ." to  believe  a violation  was,  or  will  bai, 

committed,  <he  FEC and the  respondents  to the  proceeding  11re  required  by  statute  to 

enter  into scttlcmcot discussions. 2 U.S .C. § 437g(a](4)(A). 1 If  Uie  discussions arc unsucocssful  nnd  do not result in  .a  signed  concllintion  agreement  memorializing" 

settlement,  the  FEC  may vote to initia te a l~wsuit  against  the  respondents  for a oivil 

penalty  and  injunctive relief. Id.  § 437g(a)(6)(A). 2.  T he  Nec d for  Gr ea ter  T rans parency 

The vast majority of FEC  enforcement  proceedings  conclude prior 10 litigation, 

either  in dismissal or a conciliation agreement. Accordingly,  (hcncgotialion  of  the 

civil  penalty  in a conciliation  agreement  is  often  U,e  de  facto  penalty  phase of  any 

enforcement  proceeding,  This  negotiation can be  frustrated  by !he F,EC's  lack  of 

transparency. 

When  proposing  an  initial draft conciliation agreement,  the  FEC  almost  always 

includes  a civil  penalty  that  is  seemingly  tethered  to the upper limit of  what  the 

statutory penalty  scbeme  pcnnits.  Su  note I. Prior to  responding,  I research  the 

conciliation  agreements  in  closed enforcement proceedings - publicly available pursuant to 2 U.S.C.  § 437g(aX4)(B)(ii)- to  find  past conciliation agreements t hat describe  fa,cts  similar  to those J am addressing. Tbese conciliation  ai;reements  often 

include  penalties  tha1  are  far smaller than  what  the FEC has initially proposed. 

Whenever  possible,  I make  a counter-offer  that  is  tied  to what  the  FEC  has  accepted 

in these past conciliation  agreements  and just ify  the  counter-offer  on that basis.  On_ 

more  lhan  one occasion, l have been told by  FEC  staff  that  the  conciliation 

agreements  upon  which  1 was  relying  arc  distinguishable,  the  FEC has  an  interna( 

process  to  ensure  consistency in civil  penalties,  and  tha1  process  was  used  to 

The  FEC  QO  purs1,1e  civil  pe.nahie.s  ln  a settJe.i,,entorup  to  SS,000  per  viollltion  ru  an 

amount equal 10 (he  contribution,  or  <1<pcnditurcs  th•t  resulted  in  the  vk, ]ation.  2 U.S.C. 

-§  4J7g(~X5XA)·(B)  (these  amounts  cao  inc.rea;c  to St0,000  and  $50,000  per  violation  or  200%  and 

I,OOO"A  of  the  contributions or  <1<penditures  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  vio lation).  Thi,  storutol)' 

penalty  •cheme  vests  the  FEC  with  wide  disc~on  to  detennine  U,c  dvll  pena llles  it  put••ues . For 

c><amplc,  ifa  campaign  did  not  follow  lheprope,  procedures  to  rcd<signato  and  roport  one  hundred 

camp~ign  contribuUons  of  S too,  tho  FEC could  demand  a pelllllty  or  up  I()  $500 ,000  ($5,000  ~ JQO 

v1o lations)  1nste•d  ofSI0,000  ($1001<  100  contribuUons).  Alternatively,  if  a campaign  did not 

include  proper  notices  011  • St00,000  advertisemen~  the  rnc  could  insist  ona  ptll"lty  orup  to 

St00,000 (SI00,000  ~ l 0Jtpcndi 1urc)  instead  of  SS,000  (SS,000  x I violalion). 66 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00068 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 99 here 72282A.043 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

# • Congressman  Gregg  Harper 

Chairm!lll  Subcommittee on  Elections 

Committee  on House  Administration 

October  27, 2011 Page 3 

detcrmfoe  fhe  FBC's  proposed civil  penalty.  Wben  I have  asked  for  more 

information about that  process  to better  assess  the FEC 's claim for the proposed civil  penalty.  I have  been  denied .

The  FEC's  failure to provide information about its  penalty  calculation  process 

creates numerous prob lems , Firs~  it  hampers  selllement  negotiations  because  the 

FEC  does  not prc,vide  the  basis  for  its  proposed civil penalty, With  that 

inf onnatioo,  a respondent  ,;ttight  be  able to agree that  \be  FEC's  proposal is  fair  or atte mp t to exp lain to the FEC why it ls  not  Without that  information.  o respondent 

is left to  negotiate  against  something  that  is  n complete unknown which  makes 

me!lllingful  settlement  discussion  vtry  diflicult. Second,  tbe  civil penalty  negotiations  often bel ie the PEC's  claitn  that  lhe  civil 

penally  is  the  result of  a consistently  applied  process. The  civi7  penalty  is  almost always  negotiated  down from  1he  FEC's  orig i1 u,J  proposal.  If,  in  foci,  the  FEC  has a consistently applied process  that  dictates the appropriate civil  penalty,  1hcrc  would 

not  be  much  need  for negot iation,  Yet.  I have  never  participated  in settlement negotiations  where  the final c ivil  penalty  did not change  - significantly  in  many cases - from  the FEC's  original  proposal. 

Third,  the  FEC 's  failure lo provide information  about  its  civil  penalty  process 

erodes  confidence that  the  FEC  is  enforci ng  the  campaign  fin;mce  laws fair ly . Titi= 

area  in which  the  FEC  regulates  invariably  arouses  S\ISpicion  regarding  political 

motivations, 2 The  campaign  finance laws attempt to  addres~  Ibis  issue by  ensurin_g 

that no  more  th~n  three  FEC  oonunissioners  are  from  tl1e  same political  party.  2U,S.C.  § 437c(a)(l). No  similarly  strong  statutory  safeguard  applies  to the FEC staff negotiating conciliation  agJeements.  When the FEC  staff  insists  on a civil 

pea.illy  unlike that  in  any  similar  publicly  available  conciliation  agreement,  the  FEC 

is  invitiug  challenges to  its  impartiality  and motivations. 

Se•.  e.g.,  In  rt / SelJ!td  Case , 231  F,3d  6S7,  66S (D.C.  Cir.  2001)  C'We  would  hope  lhol  f~•~ 

FEC'sl  ,trident  oppo>ilion  is  nor  politically  motivniC<I  nor  com)>Cllod  by  ,ome  vlndlGtive  dos ire, ,, 

[f]he  weal<nes<  of111<  FEC's  position  In  lhi,1  cose  in\'iles  the  suspicion  Iha!  its  aclion,  are  oxlemally 

motivated ,.') 67 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00069 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 100 here 72282A.044 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

# • ConllfCS.sma n Gregg  Harper 

Chaim1an  Subcommiltee  on Elections Committee on House Administration October 27, 2011 Page4 

Wheo  discussing  the  F!EC's  failure  to  publicly explain  iLS  civil  penalty  process,  11\e 

most  frequent  defense  given is a general  claim  that  this  information will 

compromise  the  FEC's  negotiating  posilion  and,  as  a re sult,  the  enforcement 

process. 1  have  never  understood that  nrgumenl.  federal criminal  defendnnts 

negotiate  plea  agreements  by  reference  to  the  Federal  Sen1encing  Guidelines which 

are  not only  publicly  known,  but are developed wiih input from the public. 28 U.S.C. § 994(a),  (x).  Far  from  undermining t he criminal  juslice  system, 1he Federal Sentencing Guidelines  have  provided a framework to increase efficiency and to provide  certainty  and  fairness in criminal  penalty  proceeding,5.  'These  same  goals 

can  be  achieved  in. FEC enforcement  proceedrogs  if information  regarding  the 

FEC 's  civil  penalty  prncess  were  public .

## •

In  recent  year,;,  the FEC  has  taken significant  sleps  to  increase  the  transparency  in 

its  enforcement proceedings and to  rcspecl  the due  process  rights  of respondents 

participating  in  !hose  proceediogs. 3 By  making  it s civil penalty process publicly known, the  FEC  can  continue to advance these  important  goals. Sincerely, 

Caleb  P.  811ms 

Su,  e.g.  Agcney  Procedure  Foilowlng  the  Suh,uissioo  of  ProbableCau.e  Bri•fs  by  the 

Office  of  General  Cbunscl,  76  Fed.  Reg. 63510  (Oct.  13 , 20 1l);  Agency  Procedu re  for  DisolOSllre  of 

Documents  nnd  lnformatioo  in the  Enforce ment  Procm, 76  fed.  Reg , 11986  (Jim•  15,  201  I); 

A_geney  Proeedure  fo r Notice  to  Rcspoudents  1n  Non..Complaint  Gooenled  Matters,  74 Fed.  Reg, 

38617  (Aug.  4,2009). 68 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00070 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 101 here 72282A.045 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING           

> Mc:C ffl•~l.l P
> ?001 k5~ N.W.
> S\lite4(IO
> Vmni"SlQf'f, OC ;10006-1040
> Ptlc>n~102!157.1 700
> f-..l1t :2021 1S'1 .1;n
> www, mcgv,lr~, .cam

·•~s. •"'-•Oola:%: 10 1J 1.ll ~, 1• 

McGUIREWmos 

Congressman Gregg Harper Chainnan Congressman Char le s Gonzalez 

Ranking  Member 

Subcommittee on Elections Committee on House Administration 1309 Longworth House Office Building 

Washington,  D.C. 20515 October 31 , 20  I\ 

Dear  Cbainnan  Harper  and Ranking  M~mberGonzalez: 

We  write  to you today as the  bipartiSl!n  chairs  of the Political Law Group at McGuireWoods  LLP 

in  anticipation  of a hearipg  you  have  noticed for November  3,  2011, in which  Commissioners  of the 

Federal  Election Commission (FEC or Commission)  are  scheduled  10 appear  as witnesses, The comments we discu ss herein are our  own  and  do  not  necessarily  represent 1h e opinion of othe r members of our 

practice  group  or tha t of nur firm. Together, we have a combined thirty  years  of experience  in representing clients before  rhe  FEC .We have  determined  that  the more guidance  that  is issued by the  FEC,  the greater the ability  polllical 

committees hav e to adhere to both the  letter  and  spi rit of the  Federal  Election  Campaign  Act  and  the regulations promulgated thereunder. During  a hearing  held by the  FEC  in  2009,  a discussion  ooc um:d  regarding  the  nced  for  the 

Commission to  mak e public its  intt".rnal  enforcement manual and  guidelines.  The  lack  of transparency that binds FEC Office of  General  Co unsel attorneys in their negotiations  and  dealings  does  a disservice to both the FEC  and  respondents to  enforcement  proceedings. If the Department of Justice can  recognize 

the  public interest in making available its U.S . Attorneys'  Manual , the FECcan most  certainly  do the same with  n:specl  to  its  enforcement guidelines. We encourage you to  make  this request to  the 

Commissioners  appearing  before your Committee on November 3. S in cerely, Elliot S. Berke 

'"'""  / """"1 t e.1..,.../BMHI•  I Cl!a-10.., 1....,~1,  /O.l 0i0f- / l><loo1"•1,  I l-              

> 1,. "1(dK I~.. VM I""""' IP,....,.h /IW<i,h /R~-61 l)'O<>ffl

c....,  /Wllh),g>on,  o. c.  I _,,..,. 69 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00071 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 102 here 72282A.046 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

Cov1  NGTO  N & Bu  Rll  NG  I.._LP            

> llOl F>ENNS VI.VA NIA AVEN YE. NW
> WASl ,ON~ l O N. DC 1DOOo4 ,2•0t
> Tll. 20l .G~ .t,<:,Oa'

.,.,.,.  ~o, .eo:  e,0 1 

> WWWCOV ,COM

ChaiJ'Ttlan  Gregg  Harper 

Subconunittee  on  Elections      

> -~tf f(J
> DJIIU3nU
> l ol'(oo u
> J,1 ~\p ~)I(
> 5'MI 01Ri0
> t,,u,1 •~ eisc: 0
> -S\UCOH, \' 61.U: Y

Commitlee on  House  Administration 

1309 Longworth  House  Offic,e  Building 

Washington,  DC20515           

> QOOUn K. KELHUI
> Tfil '20:i, 612 ,6 1Hll
> r,. ,vt. ~0 2, 17 89!U ) )
> R "', EL.J •n i'\. COY .CO M

Oc:tober  J l ,  2011 Re : Federal  Election  Commission  - Reviewing Policies, Proc es ses and Procedures 

Dear  Chairman Harper: Thank you for the  opportunity  to  submit  comments in conjunotion with  th o

Subcommittee on Elections' No v ember  3,  2011,  hearing  on  the  Federal Election Commission 

- Reviewing Policies, Process es and Procedures. This hearing is an  impor1ant  step toward improving the Commission's  effectiveness  and improving public confidence  in  both  the Commission and the electoral proces s. The comments  lam  submitting  ore  my  own  and  are  no t submitted on  behalf  of  any client. Nor do my  views  necessarily reflect U1e  Views  of  any  client. By  way  of 

background.  I am  Chainnan  of  the  Election and  Political  Law Practice Gro up of Covington  & 13urlj ng  Ll.P.  Covington has one of  tile  nation's  oldest  election  ahd  political Jaw practices.  We  advise a wide variety of  corporate  and  trade  associ ation  clieo~,  as well 

as  political parties, PACs, lobbying  fiJ'Ttls . tax-exempt organizations, and individuals, concerni ng compliance with the federal elec t ion laws. Our election and  political  law clients include some of the nation's  leading  trade asso ciations,  financial  lns1itu1ion s, 

manufacturers,  and technology companies. We regularly represent cl ients jn  enforcement 

matters before !he Federal Ele c tion  C ommi ss ion .

Currently, the Federal Election Commission does not publicly release the methodology that it uses to ma ke an initial assessment of penalties in an enforcement action . The Commission's  pract i ce  of  maintaining  se crec y around  its  det e rminat ion  of penalties adver sely shapes the way that regulated  pen;ons  view the enforcement proces s, and  it  discourages those persons from vo l un tarily disclosing  compliance  issue s to the Commissi on. Making the methodology for initial  penalty  assessments  available  to  the 

public would  mal<'e  t}) e enforcement  process  more  fair  and  tran s parent,  reduce  the risk of 70          

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00072 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 103 here 72282A.047 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING
> Co\llNGTOJII

& BURL I NG  L.lP 

Chairman  Gregg  Harper 

October 3 I,  10  l l 

J>age2 

improper strategic behavior  by  enforcement staff during conciliation negotiations, and greatly  increase  the  incentive for voluntary disclosure of violations to  the  Commission. Other federal agencies understand this fundamental logic. A number of federal agencies  currcnlly  disclose !heir methodologies for determining civil penalties.  See,  e.gv 

Nuclear Regulatory Commission Enforcerncnt Policy (July 14, 2011) 1: 2010 Federal 

Sentencing  Guidelines Manual (Nov.  I,  2010}7; 74 Ped.  Reg.  57593 (Nov. 9, 2009)  (Offi ce 

of  Foreign  Assets  Control Economic Sanctions  Enforcement  Guidelihes)3;  15 C.F.R.  Part 

766 Supps. I & 2 (faport  Administration Regulations); 47 C.P.R.  § I.BO (Federal 

Communications  Committee Forfeiture Proceedings); Civil Money Penalties Policy, Comptroller of the  Currency  Administrator of National Banks, Policies & Procedures 

Manual  5000·7 (June 16,  1993f 

For instance, the  Environment-di  Protection Agency's  ("'EPA")  website  publishes  alist of civil penalty  policies  for a number of the  laws  EPA administers. 5 One  of several EPA policies that sels sclllement penalties is the Public  Water  System Supervision  Program 

SetUement Penalty Policy under the Saf e Drinking Water Act (the "SDWA Policy"). 6 The 

14-page  policy was introduced  in  1994 and  iactudes  a wockshect for calculating settlement 

penalties.  The SWDA Policy sets forth the maximum penalties allowed by  statute  and 

then  discusses  a two-step process  for  calculating  penalties,  which  includes how to compute an "economic  benefit"  component and  a "gravity"  component, SDWA Policy at 3. The 

figure  is then adjusted based on a number of factors, including the degree of willfulness, 

history  of noncompliance, litigation considerations,  and  ability to pay. The SWDA Policy 

gives  detailed guidance regarding how the EPA  arrives  at each of  these  figures.  lt  also  gives 

the EPA  flexibility  to reduce a penalty  amount  in  e1Cchange  for the  par1y  completing on environmentally beneficial project,  See  id. at  12  The SWDA Policy  makes  clear that  h

applies ooly  in settlement negotiations and that  EPA  will seek the statutory maximum in a  

> 1

At  hrtp:l/pbadupws.nrc.gov/doos/ML0934/ML093480037.pdf. This policy has been updated 

several  times.  Those updates are  !l vailable  on  the  NRC's website  ut 

ht1p://www. nrc .gov /about-nrc/tegulatory/enforcement/enforce-pol.html,  

> 2

At  http: /l www.ussc._gov/guidclines/20 IO _guidelines/index.efm.  

> 3

OFAC  pttblishes  guidance, including  iiskmatrices,  for several economic and  trade  sam:tions 

online at http://www.treasury  .gov/r 1:1 sourcc-center/ sanctions/Pages/dcfaultaspx.  

> 4

Ar  http://www.occ.gov/news-issu:mceslbulletins/pre-1994/banking-circularslbulletin•273a. pdf . 

> 5

See http://cfpub.epa.gov/compliance/resources/policies/civil/penalty/. The EPA  has  published 

penalty policies for at  leasl  18 distinct  progtams  the agency administers.  

> 6

At  hrtp://www.epa.gov/compliance/resources/policies/civil/sdwa/sdwapen.pdf. 71          

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00073 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 104 here 72282A.048 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING
> COVINGTON

& BURLING  LLF' 

Chainnan Gregg  Harper 

Oc tober 31, 2011 Page3 

litigation  proceeding.  The  EPA reserves the right to "change this policy  at  any  lime, 

without  prior notice, or to act  at  variance  to this  policy"  and the policy "does nol  create 

any  rights, implied or otherwise, in  any  third  parties."  fd _at  14. 

The  Commission should follow the  ex-ample  of the numerous federal agencies  that 

publish methodologies for computing  penallie.s.  The Commission's disclosure of the 

criteria  for  assessing  penalties  would give the public  a greater  sense-that  the Commission 

is  acting consistently  and  fairly,  This will  posilively  affect enforcement proceedings. Under the Commission's  current  practice, penalties may  vary  widely in wha lappear to  be  similar cases. For  years,  practitioners have been pondering how  the 

Commission makes an initial assessment of penalties. Yet, it remains a mystery that only 

those  who have experience on the inside can answer . And even former  insiders  can only speculate, at best, based on  past  practices. To  outsiders,  there  appears  to be  little  rhyme 

or reason to these  assessments.  Sometimes penalties seem to  be  influenced by subjective factors, such as the size or prominence of the respondent or the respondent's reputational or political vulnerability,  rather  than by objective, quantifiable  factors.  This leads to asituation where penalties in like cases do not always appear to be consistent and creates 

an  appearance that the Commission is  trealing  respondents in  an  arbitrary  and unfair 

m111111cr _ Conciliation  proceedings  are  likely to  progress  more smoothly when  respondents 

feel they are being  treated  fairly  ancl  understand how  the  Commission  arrives  at  an opening settlement offer .Publishing the Commission's methodology for assessing  peoal\ics  is also likely to increase voluntary self-reporting.  Cummtly,  the incentives for regulated  commillees  and 

corporations to  self-disclose  violations, where disclosure is not required by law, are greatly reduced. This  js  because  a respondent cannot asses the level  oft.he  fine  the 

Commission  may  impose  with  nny  reasonable  amount  of confidence.  A potential 

respondent  is more  likely  to  make  11  sua  spome  disclosure  of a violation if the  likely 

penalty can be assessed prior to  contac. ting  the Commlssion. In 2007, the Commission adopted  a voluntary disclosure  policy  statement, which sought to encourage voluntary disclosures of Federal Election Campaign Act  ("PECA") 

violations by offering to reduce penalties by  25¾  to 75%, if certain  conditions  are met. 

See  Policy  Reg;irding  Self-Reporting of  Campaign  Finance Violations  (Sua  Sponte Submissions), 72 Fed. Reg. 16695 (Apr.  5,  2007). However,  the  Commission's voluntary 

disclosure  policy is substantially  undemuncd  by the fact  that  the Commission refuses to 

rnake  public the methodology by which ii makes  an  initial assessment of penalties. In  the 

absence of clear and Jransparent standards for  detennining  the inirial assessment, it is difficult or impossible to predict the impact of the promised  25¾  to 75% reduction for  a

voluntary  disclosure.  Because the Commission staff can simply adjust  the  ,nitial 

assessment  of the penalty  upward  to "compensate" for the effect oflhe  25%  t.o  75% 72           

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00074 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 105 here 72282A.049 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING
> COVINGTON&, BURLING LLI •

Chainnan Gregg  Harper 

October)  I,  2011 

l'agc4 

reduction  - and can do so in a manner that is permanently shrouded from public  scruliny 

- lhc  Commission's voluntary disclosure policy has had fur less effect than  11  otherwise might have. If the Commission is free simply to  ratchet  up the  initial  assessment  lo  offset 

the promised reduction, the incentive to self-disc lose under the policy  is  rendered meaningless. The Commission  may  fear  that creating a formula, publicizing  it . and applying  it 

consistently will impair its ability to  exercise  discretion lo adjust penalties in appropriate circumstances. However, the agency methodologies cited above provide for  adj'ustmeots 

based on mitigating factors, aggravating  factors,  and/or other  circumstances  (such as ability to pay}.  Like  these other policies, the Commission 's criteria could incorporate limited adjustments or exceptions the Commission feels  are  needed to apply discretion, as the Commission has already done in its voluntary disclosure policy statement. There may also be concerns  (hat  giving the public  grcater  insight into the Commission's penalty structure will  permit  bad actors to calculate  the  likely cost ofa 

violotion  in  advance.  This could allow so-called bad actors to simply figure the penalty into the  "cost  of doing business." However, the  penal!)'  structure can  tak.e  such a conscious violation into account. Acting with knowing and willful intent to vi olate the law may trigger criminal sanctions,  which  is  11  significant deterrent. Further, if the Commission is  concerned  that disclosing the civil penalties  authorized 

in FECA would be an  insufficient  deterrent to unlawful behavior, then the solution is to seek statutory  increases  to  those  penalties,  not lo  cloak  the  existing penalty  regime  under a veil of secrecy. 7 If the Commission  needs  statutory authority to stiffen  penalties,  lhe Commission should seek that authority. But the penalty regime  i!Self  must  be  transparent.  coherent, and 

predictable  to help ensure fundamental  fairness. 

It is time to  lifi  rhe  veil  of  secrecy  that shrouds  the  process the Commission  uses  to 

detennine  Jines  that  should be  tmposet;I  in enforcement actions. The Commission' s current approach can seem opaque and unpredictable, which undermines public confidence  and  empowers tbe Commission's critics. Cloaking the penalty process in 

m)'slery  encourages  the  public 10 suspect that  the  Commission  plucks  penalties  from lhio air based on what the Commission thinks it can achieve, rather  than  based on identifiable law. While I do not believe it would be an accurate inlerence,  the  public  cannot  be faulted for drawing the inference  that  penalties  are handed  OU!  in  a smoke-filled  room guided by politics. not law, in the face of the Commission's reluctance to explain its own  

> 7

For example, the Federal Sentencing Guidelines set forth  vGry  high,  but very clear,  penalties. 

See 2008  Federal  Sentencing Guidelines Manual,  supra. 73 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00075 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 106 here 72282A.050 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

CoVtNGTON  & BuRLlNG  ccP 

Chainnan Gregg Harper 

October  JI  , 2011 

Page  5

procedures. The Commission could blunt some public criticism by  revamping  its 

procedures.  lo enhance due process protections for  respondents  and to increase the transparency of its decision  making,, 

Robert  K.  Kelner 74 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00076 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 107 here 72282A.051 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

Is Another Bear Mark et Around the  Corner? 

If  you have a  $500 ,000  portfolio, you  shou ld  download the lat es t report  by  Ft 

ken  Fisher's  firm.  It tells you whe re  we  th ink the  stock  market is headed  and 

must-re-,d  report Includes our latest stock market forecast. plus res earch  an ,

use  in  your portfolio right now.  1, I Cljck  Here  to  o ow ·otoad 

= ;:::, ~l ~~~ s~ li~ :~  ~&~ :::~~~~ ,~=:r::::~~PC:!:= = ~~ o, d"~trtb ~o nto~            

> See a, atnplc R! prl ~lnPOF format Of dern tep ri rc of this &n: cle

row 

# -·- -- ---·-· --·---· ·- - - --------

THE  WALL  srR.EEf  JOllRNAL .ws,..,.   

> REVIEW &CIJTI..OOK

I JUL Y 11,  2009 

Our Pettifogging FEC 

'Hillary:  TheMvvie'  is  the  Court's chance to.finally fix the FEC. 

The Supreme Court sen t a lovely shudder through campaign-finance scolds this month when it  agreed  to  bear  argU,m.ents  in a case  that  could overturn election donation limits. It's about  time,  as  the  Justices  will appreciate if  they  look at the follies at today's Federal Election Commission. The  High  Court  agreed  to hold over  until  the fall any decision in a case  involving  "Hillary: 

The Movie." The FEC claimed the go-minute 2008 anti-Clinton documentary violated 

campaign  spending limits, which  looks  like a clear  example  of limiting political  speech.  The 

Justices invited new arguments on some of their more benighted precedents, including 

2003's  McConnell-v.  FEC,  which  carved  a hole in the First Amendment. We hope the Court revisits the entire  edifice  of campaign-finance law, whose  absurdities  are 

now  on  display at  the  six-member  FEC,  which is deadlocked on som e key rulings. The delay 

has  the campaign-finance goo-goos howling, with  some  calling on President Obama to boot GOP "obstructionists" whose  terms  have  officially  ended, but for  wh om  he  has  yet  to  nallle 

replacements. Let's hope for more delny. The cases on  which  the GOP Commiss ioners are digging in their heels  aren 't  trivial. Consider  Arjinderpal  Sekhon, a self-employ ed medical doctor serving in the U.S.  Army  Reserve,  who in 2006 ran as a Democrat for the Hous e against a long-serving GOP incumbent in  a heavily Republican California  district.  He raised  less  than $200,000, had  a family member serve  as  his treasurer and lost in a landslide. No complaint was ever  filed  about Mr. Sekhon's campaign disclosure forms  -- not by  his 

opponent or  an y watchdog group. Yet six months  after  the  election,  the  fEC  found that his electronic reports we re missing information. In  228  of the 230 itemized contributions, the campaign had listed " self' for both the donor's oc cupation and employer. The  mistakes  were clearly du e to  a software  g}itc.h,  since Mr.  Sekhon's  first reports-· compleled  by  hand  -were 

correct. 75         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00077 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 108 here 72282A.052 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

The Sekhon campaign tried to remedy U 1is , contacting  the  FECfor  guidance and resubmitting the  forms.  -Yet  more than a year after the election, the FEC staff recommended that the  Commissjoners  find  reason to  believe  the Sekhon campaign bad broken the law. Because this was  an  FEC-generated cornplaint, the Sekhon  campaign  wasn't told of this recommendation  and  so couldn't defend itselfc Not Jong after, the FEC lost its quorum, which meant Mr. Sekhon was unable to appeal. 

FEC  staff instead negotiated a settlement. Rather than find Mr . Sekhon guilty of one mistake, it essentially  dinged  him  for each error and fined him, we are told,  approximately  

> $20,000

(the records are closed to the public). Once the FEC again  obtained  a quorum, Commissioners  were  asked to vote to accept  this  agreement. The three Republicans refused, 

arguing  that  the case illustrated FEC "shortcomings'' in "d ue process and civil penalty calculation," and highUghted the "unfair impact on inexperienced political participants." They contrasted the treatment of  Mr.  Sekbon  with  Kay  tlagan,  a Democrat who won a North, Carolina Senate seat in 2008. Ms. Hagan's campaign raised $8.5 million. A complaint  was 

filed that the campaign had failed to include the occupation and employer for some $350 1000 to $500,000 of contributions (far more than Mr. Sekhon's total). Yet the Hagan campaign  was  allowed to  respond,  hired  a lawyer,  and  the  FEC dismissed the matter 5-0. Unable to agree on Mr. Sekhon, the FEC Commissioners ultimately voted to close the  case, 

which at least spares him from  the  outrageous fine. Yet Mr. Sekhon is  an  example of how the 

FEC  treats far too many  candidates  who run afoul of its pettifogging rules. The Sekhon case has been followed by similar petty enforcement  actions,  and  the GOP Commissioners  -

Matthew  Petersen, Caroline Hunter and Donald McGabn  -~  are  refusing to  agree  and  are calling for reforms to make the  system  more navigable to  less  wealthy or experienced candidates of either party. The fact  that  the  "reform"  community is attacking them reveals  OJ)Ce  again that the real goal of campaign  rules  is to  protect  the professional polltical class. Justices, take note. 

Pn'nled  ill  The  Wall  Street  Jcumal,  page  A10  

> Copyright

;zo 11  Dow Jones & Company , Inc,  /!JI  Right•  Reso rvod                

> This copy Is for your personal. non•CO!T¥116ro lal use only. Distribution and 1is eof lhl• material ere governed by O<Ar

Subscriber  Agreement  and  by  COPJlrlght  law.  For  no~-personaJ  use or to  ord er  mulllpl~  toples.  ple'lse  co,,tael  Daw  Jones    

> Reprints"' f-800-843-0008 or visit
> www.djreprlnts. com

76         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00078 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 109 here 72282A.053 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Enforcement Manuals Made Pu blic 

D ep11 r1me nt  ofLobor 

http:l/www.d,,l.l!O\'lcbso'ocmnmmll 

Th is  manual  explains  the  investigative  authority of the  DO(,,  its  relationship with other  agencies , the administrative  procedures  and rights given to individltals under  investigation,  and voluntary 

compliance  guidelines. 

U.S.  Attorney s'  Ma. 111111/ 

http:liwww.justicc.l:!ovlusno!cousa/foin  rcadin!'.  r oo mlusam/imlex.html 

TI1is manual explains  the  authorities  of  the Attorney  General  with  m;pcct  to U.S. Attorneys,  the 

policic.s  and guidelines  for  most US Attorney  fitnctions  and  how investiga ti on and  enforcement  of 

violatiqns  of the law by  ll.S . Allomeys  opcmtc. 

Training  Matertals  from  Offi ce  o[/11(ormatio11  Pollcv 

ht1p://www.just1cc.!!ov/oipllrnininl:!,materials.html 

This  material  explain,  how  the  OTP trains DOJ attorneys and  divisions  to  respond  to  FO!A  rC(JuCSts ,

OL CS tnf(Mn1t1"'/ 

htlp:1/w,rw.justice.gov/ol.clbest-pmcl ic. c.s-memo. pdf 

This  manual  explains the  pmces5  hy  which OLC  staff  should  develop  and  publish  mcmorr.nda. 

SE C £n(orce111e11t  /vf a1111al 

http:l/ww\\'.sec.l:!o\'/di\'isionslcnforcclcnforccmentmanual.pdf 

"!'his  almost 1 50  pagtl  n1ru1ual  ex.plains  the  process  rrc>tn  commencement of  investigation  through 

te.~timony  on how the  SEC  slafT  should attempt to conduct investigations  and  work with  other  stntc  an d

federal  ~gcncieson  violations  of  securities  law. 

U.S.  Parol e Crmt1/rissio11  's  Rul e.~  and  Prn cedur es  Mamlnl 

http://www.justice.nov/ uspdru les  proccdurcsluspc-maouall  I l.507. pdf This  manual  explniru;  the  process  and  procei-!urcs  the U.S. Parole  Cotntnission  uses  1n  evaluating 

parole  rl ,'QUCStS. 

, 111titm st  Divisio11  ftfam, a/ 

ht1p:/Jw ww .jus1icc_~ov/~tr/p ubTi e/di , ~s1onmanual /a 1rd i ,man .pdf 

This  manua l explains the process,  tactics.  and  procedures  used  by tl1c  /\ntitn.1st  division  in  the 

pr osec ution  nnd  trinT  of antitrust  compl 01nt~ .77 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00079 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 110 here 72282A.054 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

# ......... . ~e-...: 

. U!S,,1.,01"( .. 

. t,&,A-:\IIP)C,$11" 

- ~~~ 

T.cfw,IQ,I~ 

- ~tHf!«t~ 

•l \11~ 

# ......... . W~t~ 

• .,.~,...t.l,icr-.t 

• £0 t 23(t,61,..t!i1t".;,t 

~~a...or~ 

. ~ d 'W 

## .~,·~ _...,__ 

. rer1~~ 

- ~~  ....... • Jvs,'QI~ 

## ... ~,~""' ... ~11),.,t 

## .w -

ESSA  Enforcement  Mao uol  T•~ le  Of  Ccnt•nts 

L -

# ~-~~ 

11.  G.41'1tcll~~ 

'- ~NOn,tr..,.-..., 

....,,...;;nr:':+tttffix 

# =

¢;::;~• -::aWC:::o- 1-::,t:n1:, 

NtC'!'"  r<  ' ' Ut:W'.S:::  P'f::r-u 

Y:1-,..,.,,,..,..,,,..., ~, ora 

# =tl1,B\,~~ 

~

~

re:n:a  1M  I r:n1  lm  :a 

H.  fOr"i 

# ="'7:•er~:r·,·ar 

"''"'!n:tr'tttm  ,, .... ..,,1r.,,.al 

n:,  ,d,..,.,ta:rn  r ~.,.,, 

:n:c:•n,.,.,,..,..,~,ruo 

21hC:t·1' ttr·,~,  PNiM"'i :\&:s 

UZfOt"d:t-rot  r:-:t::r  •- H'."'tl  !TtO'J 

nmc:,c\"ttGMJ  PlSM ...  '1  PYl 

:N\~:::a,·a•, .. _,,e;ee, 78 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00080 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 111 here 72282A.055 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

US  A'tji1111cys  > USAM 

United States Attorneys' Manual 

lillc I Organization  and  functkms 

l it le 2 Appeals title  3 EOUSA 

tit le4 Civil 

tltle5  ENRD 

litle6  Tax 

litlc 7 Antitntst ti tle  8 Civil  Righ t~ 

title 9  Cd minal 

Resource  Manual :; 

Index 

Th is  is  lhe  current  a nd  Qffic ial  copy  of  the  llni1ed  Simes  Altorm~ ys'  Mn11ual  (USJ\.M ).  The  USAM  was. 

co1nprehem~1vcly  revised  i1 1 1997.  Changes  or  t1dd itioru.since  1997  nre.  noted  at  lht:  end  of  affected  sections. 79 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00081 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 112 here 72282A.056 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

US  Attorneys>  USAM  > f11drx 

A [l  CD  E f'  G H I J KL  1\1  NO  fl  QR  STU  V \VXYZ 

ABA  STANOARDS  FOR  CR IMCNAL  .nJSTICE 

.2.:blfil  AmcricWl  Bar  As~ociation  Standards  for  C1imi11al  Justice 

ABU . I TV  TO  PAV 

sec  fNABILITY  TO PAY ABORT I ON 

8-2.260  Special  LitigatiM  Scc1ion 

8-2.264  Freedom Of  Access  To  Clinic  Entrances  Act ABS E NCE  FROM  OFf,ICE 

3-2.150  Ab;~nce  !Tom  OfliC<'-Arting  United States  AttomC)' 

ABSEN'rBI,  VOTING 

4-7,200 Revocation  ofNaturalizntion 

5-1  300 Supervision and Handling  ofEnvironrnent  and  Nat\Jrnl  Resources  Division  Cases-

Genemlly 

8-2.270 Voting  Rights-Overview 

8-2  286  Voting  Rights- Miscdlonc-0l1S  Provisions  

> ~

Preservation  and  J'>rod11ction  of  Voting  Record~.  42  lf.S.C.  §§  I974  to  I974d 

AJ3SOLUTC  LM~lUNJ TV 

4-2  100 Sovereign Immunity  

> ~

C'onstitutional  To,i;;  Thtt  Immunity  Defenses 

ABSTRACT  OF  TILE  JUDGMENT 

3-10 ,200  Civil  Pos1judg1nent  Financial  Litig,tion  Activlt y_. Pcrfccting- the  Judgment 

ACCESS OEVICES sec  gener~lly  Title  Q,  Chamer  49 

ACCESSTOJLITY 

.l.:!.I.JQll  D0part1Mnt  Responsibilities 

8-2.400  DLsability  Right$  Scctiun 

8-2.410  Di~"hillty  Rights  Section- ADA  Enforcement 

ACCOUNTS  l'AY  ABLE  (AP)  TRAVEL  ~JOl)ULF, 

3-8,  720  l'aymunt  for  Trav~I  Expcnsc,.s 80 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00082 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 113 here 72282A.057 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

.. ~UR)O,l:a,,i,tU~N'-"--_~ • "1a'tlo~ 

I

~ liH((U • IO  1r<LA 'II;  l}Tlfl'li'JILO,[){~,,.,  tl C\,I T!\ 4 g;,(,~1"1  tEJ',~ 

~ SU.-~D€$lt 

'i"lflt;NJTtDS T ~tlll  - 11!5zl DEPARTMENTfJuSTICE  , "'°""-'  1~

~\e,,,{f('!-

...... l~jl•, .... 

\)l1'~e ,!.,-

'f01•Q-,w;-t.-

._,.  t•u,  ~-d

# .. .,..,,, r'.Mi:tr,Cftdo1;; 

lli..:::,1,--~tl•I  L1t,:.11  •••, 

00! 

(Q;),,tf1.~'\l'"',n:t,1i t 1 

"'' ~! IH t"'f\ 

~..,l..._!i!f!I~ 

11.f-~rt/l~k.tkCPAttOl'ltl';tfNM'm/'lwt&MJW., 

nllt't'oda,.v.-ov-b~tdf«.ftSl>rl..f!•J,P-')tA~ 1 ar:.d. 

=:ot.\.:::'!.,~~t'::~~~=!':w.':~~ Tb• 

"Nl'-P'"~"-•o_.-.1,t,ot&.roi>.I:t-.do.Un11duoatrion«dt. 

~~~!::'~~ ;.~~~'!~.~ 

~o;;:~.;::~i "r!'!:i!::1t!:~~~:,C: 

~s,6,~ou(",•WUll,r.oc,OC) 

fDil-7~~aH(Waffll~oci,Dq 

x.;s~wi,11(WW..laP1U,l)C) 

hly  ,,-.,a,  ~ou(,\ 'ul\1•#00,  0C) 

MfJJ!!:1 .•lS,!l.Ol"l~f,WA) 

Mt.~ f,-,W,)ffl  c/lrf«',r..::iot:kt  Sffl&t.r 

lhl.Jffllkw1lwl~brou.,,ot.,t1111,,l.1 .-i d,l.pl..l,'Uor• d~ 

~1,-d11 . f:pr~t..ldv~W'rnl~on~~---

~fOtA.~ISlK,l>-U•p,oltcy~-9\'lfl!l'l~dt,POt..\ 

# ===r~~~ib~r;:~w~~~~ ~1dl • 1'0U.. 

-Aorilu,.101.t(W•&ipa,OC, 

ft"Hf!.fflo/tr.~Aa.Ml!rr.lm,::b ·Fllf"'JITI 

~~~¾-=~~~~~:ulm• ::=J•sofrotA  r.q-11.ac,  on  a4~i,  tiu,.  Uh  Ufoc...i-'1:)on«1d1.lru 

## =::.::::~:!.\~=-~~~~~~.oonl-., ..... , jl,d,.."'1'M-f,f,&dautc11i1--~prNtJUi,Omp.tto 

~•al t u1uipUll'Soru111Sotd.,,~~Ndi,.,~,o11.:tu,ud 

:=1:::=•~~~::ir-~w _.#1111'.-,di.!IQIOJlt.#tlb&to:~M<lllbiidel~~•rotA. 

IIIU,, 1~1-,(WM!i•IW'ft,,CC') 

J~r.rt.'itl'rud41r.1ofl~WTN:il.:tt.N:1 

1b(tW.dq,rosraap,..iJ.,,t.wo-,.-vl.""°'dHRXAfor1Jt11(") 

P,,kZOtlllto®~~ba.xu1b....l: l,, 4ulptdNfelio .. ..tio 

tikvottldm,C..f()IAor/,'/Ck!c~J•6MllemlJ;1F"af 

==tdl~~d4::~~~i:r;'""'·ftlattd 

Mardi  4,ooi,(Wtt.,f11$'4, 0Cl 

G&ir,:SlAL  INFOIUUTIOS 

0,,IC IOf 

I M'P()Uf,\"fl(lH  ?Ol.li !'I' 

Wlil'l.siflf' 

lt,J~Arul.Pulot-, '

llir~or 

Wr!J,'ff 

OfflN  oflflfomuUot1  Foll it>• 

t,02)51-4-!0CA.t,6,i'l) 

FOIAc; ov 

TRAINING  ANO  OU1'R2-ACII 

,, 

Tt.tln-;.-rciPOl'-lJ::!poot:S-11,," 

(\','_,!JC) 

hr1fd&:crlllp,a:,illWl,  .... t,,lirk 

ou t,;r~ ~..,._ 

OPEN  GOVERNMENT 

U1"11r 

t1ttu1.r~u:. h,- ,;l"'JlH tc  L

STAYCOXNECT2D  -1 

-~• •••1f'l4 l )'II'• 

0~1~ ,..... _..,.~. 

# I81         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00083 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 114 here 72282A.058 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

U.S. Depa rtm ent  o f"  J ustice 

Office  of  Legal  Counsel 

May  16 , 2005 

MEMORANDUM FOR ATTORNEYS OF  TH E OF Fr CE 

Re : Be.fl  f'mctice.,  .for  OLC  Opi11io11s 

By delegation, the  Office  of Legal Counsel exercises  the  Attorney  General's authority under the J ud iciary Acl of  17119  to  advise the President and  executive  agencies  on  questions  or 

law. OLC is  authoriied  lo provide  legal  advice only lo the  Executive  Branch; we do not adviso Congress, the Judiciary, foreign  governments,  private  parties,  or  any  other pcrsnn or  eu tily 

outside  the  Executive  Branch.  OLC's  primary funcJion is 10 provide  fonnal  advice through 

written  opinions  sigJ1cd  by the Assistant  Attorney  General  or (with  tl1e  approval of t he AAG) a Deputy  Assistant  Allomey General. Our Office  is  frequently  called  upon to address  issues  of central  importance  to the  functiC1ning  of the  feder~l  Government, and, subject  to  the President's authority under the  Co11st itutioo,  OLC opinions  are  controlllng  on  questions  of law  within  \lie 

Executive  Brand~  Accordingly, il is imperative  that  our  opinions be clear,  accurnte,  thoroughly 

researched,  and soundly reasoned.  TI1e  value  of an OLC opinion  depend~  on the  strength  of its 

analysis.  Over the years, OLC has earned a reputation for giving candid, independent,  and 

principled  advicc,-cvcn  when  that  advice  may  be inconsistent wi th the  d~sires  ofp<,J icymakers. 

Th is memorandum  rcaffinns  the  longstanding principles  tliat  have guided  and  will  contim1e  to 

guide  OLC attornoys  in  preparing  l11c  fonnal  opinions of the Office.     

> Ev11l11a ci11g opi11io11 requ e.l'ts.

Each opinion  request  is assignee! to  a Deputy and  an 

A Homey-Adviser,  who  wil l review  the  qL 1estion  presented and  any  relevant  statlllory  materials, prior OLC opinions, and leading  cases  to  dctcnnine  prel i111inarily  whether the question is 

appl'Opriate  for OLC advice  and  wl 1ether  ii appears  10  merit  a written  opinion,  as  distinct from 

info1111a l ndvice.  The  legal  question  presented  should  be  focused  and  concrete;  OLC  generally 

~voids  undertaking  a ge11cra1  survey  of  an  area  of  law  or  a broad,  abstract  legal  opinion.  Tl 1erc also  should  be  3 practical  need  for  the  opinion;  OLC  particularly  sho~ld  avnid  giving 

unnecessary  advice where  it  ~ppcars  that  polt<--ytnakers  arc  likely  to move in  a different direction, A foonal  opinion  1s  more  likely  to  be  necess.~ry  1vhen  the  legal  question  is  the  subject nf  a

concrete  r.nd  ongoing  dispute  between  two or more  ex.ecu1ive  agencies.  lfwe  are  asked lo provi de  an  opinion  to  1111  cxccnlive  agency  whose  head does not serve  at  the  pleasure  of the 

President  (i.e.,  an  agency  whose  head  is  subject  to  a "for  cause"  removal  ,e striction),  our  practice is  to  receive in writing  from  that  ageLt cy  an  ~grcemenl  to be bo11nd by  our  opi11ion.  As  a

prudential  matter,  OLC  should  avoi ll  opi11ing  on  questions  likely  to  be  at  is5uc  in  pending  or 

immi nent  li tigation involving the  United  States  as  a p<1rty  (except  where there is  a need  lo resolve 

a dispute within  the  Executive  Branch  over  a position  to  be taken in liligalion). Finally,  the 

opi11ions  nf  11'c  Office  should  address  legal  questio ns  prospectively;  OLC  ovoid5  opining.on the 82         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00084 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 115 here 72282A.059 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

legality  of  past  condt1c1  (though  from  time  to  rime  we  may  issue  prospective opinions that 

confinn  or  mernorialiie  past  advice or thut  necess;irily  bear on  past  conduct ). 

So /iciti11 g //,e  1•ie iv s of int erest ed  agenci es.  Before we proceed  with  aa  opinion, our general  practice  is to ask the requesting agency  for  a detailed  memorandum  setting  forth the agency's  own  analysis of the question- in many cases,  there  will  be  preliminary  discussions wi th the requesting agency before  the  fom,al  opinion  reques!  is  submined  to  OLC,  and  the 

agency  wi ll be  able  lo provide  its  analysis nlong with the opinion request. (A detail ed analysis is not requir ed when  tJ1c  request com es from the Counsel to the Presiden t, the Attorney  General,  or one of the three  other  Senior Management Offices of  the  Dcpanment of .Justice.) ln the case of an  interagency  uispute,  we wi ll  ask  each side to submit such  u memorandum. Ordinarily, we 

ex  peel  the agencies on  each  side of  a dispute to  share  their memoranda wit h the other side, or 

permit  us to share  them,  so that we  may  have the he11efi t or  reply  comment s,  when necessary. 

When  appropriate and  helpflll,  and  consistent  with t he confidentiality  interests  of the requesting agency. we will  also  solicit  the views of other  agencies  not directly involved in the o pi ni on request lhat have subject-matter  expertise  01 · a special  in terest  111  the  question  presented.  For 

example,  when  the question involves the interpreta ti on of a treaty or a matter of foreign relations, our practice is to  seek  the views of the State  Depar1111ent;  when  it  involves the  itllerpretation  of acriminal sta tu te,  we  wi ll usually  seek  the views  of  the  Justice Department's  Criminal  Division. We will nol,  however,  circulate~  copy ofan opinion  rcql,les t to  t]J ird-party  ;i.gencics  without  the prior  consent  of  the  requesting  agency.        

> Resea rc hi 11g ,our/i 11 i11 g,

n11 d ilrnftillg,  An OLC opinion is the product of  a qircful  and 

deliberate  process.  After  reviewing agency  submissions  and  relevant  statute~.  OLC opinions  and 

lead ing cases, the Deputy  and  Allorney-i\<lviser  should meet to  map  out  a plan for researching 

the  •~sues  and  prcpming  an  outline  and  first  draft  of  tho  opini on. The Deputy an d Attomey-Adviser should  set  target  deadlines  for each step in the process and  shmtld  meet  regularly  to 

review  progress  on the opinion. A  lhorough  wor kil1g  oullinc  of the opinion  will  help to focus  the 

necessary  research and the  direction  of  the analysis.  An  early  first  draft  often  will help  idet1tify 

weaknesses or  holesiri  the  analy b'I S,e.,uiring  greater  attention  than  in it-ially  anticipated,  As  work 

on  theopii1ion  progress~.  it will  generally  he  useful  for the Deputy and the Attorney-Adviser to meet  from  time to  1i 1ne  with  the AAG to  di$cuss  1he status  ancl  direction of the op inion  project.. 

A1 1OLC opinion should  f11cus  intensively on  the  cc11tral  iss\les  raised by a question  of 

law  and should, where possible, avoid  addressing  isst1es  not  sq uarely  present ed.  011  any issue involving  a con~titu ti onal  question,  OLC's  an~lysis  should  foct1s  pr,ncipally  on  the  text of the Constitution  and  the historical  record  i1Jt1111,na1Jng  the  origini!.11r1c~ui11g  of  the  text  and should be 

faithful  lo  that  historical  undcrstwdi,,g.  Wh ere  the  question  relates to the authorities of the 

President  or  other executive  officers  or the  separntion  of powers  bel weer1  tl 1e B ra nches  of the 

Govcrn,ncnt,  past  precedentfi  and  historical  practice  nrc  oflen highly relevant.  On  questionfi  of' 

stat~tol)'  and  treaty  interpretation,  OL C's  analysis wil l he guided by t he  text  and  will  rnly  on 

traditional  tools  of  construction  in  interpreting  the  tex t.  OLC'  opinions shonld  also  consider  :md 

apply lhe  pa~t  opinions of  Attorneys  General  ancl  this  Office,  which  are  ordinari ly given  great 

weigJ H,  The  Office  will  nM  lightly  depart  from  such  past decisions,  particularly  where  lhcy 

directly  address  and  decide  a point  in  question"  Decisions of the Supreme Court  nnd  courts  of 

appeals directly on  poinl  oflc11  provide  guiding  authorit)'  ru,u  should be thoroughly  ad drc~ed, 

283         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00085 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 116 here 72282A.060 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

particuhtrly  whcre  tl1c  issue  is  one  thal is  likely  lo  become  the subject of litigation, Many times, however, our Office will be asked to opine on an issue of  firsl  in1pr-ession  or one  that  is unlikely to be  resolved  by the  e11urts;  in such instances.  courldccisions  in relevant or  analogous  areas 

m11y  serve as  persuasive  aufhorily, depending on the strength of their  analysis. 

In general,  we  strive in our opi11ions for clarity  and  concisenes~  ir1  the analysis  and  abalanced presenlatioll of argwncnts  on  each  s1d1:  of an  issoe,  If  the  opinion resolves an  issue  in 

dfapulc  bctwcc11  e.\'.ecutive  agencies, we should  take  care lo consi der fully and address ,mpartia]ly the points raised on both sides: in doing so,  ii  is best, 10 1he  ex 1eo1  practicable,  to avoid  ascribing  partict,l ar  points  of  view to the  agencies  in a way  !hat  might  suggest  that one side is the  "w inner"  and  one the "loser." OLC's interest is simply to  provide  lhe correct  answer  on the law, taking into  account  all reasonable co un terarguments, whether provided by  an  agency or not. It is therefore often  not  necessary  or  desirable  to cilc  or  quote agencies' views letters. 

Sea()nt/ary  revie,v  of drnft  op i11io11 s.  Before  an  OLC opinion is finalized it  undergoes 

ri gorous review  hy  the Front Office within OJ.C and ofle n by  others  outside  the  Omce.  When th e primary Deputy and the Aftomcy-Adviser responsible for the opinion arc  satisfied  that  the 

dran  opinion  is  ready for secondary review.  1hc  opinion  is  generally  assigned  lo  a se.:.-ond  Deputy 

for a "second Deputy read."  Along  wilh the draft opinion, the  Attorney-Adviser  shot1 ld  provide to the second Dcpuly copies of any key  materials,  including  statutes,  regulations,  key  cases, 

relcvanl  prior OLC opinions,  arid  the views memoranda  rcc e> ivcd  from inrerestcd  agencie,.  Once the  second  Depl 1ly  read  is  complete  and  lhe.second  Deputy's comments  have  been addressed,  1he 

primary  Depuly  should  circulute  t he  drnfl  opinion  for  final  review by  the  AAG,  the  remaining 

Dtpu1ies,  and any particular nttomeys  within  the  Office-with  relevant  expertise. 

Once  OLC's  infernal  review is  complete,  a drafl  of the opinion  may  be shared outside the 

Office.  In  s ome  cases,  because  of time  cons1raints,  OLC may  circulate  a d raft  c,pin ion  before lhc 

internal  review is complete.  Otu  general  practice is to circulate draft  opinions  lo  the Office of the Attorney  General  and 1hc  Office  of lhe  Deptity  Attomcy  General  for review  a11d  commeut. 

When and  as  warranted, we  al-so  circulate  an  informational  copy  o f lhe  draft  opinion to the Office of the  Counsel to the President. In addition,  in  most  cases,  we  will  llirculate  a drafl to  the 

requesting agency (or.  in  cases  whc:,e  we  arc  resolving  a dispute  between  agencies,  to  th ose 

agencie.~  that  are  parties  10  the  dispute)  for  review,  prim~rily  to  ensure  Ihat  the  opinion  does  not mi ss1a1c  1hc  fac1s  or  the  legal points  of  i11terc~ 1 to the  ag e 11cics . On ccnain occasions,  where  we 

dete,mine it appropriate, we  may  circulate  a clraft  opinion to  one  or  more  other  agencies that 

have  special  expertise  or  interes t  in  the  subject  matter  orthe  opinion,  parlieulnrl y  if  they  have 

offered  views  011  the  qacstion. 

Fina/hi/lg  opi 11i (J1JS , Once  ;11 1 substnntivc  work  on  the  cipioion  is  co mp lete,  it  !llnsl 

undergo  a thc,ro 11 gh  cite check by  our  para legal  slaffro  cns1irc  the  nccurncy  of all  cita1ions  and 

cC111Sistency  with  the  Office's  rules  of  style.  Aller  all  cile-chcck.ing  changes ha ve been  approved 

and  made,  the  final  opinion  should be  printed  011  bond  paper  fm •sigoature,  Each  opinion  ready 

for  signature should  inclu<lc  a co,npleted  opinion  co,HTc•l  sheet  ~ii;netl  by  the  prin,ary  Depllly, the 

Atlorney-J\dviscr,  ancl  1he  Dei,uty  who  did  the  sccoll(]  Depuly  read.  Aner  ii  is  s1g1 1ed  and  issued, 

; f thcop iniiin  is  \uiclp ss ified,  it  wlil  be  1oaded  into  our  [SYS  d1 1taba sc  and  in,;h,ded  in the Office's  unclassified  Day  Book s. A  Separale  (Uc  containing  a co py  oftbe  sig,wd  opi11[on,  tl1c 

384         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00086 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 117 here 72282A.061 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

opinion  control  sheet.  and  copies of  key  materials  not  readily available,  StJch  as the original opinion requesl, the views memoranda of  interested  agencies,  and  obscure  sources  cited in the opinio11 , will  also  be  retained  in  our files for future reference. 

Opinion  p11b ficati o11.  Most OLC opinions consist of confidential  legal  ndvice for senior 

Executive  Branch  officials. Maintaining the  confidentiality  of OLC opinions is  often  necessary to preserve the deliberative process of  decisiomnaking  within the  l;xecutivc  Branch and  attorney-

client  relationships  between OLC and other executive  offices;  in some cases, the disclosure of 

Ol.C  advice  also  may  interfere with federal l aw enforcement  efforts.  'l'hesc  confidentiality 

interests  m·e  especially  g,cal  for OLC opinions relating to  the  President's  exercise of his constitutional authorities, including his aulhorily  as  Commander in Chief. It  is  critical  to  the discharge of the  Pr csidtnl's  constitutional responsibilities that he  and  the  officials  under  his 

supervision  are  able  to receive  confidential  legal advice from OLC. 

i\l  the same time, meny OLC opinions address issues  ofrelcva11cc  to  a broader circle of 

Executive  8!'anch  lawyers or a_gencies  than  just those officials  dir-cctly  involved in the opinion request. ln  son1e  cases, the President  or  an  affected  agency  may  have  a prograrnmatic  ioterest  in putting  other  agencies, Congress, or the public on notice of the  !egal  conclusion reached  by  OLC and  the  supporting  reasoning.  In addition, some OLC  opi111rn1 s wil\ be of significant  practical 

interest  and  benefit  to  lawyers  outside  the Executive Branch, or of  broader  interest to  the  gco.:ral 

public,  includtttg  historians. In  such  cases,  and  when consistent with the legitimate. confidentiality  tnterests  of the President  and  the  Executive  Branch, it  is  the policy of our Office 

to  publisb  OLC opinions. This publication  program  is  in accordance with a directive  from  !he 

Allomey  General  to OLC  to  publish  selected  opinions  on  an  annual  basis  for  the.convenience  of 

the  Execntivc,  Legislative.  and  Judicial  Branches  of  the  Government,  and  of the professional  liar 

and  the  general  public. At the  time  an  opinion is  signed,  the  at1omcys  responsible for  t11e  opinion  will make  u

preliminary  recommcudation  as  to whclhcr  it  may  be  appropriate  for  eventual  publication. 

Thercaft.er,  on  a rolling or  periodic  basis,  each  opinion  issued by  the.Office  is reviewed for 

possible  publication by the OLC Publication  Review  Conm,itte t:.  lf  th e Pl.1blica1io11  Review 

Committee  decides \hat  the  opinion  mecls  the  Offtoe's  hnsic  criteria  forpublica1ion, tl1e 

Committee  will solicit  .the  views of  the  agency  <w  Jus1i0e  Dcpamnenl  componelll  Ihat requested the opinion,  Jnd  any  ~gency  or  compMenl  likely  lo be  affected  by  its  p1.1blica1ion , as to whether 

th e opinion is  appropriale  for  current  public,uion,  whether  its publication should be deferred, or whether it  should  1101  be  p11blisbcd.  OLC gives  due  weight  lo  the  pllblication  rccommcrnlations 

of interested  agencies  and  components,  particularly  where they  rai se  specific concerns abo111 

progi-a 1111natic  or  litigation  interests  th/II  111ig.bt  be  odvanced  or  compromised  by  publjcnti011  of 

the  opinion.  OLC  al so generally  solicits  lhe  view$  oft  he  Office  ofth,•  Attorney  Ocnernl  and  the 

Orfice  of the Counsel  to  the  President  on publication  questions,  11~11icularly  with  1espee\  10 

s ig,nifLcant  opinions of the Office.   

> After the

finnl  decision is made  lo  publish  an  opinion,  the  opi11ion  is  rechecked  and 

refor1na11ed  for  on  line publication;  a headnote  is  prepared  and  added  to 1hc  opi11im1;  and  the 

opinion  is po sted to t11c  Pepa11ment  of Justice Web site  at  www.usdoj.gov/olc/opinions.ht1n.  t\11 

opinions  posted  011 th e Web site  ore  eventually  published  in  OLC's  ha rd cover  bound  volumes 

485 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00087 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 118 here 72282A.062 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

# ..  *

Please  le i me  knnw  il"you  h~vc  any  questions  about  the  pri11ciples  sci fonl1  above  or  any 

suggestions  for  revising  or  :id d i11g  to  the  guiclonce  provided in this  mcmore.ndum. 

# ~<S-~~ 

Steven G.  BrJdbury 

Principal  Deputy  Assi$1ant  I\Uomey  General 

586 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00088 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 119 here 72282A.063 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

Securiti es and Exchange Commi ss ion Div ision of Enf orcement Enforcement Manaa l

O ffi ce of C h ief  Counsel 

A11 g 11s1  2,  201  I87         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00089 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 120 here 72282A.064 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

I. 2. Introduction 1. 1. Purnosc and  Scon.· 

1.2.  Ori!!in 

1.3. Public  Disclosure 

Enforcement Manual Table of Contents I .4.  F11nclamen1al  Considerations 1.4.1.  Mission  Statement 

1.4.2.  U[2!!atin!!  Internal  Svs1cn1s 

1.4.3. Consultation 1.4.4. Ethics 

.

A Guide  to  Matters  Under  l.nguirv,  and t he  Stas?.cs  of ln~ -esti!mtions 

2 .l . General Policies and Procedures 2.1.1.  R.n11kin2  lm ·e s1i1!3tions  and Allocatinl! Resources 2. 1. 2.  Ouarterlv  Reviews  of  lnvcsti!!lltions  and  S1atus  Updates 2.2. Comnlaints. Tins and  Referr.ils 

2.2. l. Comolaints and Tios From  the  Public 

2.2.1.  I.  Processin2:  Tins and Comolaints  fr-0rn  lhe Public ?.2. 1. 2.  \Vhistleblower  Award  PrO!!ram 

2.2.2 . Other  Referrals 

2.2.2. l.  Referrals  from FinCEN or Ref errals  lnvolvim!  Bank  Secrecy  Act 

Material 

2.2.2.2.  Referrals from the Public Cumoanv  Accountin2  0H'.rsi2ht  Board 

27.2.3.  Referrals  from  State:  Securities  Reuulators 88         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00090 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 121 here 72282A.065 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

2.2,2.4_  l{cfcrrab  from  Con!?rcss 

2.2 .2.5.  Referrals  from  Sclf-Rc~ulalorv  Onrn11iza1i ons 

2.3.  f,.l altrn , Under  lnouir.•  l" MlJl, c-1  and  lm c.s li ua lions 

2.3.  I.  O~nin!!aMU I

2.3.2.  011cnin !!  an  ln,csti!!ation.  Con,·ertin!!  a MUI.  or  Clos in!!.  a MU L

2.3.3.  Fonnal  Orders  ofln\c sti! 1at ion 

2.3.4.  Fomml  Order  Process 

2.3.4.1.  Sunnlemcn tin!!  a Fonnal  Order 

2 .3.4.1. Rcouests for a  Conv  oft  he  Fomial  Order 

2 .4. The Wells Process 2.5.  Enforceme nt  Recommendations 

1.5.l.  ' 111c  Action Memo Process 2.5.2.  Commi ss ion  Authorization 

25-.2.  l. Closed  Meelin !!.S 

2.5.2.2. Seriatim  Consideration 

1.5.2.3.  Outv  Officer  Considerati on 2.5.3.  Dclc!!alions  of Commission Authoritv 2.6.  C.losin!!  ~n  lnw sti!!ation 

2.6. 1. Po li c ie s and Procedures 2 .6 .2. Termination Notices 3. A Guide  to  lnvesti!!alivc  Practic es 3.1. Soecial Considerations 3. 1, I.  External  Communica1ions B et ween Senior Enforcement Officials and Persons  Outside  the SEC Who Are  lnrnlved  in Investigations 3. l.2. Statutes of Limitations and  Tollin!!  A!!rcemenls 

> II

89         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00091 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 122 here 72282A.066 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

3.L3 . lnvc s li!! alions  1)1,rinc  On!!oinu  SEC  Liti!!:ttii•n 

3 .1.4.  Pa rn l k•I  lnve s ti!!ations  and  the  State  Actor Doctrine 3.2. Documents and  Other  l\latcri,11s 

3.2 .1.  Pri\'ik!!es  and  Pri, ·acv  Acts 3.2 .2 . Olucshecls 

3.2 .3 . Voluntarv  document  reauc s ts 

3.2.3.1. Fom1s 1661 and 1662 3.2.4. Document  Reuuc s ts  to  Re 0 ufoted  Entities 3. 2 .S·. Document  Reaue~1s  to the  News  Media 3.2.6.  Subnoenas  for Documents 3.2.6.1.  Service  of  Subnncna~ 

3.2. 6. 2. Form of Production 3.2.6.2.1 .  Accepting_  Production of Cooics 3.2.6  7. 2 .  Dates  Stamoin2. 

3.2.6.2.3. Fonnat for  Electronic  Production of Documents to the SEC 3. 2.6.2.4.  Pri\'ilege  Lo11s 

3. 2.6 .2.5. Bu siness Record Certifications 3.2.6.2.6 .  Conlim1in2  Comolcteness of Production 3.2.6.3. forthwith  Subooenas  in  lnvcslil!alions 

3.2.6.4.  Maintainina  lnvestil'3Li,·e  Files 3.2.6.4.1. Document Control 3.2.6.4. l. l . Document  lma2im?  in  hl\'c sti2 ations 

3.2 .6.4.1. 2. Electronic Files 

3.2.6.4.1.3  Comolvin2  with  Federal Rule  ofCi\' il  Procedure 26(a) i ii 90         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00092 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 123 here 72282A.067 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Rcm1ir,·ml'nts  and  Pr=n  in !?.  Evi,knct:  .in  A111ic inatit1n  of  Liti!!3lion 

3?  .6.4. 1.4  Iron  Mountain 

3.2.6.4.2.  Pr.-se n·in°  lntemct  Evidence 

3.2.6.4.3.  Preservin !!  Ph\  sical  ~\'idcnce 

J .2.6.4.3.1.  Pr csen  in!?.  Audiolanes 

3.2.6.4.3.?.  P re!-Cn · in!!  Electronic  l\lcdin 

3.3. Witness  lnten ·ie\\ s  and  Test im on, ·

3.3.1.  Prh ·ik 0 es  and  Prh ·ac, · Acts 

3.3.2. No  Tar!!et·s  of  ln \'c:ai!!.ltions 

~

33.3.  Yoluntan · TeleQhone  Interviews 

3.3.3.L  Privac\'  Act  Wam in!!s  and Forms 1661  and  166 1

3.3.3.2.  Notetaking 

33.4. Yol11n1arv  On-the-Record  T estimonv 

3.3.5. Testimonv Under  Sub~na 

3.3.5. 1.  Aut horitv 

3.3.5.2.  Ba;;ic  Proc<."dures  for  Tcstimonv  Under  Subpoena 

3.3.5.2. l .  Usim!  a Back2rouad  Questionnaire 3.3.5.2.2. W itness  Ri2ht  to Counsel 3.3.5.2.3.  Goin!!  OITthe Record 3.3.5 .2 .4.  Tra nscriot  Availabilitv 

3.3.5.?.5. Review of Transcriot 3.3.6.  SQecial  case.;; 

3.3.6.l. Con lac ti n!!  Emolo, ·ecs  of  Issuers 3.3.6.2. Commu nicati ons  ,, -ith  Emolovecs  of  Broker-D.:alers 

3.3.6. 3.  Contact i n!!.  Witn.:ss  Residinl!  Overseas iv 91         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00093 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 124 here 72282A.068 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

3.3.7.  Prnn;:r  A!!H'.c ' mrn ts 

4.  Privilc!!es  a nd  Pror ec.t ion s

4. 1.  Assen  ion  ol'Privik!!es 

4.1.1.  Allomev-Clicnl  Pri,· ile!!e 

4.l. 1.1.  l\lultiok  rcn re sentation~ 

4.1.2.  Attomc\'  Work  Product Doctrine 

4.13 . The  Fifth  Amemlmenl  Prh ·ile!!e  Aeainst  Self-Incrimination 

4.2.  ln ad wrte nl  Produclion of  Pri"ile!!cd  orNon-Resnonsive  Documenls 

4 7.1.  Pu roos.:ful  Production With No  Prh· ileQ. e Review 

4.3.  Wai Yer  of  Prh-ilcl!C 

4.3. 1.  Confidentialitv  Acreements 

4.4. Comoliance  wilh  the  Pri,·acv Act of  1974 

4.5. Comnliancc  wirh  the  Ri!!ht  to Financial  Privacv  Act of I978 

4.6.  Comnliance  wi1h  rhe  Electronic Communications  Pril'acv  Act of 19S6 4.7.  Handlin!!  Materials  from Fin CEN or Other  Sources  lnrnlvin2:  Dank  Secr?cv  Act 

Material 

5.  Coon.:ration  \\ith  Other  A!!encies  and  Or!! :mizations 

5 .1 . Disclosun! oflnformation and Access  Reouests 

5.2.  Coo.ieralion  " 'i th  Criminal authorities 5.2. 1. Parallel  lnvesti2:ations 

5.2.2. Grand  Jun • Matters 5.3.  Cooncration  with  the Food and  Dorn  Administration 5.4.  Cooocration  with  the  Public  Coninam·  Account  in !!  Oversi!!ht  Board S.5. Coordination  and  Consulta tion  with  Banking  A2encies 

5.6. lnfonna!  Referrals  from Enfon:emcnt -

> y

92         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00094 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 125 here 72282A.069 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

5.6.L  lnfonnal  Ref..:rr ;i l;  In  Criminal  ~\trlhoritics 

5.6.2. lnfonnal  R.:f.:rrals  10  Sclf-Rc!!11l~lorv  Ornaniza1io11 s

5.6.3.  lnfonnal  Ref~rrals  10 the  Public  Como:mv  Accounti ll!!.  On :rsi2hl  Bo a rd 5.6.4.  lnfonn.il  Rc f<'rral s to  St:llc  A2encics 

S.6.5. lnfom1 al Ref errals to P rof essional  Licens in!!.  Boards 

6.  fosterin2  C.o oocration 

6. 1. Initial Considerations 6.J. I.  Fra111e11ork  for  Evaluatim!.  Cooocration  bv  lndi\'iduals 

6.12 .  Fmmc\,ork  for  E1 ·aluatin2  Cooocration  bv  Comoanies 

6.2.  Coogerntion  Tools 

61.  l.  Pron~r  A1?reemen1s 

6.2  ?_  Coooer.ition  Aerccmc nt s

6.2.3.  D.:fcrred  Prosecution  A!!.rcem e n1 s

62 .4 . Non-Prosecution  A2rcemen1s 

6.2.5.  lmn11mi1v  Reau cs ls 

6.3.  Publieizine  the  Ben efits  ofCoo~ration 

Index of  Defined  Tem,s ,

vi 93         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00095 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 126 here 72282A.070 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Sec1ion  (§)  Tit le 

United  Stat es Parole  Commission 

Rules and Procedures Manua l

TA_l3L£  OJT CONTENTS 

age SUBPART  A-UNITED  STATES CODE PRISONERS AND  PAROLEES 

2.  l DEl'INITIONS  ············ ···· ····"·····•··········•• W•·• ··"'········ .. 9

2.2 ELIGIB ILITY FOR PAROLE ; ADULT  SENTENCES  .. .. ....................... 10 

2.3  SAME:  NARCOTlC ADDICT  REHABILITATION  ACT . .. ...................... 12 2..4  SAME ; YOU1'11  OFFENDERS  AND  JUVENILE  Of[.,!NQUENTS  ......... .. ...... 13 

2,5  SENTENCE AGGREGATION ............ .. . .. ..............,............... 13 

2,6  WJTHHBLD  1\1'D  FOlffEITEl)  GOOD TIME..................................  13 

2.7 COMMITTED  Ff NES  AND  RESTlTUTION  ORDERS ...... ... .................. 13 2.8 MENTAL . COMPETENCY  PROCEEDINGS  .................................. 14 2.9 STUDY PRIOR TO  SEN T ENCJNO ................, .......................... 16 

2.10  DATE  SERV JCE  OF  SENTENCE  COMMENCES ...............................  16 

2. 1l APPLICATION FOR  l'AROLE;NOTICE  OF HEARING ....................... ..  16 

p94 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00096 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 127 here 72282A.071 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

2.12 INITIAL  HEAH..l!'IG S:  SETI"ING  .PRESUMPT IVE  RELEASE  DATES .......• ... .. . IS 2.13  INI TlAl  HEARJl\G:  PRO CEDURE ........................................ - 19 2.14  SUBSEQUENT  PRO CEEDINGS ..................... ,~ .................  24 2. 15 PETITION  FOR  CONSIDERATION  or  PARO LS  PR !OR TO  DATE  SET AT HEARfNG27 

2.16 PAROL E OF  PRJSONER  TN STATE,  LOCAL. OR  TE RRITORIAL  INSTITUTION  ...  27 2. 17  ORIGINAL  JUR ISD ICTION CASES ..................... .. ~-•· ·.-· ·· ·· ··  28 2. 18 GRANTING OP PARO LE  ....... ... .. _.................. ,~ .. ,........ ... 30 2.19  INFORMATION  CONSIDERED .. ....... ,...... .. ...........................  30 

2.20  PAROLfNG  POUCY  GUfDEUNF,S:  STATcMENT  OF  GENERAL  POI.ICY ........ 34  61 30 110 

rage  l of  301 95         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00097 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 128 here 72282A.072 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Section(§) Title  Page 

47 

Guide lines  Chart  -, , .. .. ... ...  - .. ....  -. . . . . . . 36 Offense  Sevcri1y  Index  . . . ... , . ........ .. ... . ..  , .... , . , .•.•.. .. ..•. .... •• .... 37 Chapter I.  Offenses  of  General  l\p11l icability  .. ... ......  , ........... • .... . ......  3& 

Chanter  2. Offenses Involving  the  Person  .. . . ..... ...... ....... . . . . . .. ... . .....  39 

Chapter  3.  Offenses  Involving  Property ... ... .... , . ..  , ... ...................... 42 

Chapter  4.  OITenscs  lnvolvin -!J  lm111igration,  Naturalization,  ond  Passports  •••••••  , . .. . . Chapter 5. Offenses l11volv i11g  Rcve11ue  . . .... ........ . ...  , . • ..... .• .. ... .. .....  47 

Chapter 6.  Offenses  !11volvi11g  Govenunclltal  Process . . . . .•.............. .. , .. ...  48 

Chapter  7. Offenses Involving  Indiv idual  Rights .......... . ... . .. ......... .. . .. . . 50 Chapter 8.  Offenses  Involving  I~xplosivcs  and  Weapons ... , . , .. . , ................ S lChapter 9. Offenses Involving II Heit  Drug,  . . . .  . . . .  ..  . . . . ..• •... .. . ......  52 

Chapter 10. Offenses Involving National Defense ............... . . •. ........  , . .. . 60 Chapter 11.  Offenses  Involving Organized Criminal Activity, Gambling. Obscenity, Sexual 

B1qilo i1ation  of Children, Prostitution,  No11-Govcrnn1e11t'Jl  Co1Tuption . Currency Transactions, 

and  the  Enviro nm ent  . .  . . .  . . . . .. .. . ............. .. ......... . .. .... ... .... ..  61 

Chaptet  12.  Miscellaneous  Offenses  . , . .. ............... .......  , .. . . ...  , '" . . . . .  64 

Chapter  13.  Ge neral  Notes  and  Dcfin,tions  ..... . .. .......... , ••  , .•..••  , . • • • . . . . .  65 

Sal ient  Fae.tor  Score  ....... . .......... . .. . ..... ... . .•. ....... ..•... •• .. . ••.  , 72                         

> !tom A.... ..• •. ... •. . . . ..•.. ...... . . •. .... • . ... . • . . . . ... ..... . . . .. ... . . 7J

Item  13  ... • , . . .•.•••. . •••••  , , . • •• • , •.  , . .. . , • • • • . • . . • • . • .  • . • . . . . . • . . .  76 

lt c ,n  C ....  , .. .... .. ...  , . , , .... .. . ... ..  , .... .. ............ ......  , .. . , . . . 77 

hem  D

ltomE 

.... •. . ... •. ...... •• . . .. . ..... • . . .. ••.. .. .•.•............ • .. .•  , .•  78 

78 

Item  F ..• , •  , , •. ......  , . •  , . , •. ........ .. .. . ... .. .. .. . . . . . , ....... , . . • .  • . . 79 

Special Instructions  for  Probation  Vio lawrThis  Time . . . . .... . . . . . • . .  , , , .• ... 79 Special Instructions  for  Pam  le  Anti  Supervised  Release  Violator  This  iime  . . . 79 

Special  Instructions for  Confina111e111/Escape  Status  Violator  This Time . . .. , . . .. .. ... 80 

2.21  REPAROL E CONSIDERA TIO'-l  GUIDELINES ..... .... ..... .. ... .....  , .......  g:, 

2.22 COMMUN!CA  TION  WITH  THE  COMMlSSION . ...... ... . ............ . ..... •.  94 

2.23  DELEGATION  TO  Hf:J\RJNG  EXAMl'l\'ER.S  . ... . ..... . ..... ...... ..... ....... 96 2.24  REV IEW  OF  PA;,.;'EL  RECOMMENDATION BY  nrn  REGlONi\L  COMMISSIONER 97 

'.l.25  HEARINGS  BY  \lll)F.OCOfs;FERENCE  ... . .. . .. ... .. .................. .... .. . 99 2.26  I\PPEI\LTONATIONALAPPEALS  BOARD .. ........... .......... .. ........ 99 2.27  PETITION  FOR  RECONSmERATION  OF  ORIGlNALJURISDICTION  CASES  .. . ..  102 

2.28  REOPEN1NG  OF  CASES ......... •. .. ....... . ....... .. .• ...... , .......... . . 103    

> t,I JO IIO Pngc 2of 302

96         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00098 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 129 here 72282A.073 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Sec1io11  (§) Ti tl e Page 

2.29  RELEASEONPAROLE  . ,,  . .. .. . .... .. , . ... ......... . . . .... .. . ........... 107 

2.30  FALSt:o  INFORMATION  OR  NEW CRIMI N AL CONDUCT; DISCOVERY  AFTER 

REI. EASE  , .... .. . . . .. . .. .. ... . ... . . . .. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .... , . , I08 

2 .31  PAROLE.TODETAl>!ERS7STATEMENTOFPOLICY  , ... .... .. . . .... . .... . .  ,,  109 

2 32  PARO.LETO LOCAL OR  IMMIGHA'f!ON  DETAINE.RS  . . . .. . . . . . . .. •. . . .. . .. . 109 

2.33  RELEASE  PLANS  . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . .. .. ... . . . ... . . . ..  , . . .  ..  . . .. . . I 10 

2.34  RESCISSION  OFT'A ROLE  111 

2.35  l'v !A NDATOR YR E LEAS E fNTHE  ARSENCE OF PAROLE .....  , , ,  ...  , .... ..•. . 114 2.36 RESCISS ION  GUIDELl"-'ES  .. . . ..  : .. .. . . ... . .. .. . . . .. . , ....  , ..... . ... . ... . l 15 

2. 37  DISCLOSURE OF  INFORMA TION  CONCER,i"l!NG  PAROLEES: STATEMENT OF POLICY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . .  . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . .  . . .  . J 18 

2.38 COMMUN!  fY  SUPERVISION  FlY  UN lTTD  STA'I  ES  PROf3ATION  OFF IClS RS  . . . . l20 2.3 9 JUR.IS OI CT IO :--1  OF  THE COMM J SS ION . , .. • .... . . . ....... . . . .......... . . • .  , l20 

2.40 CONDlTIONS  OF  RELEASE'  ... • .. . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  120 

2.41 TRAVEL APPROVAL .... . . . . . .. . . . . , . , .. . . ... .... .. ... .• ...... . . ... . . ...  122 

1.42 PROBAT IO N Ol'PICrR'S  REPORTS  TO  COMMISSION ....... • ... . . •. . . . . . . . .. 122 

2.43 EAR LY  TERM INATIOi\'  . . . . . . . . . .. . ...  " .. .... ...  ,,  .. • . .. .......... . .... 123 

2.44 SUMMONS  TO  APPEAR  OR WARRANT FOR  RETAKING  OF PAROLEE . ... . . . .  121> 

2.45 SAME; YOUT H OFFENDERS . . . . ...... . . .  .,  ... ... ... . .... . .  , .  . . . . .  • . ..  . . .  127 

.2.46  EXEClJT IO N OF WARRANT AN D S.ERVtCE  OF SUMMONS . .• . .. . .. • . ....... 1 27 

2.47  WARR.ANT PLACED  AS  A Df f fAfNER  AND  DISPOSITIONAL  REV IEW  ..... . . .  128: 

2.48  REVOCATJO:'1:  l'R ELfM JNA RY  IN TERVtF.W,  . ..... , • . • .. . . , . .. , . ..• , .. .. . .•  132 

:2. 49  PL.ACE  OF  REVOCATION  HEAR ING . .. .. ....... .. . .. . ..... . ... , .. ... • .. . . 138 6!3 01 10  Pag d o f3 0 '.: 97         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00099 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 130 here 72282A.074 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Section(§)  Ti1le Page 

:?.50  RF.VOCA  l"ION  HEARTh'G  PROCEDURE  . .. . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . ... 140 

2.51  ISSUANC E OF A  SUIWOENA  FOR  TH.E  APPEARANCE  OF  WITNESSES  OR 

PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  142: 

2. 52  RE VOCA TIO:-.J  DEC ISIONS . ......... . ..  _... , .. • .. . .. . . . . .  ..  . . . . . . . . . • .  ..  . 14, 

2.53 MANDATORY PAROLE ..  ,.  .. .. . ................. . ...... .. .. . ......... . .. 146 

2,54  REVHlWS  PURSUANT TO 18 U. S.C.  4215(c)  ........... . .... . . ...............  14? 

2.55 DISCLOSURE OF FILE PRIOR TO PAROLE HEARINGS ...................... 147 2.56 DIS CLOS URE  Of'  PAROLE COMMISSION FILE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . J 54 

257  SPECIAL  PAROLE  TERMS  .. ... . . . . ........... ... ........... . .... ..  .".. ..  162 

2.58  PRIOR  ORDERS  ... .. . . ... ... . . . .............. .. .........•..... , . .  • • • • . . 16.3 

2.5 9 DESIGNATION  OF/\  COMMISSIONER TO ACT AS  A HEAR ING EXAMINER .. , 163 

2. 60  SUPERIOR  PROGl ~AM  AClnEVf.MENT  .. ............. ..... ..  , . ,.  , ..... ....  163 2. 61 QUAUFfCATIONS OF  REPRESENTATIVES  ...................... . .........  16() 

2. 62  REWARDING ASSISTANCE  JN  THE  PROSECUT ION  OP  OTHER  OFPENDERS; 

CRITERIA  AND  G UlDELINl.:S  ............... . . ..  , . , ......  , . ..  . ..  , .. . . .  166 

2.63 QUORUM .... . . ,  ..  , ........... , .. . .... .. .......  , •••  , . , . • . •• . • . • • • •  . . . . . 167 

2..64  YOUTH  CORRECT'lONS  ACT ..... . .... .. ..... . .. . ...... . .. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . J68 

2.65 PAROLING  POLI CY  FOR  PRJSO:--iERS  SERVING AGGREGATE U.S AND D.C.  CODE 

SENlF:NCES  . ................. ......... .................. , ...... . ....... 171 2.66 REVOCATION DECISION WI THOUT HEARING ... ...  + - .. . . ........ . .  , ... ...  172 

2.67  [R.fi.SERVEDJ 

SUBPART  8-TRANSFER  iREATY  PRJSONERS AND PAROLEES 

2.68  PRISON ERS  TRANSFER  RED  'f>URS UA Ni  TO  TR.EA TY  • . • . . . • . . .  . ..  • . • • . . • . . . I 73 

2.69  [R.ESFRVEDI 

61)0110  Paga  4 of30~ 98         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00100 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 131 here 72282A.075 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Sec1ion  (§) Title Page 

SUl3PAR T C-DJSTRJCT  OF  COLUMBIA CODE PRISONERS AND  PA  ROL EES 

2. 70  AUTHORJTY  AND FUNCTIONS OF TH E U.S. PAROLE COMMISS ION WITH RESPECT TO  DISTRJCT  OF COLUMB IA CODE  OFF ENDERS  .. .. . . ... . . . . .  , . . 18 1 2.7 1 APPLICATION FOR PAROLE . . . . . . . . . . .•. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182 2.72  HEARlNG  PROCEDURE  ... ........ .. . .. , . . •. .

2.73 

2.74 

PAROL.E  SUITAB ILI TY CRITER IA DEC ISION  OF  THE  COMM ISSION 

. .. .. . .. . . . ... 182 ... .• .. . .. . . ..  l83 

. . . . ... . .... .. .. . . .. .. .... . 184 

2.75  RECONS ID ERAT !ONPROC!oEDNGS  ....... .... ......... .. ........ . .,  .. ... 184 2.76  REDl1CTION  IN  MI NIMUM  SEN'TENCE  . . .  ·.. . .. . . . . .. .. ... .. .. . .. ... . .. . ... l 85 2. 77  MED ICAl..  PAROLE  .. . . . . .. . ... . ....... . .. . ................... . .. . .... .. l87 

1. 78  GElUATRIC  PAROLE . . . .. . .... . . . .... .2.79  GOOO  TIME  f'ORFE fTUR E ...... . ... . . 188 

189' 

2.80 GUID ELINES  FOR  D.C. CODE OFFENDERS . .. . .. . ..  .. . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . I89 

2.81 REPAROLE DEC ISIONS .. ... . .....  , . .,  ... . . .. .. .. . .  .,  .... .. ....... . . .....  19& 

2.82  EFFECTIVE  DATE  OF  PAROLE . ... .. . . .. . ....... . . . . ... ... . .. . ... . ..... . .  198 

2.83  RE LF.ASE  PLANNING  .. .. .. . . .. .. ....... ......... ...... .. . . .. . . ..... . . ..  199 

2.84  REL EA  SF.  ro  OTHER  JURJSDJCTIONS  .•.... . ..• •• . . .  , •. •• ..... • . •.  , . .  . . . . 200 2.85 CONDITI ONS OF RELEASE ........... .. ..... . ...... . ....... . . . . ... . .. ...  10 1

'.! .86  REJ..,EASB  ON  PAROL E; RESCISSION FOR MISCONDUCT . . ..... . •.. .. . ......  202: 

287 MANDATORY  RELE ASE  . . .. ..... .... .. .. .... .... .... . . .... .. .. .. ........  202 

2. 88  CONflDENTIALITY  OF  PAROLE  RECORDS  . . . . ..... . ,.  .. ... ... . ... . , .. . . . .  202 

2.89  MISCELLANEOUS PROVlSIONS . . . . ..... . . . ..... . ... , .. . .. .... . .. • . ......  203 

2.90  PRJOR  ORD ERS OP  TH.E  BOA  RO  OF  {'A  ROLE  •• •••• • 4 .. .. . .. . . ... ...  ~ ... . ' ••  + • 203 

61 301 10 Pa ges  of 3()1 99         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00101 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 132 here 72282A.076 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

SeclLOll  (§)  Title  Pagi, 

2.91 SUPERVISION RESPONSIBILITY ... , .•.. . ..•• .. ..  103 

2.92  JUR ISDICT IO N 0 1 ' THE  COMM ISSION . .. .•. , ........... . .. , .. , •. .• .. . ..... 203 

2. 93  T RAVEL  AP PROVAL ............. . .....•.•.  , , , ........... •. , . . •. .•  , , .•  , , 204 

2.94  SUPF.RVtS ION  REPOR TS TO  COM\-11SSION  ... . ... , ... , , ... , . , ...... .. .....  204 

2.95  EA RLY  TERMINATIO~  FROM  SUPERVISION ... . .  '.!04 

2.96 ORDER.OF EA RLY  TERMINATION  ......  , ... ... ..  , ..... . ............ . .  , .. 205 

2.97  WITHDRAWAL  OF ORDER  or  Rl ~LE ASE  . ..... ....... ........ ... ... .... , . .  205 

:Z.98  SUMMONS  TO  APPEAR.Oll  WARRANT FOR  !UlTAKJNG  OF PAROLEE. ........ 206 

2.99 EX ECU TION OF  WARRAN T AND  SERVICE  OF SUMMONS ....... . ....... . .. 207 

2.100  WARRA1'-i1  PLACED  AS  DETAINER  AND DISPOSITIONAL REVIEW  , .......  , _ 108 2. 10 \  PROBABLE  CAUSE  HE ARING  AND  DETERMINAT!Ol\  .. ... . •. ... , . , ........  209 

2. 102  P LAC E OF REVOCATION  HEARING  ................. . . ..... .............  , 211 2.1 03  R EVOCATIONHEAfUNGP RO CWURE  . ...... . .... . ......... . ........... .. 212 

2.1 04  ISSUANCE  OF SUB PO EN A FOR  APPl: ARANCE  01'  Wr!NESSES  OR PROD UCT ION 

OF  DOCUMENTS  ..... . ...................... . .................... . ..... 213 2. 105 REVOCATIONDEC1SIONS  . ........ ..  , .. .. .................... .. . ..... ...  214 

V 06  YOUTH REHAB[LITATION ACT . ..... .. . . ............ . . .. ... . ....... ..... 215 2, 107  fNTERSTATE  COM PACT  .... . ........ ..  , ..............................  "' . 2 17 SUB PART  D-D l STR l CT  OF COLUMBIA  CODE  SUPERVISED  RELEASEES 

i ,200  AUTHORITY,  JURISD1CTION  AND  FUNCrtONS  OF  THE  U.S.  l'AROU .: 

COMM l SS fON WI TH  RESPCCT  TO OFFENDERS SER VIN G TERMS  OF SUPERVISED  RELEASE  lMPOSEP  BY  TH E SUPER IOR  COUR  roF  THE 

OISTRICTOFCOLUMB!A.. .. . . . .. . ,.,  ....  , , . .  ....  .. . . . .. . . . .  21S 

2.201  PERJODOFSUPERVI SEDRELF.A<;f.  ..  , ..  _,  __  ..  _.... .... . .... ........... ..  21 9   

> ~,13 0110 Page 6ofl03

100         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00102 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 133 here 72282A.077 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Section(§)  Titk  Pago 

2202  PRERELEASE  PRO CEDURES ........ , . .  220 2.203  CERTIFICATE  OF  SUPERVfSED  RELEASE  , .•. ......... . 220 

2.204  CONOIT\ONS  OF  SUP ERV I SED  RELEASE .. .... . , ................ , .  .,  . .. ...  220 

2.205 CO:--JFIDENTIALITY OF  SUPERVISED  RELEASE  RECORDS  . .. . .. . .. . .. . . . .. . 235 

2. 20 6 TRAVEL  APPROVAL AND  TRANSFERS  OF SUPERVISION . ... ... .. . .........  235 

2.207  SUPeRVISION  REPORTS  TO CO MMJ SStON ... .. , .............. •. .... . •. ... 236 

2.208  TERMTNATION'  OF  A T ERM OF SUPERVISED RELEASE .... . . . . . . ... . ....... 237 2.209 ORDER. OF  TR RMfNA T ION  . , . , , ... .. ... .. .. . .. . , .... .... ... , .. . .. . .. .. . . . 2 3S 2.210 EX  TE NS  ION OF  TF.RJvt  . ... .. .... ... ... .. . ...... . . ...... ..  , . . ... •.  , ,.  . - •.  _ 238 

2. 21 I SUMMONS  TO  APt>BAROR  WARRANT  FOR RETAKING  RELEASEE  . . , •. , .. , .  239 

2.212  EXFCIJ'TION  Of  WARRANT  A:-1D  SERVI CE  Of  SUMMONS ••. . .. . , . . . •. . ,  •..  243 

2 .213  WARRANT  PLACED  AS  DETAINER  AND  DISPOSITIONAL  RE.VIEW  . ... • . . , , .  2.45 

2. 21~  PR0!3ABLE  CAUSE  HEARING  AND DETERMINATION . ....... . ........... . . 245 2.215  PLACE  OF RRVOCATION  HEARING  .... .. .. .. . . . .... ... ............... ... 250 2.216  REVOCA ' flO N 1-1.E,'\R JN G PR OCEDURE  .. . , .. . ............. . . .............  2:u 

2.2 17 lSSUANCE OF  SUBPOENA  FOR APPEARANCE OF  WITNESSES  OR PRODUCTlON OF  DOCUMENTS  ..... . . . . .. . . . ...... .. , . , , .  • . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  255 

2.2 18  RJ : VOCATION  DECISIONS .............. . . ,  257 

2.2 19  '-4.AX I MVM  IBRMS  OF  IMPRISONMENT  AN'b  SUPERVISED  RELBASE  259 

2.220  APPEAL  . . . ...  . 275 M MISCEL LANEOUS  PRO C!:DU RE.S  .. . . . .  275 

(O J)  Aggregated/Non-Aggreg~ted  Sentences .. .. . . . .... • ...... • ...... .• ... .• ...  275 

(02)  Courtesy  Hearings ... . . . . .. . . .... .. .. . . ,  , .. , . . • • . . . .  . . . . .  . . • . . . • . . . . . .  276  

> (03)

0i$qualificaiions  ,1l'Co111111 issi ,111  Personnel  . .• . , , .. . . .... • ...... • ... , . . .. , ,  276 

611 0/l O  Pn ge  7 of30 :0 101 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00103 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 134 here 72282A.078 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

Section  (§)  T itle  Pbge 

(04)  Standards  for  Priso n~ r Interviews  __ .... . . . ...... ... ..... . _.... . .. ... . .  _ 276 

(05)  Desig nati on  of  Pe1 ·so1rncl  Otl\er Than  Hear in g Examiners  to  Conduct  A He arin g _..  276 

(06)  Cowt  Modificntio11  of  Sentences  ....  _..... . .  _.. ... . ....... . . .... .. .... . .  277 

(07)  Tramfations  . , , . ... ..  , . . .... . . . ................ . . •... . . .• . .... . .... , . 277 

APPENDIX  1 STANDARD  WORDING ON  ORDERS  278 APPENDIX  2 TEMPORARY /SPEC IAL PRO CEDURES . . ......... . .. .. .. . .... . • . .... 287 A.  Rctro8rtivi tyofCe rtain  Co11 1mi ssion  Revisi ons  .. . . .......... ...... . ... . ... ..  287 

B,  Prelhni11 ary  Interviews:  We~ tern  District of Was hin gton Cases ....... . ... . .  _,  ... 287 C. Rescis si on Co 11s idera tio1 1s:  Scco11d  Circuit  Cases  •. .... . _.. . . . . . .  288 

APPENDIX  3 USE  OF PAROLEES  AND  MANDATORY  RELEASEE.S  AS  INFORMANTS.  29 1 

APPENDIX  4 TRANSfER  TREATY  CASES 293 

6130 110  Page&on o:; 102 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00104 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 135 here 72282A.079 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

INTRODUCTI ON 

This  manual  con1 ains  the  Commission's  rnles  (28  C.F.R. 2.1-2.107; 2.200-2.220)  as  well as  the  notei;, 

proccdut'CS,  and  a1)pcndicc~  tha t clarify and  sttpplemenl  these  niles.  I ft  here  appears  to  be  a direct  co nOict 

between any of 1he  procedures  ancl  a rnle,  the  rule  shall  control.  11,e  notes,  pro ced \\res,  and  ~ppcndi= 

in this  mam1al  arc inteoded  011ly  for the  guidance  of  Parole  Commission  per$onnel  ~nd  those  agencies 

which  must  coord,nate  their work  with  the  Commission . The notes , pro ced ures. and  appcndiCI:'$  no  not 

confer legal  rights  ai1d  nre  n o t  intended for  relinncc  by  pnvatt  pers011 s. 

tn  s0111c  ins ta nces,  it  is  necessaf)  to  implement  procedural  eha11ges  inuncdi3lely.  This will be accomplished by issuance  ofn  "R,tles  and  Pro ccd11res  Memo"  signed by the  Chainnau  (to  be  subsequently ratified by the Commission).  These  mem os  11re  uumbered  1n  seq11et1cc  according to rhc year  is~\led, 

SUBPART  A-UNITED  STATES  CODE.  PRISONERS  AND  PAROLEES 

# • §2 ,1  DEFINITIO~S. 

As  \l~ed  in  this  pnl'I: 

(a)  The  t erm  "Commi ssio n"  refers  to  the  U.S.  Parole  Com mi ss ion .(b)  Th e term  "Commissio11er' 1 refers  to  members  of  the U .S . Par ole  Commission. 

(c)  The term  "Natio11nl  Appeals  Bonrd " refers  to the three-member Co mmissi o n  siUing  :is  a body 

t o  ckdde  appcnls  t:ikcu  from  decisions  ora  Regioirnl  Commissioner,  who  pa i-ticip11te5  as  n member 

of the  National  Appe:tls  Boa r d.  The Vice  Chnimrnn  sb:i!I  be  Chnirn1an  of  the  National  'Appeals 

Boarcl. 

(d)  Th e term  "National  Commissione1 ·s"  r~f ei-s  to  tlrn  Clrnirmun  of the  Com1nissiot1  and to  the 

Co111missioncr  Who  is  nol  scrvlng  ilS  the  Rcgionnl  Commissione r it\  re spect to  a porticltln,·  ca;<', 

(e)  Tl1c  term  ''Regiona l Commissioner''  refers  to  Com mi ssio11e rs  who  :ire  :i~sigued  to  make  initial 

decisions,  pursuant  to  !he  autflority  dclcgnicd  hy  these  rules,  in  rrrpcct  lo  prisoners  and  parolees 

in  regions  ilcliiierl  hy  the  Comni ission. 

({)  The  tern,  "eligibk  prisoner''  l'efers  !o  any  Fe  demi  prisoner  eligib le  for  pnrolc  purstrnnl  to this 

part  and  iuclnncs  any  Fcdcrnl  prisoner  whose  p>1rolc  has  been  revoked  and  who  is  not  otherwise 

ineligible  for  p:1rolc. 

(g)  The term  "pa r olee"  l'cfc.-s  to  :my  Fcclcrnl  prisoner  released  or,  pa,·olc  0 1·  as  if on  p nn,lc  pursuant 

to  18 U.S. C.  4164  or  4205(1),  Th e term  "nrnndatory  r elease"  rcfrrs  to  rclen sc  pursuant  to  18 U.S.C. 4163  :n1d  4164, 

(h)  The  te1·m  "effective  ilntc  of  parole"  refers  to  a parole  date  that  hus  been  approved  following  an 

i11-pcrson  heoring  held  within  ni11~  months of  such  d ate,  or  following  a pre-release  record  rcvi~w. 

/1110110  Pogc9of) O;; 103 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00105 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 136 here 72282A.080 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

# Antitrust Division Manual 

U, S, Department of Justice 

Antitru~t  Division 

Fourth  Editfon 

Lnst  Updated December ZOOS 104         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00106 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 137 here 72282A.081 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Chapter I. Or ga nization and Fun ct ions of t he A ntitru st Di vision 

A.  Creation  ······· · · ·····- ···· ··-···· -- -· ····· •··· •··,--- · ·· ·-··· •·---·••u  ..  · ··  l-2 

B. Purpose . ....... . .... . ........ .. .... . ..... .......... ..........................  (.2 

C.  Organization  .. . . . •• ........................... •. . .... •• ... •. . . .. ... . , .... .. ...  l •J 

l.  Office  of the  Assista,nt  At1omey Ge neral  .. . ..  , •.. ... .••  , •.....•....••• ...•.. . .  1--1 

a. Assistant Attorney  (',eneral  .... •. ..... ..... .. .... .... . . ..... . ........ •.  1--1 

b.  Deputy  Assistant  Attorneys  General ..... • ....•... .. . • .... . ......... • ....  1-4 

c. Directors of  Enforcen><.'!ll  .....•.•....••.......... . • .......•.. • ........  1-5 

2. Office of Operations  ...... . . . ... . .. . . .... . ..... ..... ... . .. •. ............. . 1-5 3. Washington Sections •.. ..... . .... •. ....... . ...•........ ... •. .. .... • . ......  f.6 

a. Litigation I Sccfioo (Lit  Q ........ .... .. .... . .... . . . ... . .... . ..  _ .......  J.6 

b. Litigation  n Section  (1.il  II) . ... . ......... .. . . . . . . • .... .. ..• . • .. •• . . ....  1·6 

c . Litigation m Se..-tion  (Lit  ffi ) ................ .. ..... . .. . . .. ... . . ..... ..  1-7 

d. National Criminal Enforcement  Scctio11  {NCES)  .... . . ....  ,.  . •  .,  ,.  ..... . . . .  1.7 

e.  Network~  and Technology Enforcement Sectioo  (NET  TECH)  . . .............. 1-7 

f.  Telecommunications  and  Media  Enforcement  Scctioo.  (Tl:'.L)  ....• •• . •. ... •. ..  J.7 

g.  Transportation,  Energy,  and Agriculture Section  {TEA)  .... ... •... • ..••.. . ..  1:1 

4. field  Offices  .............. . . ..................... .. . . .. •. .. • ...•.........  l•S 

5. Economic  Analysis  Group  .. .. .... ... ...... ..... ..  _...  , ...•.  , . .... , •. . • ..  .,  . l•S 

6. Specialized  ComponeolS  . ........... .. ...... .. ..... . . ..... . ,.  .............. 1-9  

> a,

Aprella(e  Section  .... ............ • •. . ..••. • ••. .. , .•. • . •• •. . •• ..• , • ...  1-9 

b.  foreignCommc-rccScction  ... .. ........ .. . . ,  ... ..... ... . ..........  .- , l•IO 

c.  legal  Policy  S c-ct ion  . .. .... ................................. . . . .....  f.  JO 

d.  faccutivc  Office  and  lnfomialion  Systems  Su ppon  Group ......... , . , .. .•.• 1-10 7.  Antitrust  Division  Library  Sysle.m  ........ ... ... . ..  , ...  , ....................  ill  

> Anliln.l.St

Oivi~kif1  Mar, uaJ,  four1h  Erll t'io n J-1 105         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00107 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 138 here 72282A.082 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Introduction 

[ ~111  pleased  tr•  in1roduee  a new  ~d,tion  uf1lw  Anlitrusl  Divi~mn  Manual, lhe 

latest  version  of  the  day -10-<tay  resource  used  by  lhe  attorney;;,  economisls,  an<I 

other  profossionals  oflbe Division lo enforce this  countzy's  a11tllrust  laws.  Thi.'. 

revisions to the Third  Edition  incorporate  changes  in  the  stalutes,  guideliocs, 

roles,  and  other  documents  rhal  govern  lhc  Division  arid  reflect  the  Division's current  practices  .ind  procedures. This  new  edition is  lhe  result of countless 

hour,  of,vork  spent by individuals  th1oughout  the  Oivisio11;  wi1bout  them  this 

document would nol  be  possible-.

Since  1998,  when  th~  Third Edilion  oflhe  M~nual  was  published,  loom  have 

bcc11  many changes in lb c laws  and  regulations  Iha!  the  Division  enforces  and  lbe 

ways  !hat  lhe  Division  enforces  them.  'The  very structure of the Division  itself 

was  reo rganized,  will,  1be  creation  afne\V  litigating  sections  ln  Wasbiilgton, 

o_ c_ Criminal  penalties  for violating  tha  Sherman  Act  have  been.raised.  and the role of  the  Sentencing  Guidelines  in  determining  bow  those  pcmtltles  should be applied  ha5  undergone•  a s ignificant  transfonnalion.  The  corporaoo  and  individual leniency  program  for  reporting  criminal  offen,cs  bas  uodcrgooc  further 

refinement  Civi l practice  has become increasingly sophisticated  as  economics 

plays  a more  crncial  role in  investig:itions  and litigation. Amidst  these  change,. 

decrronic  document  producticm  and  discovery  have  created  a whole new  sel  of challenges and  opportunilies  for lhe Division, enabling more  sopbisticated  data 

analysis  but also  creating  new logistical burdens. 

Tho  Manual  is  an  important  re.source  for  everyone  at  the.  Division, from seasoned 

,itlomeys  wilh  years  of practice under their belts to new paralegals  fresh  out of 

college.  The  lllllkriru  that follows  answers  questions,  ranging from  the  everyday  

> lo

I.he  arca.l)e,  thsr  arise  when  conducting  investigations  or  litigating  cases_  This 

edition  of  the  Ma nu al is a web-only  document  with  improved  text  searching 

funclions  lhat  allow  s1aff eff 1cien1ly ro find answers to  questions  aboul  Division 

practice  and  procedure.  The  new  fonnal  also  will  allow  the  Division  continually 

lo  update  the  Manual to  reflect  changes  in  bi  vision  pmc1icc  ~nd  the  law. 

Many  lhauks  to  all of !hose  at  tbe  Division  whose  contributions  m;,dc  11 ,is  new 

e.dir ion  possibl e.  Thank you  as  well  to  tho;e  individual;  whose  experieuces  have 

sllJlped  lhepractices  and  procedures  <lcs enocd  in  lhcsc  poges. 

Thomas 0 .  BarneU 

Assistant  Atlomey  General 

Antilru st  Div  is ion 

September  2008 

An1 i1 rn,1 Dhi si cm  Manu~) , l'oun~  bJitlon 106 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00108 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 139 here 72282A.083 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

Disclaime r This  M3n ual  provides  Oll ly  inccmal  Department  of  Justil:e  guida 11 ce.  ll  is  not inrended to, does not, and may oot be  relied  upon to  crcalt:  any  ri ghts, 

sub,lanti \'e  or  procedural,  enforceable  at  law  by  any  party  in any  mal1cr  civil  or 

crimina l.  No  limilarions  are  licrebyplaced  on  otherwise  l.1wfu l investigative  and 

litig;itive  prerog;ilives  oftbe  Dcp, rtmenl  of  Justice. 107         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00109 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 152 here 72282A.096 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

,,,,, ..  ,     

> 'FEDERAL ELECTION COM MISSION ~

:..  . W4SH 1H GT O N ,  0 G 2 0 •aJ 

'" 

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS FROM  THE 

COMMITTEE  ON HOUSE ADMJNISTRATfON 

JULY 29, 2011 

MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION I. In  March  20/0,  the  FEC Office of Jnspecror  General made recommendations  regarding 

1he  in1emal  control  sys1en,Jor  personal  commzmication  devices.fleet  vehicles,  and fleet 

charge  cards  Iha/  would  produce  a projec1ed  annual  savings of about  $50,000.  Whal  rs 

tire  Sia/Us  ef ihe  fmplementallon  of these  recommendalions?  Please  provide  any 

documents  related lo  steps  laken  to  1111pleme11/  the  re1:0111mendo1ion s and  the  c111n•11/ 

status  of the  implemen1a1io11 ,

The  PEC  OIG 1 s Fi11al  Reporl.·  Audit of the  Commission 's  Propeny  Managemem  Control~ ·

(March 2010), observed  that  a different  servioe  pl an for personal communication devices (PCDs) offered by  a different provider would save approximately $50,000. However, the Audit Report did not recommend  that  the FEC  cha nge  service  providers  or service p lans. Instead.  the 

recommendations  were  that: 

''2i.  !TD's  Management Assistant should annually monitor monthly PCD  nsage  to 

assess  if the current  plan  should  be  adjusted to appropriately meet user  needs;' ·  and 

"2j.  Prior to renewing PCD services or sw itching  service  plans, the Contracting 

Office,  in consultation  with  the PCD Program  Office,  should condu ct and document analysis of service plans offered by the  current  pcovider  and  other  potential  vendors  on the GSA  schedule  to  ach,eve  best value for the agency.  Fu11 .her,  the  Contracting  Office should  discuss  actual pion detai ls  and  agency  use with the PCD program office and ensure any negotiated service options, such as free textlng. are included in the quotes 

from  potential  vendor s:' 

The  recommendations  to  tnonitor  monthly PCD usage and  survey  servkc  plans available  have 

been implemented. In addition 10 the cost  ofa  service plan, the agency must co nsider all 

technical  roquirementS.  Among  the  technical  requirements considered when se lect in g a service provi der arc: (i) compatibility with the FE C mail  system;  (ii) area coverage to include all  ageJJcy 

travel  requirements;  (iii)  reliabtlity  in an emergency competitive environment;  and  (iv) voice, data, mail, and roaming plans to  suh  all  the  missi on elements of  the  FEC. 

Each  fiscal year, the contracting officer and the program contracting officer' s technical representative detennine which General Services Administration (GSA) schedule holder  has  the 

bes t value for the FEC for that  liscal  year.  For FY  20 11,  the  FEC  was.  able  to  obtain  services  that 108         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00110 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 153 here 72282A.097 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

,Tiet  the FEC's  tt:ehnical  requirements while  realizing  a savings of$25,000 compared to  the 

previous  year.  Based o n the  annual  cornpariSC>Jl  of GSA schedule  serv1ce  providers.  the  same vendor  was  again  determined to  provide  the best value to the agency for its PCD services. The corrective act ion plan  for  this audit  is  attached. 

2.  ln  the  FY 20 I I Budge/ Justification, the FEC discussed several  inilimi~es  involving 

security  enhancements relating to  ri .~k  assessments of operations, disaster recovery,  anti 

0011/inuity  of operations  in  /he  event  llj'a  disnsler.  What  is  the  s/allls  of these 

enhancements?  Please  provide  copies of the  risk  assessments  discussed  in  the  hudge, 

juslijicolion. 

The  FEC  began to develop an  agency-wide  Disaster Recovery Pl an (DRP) in FY 2008 and completed the plan in FY 2009. This plan  provides  the means to reduce the ri sk  to  ,he  agency and  its  systems  in  the event of an emergency  sit uatfon.  including  events  wbfch  affect  the  FEC 

alone,  or  a regioniil  disaster.  the  plan provides  direction  for each division of the  agency,  and  it identifies key personnel and  assigns  duties to  those  Tndividuals in conducting agency business during ihe event. In FY 2009,  a back-up primary mission su ite of server equipment was purchased  and  configured to  enhance  the disaster  recovery  and  all ow  the  PEC  to continue ope rations of the agency if the production environment is lost. This  back-up  system resides  i11  a separate  data  center from the production  environment  and ensures the continuity of operations of  the  PEC' s primary mission syste ms in  U,c  event of  a regional  disruption. The PEC developed its Continuity of  Operations  Plan (COOP) during FY 2009 and FY2010. This plan documents the requirtiments  and  processes  necessary  for the FEC to perform its 

mission  during various disaster scenari os . The COOP  also  identities  the  minimum computer equipment and space needed to accomplish mission objectives during a  period  when production 

equipment  and  normal  work space are not uvailable. In PY 2010, the FEC began implementing the requirements of Homeland  Security  Presidential 

Directive  (HSPD- 12). The fEC split implementation  into  three phases. Phase I  cons.lsted  of procuring the  equipment  necessary  to  produce and issue smart  cards  for  all  FEC  employees. This phase  was.  completed in FY 20 I 0. Phase II consists  of  using the smart car ds  as  a secondary 

authentication device for  network  access. Procurement of additional smart card reading equipment has been completed. and Pha se !I  is  in a te st environmenta.nd will be introduced to the agency  ass  whole later  this  fiscal  year . Pha se II  was  funded  with  l"Y  20 I l funds. Phase lll is the  final  phase of  HSPD-12  implcmemation.  which  involves physical security of the work 

spaces,  Spccficially, Kastlc Keys will be repla ced with the HSPD-12 smart cards  to  gain access to the building. elevators. and stairwells during off-duty hours  by  au thorized personnel. The  risk  assessments  arc  attached. 109         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00111 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 154 here 72282A.098 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

3.  The  FEC  ·s  FY 2012  Budget  R.eques1  Jusliflcation  states  that  the  agency  will  be implementing a stralegic  managemem  system. What does the  Mrate1!i, • management  plan 

entail  and  what  else  will  1he  agency  be implementing in  order  to comply with  the 

Government  Performance  Res!llts  Modtrniza1ion  Act  of 2010? Please provide a  cop)'  of the  strmegic  managemem  plnn  m,d  all  comm,mlcatio11s  re/ari11g  to  its  fmplememation. 

The  PowerPt)int  presentation  e.nti1led  An  Approach  for FEC  Strategic:  Planning and  Manoge111e11/ 

illustrates  the  FEC's strategic  management  framework  and  timeline for  revising  FEC's  Strategic 

Plan,  in  compliance with GPRA Modernization Act of2010. The Commission is currently on the first phase of implementation. ln this  phase,  the strategic  team  developed  tbc  ·'Strengtos, 

Weaknesses,  Opportunitie~,  and  Threats  (SWOT) ..  que$iions.  Currently,  Commission  s1aff  is conducting the SWOT analysis with focus groups, reviewing  e-xisting  plans,  and conducting  an 

analysis ofPEC mandates. In FY 20l2,  staff  will  kick-off  a strategic  leadership  team that  wil'I 

identify the Commission's priority  goalS- in coming  years,  based on  the  results  of the phase  one 

analysis.  During FY 2012. the Commission plans  to  revisi1 Agency  priorities and strategic initiatives, and  will  most  likely redefine the  FECs  performance measures  10 align  them  to the 

scra1eglc  plan. To  make  those  revisions,  the Commission nlso  plans  to  consult"'  ith  Congress,  as. 

required  by GPRA and the GPRA Modernization Act , aJ1d  with  external  stakeholders based on a communication plan that the PEC will  develop. 

Last  winter,  the Commission conducted a ·'Request for lnfonnalion  (RF[)''  from  the  vendor 

community in order to evaluate  the  need for  potential  additional resources for this  effort, 

The  PowerPoint  presentation, Lhc SWOT questions,  and  the  RPI  arc.  attached. 

4.  Please  describe,  in  detail. the allocation of fimdingfor  OC!O  Support  an(/  fniliotives  a/If/ 

pro~•ide  sipporting  documentation. 

The  attached  document, entitled  20./  I OC JO  Projecl s-Budgeted  Projects  provides a list  of  IT projects, and fo r each  project it  st11tes  a projecl  description a11d benefit,  the  cur rent  stallls,  and  an 

estimate of  the  FY 20 11  fui,ds  that will be needed  for  each project. These figures  are  as  of 

January  I. 20 I I,  11nd  projects  that  wil  I need funds in later  fiscal  ye.ars  are  noted.  The pie  chan 

below illustrates the allocation of  funding. 

J110          

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00112 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 155 here 72282A.099 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING
> 100 ,000 .00 50 ,000 .00
> 400.00000
> 100 ,000 .00

• Smart  Ca rd  

> Implcm on 1at ron

• Dara  Ce nt er  Cons olidat io n    

> il Com m Do t um cnt
> W o rkf lo w

• Dalil  Too l,  fo r cRcvicw 

• Ele ct r on ic  Rec ord < M gm t     

> "E. nte rpr is cScJr c.11 Tool s

To provide  a process to oversee and  approve  expenditure of IT pr oject  fund$  in support of the 

FEC  mission. in October  1009.  the  FF,C  established and  chartered  an  IT  Project Review Roarcl ( ITPRB).  The  board  meets  periodically as convened by the CI O. but at least during the budge, 

1om1ulution  proct>ss  and the  drafting  of the  agency  management plan. The  members  of the board, representing each office within the  l'EC,  suggest  IT initiatives required in support of their 

part  of  the  mission. The  projects  are then prioritized by vote of  the  membership,  approved  by  chc 

Commission, and executed wichin the IT budget which is  part  of  the  management plan  approved 

by the Finance Committee and the Commission. The Commission  via  the Finance  Cornrnitlee  is kept  apprised  of the  $latus  of  initiatl  vcs  and add itional funding needs.  The  board, under  the 

leadership of the  CIO , keeps  a running  ltst  of the  projects,  their  status,  the funding  requi,·ed,  and 

1hose that  haw  been po stponed for  lalcr  implementation pending availability of funding.  The 

cha11er  of  the  lTPR.R  and  'lhe  FY 2011 ITPR,B  result.~  li$tiflg  are  attached. 

5. ln  June  2009,  the  Office  of  Personnel  Management pe,formed  w1  evaluation  of the  FEC  •~

human  capital  manageme nt.  Please provide  a copy oft he  final  repor/  supplied by OPM 

al  th~  co11d11sion  ofthal  eva/uaiion. 

The  Office  of Per sonnel  Managemen1·s  (OPM)  2009 evaluation of the  FFC s human capita l management is attached.  In  response. the PEC devel oped a fresh approach and strategies to 

address  1he  OPM  findings.  The  atrnched  PowcrPoint  prcscnration.  A Proposed  Human Capital 

Management  System  for  FEC.  ill11stra\es  the  FEC's  approach to  acldresslng  its  human  capii.al 

cha)lcngcs.  lhe  PEC  consulted with O PM regarding  the  new approach and obtained its concurrence in  January  2011. Since January. the FEC  has  made  cons iderable  pr ogress in implementing this  plan, 

At  the  strategic  level. the  P8 C  is currently drafting it s Human  Capita l  strategies  and plan by engaging managers and employees  al  all  levels.  The  FEC',o;  Stmlegic  Pion is under  revision  to inclu de Human  Capita l  srrutcgic  initiatives. /\ Request for Proposal (RFI') has been released  for 

hiring  a contractor to  .a ssist  l'EC  to  analyze  its  workforce  needs. A  second  RFP is being  rdeased 

4111         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00113 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 156 here 72282A.100 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

to acquire  MR  Line of  Bllsiness  solution, The FEC has consulted  ,vith  OPM in order to identify 

nece$ssry  steps  for obtaining  OPM  certification for the  FEC's  performance management system, in compliance with OPM Human Capital Assessment.and Accountability  Framework  (HCAAF). At the tactical level,  the  FEC  is conducting  an  internal  third party review of  its  employees' electronic Official Personnel Files (eOPF) ro  ensure  accuracy  and completeness  ofdaia;  policies for personnel security are being developed and a tracking system is  bei11g  put in  place  for ensuring personnel security compliances. An analysis of the HR sta  rf  is currently underway  for 

development and implementation  ofa  comprehensive training  plan. 

6.  The  FJ:;C  recent~v  began  seve~al  security  enhanceme/11  initiatives  relating  to risk 

asse.mnents  of operati ons,  disaster  recove1y  and  conlin11ity  Qf operations  in  the  event  of a

disaster.  What  were  these  iniriatives?  Whqt  re, 'tlillS  have  they  produced'.J  Please  provide 

all  tlocumen1$  relevant  to  these  iniliarives. 

Please see  the  Response  to  Questi1,n  2 above. 

7,  In addition  w West/aw , whal  other  /ego/  research  tools  are  being  used  by  the FEC  '.s 

Office  of General Counsel?  Is  anyone  too/found  "1  be  more  helpful  than  the  <1the.r.f ?

How  much  does  each  tool  cos/?  l'lea.1 ·e  provide  any  s11pp<>rfi11g  documents  for  )'OW' 

answers. 

The  Office  of  General  Counsel  primarily  11ses  fo ur major research  tools:  (i) Westlaw; (ii) 

Lexis/Nexis;  {iii)  Duo & Bradstreet:  and  (iv) PACER. Overall,  the  Agency and  the  Offtce  of 

General  Col!nsel  rely most heavily on Westlaw. The FY 2011 yearly cost for Westlaw was $430,542. The FY 201 I yearly  cost  for  LexisNcxis  was $42.996, which was nearly 60% lower than it was in previous fiscal  years.  The FY 2011 yearly cost for Dun & Bradstreet was  $24,363. 

The FY 2011 yearly  cost  for  PA CER  was.$3,500.  Invoices for these expenses are  at1ached. 

8.  The FEC's FY  2011  budget  req11es1Jor  capitalized  equipment  was  88% higher  than  the 

fl ' 20/0 request.  The  budget Justijir.;ation  claims  this  was  due  10 the  FEC  ·s  s111dies  on //,1 

Case  Management and Data  Wareho11Se  Systems  in  2008  and  2009.  Whm  were  the 

results  ()f  1he  study?  What  wilhin  the  sludles  supports  such a dramatically hi gher 

capllo/izad  equipment  request'  Whm  is  the  .status  of implementation  o/'the  project,v ?

Please  provide copies of the  studies. 

Genera fly,  lT  development projects. software development,  and  IT  purchasos  ove r the 

capitalization  th.reshold are considered capitalized  equipment.  The FY 201 1 budget request  fot 

capitalized  equipment  included  the  implementation phase of the  Case  Management  System (CMS)  replacement  project. CMS is used to  track  the  status  of enforcement, administrative tines,  and  ADR matters fr om initiation through  case  closure. The  FEC's  CMS study concluded that the current system was outdated,  inefficient.,  no longer met the needs of 1he  PEC,  and  sho uld 

be  brou,ght  up lo  date  u.tiHzing  modern  technolog_v  and  collaborative  S)'Slem$  available in  today's 

5112         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00114 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 157 here 72282A.101 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

market The cost of the CMS replacement p roject is  r«t1 ective  o f a complete re-make of  the  CMS to include process renewal, mission custom configuration, and a completely new flow strategy. The next phase of  this  proje.ct  has not yet  been  funded. The  FEC  also started a Data Warehouse project study and the deve lopmenta l prototype, funded out of FY 2009 and FY 20 IO appropriations. The initial phase s tudied the need for a data warehouse to organize data, to extract data from  the  disclosure data base in support of  data 

analysis, and to aut omate da ta  review  without slowing down  operational  sy stems.  The FY 2011 request was to begin  the  implementation phase of  the  Data Warehouse project, capitalizing on 

the  investment made in development of the prototype. The implementation is estimated to exceed $2 million over a four-year period. The current prototype  phase  will be completed on September 30. 

The  studies  are  attached. 

9. What areas of the  FE C' s operations (including  repor1ing,  enfonement , and  aud it functions)  c1re  formally  measured' ? What  new  metrics  have  been adopted  since 

.January  I,  200 7,  and  what  arc  the  resu/t.5  of those  me tri c.~ ?

The formal measures of FEC operations  are  the 17 performance measures in the FEC  Strategic 

Plan, which was approved by the  Commission  on March 4, 2008. The following table provides  the  actual results for FY 2008, FY 2009 and FY 20  l0,  along with the  tnrgets  scl by the  Strategic  f'lan. 

I. Process  repons  within 30 days of 95% 91% 78% 91% recei  t a !i  measured uarterlv Meet the  staiutory  requirement to 

2. make reports and  statements  filed  on  100% 100% 100% 100% paper with the PEC available to ihe ublic within 48 hours of re .cei t Conduct educational conferences  and 

host  rnundtable  workshops on the J.  campaign  finance  law each  election 

cycle. achieving a mean sa tisfaction 100% 100% 100% 100% ratin of 4.0 on a 5.0 sca le Issue press releases summarizing 4. completed compliance matters within 100%  22%  63 % 98% two weeks of  a matter being made ublic b the Commission 

> 6

113         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00115 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 158 here 72282A.102 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Issue  press  re l eases co ntaining 5. summa rie s of c.ampaign finance  datii  100% 100% 75% 75% quarterly 6. Process enforcement cases within an 100% 66% 76% 75% average of 15 months of re ceipt Process cases assig ned to A lternative 

7.  Dispute Resolution within 155 days of 75% 64% 26% 64% a case  being  assigned Process reason-to-believe recommendations for the 

8. Adm inistrative Fine Program wit hin 75% 79% 84% 100% 60 days of  the  original due date of the subject untimelv or  unfilfd  reoort Process the challenges in  the 

9. Administrative Fine Program within 75% 14% 60% 100% 60 days of  a challenge  being  filed Conclude non-Presidential audits wi th 10 findings in an  average  of  ten  months, 

exc luding  time  delays beyond the 100% 95% 12% 60% Comm ission' s control, such as subpoenas and extension requests 11 Conclude non-Presidential audits  with 

no findings in an  average  of90 days  100%  100% 0% 100% from beginning of fieldwork 

Conclude  Presidential audits in a n 12 average of24  months  of the election, excluding t.ime de lays beyond the 100%  NIA  100% l00% Comm ission' s control, such  as 

b .. d t .

Strategic  Ob_i.:ctive  C:  Dl  V[LOP:\IENl  OT· THL  LA\\ 

Complete rulemakings within  specific 

13 time fram es that reflect the im portance oftbe top ic s addressed, proximity to 100% 50% 8 3% 50% upcoming elections, and  ex te rn ally 

established dea dlin es 

14 Issue all advisory opinions within  60 - 10 0% 97% 100% 100% d av  and  20-dav statutorv deadlines fssue expedited advisory opinions for 15 time-sensitive hi ghly signifi ca nt requests within 30 days of receiving a 100% 60% 100% NI A 

complete request, or a s h orte r time when warranted 

1,6 I Ensure  that co urt filings meet all 100% 100% 100% 100% J deadlines  nnd  rul es im posed by  the 

· Courts 7114         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00116 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 159 here 72282A.103 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Process public funding payments in I17  the  correct amounts and within 100 % 100% 100% NIA 

established time frames 

-

Discussion of t he se pe rformance  measures  can  be found in the FEC's  Pe,jormance  and 

Accountability Reports  (PARs).  and copies of  the  FEC  PARs  for FY 2008 through FY 2010  are 

attached. 

I0.  Whal was the cos r of th e contracr  with  Cherry.  Bekoert  & Hollan d,  LLP for  rhefr 

follow  up  audit  C1f procurement  and  contract manag ement  issued  in  June  101  I? 

The Respon se to Question IO  has  been provided  by  the Office or Inspector General. In accordan ce with the Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended, the Office of Inspector General o perates  11s  an  independent u nit  within  the  Federal  Election Co mmissio n. 

$55,173.73. 

1J.  Explaii1  why  Regis & Associates,  l'C  wn s 11 01  11 sed  agai n Jot  the  audfI  as  they  hnd  been 

in  Sep te mb er  2009 ., 

The  Offi ce  of the Inspector  General  provided  the re spon se to  Question  l l. 

Regis & Associates (Regis) was not  selected  to perform the follow-up audit because  Regis· 

contract offer did not  result  in the best va lu e to  the  government  (FEC/OIG). In a full and open competition, the 010 solicited bids fr om  audit  firm s and awa rd ed  the . contract to  the  tinn  thal 

offered the  best  overall price  and  technical  approach. A panel of FEC 010 staff rev iewed all 

otlcrs  a.nd  concluded that the audit  fi rm  Cherry,  8ckaert  & Ho ll and presented  the  best value lo the  l'EC/OIG. 

8115         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00117 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 160 here 72282A.104 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

I 2, According  to  tJie  Follow-up  A 11dil  of  Procurement  a11d  Con/roe/  Ma1wgeme,11: 

'The  pr('vious  audit  included  a review  of opproxima1ely  S27.6 million of vor/01,s 

1ypes  ofproc11remem  instritmems  (e.g.  controcl S,  purchase  orders,  blanket  purchase 

agreements,  and one  specified  interagency  agreement)  awarded/executed  by  1he 

l'rocurement  and  Contracting  Office in fiscal years 2006  1hro11gh  2008.  711e  follow-

up  audit selected approximately  $9  million of various  prornremenl  instrumen/s 

awarded/executed by  /he  FEC fi·om June l. 2009  thwugh  September JO, 2010 for 

resting;" 

Why did the most  recenl  audit  include  011{1 ' S9  million  of procurement  instmmen/s  while 

1he  previous  audit  included  $2  7.6  million? 

T he  Offi ce o f  the  Inspector General provided the respon se to Question 1 2. 

The purpose of lhe fo llow-up procureme.nt  audit  (''recent  audit'')  was to determine  whecher  th e

FEC implemenled  the  recommenda1ions from the 2008 Aud it of Procurement and  Contracl 

Management. The  mosl  recent  audit was a follow-up to  the  original audit and intended  to  be 

sn1aller in scope than the original audit The audit  sample  for the follow-up  audit  was designed to provide  a repre se ntative  number  of"procurcment  instruments"  that would provide sufficient evidence on whether  the  agency had addressed the previously reported  weaknesses.  Therefore, the auditors concluded $9 million of procurement instruments was  an  appropriate amount  to 

reach their conclusions for the follow-up audit. 

13.  Ac.cording 10  the  Follow-up  A udil of  Ptncuremenl  and Contract  Mantigemenl,  "there  is  a

lack  of a hum ar,  resource  co11tingenc:y  plan  ro address the risk  resuJtingfrom  having  one 

Juli time contracting  o/f,C"er  in  the  agency. ··  /'lease  e,,;plai n whaJ.  e:iactZv  the  .. risk "  is  in 

having  one  full  lime  ronrracting  ojj,cer  in  the  aiency. 

T he  Offi ce  of th e Inspector  Ge ne ra l  pr ov ided the  respon se  to Question  13. 

The OIG 's 2008 Per fo nnance Audit of Procurement and Contract Management  repon  noted 

periods of extended absence of the FEC Contracting Officer  and  no  hum3n  capit<1l  plan  to 

address  tl1c  risk. The  rlsk  encompasses  the possible  extended  absence of the  sole  i" EC 

Contracting Officer  and  the lack of an experienced individual to carry-out the duties and responsibilities  of  the Contracting  Officer.  exposing the  FEC  to  several  risl,s.  Such risks  include, 

among others, the  execution  of  cont:racl.S  that  have  not been authorized, or more importantly. for which funding  1s  not available:  inadequare  monitoring  ofcontrnctor performance; and the acquisition of goods  and  services that do not fully meet the needs of the  agency.  thereby resulting in wasted funds. FEC management agreed with the audhors and  has  taken  step~  to address the risk, including recruitment  or a Contract Specialist that is a certified  acquisition 

professional. thereby  providing  the agency  wit'1  another  individual  trained  and knowledgeable  in 

acquisition,  in  the event the Contracting Officer is absent. 

\/ 116         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00118 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 161 here 72282A.105 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

14.  Twelve  of f,jieen  prior  reconimendwiont  remain  open  (lfld  a monber  of ne\" 

recommendallrms  regarding  procurement  and  contract  management  have  been  added  1r1 

the  201 I Audit.  Plet1se  explain  in detail  which  recommendations  ha~·e  remained  open 

since  lhe  previous  audit  and  which  recomlnendations  are  new .

The attached  spreadsheet,  Response  10  QJ4,  identifies the 12 audit findings  that  remain open since  the  previous audit and  the  one  audit  finding  tiiat  is  new. 

15.  Add/tionally,  please  explain  why  the  previou.f  recnmmendat/1111~  remain  open  mu!  what,.~ 

being done  tn  resolve  them. 

The  attached  spreadsheet,  Response  to  Ql5 , outlines  the corrective  action  plan  tliat  was 

developed to address the findings and  w~at  action has been taken. 

16 . Of 1hefo11rteenft11dings  and  tecommendalions,  management  '1as  concurred/11/ly  wit ft  9

1?(  the  recnmmendatiom.  l'/ense  describe  each  recomrmmdarinn  and explain  i11_fr1/l  how 

manage me Ill  plant  lo  1mpleme111  each recommendalion. 

The attached spreadsheet. Response to QI 6, outltnes  the  audit recommendations and 

management's  plan to address each recommendation. 

17. For  the  five  additional recommendations  that  management did  1111/  r;:nm:ur  with,  please 

e.xplain  the reasoning  behind  each  disagreement  and  explain any  a/ternatNes 

mwwgemem  plans  to  take. 

The altachcd  spreadsheet;  Response  I()  Q 17.  out!Tncs  the  audit recommendations  management's 

plans to address  the  recomrnendatlons.  and  management's reason for not  cohcurring. 

I8.  What  is  the  FEC  's  current  pny  Itructure.for  individuals  olher  than  the Sta.If J)ireG'IIJI'  cmd 

General Counsel?  What  (Ire  the benefits  pro1·ided  to  employ,ws? 

Under FECA.  tile  Commissioners' salaries  are  at Executive Level IV. Other tha n the statutorily paid positions of Commissioner, Stoff Director and General Counse l, the  Commission's  current 

pay  structure  consis1s of  Genera l  Schedule and  Senior  Level (SL) positions. As shown on the attached FEC Sta_fJing  Repar/,  currently IO employees  are  in  SL  posi1-ions.  and 335  are  on the General Schedule. In addition to salary. the Commission exercises its  authority  under  5 C.F.R. Part 451 to  grant  perfom1ancc, monetary. honorary. and  time-off  awards to  its  employees in appropriate  circumsiances. 

ill 117         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00119 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 162 here 72282A.106 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

The Commission also  provides  the  s111ndard  array  pf  Federal  government  benefits  progcams_ 

FEC benefits include  the  Federal Employees Health Benefits Program; Dental and Vision 

Insurance  (where employees pay al l premiums); Flexible Spending Accounts; Annual, Sick and Holiday  Le.ave;  Thrift  Savings  Plans;  Retirement;  Medicare  - Part A. where applicable:  Federal 

Employees Group Life Insurance; Long Term Care  Insurance  Program; Recruitment, Retention. Relocation Incentives, where applicable; Transit  Subs)dy  Benefits;  Flexible Work Schedules: 

and  Tclework, 

19 . Ha.r  the  pay  .ilructure  precluded  1he  FEC  fi'om  hiring  any  individuals  oilier  than  the  Staff 

Director  and  Geneml  Collnsel?  If so,  please provide  examples  and  explanations. 

Because the  Comtnission  is speciJically  excluded  from the Senior  Executive  Service  (SES)  by 

statute, 5 U.S.C.  § 3 l 32(a)( J ),  the FEC's senior  executives  (i ,e.,  the  Deputy Staff Directors, the Deputy and Associate General Counsels, nnd the Chief Financial  Officor)  are in  positions 

designated Senior L,evel.  Since-passage  of the Senior Professional Performance  Act  of 2008, Public  Law  I 10 -372, 122 Stat. 4043 (2008),  the  pay forthc Senior  Level  and  the SES  is  in parity. The Commission has not been precluded from filling any positions by the  lack  of SES  eHgibility. 

Nonetheless.  the  Commission is  at  a disadvantage when it  attempts  to fill its Senior Level positions because those positions are less attractive to potential applicants as Senior Level positions than they would be as SES positions. For applicants who  are  already  1n  the SES and for  SES  certified  applicants, positions in the SES  program  are more  appealing.  Addluona,lly, 

with SES program  cliglbility.  the Commission  wo1,1ld  be able to  draw  from  a pool of  applicants 

who are already in the Senior  Executive  Service.  These applicants nor only possess theeorc 

executive  qualifications,  but  also are  experienced  and  seosoncd  leaders.  The  Commission  ulso 

could  use the services of  an  OPM Qualifications Review Board tn certify the executive qualifications of the selectee. The appointment and retention of  these  key leaders has been identified asan ongoing challenge to  1he  Commission by the Inspector General  in  recent 

Performance  and  Accmmwbiliiy  Reports.  l ' he  Commission expects that retention and  recruitil'\g 

in Senior Level positions would be enhanced if the  Commission  were eligible 10  participate  in 

the  SES program. 

20.  The FEC 's  legislative  proposals  suggest  rhat  the  Commission  be  allowed lo  hire 

i11divid11ols  as  part  of1he  Senior  Execu/ive  Service  (SES)_  Does  the FEC  currenlly  have 

prnblents  recruiting  and  rernining  qualified  i11tlivid1111ls  in  senior  pnsi/iom!'  If so,  pie .a.re 

provide  examples  and  explanatt'nn.,. 

Yes,  as  described above in Response to Question 19. Additionally,  when  the Commission used 

executive  search finns  m recruit for  key  management  positions. the  firm  noted that although applicants were interested, many potential  applicants  expressed  a reluctance to  pursue  a position 

tliat  was not  p;irt  of the SES program. 11 118         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00120 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 163 here 72282A.107 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

21. The  FEC  's  legisla/ive  reMmmer,da1ionsfor  this  year  proposed  allowir,g  !he  Co111missi1Jn  

> "M

m<rve  10  merit-baJed  p(ly  s;tflems  for lop  execwfves,  ··  How  wmtld  ym1  measure 

"merit"far  these  executives? 

The Commission's top executives,  apart  from Commissioners,  the  StalT  Director and General Counsel,  are  currently  classified in the Senior Level,  and  their  bonuses and pay  raises  are  based 

on performance. If the Commission is made eligible to create Senior  Exec uti ve  Service positions. it wou ld measure  merit  by  basing  pay on performance,  consistent  with the Office or Personnel Management"s (OPM)  and  the Office of Management and Budget's (0MB) merit-based  pay  systems  for  executives.  To do so, it will develop an SES performance appraisal system for its executives bnsed on OPM's SES  Perfonuance  Appraisal Assessment Tool (SES-PAA T)  and  would  seek  OPM cenification and 0MB  concurrence  of its  appr.1isa l system 

pursuant  10 the Chief Human Capital  Officers  Act of 2002. Thls would require the FEC to align individual  performance  plans  with  the  FEC's  strategic and human  capital  plans,  

> n.

The  FEC  's  legis/a/il•e  proposals  suggest  removing  the  requiremenl  ji·omjederol  ,V/(l/11/e 

thatfraudul!!nl  misrepresenla/ion  of campaign  au/hority  be damaging lo a campaigr,. 

How  many  individuals  have  not  been  proseculed  because  of the  requirement  ofprovir,:; 

damogesfor claiming  tn  act under the  authority  of a real  orfictitiollS  campaign  or 

politico!  organizalion? 

The Commission is unable. to de1ennine how  many  individuals  have  not  been  subjecied to Commission enforcement actions because of the requirement for proving  d~mages  for claiming to act under the authority of a real  or  lietitious  campaign  or organization.  'ihc  Commission's statement in  1ts  legislative recommendation regarding th e di mcultics of proving damages al the threshold  "reason  to believe" stage was  a general Statement, and was not referencing particular matters. Because of  the  inherent nature of  the  activi ty  involved  in a violation of2 U.S.C. § 441h, 

the Commission considers this  a core violation that should be aggressively enforced, particularly 

given  the  proliferati on of  varying  forms  of electronic  communication  that reach  large  numbers of individuals  " 'ilh  liltle  e('\'0rt  and  vim,a l  anonymity.  The damages  requir~ment  in  1hc  fraudulent 

misrepresentation portion  oft11e  statute  creates  the  need  for an additional  showing  not required in 

connection with  a matter  involving  fraudulent so li citation of funds.  Accordingly,  1he Commission recommended making the two portions of the  staWte  consistent by  removing  the 

damages  requirement  from  2 U.S.C.  § 441 h(a). 

23.  What  arc  all  the  Commissior,  's  staff positions  and  rheir  description'/  (dwies.  salary, 

ex~atnrions,  etc,)'! 

Attached  is the FEC's  Staffing  Report,  as of July 16. 20 I I.  which  lists  every  position  title,  pay plan,  grade,  1111d  sa lary. Also attached  arc  position descriptions  explaining  the duties  and 

expectations for  each  of  the  positions listed on the  Staffing  Rcpor-1 .

I:! 119         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00121 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 164 here 72282A.108 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

2-t  What  is  th~  sw/us  of 1/ie  FEC's  e.ffons  to fill  1he  position  of Slaff  Dire ctor? 

The Commission will provide an answer to this question  next  week. 

25.  ls  there  a policy  regarding  the hiring of individuals  for  the  Office  of General Counsel 

who  have  represented or  been  employed by candidates, political parry co mmittees.  or 

01he1·  politfcol  committees? 1f so,  what  is  thar policy? 

There  is  no policy wit hi n the  Office  ofG~neral  Counsel regard i ng hir ing individu als  who  have 

represented  or  been  ernployed  by  candidates,  party  comminees  or  otJiet  political  committees.. 

26.  1-/ow  many  people  employed  by 1h e FEC have  prior  experience  representing  or  being 

emp/oyl?d  by candida1es. political party committees, or  01her  political committees? 

The Commission  has  not collected, maintained or surveyed this information in a sys tematic  way. 

The  Commission  is  concerned that doing so now could  lead  to and complicate  the  defense of potential complaints  that  ihe agency has  discriminated  for or  aga1nst  emplo yees or app licants for employment on t he basis of the ir political  affi liation,.  See  5 U.S.C.  § 2302(b)( l  )(E) .

27,  How  many people employed by the  O.fjlce  of General  Co unsel  have  prior  experie 11 c-e 

repre.ientlng  or  bei11gemploycd  by  ccmdidall!s.  1x 1li1 lcn/  party  commillee s.  or  ulhi:r 

polilical  commillee{ ?

Please see the Response  to  Question  26  ab ov e. 

28.  How  1t1(1ny federal  guards  are  employed  by  che  FEC?  How  much does it  C'tW  to  arm  eaC'IT 

gua,•d? 

TI,e contracted guards  at  the screening po ints  into  the building that houses  the  fEC and  part  OI 

the Federal Emergency Management Agency  ( FEMA)  are armed  as  required by GSA federal security lease  ;tandards  and  Federal Protective Service policy. The Commission entered into a new  inler·agency  agreement with 1he Department of Homeland Security in 2009 for armed guard se rvices. Currentl y, there  are  th r ee armed federal guar ds  in  the Commission lobby Monday through  l'riday  between t he hours of 6: 30 AM  and  6:00  PM,  8C1d  one guard remains  o n-s ite  from 6:00prn - through  10:30pm.  These guards stnffthe  ~creening  point in the building's lobby. The total yearly  co111ract  to provide  anned  guurds  during these hours  is  $530,000  {Whiol1  includes basic secur ity, armed guards, guard su pervisor, fees, and optional additional  services).  f.EMA 

pays additional funds fo r its  share of  !he  cost of the guards. A copy of the co ntract for  FY  20 I I is  11t1ached .

13 120         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00122 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 165 here 72282A.109 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

29.  ., ~ft-er  the  Citizens United decision,  has  sra/f  that  pre vio 11sly  dealt  with  those  issues  been 

real/Qcated?  ~f so.  lO  what  deparrmen1  and  why?  ff no , why  1101_, 

Because no Commission  stafTwere  assigned to work exclusively on issues related to  corporate 

independent expenditures and electioneering communications, which were at issue in  Citizens 

United, no staff were reallocated as  a result  of the decision. As the  Commission's  disclosure 

provisions  were  upheld in  Citizens  United, reallocation of staff in the Reports Analysis Division was not necessary. The decision  has  resulted  [nan  1ncrease in reports  filed.  which in tum eq_uales 10 more reports to review. The Commission anticipates this  trend  to  continue  as  more 

Independent Expenditure PA Cs register and corporations  and  labor organizations  engage  in 

independent expenditure  activity.  The Commission  will  perform  en  analysis of its  workforce  as 

part  of  the  strategic p lanning  and  Human  Capital  p lanning  activities that have recently begun. In this workforce  ana lysis,  the Co mmission  is  planning to  re-examine  thcallocalion  ofits  resources. 

30. ls there  a record of hol''  often !he "Co11fl ic1 Coaching  ..  process is  1Jti!i2ed ?

TI1e  ··Conflict  Coaching•· program,  an  internal Agency program designed to enhance employee 

communicatio. ri  sk.tlls  in resolving challenging issues in  a positive fashion, has been  u 1il i1.ed  12 

times  sjnce  its  creation  in  January  of 2011. 

• Do  the  two  conflicl  coaches  hai•e  other  duties  assigned  to  them  as  well ?

Yes, the  two  conflict coaches  at  the  Agency  are  full time  staff within the Alternative Dispute Resolution  Officc(ADR  Oflice),  and they provide conflict coaching as a collateral  duty. 

3J.  How  much  d1JcJ  each  "Conjlri:1  C<1(tchi ng"  ses.tion  ms/  to  the  Commission? 

A "Conflict Coaching"  session  is provided  as  o col lateral duty to Commission  sl3ff  by the ADR Spec-inlists. As such, there is no direct cost associated with each session. 

32 . Has  the  FEC  explored  opparllmilie.s  lo  'Ji·anchisc  ''  ad111inistratfre  fi111c/io11s  by  having 

anolher  agency  pe,jorm  th em:'  lfso,  whCJt.fimctionswere  co,isidered,  what  inquiries 

were  mode,  anc(whatwere  1he  resalis? 

The Commission's administrative functions with respect  to  payroll and  linaacial  management arc outsourced  to  the National Finance Center and General Services  Administration. 

respectively. The Commission  is  currently  exploring  human  resources  lines  ofbusines.  as a way to provide more of an integrated human resources function, In  addition.  the  Commission's Health Unit and Security Guards  are  provided  through  imer•agency  agrcement.s  with  the Departmcn\S of  Hea lth  and Human Services and Homeland Security, respectively. Finally, the Government Printing Office currently assists the Commission in  processing  required 

employment  s.:curi\y clearances. 

IA 121         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00123 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 166 here 72282A.110 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

33.  The  Election  Assista;,ce  Co mmiSsion  has  come  under fire  for  ils  process  in  hiriflg  a

general  counsel_  How  has  1he  FEC  avoided  these  is$ues? 

With respect to all senior  level  and  staturory  positions, the Commission  makes  the final hiring decision with  the  assistance of its personne l committee. consisting of two Commissioners.  The 

process involves multiple interviews and a  multi- layered  screening of  candidates. 

Repor-1111,:  and  Olsdosure 

34.  What  actions  prompt a  ca 111paign  commi//ee  to  rt'<·ei~•e  a Request.for  Additional 

lnforma1io11  ("RFAr)? 

The  Reports  /\nn lysis  Division's review of reports is based on a Commission-approved  internal 

manual that  hss  categories of review  with  specific thresholds for determining when an  RF Al should be sent to  a campaign  committee. Some of the  issues  that may prompt  a committee  to recei ve an RFAI  include  missing contributor info1mation. mathematical  discrepancies,  -apparem 

excessive or prohibited contributions. and failure to properly d isclose disbursements. debts, 

loans.  orindependent  e,xpendttures. 

a.  Have  RFA/s  been  sen/lo  f'AC s?  ((  so,  how  many  and  11 ·har percentage  tlo  they 

repre!ienr  of  /he  Iota/  number  CJ/  RF'AI.~ ?

Yes, RFA ls arc  routinely  sent to PACs, which are technically known as separate, segregated 

funds  established by  corpora.lions  or labor  organizations  mid  non-connected  committees.  During 

the  2007-2008 election cycle,  8,0 53  RFAls  were  sent to PACs. This represented 48% of the total RFAls sent. During the 2009-20!0 election  cycle,  6,550 RFAls were  sent  to  PACs.  Thi srepresented 45% of the total RF  /\ls  s.:nt. 

b.  Htwe  RFA/s  been  sen/  lo  urg1111iwlions  conducting  independent  expenditures?  /J 

;;o,  how  many  and  whal  percentage  do  they  represent  a.f ihe  Iota/  nwnher  of 

RFA/s? 

Yes, RFA!s are routinely  sent  to  organizaLions  making  independent  expendit ufcS_  During  the 2007-2008 election cycle, 16 I RFA ls were sent to these  organizations.  This represented 1% of the total  RFAls  sent.  During  the'2009-20 10  election  cycle. 245 RFAis were sent to these 

organi1..ations.  which included PACs that make  only  independent  expenditures  as  permitted  under 

Sper:chNow.org  v_  FE C.  This  represented I. 7% of  the  tota l  !lFA,ts  sent. 

15 122         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00124 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 167 here 72282A.111 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

35. Is  rhere  a manual or handbook  t/lal  instructs  Stq/J  as  lo  wl,e,,  an RFAI  sho,Jd  be  sent? 

Why  is  that  mnmlnl  or handbook not disclosed to  1he  public?  !'lease  pro\lide  a current 

copy  oft he  manual  or  handbook  to  the  Committee  along  with  your  response  ro  these 

que. <tions .

Yes , the  Reports Analysis Division uses  a document  entitled  RAD  Review  cmd  Referral 

Procedures,  sometimes  referred  to as  the  RAD  manu31,  to  de lennine when an RPAI should be sent. As stated previously,  the  manual contains specific thresholds which instructs  staff  when to send  an  RFA I. This manual is  updated  and  circul~ted  to the Commission for approval  every  two 

years  and  the  content is  based  on input from both  staff  and Commissioner s. One of the FE C's 

primary objectives is to facilitate  lrnnsparcncy  through public disclosure of  campaign  finance activity.  The  FEC  must depend on voluntary compliance, particularly in connection  with 

disclosure,  given  the  volume of reported financial activity. Disclosing the internal  threshol ds  lo 

the public  may  diminish the incentive to provide  full  and  accurate  disclosure on reports filed. The RAD manual, developed pursuant to FECA,  § 311 (b), codified at  2 U.S.C.  § 438(b). is considered  n sensitive internal-use-only  documem. 

36. Jfrhere  is  not  a mnmml  or handbook rhot  instnu:rs  staff as  10  when  an  RFAI  should  be 

~-en~  h<>w  are  decisions  mad~  ro send on  RFA  I? 

As stated in the answer to question 35.  the  RAD  manual  i,  used  to determine when  an  RFAI should  be  senl. 

3 7.  According  to  .)vur  2010  PAR.  elecn·onicjiling  wem  down.from  7-1 .6%  reported  in  2009  tr, 

69.-1 % reportl!d  in  2010.  What  explains  this  decrease  in  electronic  filing  over  the  past 

)'ear? 

The  data provi ded  in  the  FEC's  20 IO PA  lJ.  illustrates  t lt at  the  total  number  of repo1 1s and statements filed in FY 2009 (both  elec:tronically  and on paper) was 74.6 thousand. and in FY 2010 the  total  number of reports and statements  filed  was  69.4 thousand. As stated in th.: 2010 

PAR  above  Figure  5,  because  elec1ions  occur  in  Novcrnber,  the  data  snow  an increase in the number of  reports  received by the  fBC  in  odd-numbered  fiscal  years. The  FEC's  2010  PAR  is  auached .

38 . Reporting  nnd  disclosurl.'  are  o major  par/ of the  FEC  's  work.  but  ir  is  the  Commi1tee  '.le 

u11ders1anding  that  only  aho11/  ten  percent  of /he  F"l:C  ·s  employees  work  011  reports.  ,111e1 

disclosure . Ls  thot  correct?  If so . is  ii  an  apprapr1nre  a/location  o_{lhe  Commis.sion  's 

sraff resources'.' 

The Commission estimal es that, nt  a minimum,  the  percentage of  employees  who work exclusively on reporting  and  disclosure functions is 23 percent, including those in the ReportS 

Analysis  Division (53  employees).  the  Public Disclosure  Division  (23  employ ees ).  the Office of 

16 123         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00125 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 168 here 72282A.112 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Administrative Review (I employee), and some in  the  lnfom1ation  Technology  Division  (4 employees).  Moreover,  this  figure does not include those employees with  a ponion of responsibilities that are related to  reporting  and disclosure. including the Audit Division (36 employees), the Office of Alternative Dispute Resolution  (2  employees), the Information Division (14 emp loyees), and additional Information Technology Division  sta1T(6  more employees). Finally, the staff in many other offices regularly address reporting and  disclosure 

issues, including particularly attorneys in the  Office  of General  Coonse!. 

Managers routinely evaluate workforce needs and balance priorities accordingly. The Commission will perform  an  analysfa  of its workforce as a part of the  strategic  planning and Human Capital planning activities that  arejusl  ~iarted.  In  thi~  workforce  analyl'.is.  the 

Commission is  planning  to re-examine the allocati on  of  its  resources. 

39. Does  lhl!  FEC  belie~·e  it  is  appropriate  to  request  information from  reporling  entities 

when  the  entity  has  no legal obligation 10 provide  the  information?  Please provide  m1 

(!}(planation  for  your  answer. 

No,  the FEC  docs  not believe it is appropriate to request information from reporting ent ities when the entity  has  no  legal  obligation to provide the information. Requests For Additional Informati on  (RF A ls) are sent only to those filers  wh,)  appear to have discrepancies on the reports it has  filed  when an applicable threshold in the Commission-approved RAD manual, which is  a

compromise document, has bocn  met.  All  RF Als  specifically  cite  to an applicable regulation or statute at issue. Thus, an Rf Al is a  first  step in implementing and enforcing the statutory and regulatory program. Further, the RAD manual outlines cenain limited circumstances for  which 

an  informa!Jonal  paragraph can  be  sent in an  effort  to educate filers on reporting issues;  however, 

a response is  not  required.  For  example.  an RFAI  will  inform a filing entity if  it  reported  a

finandal  transaction on  an  incorrect line on the  Detailed  Summary Page of an PEC form. 

40. What  safeg11ards  are  in  pla"c  la  emure  that  RFAfs  m ·e  1ml  used  to  disco11rage  or 

suppress  political  speech? 

RFA1s  are  sent  to  ensure  clear  and  accurate public disclosure of  campaign  finance  activity  in compliance  with  the Federal Election Campaign Act 's d isclosure provisions. A rec-ont  innovation by the Commission permits reporting entities to pose legal questions to the Commission, and this avenue is  .avail11b le  to any reporting entity  that  disagrees on  n question of 

law  related to  the  correc1ive action  requested  in  an  RFAI. See FEC,  Policy  S1a1emenl 

Establfrhing a Pilot Program.for  Requesting  Consirlemlion  of  Legal  Questions  by the 

Co111mi ,1sio11,  75 Fed. R.eg. 42088 (July 20. 20 I 0) , The Commission voted to make  this  program 

pennancnt on July 21,  2011 ,  The RAD manual, which is a compromise document that determines when an RFAI should be sent,  is  updated  aml  circlllatcd  to  the Commission for approval every  two  years,  As  an  additional safeguard, all RF Als and Committee responses to Rf Als are placed  oo  the public record  via  the  FEC 's website, 

17 124         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00126 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 169 here 72282A.113 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

The Policy  Sta1t1me,11  and the  Commission's  recent  agenda document  ma!cing  the program permanent are attached. 

En{t,rcement  Proces.v 

4 I Pas/  Commission  legislative  recommendallons  h{lve  suggested  moving  away  fiwn  /he 

"rec1sun-to-be/ieve  "standard  (for  example. in  /982 -96 , /999 , :!001-02  and  200./-05). 

Do  you  believe  1ha1  /he  "reason-lo-believe"  standard  is  still appropriate? Does  /he 

"reason-to-believe"  standard  creole  !he  appearance  !hat  the  Commission  /,as  decided 

the  merits  of a fl/Oller  before  conducting  an  inveS/igation?  Please  provide  e:xplana1ion3 

fur  yo11r  answers. 

A '"reason  to be lieve" finding by itself  docs  not establish  that  the  law has been violated. Rather, the ·'reason to believe" standard requires  a determination by the Commission based on a complaint or  upon  ir11'onnation  ascertained in  the  course  of its  supervisory  responsibi lities that 

"lhere  is reason  to  be lieve that a person has committed, or is  about  to  commit,  a violation of t he Act."  PECA,  § 309(a)(2),  codified  al  2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(2). In complaint generated  matters.  lhc 

Commission may not make such a finding without  first  providing the respondent an opportunity to  demonstrate  in writing that no action should be taken on the complaint. 2 U.S.C.  § 437g(a)(  I) .Commission regulations further  specify  that  the Commission "shall not  take  any  action,  or  mal<.e 

any  finding,  against  a respondent...unlcss  it  has considered  such  response or unless no such response  has  been  served."  11 C.F.R.  § l I 1.6(b). The  Federal  Election Campaign Ac1 requires that the Commission  find  --reason  to believe that a person has committed,  or  is about to commit, 

a violation"  of  the  Act  as  a precondition to opening an investigation  tn  to the alleged  violation. 

FECA,  § 309(a)(2), codified  at  2 U.S.C.  § 437g(a)(2). Periodically,  the  Commission has asked Congress to replace the  "reason-to-believe"  requirement with a --reason  to open an  investigation.''  See  e.g.,  Legislative Recommendations of the Federal' Election Commission in 1982-1984. 1986-2002 , 2004.  and  2005 (links avai lable at http://www.fec.gov/law/fcca/feea.shtml#legislntion). Congress. however, did not  change  the requirement. 

In  March  2007,  ttie  Commission  adopted  a Stare men/  of Policy  srating  that: 

Commission "reason to  beliei'e"  lfo<Jings  have  caused  confusfon  in  the  past because they have been viewed as definitive dctenninations  that  a respondent violated  the  Act. In  fact,  •·reason to believe" findings  indicate  only that  the 

Commission  found  sufficient  legaljus1ifica1ion  to open an  investigation  to determine whether a violation of the Act  has  occurred, 

,"iee  FEC,  StatenJe11l  of Policy Regarding Commission Ac/ion in Mallers at /he Initial  Stage  in the 

Enforcement  Process,  72  fed.  Reg. 12545. 12545  (Mar.  16, 2007). The Commission  further 

explained: 125         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00127 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 170 here 72282A.114 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

The Commission will find  ..  reason  to believe·· in  cases  where the available evidence in the matter is at  le ~ist  sufficient to warrant conducting an investigation, and where  the  seriousness of the alleged  violation  warrants  either  further investigation or immediate conciliat io n. .. 

Id.  at 12545. A complete copy of the  S1atemrmt  of Policy  is  attached.  Since the adoption  of  the 

Stalemenl  of Policy,  the  Commission  has  not  renewed  its previous legislative recommendalion to revise the standard from  "reason  to  believe•·  to  " reason  to open an investigatio n:· The Commission published the  SlatemeJII  of Pa/icy in an effort to reduce that confusion and to 

avoid  an  appearance  that  the  Commission has reached any conclusions. other than finding  a

suflicient  legal  justification  to  open an in vestigation to  deten11ine  w'hether  a violation of  the  Act 

ha s occurred.  l lowever, depending upon  the  facts  of  a particular  matter.  Commissioners  may 

continue to disagree  with  respect to the application  oft.he  reason  to beHeve standard in 1ha1 matter. 

./2.  From  Ja,warv  / , 2007 ro  the  pr ese nl,  how  manye,!foi-•· emenl  actions  were  initialed by 

1he  FE C in Iola/ and  how  many  were  ini/ia/ed  ns  a r e. mil  of:  

> a.

Complain1-generaled  m(((ters? 

b.  Non-camplainl  generaled  mailers'! 

c.  Infernal  referm/ s'.' 

d.  Ex1ernal  referrals? 

e.  Sua  sponte  submissions? 

From  January  t,  2007 through June 30. 2011.  the  FEC  has  processed a total  of674  ca,es.  The cases are broken down by t he following  categl ,ries:  (a)  complaint-generated  rn atters;  {b)  non-complaint-generated 

matters; (c)  internal  matters:  (d)  external  reforrdl S;  and  (c)  .nia  sponte  submission s. a. b.  Non-

Co mplaint- complaint c.  Internal  d.  Extemal  e. 

S1111Spo111e 

Generated  gerier~ted  rnferrals referrals  su bmi~ .,; ions  Totals 

mulle ts  matters 2007  45  24  19 l 6 95 2008 l 75  27  14 I 12  229 

2009 64 14 12 2 4 96 

W!Ci  194  9 4 I 12 220 20 11 2 1 () 6 2 5 34 

'IOTALS  499  74  i 5S  1 I 39  674  ~ses-

19 126         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00128 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 171 here 72282A.115 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

43.  Ow  of the  Lotu!  number  of enforce111en1  actium  iniliared by  1he  FF:C  since  January  1. 2007.  how  many  result ed  in  lirigation? 

CY  FEC  Initiated FEC Defending  Total 

2007 4 2 6

2008 0 3 3

20'09  I 2 3

2010 I 3 4

2011 · 0 I l., 

TOTAIJS  6 II  11 

l'ot the purposes  of  this question,  " l'EC  Initiated ''  litigation refers to cases brought by the Commission under2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(6) when the Commission votes  to  in itiate civil l ili_gation lo  enforce  the  Federal Election Campaign /\c t. and  "FEC  Defending"  li ti gation refers to cases brought against the  Commission  under  2 U.S.C.  § 437g(a)(8)  when an  administrative 

complainant  seeks  lo challenge  how  the  Commission has handled an administrative complaint. 

-N . Does  the  origin  of an  e11forcement  matr er  tif.[ect  the type  ofenfarcemem  action taken? 

Yes,  the o ri gin ofan enforcement matter may affcc1 the type of enforcement action taken as explained in the  paragraph  be low. The enforcement process begins in one of four ways: ( I)  lhe 

filing  of a complaint. (2} a referral  from another government agency (3) an internal referral from the Commission's  Audit  Division  or  Reports Analysis Division, or (4)  a voluntary submission made  by  persons  or  entities who  believe  they  may  have  violat~d  campaign  nnance  laws (often 

referr~d  to  as  a sua  sponte  submission). 

Enforcement matters orig in ating from a  suo  sponte submission are considered  pursuant  to a Commission policy designed to encourage individuals to bring violations of the  FECA  and Commission  regulations  to the Commission's attention and  coopcrQte  with any  resulting 

investigation. In consideration for such self-repo rti ng  and  cooperation. the Commission may do one or more of the fo ll owing: take no action against particular respondents; offer a sig nificantly lower penalty than what  the  Commission otherwise would have sought in a complaint-generated! matter involving simil ar circumstances or. where appropriate, no civil penalty; offer conciliation 

befor-e  a finiling  of  probable  cause  to believe  a violation  occurred,  und  ln  cenain cases proceed directly to conc il iation without the Commission first finding reason to believe that  a violation occurred: refrain from making a formal finding  that  a violation was knowing and willful. even 

where  the  available  infonnation would otherwi se support such a  finding:  proceed only  as  to  an 

organization  ralh~r  than  as  to  various individual  agentS  or , where  appropriate.  proceed only  as  10 

individuals rather than  organizational  re spo ndents:  include language in the conciliation agreement that indicates  the  level of cooperation provided by respondents a nd the remedial 20 127         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00129 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 172 here 72282A.116 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

action  1aker1.  See  FEC,  Policy  Regarding  Se!ffleporting  o{Compaig11  Finance  Violurions  (Sua 

Sponte  Submlssinns),  72  Fed . Reg. 16695 (A pr. 5. 2007). The  Policy  is attached .

.J5  From  January  I. 2007  ta  the  present,  how  ma,V'  e111illes  or  individuals  1ha1  were 

respondents  in  enjorcemem  matters  elected  ta  be  represemed  by  cmmsel  and  hmv  many 

did 1101? 

From  January  l, 2007 to  the  present,  OGC closed a total  of 674  cases,  involving 2,398 respondents. Of these  2,398  respond¢nts,  571 designated counsel and 1.827 did not designate counsel, 

46.  Whal  ,~  the  cos/  {b111h range  and  overage)  lo  /he  FEC  when  a mailer  goes  inlo  an 

invesltgnltim  phase  after a  ·'re11sa11-to-belie~•e  "det er111in(ll1on ~

From  January  l, 2007 through June 30, 2011, the  average  co st  for a matter that went into  the 

invesligative  phase of the  enforcement  pr ocess was $48,172.  1l1e  r.mge  for the da1a  ~el  wns $425 ,061 , and the per-investigation cost  varied  from under$ l, 000 to $425,079. These sums retlect  staff  hours as well  as  costs incurred for deposition transcripts, court  reporters,  and  travel. The  statT  hours  ponion of  these  expenses was calcu lated using the FE  C's  Case Management System. which mu lciplies the hours worked on a case.  by the hourly  rate  pnid lo each  employee 

assigned to that Case. 

4 7.  If/hot  is  the  role  of agency  staff in  drafting  recommendations for  enforc 'ement  artiom? 

The staff in the Office of General Counsel  dr-afts  forma l recommendations  to the Commission in the form of  General  Counsel's  Reports, or memoranda. The recommendations are explained  by 

a factual and  legal  analysis contained in  the  document, and  are  sent to each Cornmissioncrso  that 

he or she may formally vote on  the  recommendations.  See  11  C.F.R.  §§  111.7 and  111.8;  !'EC. 

Statem~nl  of Policy  Regarding  Commission  Action in  Malle rs al  the  Initial Stage in  the 

EY!forcemenl  Process.  72  Fed. Reg . 1 2545 (Mar. l 6, 2007).  Subsequent  to  the  First  General 

Counsel"s  Report,  the  sta!Tdrafts  additional  reports  that  make  recommendations appropriate  for 

later stnges of a matter: for  examp le.  a recommendation to conciliate or investigate.  At  the probable  cause  stage  of  the  enforcem~nt  process.  after  reviewing  Respondent' s  brief , the General Counsel also advises the Commission whether  10  proceed  whh  probable  cause  by  circulating  areport to the  Commjsslon,  which is not served on  the  Respondent ,The  Statel/lent  of Policy is attached. 

21 128         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00130 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 173 here 72282A.117 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

./8.  Does  11,e  Office of Genera(  Co1msel  at·/  as  co1.msel  Jo  lhe  Commissioners  i11  e1,jorcement 

proceedings.  or  does it  acl  as  prosecutor before the Commissioners as tribunal?  (( the  answer  is 

that OGC performs  hoth  roles.  do  1he  same attorneys  c,ct  in both  roles?  Additionally. if the 

answer  is  Iha/  OGC  performs  both roles.  what  measzwes  are  take,i  to  ensure  that the  counsel 

provided to  the  Co mmissioners  i.s  1101 influenced by  the  desire  ta  zealuusl> • prosecute  /he  same 

mailer? 

Following procedures  set  forth in the statute and Commission regulations,  the  Office  of  General 

Counsel's Enforcement Division investigates  alleged  violations of the  law , recommends to the Commission appropriate action to take with  respect  to  apparent  violations,  and  directly negotiates conciliation  agreements,  which may include civil  penalties  and other  romedies,  with respondents or their counsel to  resolve  the matter.  See  generally 2 U.S.C.  § 437g; 11 C.F.R. Part 111 Subpart A. When the General Counsel's office makes  a recommendation  to  the Commission,  it's  role is 10 present the matter based on the facts and the  law  ltnd  eXplain  its recommendation in reports to  ihe  Commission, in Commission meetings, and with individual 

Commissioners  and their  staff.  Recommendations from the Office of  General  Counsel  include 

whether or not to find  reason  to believe  that  a violation  has  occ urred, wbether or not to dismiss  a

complaint, whether or not to  grant  a motion,  whether  or not to find probable  cause  that  a

violation  has  occurred,  whether - and on  what  terms - to conciliate a  matter,  and whether or not 

to  authorize a civil action for relief.  Regardless  of the General Counsel's  recommendation,  rhe. 

decision to proceed  with  enforcement lies  with  the  Commission. If the Commission  authorizes 

suit, the  G1meral  Counsel's Litigation Division  represents  the Commission in the case  agalhst  the Respondent. To ensure fairness and transparency in  th e enforcement  process,  General Counsel Reports strive to: (I)  set  forth a  clear  statement of the  fa,,ts  and  the law; (2) discuss any  rclevant  closed  or pending MURs.  advisory  opinion s, audits, legislative history, Explanation and Justifications of Final Rules, public records, and court decisions (whether these authorities  are  favorable or adverse to the  General  Counse l's recommendation), (3)  addre ss  respondents'  arguments,  and  (4) 

re co mm end  .a  course of action and  <ix plain the  basis  for that recommendation. Any report recommending  that  the Commission approve.  accept,  or reject a conciliation  agreemen1  should include  the  out-the-door  o!Ters  and final penalty  amOL1n1s  of similar  viol/ltions. 

49 . Is  1he  FEC's  role  to  undertake  enforceme nr  actions to carry  ouJ  th e intent  of Co ngre ss 

when  ii  adopted  the  Federal  Election  Campaign  Act  and it s t1mend111en1s,  or 10  ca r, y olll 

1he  stalwcs  as interpreted by  the  co11ns 1 Please  pro vi de  an  explanalionfor  yo ur  answer. 

The Co mmiss ion's role is to  enforce  the  statute  cm1c1ed by Congress as interpreted by  the  courts. 

Under the principles of  Chevron,  UJL4 ..  Inc.  v.  Nottrral  Re so urc es Defense Counc il, Inc ., 467 U.S. 837 (1984), if a statute is ambiguous on  n particular issue, the Commission str ives to exercise  its  discretion in  a manner that is consistent with the statute's language. its legislative history,  and  congressional intent. 22 129         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00131 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 174 here 72282A.118 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

50.  Jr,  1999.  the  FEC adopted a policy  by vole of the  Commissir;,ners  1h01  It  would  not  enforce 

l l CFR §  /()0.22(b)  in  the  Frrst  and  Fourth  Circ11its .a) ls that policy still  in  effect? 

Although  the  policy has  not  been formally withdrawn by  the  Commission, after the Supreme Court's decision in McConnell  v.  FEC.  540 U.S. 93 (2003), the policy is no longer followed. For 

example,  Commission has pu rsued  enforcement  mailers  such as: MU Rs 5S 11 & 5525 (Swift Boat Veterans) (2006); MUR 5753 (League of Conservation Voters) (2006), and the 

Commission  has been defending 11 C.F.R.  § I00.22(b) in  Real  Tn11h  About  Obama. Inc.  v.  FE C, 

2011 WL 2457730  (E.D.Va.  Jun. 16,2011), a case which  arose  in the Fourth Circuit. In that case, the District  Court  found that McConnell  and  WRTL  effectively overruled a prior castt in the 

Fourth  Circuit  Lliat  ·had found section I00.22(b)  unconstitutional. 

No .

b) Are there other statutes  or  reg1tlations  that the FEC enforces in some  jlll'isdictirm.~ 

but  nor  others?  ff so,  1vha1  are  the  slawtes  or  regulations  and  what  are  the 

j11ri.vdiction.r?  

> c)

Is  II  the  policy  m·  practice  of the FEC !hat  wlwn  a court  declares a  stawte  or regulation  unconstitutional.  the  Sia/11/e  or regulation  remains  constit11tio,,a/ 

outside  the  jurisdiclion  of that  court' 

The Commission does not  have  a uniform  practice regarding whether it considers a statutory or regulatory  provisicm  constitutional  in one jurisdiction when a provision has been declared unconstitutional in another jurisdiction. The Office of  General  Counsel makes its 

recommendations  on  such  determinations  based  upon several factors, such  as  the nature of the constitutional challenge (e.g.,  ·'facial"  or  "as  applied"'), the  relief  ordered by the  court  (e.g., declaratory ruling or order vac.aling a provision). the tribunal's place in the judici al hierarchy, and various venue  c-onsiderations.  federal  agencies  retain the discretion  to  engage in in1c rcircu11 nonacquicsence,  as  implicitly  approved  by  the Supreme Cou. rt in  United  State.t  v.  /11e11doza , 464 U.S. l S4 ( 1984). In that case, the Court noted that cstopping the  government  from  challenging 

an  adverse circuit  court  decision in other  cirtuii.s  would  foreclose the development of circuit 

splits,  which  tile  Supreme Court relies on in selecting  its  docket. 

d)  When  a regulation  is  declared  imconslil!ltitmal.  what  steps  doe.1 · the FEC  lake 

1vilh  regard  to  notice to  the  regu/ored  commw1ity , modification of er!forccment 

procedures,  and  1'e11isio11  to  1he  regulation 7

Under  current  practice,  when  a regulation is declared unconstitutional. the Commission may  fake 

a variety of steps, including  seeking  further judicial review. If no such  further  review  occurs, the Commission issues a press release indicating  to  the  public the precise provisions that it no longer 

inter1ds  to  enforce,  and  its  enforcement  pmctices  will  1hen  follow the guidance it  has  issued to the public. Depending  upon  the regulation and the  court's  opinion,  the  Commission may simply rely on  the  court's  dec,sion  and cease enforcing the regulation, or it may repeal the regulation or begin a rulemaking Lo consider  rcvi$ing  the regulat ion rather than  repealing  ii altoge.ther. 

23 130         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00132 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 175 here 72282A.119 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Under current practice, notice lo the regulated  community  often begins  with  a press  release, 

fo llowed  by  other  less  fo rmal means of communication,  S\lC h as  the  Tips  for  Treasurers RSS feed,  a11iclcs  in The  Rec(Jrd  newsletter,  and  sometimes-as  in the case of last year's  Ciliwns. 

United decision-an instructional video.  Depe.nding  on the  scope  of th e affected  regulation, the Commission  may  also se nd tar geted  e-m ails  t o th l"  committ~e~  most likely to be affected by the change. Additionally, explanat ory notes are added  to  affected publications and outreach materia ls  are  updated. 

51. The FEC  website  lists  a ru/enwking  petition  ji-o m 2004  pertuiniTJg  to MUR  doounents 

u11d  records  after  close  as  an  "ongoing  project." In  light  of the  Co m111i ssion  ·s  adoption of procedures  in  December  2009 and recent  addi1io110/  co11Sideratiun  of other  disclosure 

procedure,,  does  the  agency  ime11d  to conduct a rulemaking  in  response  to  /he  pelilion 7

The  Commissi on issued a S ra te ment  of Po/fey  Regarding  Disclos11re  of Closed  Enforcement  and Related Files in December  2003.  See  68 Fed. Reg. 70426 (Dec. 18, 2003). While it  may  still  he 

useful to update the regulations  regardin,g  ihe  public  release  of MUR  files,  the Commission has detennined that olher  rulemakings  take  precedence  over this one and has not  issued  a Notice  of Proposed Rulemaking regarding  the  documents that are made public  at  the close ofa  MUR. 

The  State111e11/  of l'olicy  is  anachc d. 

52.  Wh at  is  the  role of agency  stqf/ in  conducting  el'//(Jrce11te ,11  mallers? 

Please see the Response to Question 48 , above. 

53.  ls  there  n matrix,  chan , or  other  dornment  identifying  the  pcnalries the  FEC  seeks/or 

each  type  of violalion?  if so. a)  Why  isn't  !hat  matri;,:,  char/,  or  other  dnc11ment  disclnsed  to  the  public? bj Please  pr(wide  o current  copy  of the  matrix,  clwn,  or  other doc11111en1 lo the Committee  along  with  ymrr  responses  to  thl!St!  qu1:stions. 

Th e Co mm ission maintains in formation that allows it to apply consistent standards  when 

detennining  the  civil penalty  that  it will  seek  in an i nd ividual  enforcement  matter.  The 

Commission's method of calculating penalties is not  disclosed  to  the  public  out  of concerns that doing so would decrease  the  detern:ncc  effect. At the same time,  t he  Commission reoognizes the 

competing  goals  of transparency  and  the need for  lle.'<.ibiJit y to co nsider the individuul c ircumstances of a particular cnse. The Commission's current po licy is to keep  suc.h  in ( c,rm1:1tio11  onnlidential,  but  ii has also  sought 

comments  from  the  public  in  order  to  consider  whether it should revisit th is policy. On December  8,  2008,  the  Commissron  issued a Notice of Public Hearing and Request for Public Co mment  regarding  the  co mpliunce  and  enforcement  aspects  of its agency procedures,  see- FEC. 

24 131         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00133 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 176 here 72282A.120 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Agency Procedures: Notice of Public  Henring  and  Request Jot P11blic  Comments.  7 3 Fed.  Reg. 74494 (Dec. 8, 2008), which requested,  inter  olia, comments on whether it should provide the publie with information  about  how it calculates its  penalties,  and if it did provide such in formation, whether it should retain its discretion ro depart from the guidelines, and  whctlm 

such guidelines would minimize or eliminate negotiations over what  constitutes  an appropriate 

p~nalry.  The Commission received  1vritten  comments related to this question.  and  heard relevant testimony  at  the  public  hearing  held on January 14 and  15,  2009,  (Documents related to this hearing  are  located on  the  Commission's website.  Se~ 

http://www.fec.gov/luw/policv/enforcement/publichearingOl l409.shtm l. ) Most of the written comments  nnd  hearing  testimon)'  focused on the question of what, if any, information about civil penalty calculations should  be  published. Although several comments  recommended  tha1  the 

Commission increase the  transparency  of the  penal ty  ca lculation. there were varying  positions  on how  much,  and  ,vhat,  inforrnation  the  Commission  should  publish,  including recommendations that  the  Commission should keep such information confidential. Since the  hearing  in January 2009. the Commission  has  considered  sever-di  of  th~  issues  raised by com  mentors  on a variety of issues raised in the 2008  Notic-.e- and  has  iss.ucd  several  new  significant agency procedures, even ·as  rec~otly  as June of this year.  &e  e.g., FEC, Agency Procedure for Disclosure of Doc11ments 

1111d Information  in  the  Enforcemem  Process. 76 Fed. Reg. 34986  (June  15.201 1). Due lo the imponance and  complexi1.y  of the considerations  that  need  to  be weighed in order to decide whether the  Commission  shout(!  revise  its  current  policy of maintaining the confidentiality of  the 

manner in which il calculates civil penalties in enforcement matters, the Commission is con1inuing to consider this issue. Until such  time  as  lhe Commission revises its policy to make such information public, it  does  not maintain information regarding the civil penalties  that  it seeks in  .a  manner that is appropriate for public use. The 2008 and 2011 Federal  Register  documents  are attached. 

5:/.  When  the  FEC is a  party  to  /i1igatio11 , nre  decisions  on  /he  positions  taken in court  made 

by the  stnjf or by  the  commissioners?  Please  provide  an  explanation  for  your  ans wer. 

When the Commission  is  a party to  litigation.  briefs  tiled  on  its  behalf  are  signed  (usually 

electron ic ally) by the General Counsel and  s(affwho  panicipatcd in their  drafiing.  Although the briefs are not  writ!en  by the  Commissioners.  the briefs Ii led by the General Counsel attempt  to 

reflect the positions taken by the Commission  as  a body or by the controlling group of 

Commissioners  in any particular  r11atter.  For  example, in cases brought under 2 U.S.C.  §

437g(a)(8)  challenging the dismissal of  nn  administrotive  complaint  that  resulted  from  a 3-3  vote by the Commission, the General  Counsel  de fonds the position of the three Commissioners  who 

voted not to proceed with  the  allegations of  the  complainL See FEC  v.  National  Republican 

Senatorial  Comm.,  966 F. 3d 147  I,  1476 (D.C. Cir. I992). l n cases  that  raise  issues abo ul  which 

the Commission has not yet  taken  a formal position,  the  Office of General Counsel  consults  with the Commissioners before  Inking  a position in court.  Current  pr-dctice  is  that  litigation briefs and 

positions  are generally circulated on  an  infom1ational  basis,  but are not formally approved by  the 

Commission. 25 132         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00134 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 177 here 72282A.121 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

55. What  is  the  averaf{e  length of time  between  the  11 otiflcalio11  lo a respondent  that  a Matter 

Under  Review  has  been  i11itia ted.  and the  decision  by  the Co mmissioners  thm  a !here is or  fs  not reason to believe a violation  occurred?  Whot  is the median le11g1h of lime ?

Number of days from Notification to No-RTB ( 1/ 1/07 -6 /3 0/l I); Average Median I 22s 

Number of days from Notification to RTB (l/l/07 -6/30/ l l): 

Average 

Median I 260 

56. Does  the  Office  of General  Counsel  have  a manual  or  handbook  that  guides  its attorneys 

i11  conducting  enfnrcement  acclons?  {(.<a, 

a) Why is the manual  not  made available to the public in the  same  way  the 

Department of Justice  disclase,1·  its  manuals? 

h)  How  is  the  manual  updated  after  the  FEC  lo, es  a courl  case? 

c)  Please  provide a  c11rre111  C{1py  of the  manual  to the Committee  along  with  your 

responses to  these  questions. 

The Office of  the  General Counsel Enforcement Division's internal  general  manual was  last 

updated in 1997,  and  is currently us ed primarily as a rcforence  document  on  non-substantive questions o f internal process  (e.g.  containing references and discussion of outdated fom1s and data systems used to perform mundane administrative functions such as saving routine correspondence). The Office of General  Counsel  keeps  its  staff current on changes in the law , policies and procedures in  a variety of methods. There is no single  manual  or band book that  serve~  this purpose. The  Office  of General Counsel's  enforccmcnl  practice  is  "organic"  in that  it  undergoes 

continual refinement  a11d  modification  based  on con tinual determinations by the Commission  in 

enforcement  matters  and with regard to the policies applied lo enforcement matters. Updates to enforcement practices and procedures are distributed to the Division staff through the  issnance  of 

emails  and memoranda. Because the enforcement  manual  is outdated, and  was  intended  only  as an internal  guldc  for agency  staff.  it is not available to  the  public, and it would not be appropriate  

> 10

release it  to  the public. In order to increase  transparency  by providing the public with  a co.mprehensive resource regarding the enforcement process, the Commission has  recently  issued the  G1iidebookfor 

Complainams  and  Respondents  011  the FEC  Enforcement  Proce .s .l',  which provides  relc.vant 

information to the public regarding the Commission's enforcement process and can  be  accessed 

26 133         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00135 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 178 here 72282A.122 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

on the  Commission's  website  at  hnp://www.fcc.gov/em/respondent  gulde.pdf.  A copy is attached. 

5 7. Whal  have  the  resulls  been  from  rhe  program  ro allow  respondents  to submit a  r e(J1Jest 

for a hearing  prior to  C/  pr obohle  cause  delermination in  et,Jorcemenl  proceedings? 

From Fcbnmry 16 , 2007 through June 30. 20 1 l ,  16 requests for hearings prior to probable  cause 

determinations were submitted. Of these, 12  were  granted. The  tir st  pi lot program regarding probable  ca use  hearings went into  effect  on February 16. 2007.  Sei;  FEC,  Poli c:y  Sioremenl 

Establishing a Pilot Program for Probable  Couse  Hearing s. 72 Fed. Reg. 7551 (Feb. 16.  2007). 

which is attached.  The  program was made permanent in November 2007.  See  FEC.  Pr ocedural 

Rule ~fo r Pr obable  Ca ,1 se  Hearings,  72  Fed. Reg . 64919 (Nov. 19 , 2007),  which  is  attachc,<l. 

And then later amended in October  2009  to  provide  that  th e Commissioners ma y ask  qu es tions of the General Counsel and Staff  Director  during Probable Cause Hearings.  See  FE C. 

Amendn11ml  of Agency  P/'oceduresfor  Probable  Cause  Hearings. 74 Fed. Reg. 55443  (Ocr..  28, 

2009). which is  altached.  TI 1e probable cause hearin gs have been  benefic ial  fo r t he  Commissim1 to clarify complex  que.stions  of  law  and  fact  in a give-and-take  format. 

511. Whal  iY  the  current  relalionship  berw ee n !he  FEC  and  the  Department  11/.J11slice  for 

h a11dll 11g  enforcement  mot/ers?  Whal  doc11menl  gm·erns  !hat  relo//onship?  When  was  that 

dncumenl  lasi  updated?  Has  either  the  FEC or  DO.I  proposed  lo  modify  the  dornmrml?  IJ 

so,  whal  modific:n tions  >1 1ere  proposed? 

The  Act  provides that the Commission  "s hall  have  exclusive  jur isd iction with respect to the civil enforcement•· of the provisions of the A ct and Chapters 95 and 96 of Title 26. 2 U.S.C.  §

437c(b)(I). Jurisdiction  for  criminal enforcement of  th e Act and Chapter  95  and 96 of Title 26 

resid es  in  th e Department  of Just ic e ('·OOJ").  DOJ's  Public  Integrity Section  generally  handles 

criminal  prosecutions of  violations  of  the  Act: it publishes a  comprehensive  "E lection  Crimes Manual"  (current  version  at  http://www.usdoj. g.ov/c riminal/pin/docs/electbook-0507.pdf) that may  be  of particul ar  use  to enforcem en t s talT  wh o ace  handling  cases  wi th  c>Ye rlapping  criminal issues. The  Co mm ission  and  DOJ  have  concurrent  jurisdiction over knowing and willful violations or  the  FECA.  2 U.S.C. § 437g(a)(5)(C). In 1977, the  Co mmi ssi tm  and the Department of Just  ire  entered into  a Memorandum of Understanding  ("MOU")  relating  to their 

respective  law  enforcement jurisdiction  and  responsibilities.  See  43 Fed. Reg. 5441 ( 1978 ). A copy of the MOU  is  attached. Howev er , in light of  stawtory  enhancements  to DO J's  ability  to prosecute  FE CA  crimes that  were  cont ai ned  in  the  2002 Bipartisan Campaign Reform  Act  1he MOU has become  somewhat  outdated and " ,as 1he subject of  ne gor.la tions  between DOJ and  the 

Co mmi ss ion  m2003-2007. Although several  drafl  proposals were  exchanged  between the agencies, those negotiations did a ot ultimately lead  to  a revised  MOU,  e nd  th ose discussions have not  yer  been revived. 27 134         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00136 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 179 here 72282A.123 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Alternative  Dispute  Resolu1ion 

59. How  efl'ectivc  has  the  ADR  process  been.for  ~nforcemenl  11u111ers ?

ADR  encourages  the  parties to  engage  in interest-based negotiations-a problem-solving process to develop a solution jointly, in the compliance  context.  The resulting solution is  spccitk  and appropriate fo r the  Commission and  for  the respondent in  the  administrative complaint or 

referral.  Since the Commission established the Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)  program 

in October 2000. it has evaluated the  progr<1m  twice  to assess whether the program  met  its goals. A 2002  evaluation  by an outside vendor  determined  that  the  :adoption of an  /\DR  program could 

promott>  increased  compliance  with federal  election  and  campaign finance  la,vs.  The Commission concluded, following the 2002 evaluation of the  first  year of the pilot program_ that ADR sh ould be made a permanent program  at  the Commission. The documentati on  and 

statistics developed in 2007 covering the  first  fi¥e  years of  the  Commission's ADR program demonstrated that the ADR Program  successfully  met its goals both by enhancing the processing of cases and  expanding  co")pliance  with  the  federal  election campaign laws. Speci fi cally, the ADR program  feduced  Commission costs and processing time compared to traditional enforcement cases; increased  r.he  number of  cases  processed and closed; decreased cases  closed 

without substantive action;  expanded  the  number and type of  remedial  me.asures emp loyed to encourage compliance; and showed  a l ow  recidivism  rate among respondents  participating  in the ADR program. Both  evaluations  of  tJ,e  ADR Program are attached. • Do  the  outcomes  ofmal/ers  resolved  through  ADR  dijferfro,11  similar  enforcemel1/ 

ma11ers  resolved  lhrough  litigatiot1? 

The outcomes of  matters  resolved through ADR differ from similar enforcement matters resolved through traditional  enforcement  in that,  while  both may result in a civil penalty, the ADR agreement's  pdmary  focus  is on future compliance  and  how the respondents can  become 

and remain compliant with the  FECA.  Using  inrerest-ba~ed  negotiations. respondents and the Commission's ADR  Specialists  detennine  what remedial  measures  will effectively address any procedural deficiencies that  could  impact  future compliance, and 1hus  mitigate  any  negotiated civil penalty. • Do  individuals  volunteer lo en/er the A.DR  process? 

Entrance  in 1he ADR  process  is  volunlllry  and dependent on whether a case is  iniernally  referred to ADR,  deemed  appropriate by the ADR staff. and  the  participants consent to  the  terms of the ADR process. The ADR omce (ADRO) receives cases by referral from  the  Olli.t'e  of General 

Counsel. the  ReportS  Ahalysis  Division. the Aud it Division. or by assignment from  the 

Commission  when  four or more  Commissioners  vote to refer the case to ADR. The ADRO will conduct an initial review and eva luation to determine whether  a case  is appropriate  for  ADR. If a case is deemed appropriate, the respondents may then voluntarily comm.it to the terms for participation in ADR . The terms require  that  the  respondent agrees to  partici pate  in good  faith  in the ADR process; set  aside  the statute of limit3tions  while  lhe  case  is in the ADRO;  and 

28 135         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00137 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 180 here 72282A.124 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

participate in interest-based negotiations and, ifrnmually  agreed  as appropriate,  111ediation.  If  the 

respondents  choose not to  participate  in ADR , the  matteris  forwarded to  .the  Office  of General Counsel for  further  processing. • What  rs  1},e  typical profile of an individual entering  Into  the ADR Process? 

The  typical  respondent in  a mnlter  referred  to ADR is  a po litical committee against  whom  there 

has  been  an allegation  ofa  violation of the Federal Election Campaign Act . The  Committees 

that participate in the process do  not  conform  to  a standard  profile.  but rather  vary  greatly in size, level of experience. and type (e.g. authorized committee, party committee, corporate and labor organization PAC,  ornonco nnccted  PAC). • Is  there  a specific  type of daim  /hat  d1e  ADR  process  bc,t  resolves? 

The  criteria for what  matters  are  appropriate for resolution in  the  ADR process arc very fact specific. ADRO docs not  have  the  resources  to investigate,  so  ADR-appropriate cases tend  robe 

matters in  which  there  are  no  unsettled  issues of  law  or fact. The Commission  'is  notifie\i  of every referral made to the  ADRO,  The objectives and goals of the ADR program  are  to  promote 

compliance,  e)(pand  the tools available to  the  Commission for resolving selected complaints,  and 

resolve matters more quickly without using the full  Commission  enforcement  mechanism.  1hu ~

reducing costs to both the Commission and respondents, • How  has  lheADR  program  cf,cmgedsince  its  inception  in  200/? 

The ADR program has evolved since the  first  cases were  referred  in October of 2000. Shortly 

after  the  inception  of the program, the ADRO referral thresholds were added  w the Reports Analysis Division's review and referral manual and the Audit  D'ivision's  materiality thresholds manual. One of the most significant revisions  to  the process occurred in 2005 and entailed the referral of  cases  where  committees  file  amended reports lo  disclose  a considerable change in financial  activity.  In  addition,  beginning with the 2005-2006 election cycle, committees that  are 

not  in substantial compliance  with  the Federal Election Campaign Act, and thus could be subject to an Commission audit,  may  be referred to  the  ADR program  when  the Co mmission  lacks 

resources  to audit all eligible  c ommittees.  The  linal  agreement  between the Commission  Md  the 

respondent  ,viii  enable the respondent to t.akc an active part in shaping the measures necessary to 

become  and  remain compliant with  the  obligations under the  fECA. 

(,{)  Whal factors determine  whethel'  a claim  will  he  handled  lhrough  the  AD R proces s? 

The predominant factors that determine whether a matter is appropriate for processing in ADR are that  I.here  are  no  disput. ed  foots  or unsettled issues  of  law. ADRO referral  thresholds  in  the 

Reports Analysis Division's review and  referral  manu,il  and  the  Au d it Division 's materiality thresholds manual determine whether  a matter will be  refe1Ted  lo the ADRO. both of whi ch are circulated to the Commission for approval every two  years  and  are  based  on  input  from both  staff 

and  Commissioners. 

29 136         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00138 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 181 here 72282A.125 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

61. What  ore  the steps in the ADR process? What is  t/ze  aver{1ge  1/meJdr  a c/(li111  ro  move 

thro11gh  each  step? 

T imeline of  rhe  Negotiated Settlement Process ( 150- 1 65 days) I)  Beginning  the  ADR Process  - 30-45  days 

a) Matter is referred to the ADRO b) Matter is analyzed for suitability for ADR c) The Commission is informed of the referral d) The Respondent is advised of the  referral  lo the ADRO 

e)  Respondent  commits  to participating in ADR program 2) Interest-based Negotiations and a draft settlement  - 30-45 days 

3)  Settlement  signed  by  respondent  and  returned  to ADRO for s ubmi ssion to the  Commfssion  -

20days 

4) Commission approves or rejects  ssttlement- 30 day s

5) Appropriare documonts are placed on the publfc record  - 30  days 

If a matter  is recommended for dismissal. the  time  line  is considerably shorter (within 90 da ys) I) Beginning the ADR Process  - 30  day s

a)  Maner  is referred to the ADRO. b) Matter is analyzed for suitability for ADR c) Matter is recommended for dism issal 2) Commission approves or rejects the recommendation to dismi ss- 30  day .r 

3) Appropriate documents are placed on the pub li c record  - 30  days 

62.  What  is the  cost  (bolh  r(lngi!  and  average) to /he FEC of n litigatiOn•lype  el'!fon·ernent 

aclinn?   

> ll .

ADI? ?

The  current  to t31  cost  of  the  ADR  pr og ram is approximately  $241,345  annually.  This  figure 

represents the approximate sa lary of tw o full<-time  ADR  Specialists,  as  discussed further in response to Question 64 be low. During  fiscal  ye ars  2008  lhrough  20 l 0. the  per-qse  cost ranged from approximately $500 to $4,000. The  average  cos l per ADR ca se over the  rhrcc  fisca l  year~ 

was app roximarely $1,900. These costs per case were derived by u sing the number of da ys to reso lve  a matter as an  es timate  of the cost per ADR cas e. 

b.  Administrative  Fine? 

The current total annual cost of the Administrative  Fine  (/\F)  program  f~  approximately $177,000  amiually.  This figure represents the a pproximate sa lary of two  and  a quarter 

employees,  as discussed further in response to Question 64 below . During  fiscal  years  2008 throug h current date,  the  average  overall cost of an  AP  case was  approximately  $7.625.  Du ri ng 

30 137         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00139 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 182 here 72282A.126 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

fiscaJ  yea rs  2008 through 20 1 I,  the  yearly  overage  AF case cos t ranged  from approximately $ 1,309 to $14.624. These costs per case were de .rived by dividing  total  program costs by  the 

number of cases closed du r ing the period. Since t he program's implementati on in July 2000 through July  12,  2011, 2.264 cases have  been  processed  through  the AF program and  $4  mi llion in civi I money pe nalties  have  been assessed. 

6J . Whal  are  the  d{fjerent  Jimctions  of !he  Allernati.ve  Dispute  Resaluria11  and  Adminislral i~·e 

Fine  PrograJ11s .•

Alternative Dispute Resoluti on  Progr am 

The ADR program promotes compliance wi th the FECA and Commission  regula ti ons  by encouraging settlem ents  outside  oftl1e traditional enforcement or litigation processes. By expanding  the  tools for resolving administrati ve complaints  nnd  referrals.  t he program co nsists of 

a series of constructive and efficient procedures for  resolving  d i sp ut es through the mutual consent of the parties involved. Administrative Fi ne  Progrllrn 

T he  Admi nistrative  Fine  Program  uses  established.  internal  threshol ds to i de nti fy committees that  fail  to  file  timely disclosure reports and then uses a published  formula  co  assess civil money pe nalties following Commission  app roval.  The pr og ram includes a wr it1e n cha ll enge  process whe reby committees may  dispu.tc  t he  fine,  providing supporting informati on  ond  documentation prior to  the  Commission's  fi nal  determ ination. Additiona ll y, the program  collects  the payments for the penalti es assessed and transfers uncollected penalti es to t he U.S.  Department  of  Treasury 

fo r further  collection  efforts. 

64.  What  is  the  Iota/  cost  to  1h11  FE C to  nm  the  ADR  program ?

The total cost to  the  Commis~ion  to  run  1he  ADR  program  is  approx.imately  $24 1,345  annually, 

This  figure  represents  the approximate salary of two full-time ADR Specialists. Add itional  costs 

not reflected in this figure include benefits. training. supplies, and  costs  in cu rr ed in the 

maintenan ce  of current  compltter  programs used to  administer  the ADR program.   

> •W/1t11

is  !he  total  cost  lo  the  FE C to  tlln  th e Adminl.virative  Fine  program? 

The  total  cost to the Comm ission to run tbe Adm1nis trative Fine program is approximately $177 ,000 annua ll y. This figure represents the app rox imate sa lary of two  and  3 quarter 

employees principally responsible for administering  th e program.  Additional  costs  not  reflected 

in this  figure  include  benefits,  training,  s uppl i es , and  co~ts  incurred in the development and maintenance of  comp L1ter  programs  used  lo  adminim r the Administrative Fine program. 

JI 138         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00140 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 183 here 72282A.127 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

65.  What  e/Jor/.s  ate  taken lo  Msure  1h01 ADR  enforcemem  niol/ers  (barf,  in  proctss  and  in 

t1nd  resull)  are  treo/ed  in  o consistent  manner? 

The ADR process is consistent for every referral  as  to notification of the allegations, ability for respondents to provide  a detailed  explanation  of what  occurred  and  what  they believe would be the most beneficial remedies to ensure future compliance, as well as deadlines for each step in 

the  process.  Respondents  have an opportunity to  negotiate  for  a civil penalty  reduction  based  on 

actions they take to ensure future compliance. In addition, the final resolution of all matters referred to the ADR Program must  be  approved by the Commission.  Finally,  all final 

concililliion  agreements that resolve ADR  matlt>rs  are  publicly  released in  the  same searchable database as other  enforcement  matters, 

66,  Difl'ing  FY 2010. the ADR  O.D7ce  completed  45  cases including S93.  lOO  in civil  penr.1//ieJ. 

The  Commission  mei  1he  155-day processing benchmark  in  64.4% of the  ADR  case.r, 

foiling  short  ofirs  goal  of meeling  /his  benchmark in 75% of cases.  The  2010 !'AR 

allributed  the  shortfa/110  diminished  .rtaff availohility.  However,  in  response  lo  a

dramatic  reduction  in  the volume of work  nssigned  to the  Office  of Administrative  Review 

(OAR),  !he  F6C  tron:;ferred  rwo  OAR  s tuff members  to  lhe  Reports Analysis Division (RAD),  leal'ing  one  .stajf 111ember  in OAR. ff  there  was  a deficiency in 1he  ADRprogram, 

why  1101  rransfer  or  least  one  ofrhe  OAR sra[f members  UJ  ADR  insletul  af  RAD? 

During  FY 20 IO , the ADRO received and continues to receive support as needed for 

administrative  and  clerical  tasks  from the  Office  of Administrative  Review  (OAR) and the Reports Analysis Division (RAD).  However,  the OAR staff  members  that were  transferred  to RAD did  n<.>t  possess  the specific  skill  set and expertise  required  to  work  withlh  the  ADRO,  The 

ADRO has s ince added a second ADR  Specialist,  and  during the first  quarter  of FY 2011 the Office reached the  set  performance  goal of processing 75% of cases  within  155 days. • What  is  the  sa11rce  af !he  155,day  benchmark? 

The 155-day benchmark was approved by the Commission, and it dates back to the inception of the ADR Program  when  the goal  was  to resolve  referrals  to the ADR process  in  approltimately  5

months. 

Administrative Fines 67.  Does  the  Administrati ve  Fine  p1 v ,• e.rs  a.fford  sujfic il!nl  process to  commillees  and 

candidates  Lh11t  have  allegedly  i'ialoted  releva11t  rules and  regulations?  Nease  provide 

rm  explanation  for  your  an swer, 

Yes, the Administrative Fine (AF)  program  affords sufficient process to  comminees  and candidates that  have  al legedly violated relevant rules and  regulation~.  The Administrative Fine program is based on  amendments  to  the Federal  Election  Campaign Act that pennit the FEC  lt\ 

impose  fines.  calculated using published schedules. fot violations of reporting requirements  that 

32 139         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00141 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 184 here 72282A.128 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

re late to the reporting  pe1'iods  that  end on or  bel'ore  December  31,  201J _ Committees in the AF program that failed 10 meet the reporting requirement to file or file timely  a specified report are all subject 10  the  same  internal thresholds for inclusion in the program.  Each  commince  within 

the program is also afforded the opportunity to  cha.Jlenge  the Commission's reason-to-believe finding_ calculated civil money  penalty,  or both.  and  once the Commission  has  made  a fina l 

determination_  may  appeal the  decision  10 the U.S. District court in  which  they  reside  or  transact 

business, 

68.  Since  .!amwry  I.  2007.  how  manyAdminislra/ive  Fine  cme.•  ha.~  /he  FEC  completed?  In 

how  many of those  cases  was  the  administrntive  fine  contes/ed? 

Between  Janliar)'  l,  2007  and  July  12, 2011, the  Commission  completed 888 Administrative  Fine 

cases. Of these 888  cases,  196  cases  were  chal.lenged,  In 167  (or  85%) of these challenges,  the  

> fine

was  Upheld. 

69. What is the  range  offine.1·  collecled  in  the  Admi111:~1rotfre  Fine  program? 

Fines collected  in  the  Administrative Fine program  have  ranged  from  SI  Oto $33.170, 

70.  flow  is  the  Commission  evaluating  /he  Admi11Wrafi11e  Ffne  program? 

The Commission evaluates  the  Administrative Fine program through  the  circulation and  voting 

process  for  each committee  pursued  in  the  program; the quarterly submission of program 

statistics  from the Reports Analysis Division and Office of Administrative  Review:  and  thro11gh 

the  increase  in  compliance. Since the  program' s  implementation there have  been  fewer  reports filed late or not  at  all, even amidst a  st~ady  increase  in  the number of reports  filed  each election cycle. During the 2001-2002 election  cycle,  47,572  reports  were  filed and 8. I3o/o  were  filed  late 

or  not filed at all, while during  the  2009-2010  election  cycle,  80,12 1 reports were filed  1.1nd 

6.68%  were  flied  late  or not  filed  at ull. 

7I.  Whal  e.Dorts  are  token  to  ensure  1h01  Admi11is1ra1ive  Fine enforcement  mauers  (hoth  in 

process and in  end  result)  are  rrea1ed  in  a aonsistenl  manner? 

Each  committee included in  the  Administrative Fine  program  for failure  to  meet  the  Federal Election Campaign  Act' s  requiretnent  to file its reports in a timely  manner is  subject  to the  same 

internal thresholds for inclusion in  the  progrnm.  For further consistency,  the  Administrative  l'ine 

regulations specify the calculation of  the  line and uniformly afford each committee the same opportunities, processes, and timeframes  described  in those regulations, 11 C.F.R.. §§ 111.30 through 111.46. In  the  challenge process.  each  committee is afforded the opportunity to challenge the Commission's reason-to-believe finding, civil money  penalty,  or both. If received timely, each challenge is reviewed  by  the Reviewing  Officer  according to  che  challenge guidelines outlined in 11 C.F.R.  § 111.35. Whecher a committee  avail~  itselfofthe  challenge 33 140         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00142 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 185 here 72282A.129 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

process or not, the Commission alone makes a final  determinarion  in each  case.  finally,  all Administrative  Fine  cases are made public  011cc  they  are closed  in  a searchable  datab=  on  the 

FEC website. 

72.  The  Commillee  on  House  Admini.stralion  was  instrumental  in  passing  inn  bipurlisan 

man11er  <m  extension lo  the  administrt11ivefi11es  program. The  Commiltee  also  ,tet  the 

expiration  dote  ro  coincide  with  a non-election year.  How  is  the  program  going? 

The program continues to be successful.  Sinc,e  the start of  the  program in 2000. there has been areduction in  the  incidence of noncompliance related to the timely  lilrng  of reports. This  sμccess 

translates into a direct increase it, the transparency and timely disclosure of campaign  finance 

activity.   

> •Hal'e

there  been  11ny  unforeseen  problems? 

Following  the  implementation  of  the  Admjniscrative  Fine  program,  repons timely filed and  l11ter 

amended to rcnec1 a substantial increase in reported financial activity increased. It appeared that some committees would submit incomplete  reports  in order to file them by  the  prescribed 

deadline so  as  to  nut  be  placed  in the Administrative  Fine  program. and would  latet  amend the report to disclose substantially more transactions and  activity  for the period. In order to address these  instances,  the Repons Analysis  Division·s  internal review  and  referral  policy  was  revised 

to allow such matters to be referred to the  Alternative  Dispute Resolution Office or Office of General Counsel for  further  action. • ls  it  sm•ing  the  FEC  mone}'J 

The  progrnm  saves the Commission money in  1hat  il  aHows  for  a streamlined approach to 

processing  cases centered on the failure to  f'iJe  timely  disclosure  reports. Prior to the  program·s 

implementation, each failure to file timely required  o referral to  be  written by  the  Reports Analysis Division and  formally  referred to the Office. of General Counsel (OGC) where only alimited number of these  cases  could be processed, given the other enforcement matters handled 

by OGC . 'T'he  Administrative Fine program not only saves money from the standpoint that  it 

frees OGC  reso1irces  to focus on other, more complex. enforcement matters. but  the "program's 

creation  has  also  substantially  increased  the  time!  iness  in processing such cases while simultaneously allowing for an increase in the number of  cases  processed. Addi1ionally, the increased compl1ance since the  program·s  inception has reduced the Commission's pntentiul case 

.load, 

• Whal  changes,  if any,  would  you recommend? 

The  Commission  recommends making  the  Administrative Fines Program permanent prior to  its 

expiration  after  the  2013 YC!lJ'  End  Report  violations  are  processoo. 

34 141         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00143 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 186 here 72282A.130 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Compliance  Costs 

73.  The  FEC  hnJ  nppmximately  19 1 mim1tes  of instructional  videos  on  its  website.  What 

portion of those  is  n candidate  expected  ro  watch  fn  order  111  comply  with  campaign 

.finance  laws? 

Candidates may choose to watch Commission  educational  videos, but  1hey  are  not required to watch them in order  m comply with the law. Several of the videos  are  spec.ifically  targeted to candidates (e.g.,  "Testing  the Waters," "Candidate Registration··) and all but perhaps two 

("Corporate  PAC Solicitations" and "Corporate/Labor Activity after  Citizens  United''  - roughly 

16 minutes, combined) have at least some relevance to  candidates.  However, instructional videos  are  only one of the tools the Commission uses to educate  the  public  and  to encourage 

voluntary  cor'rlpliance  whh  the federal  campaign  finance  laws. All of  the  informati on included in the educational  videos~ and  much  more ~ is  avai lable frorn  other  sources.  For  example, 

candidates could choose to cohsult the  Campnign  (;uidefor  Candidmes  nnd  Commillees,  on-line 

brochures, and FAQs, or to ca ll or  e-mail  the agency with  questions· or  to attend Commission 

outreach  programs. 

74  What  is  lite  estimated  cost.for  o i;ampaign  of each  typ~  to  ('omp/y  with  f'EC  n 1 gulation.v 1

a.  PresidenJial? 

h Senaro,·ial?  

> C.

House  of  Representatives? 

The infom1ation reported to the Commission does not provide an  accurate  basis to calculate the 

costs  of compli ance with  FEC  regulations. Political committees must report expenditures, but are  accorded  flexibility in deciding how to report the purpose of  an  e,cpenditure,  As long as the 

reported  purpose is  "s ufficiently  spec ific ..  to  make  the expenditure 's purpose  "clear ,"  the 

political  committee has met the reporting requirement in PECA.  Any  effort to identify  campaign 

finance  compliance  e;1.penses of campaigns would need to recognize this variety in reporting expenditure purposes. Some expenditure purposes. considered in light of the recipiem·s identity, will be  clear ly  related to complying with  campai gn  finance  legal  requirements. Other reported 

purposes--e .g.  •'legal  expenses'·  or  ·'accountin,g  services"- might  be  re lated  to FECA compliance costs.  HoweYer,  such expenditures might also include unrelated  coSIS,  like  ottler 

legal  e;<penses  or payroll services,  along  with  FECA  comp! iance  costs.  or  these  expenses  might 

be  entirely  unrelated to FECA  compliance.  Any aggregation of FECA compliance costs based on expenditure purposes reported under  FECA  will  be limi1 ed by 1he purposes the committees elected to report. Compliance costs will  wry  not only with the  office  sought,  bL1t  also with scope,  size,  and experience  lt:vel  of the campai gn . While some campaigns operate with  a few  vo l• nli!Crs,  others have  teams  of professionals paid for  the-ir  work on  the  many aspects  of  compliance  issues.  The Commission prov ides  free  software  IQ  help  with reporting. but  some  campaigns  purchase 

software  and consulting se rvices to go with it. 

J;i 142         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00144 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 187 here 72282A.131 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

There  are  typical FECA compliance costs that cand idate campaign committees may face, depending on how the committees choose to run their campaigns. FECA requires candidates to organize a principal campaign committee, and it requires principal campaign committees  to  have a treasurer, to maintain records.  and  to file repon s of all receipts and disbursements  with  the Commission. Presidential cand idate s who  panicipare  in the publ ic funding program for the general election may establish a Genera l Election Lega l and Accounting Compliance (GELAC) Fund. GELACs are specia l accounts maintained exclusively to pay for legal and accounting expenses related to complying with campaign finance law as wel l as any other laws with which  the  commi11ecs  must 

comp ly. such as  tax  law, contract law, or laws regarding employee relations. Compliance expenses are not subject 10  the  expenditure lim its, so candidates have an incentive to  pa y these expenses with GEL AC funds, but n ot  a requirement.  The table below presents the major  party 

candidates  for  Pre~idenl  who establi shed GELACs  rrom  2008 back 10 1980.  the  inception of GELAC Funds. The dollar amounts for GELACs  are  funds spent. Election Candidate  Grant  GELAC %Expenses 2008  McC.ain  $84,100,000  "$24,787,897 1 29.74 2004 Bush $74,620,000 $2.952,842 3.96 2004  Ke1Ty  $74,620, 000 $6,308,345 8.45 

2000 Bush $67 ,560,000 $3,325, 166 4.92 

2000  Gore $67.560,000 $4,301,546 6.37 1996 Clinton $61,820.000 $5.343,065 S.64 1996 Dole $61,820,000 $4,981,285 8.06 1992 Bush $55,240,000 $3,486,479 6.31 1992 Cli nton  $55,240,000  $4 .587, 859  8.31 

1988 Bush $46.100,000 $4.998,842 10 .84 1988 Dukakis $46, l 00,000 $2,868,536 6.22 1984 Mondale $40,400,000 $615,774 1.52 1984  Reagan  $40,400,000 $1,035, 06 2 2 .56 1980 Caner $29,440.000 $939,702 3.19 1980 Reagan  $29 ,440,000  $1.S 12,152 5.14            

> This amount include, S12.3 million in loans niadt to 1hc candidate's general election committee.

36 143         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00145 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 188 here 72282A.132 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Presiden1fol  Elec1ion  Campaign  Fund 

75 . Whc11  are  the  pre .rent  casrJ  ofndmini .~tering  rhe  Pre.<ldentia/  Election  Campaign  Fund? 

The  cost for administering the  Presidential  Election  Campaign  Fund and the Presidential  Primary 

Matching  Payment Account is presently limited to an average of25  sraff  hours  pe r month by a 

single  employee at the  GS-14  pay  rate. Typically, the cost per election cycle encompasses one full-time  GS-14  employee  and  two part-time GS-5 employees who are hired for up to 75%  ofth~ 

cycle, for a total  cost  of approximately $330,000. ln past  election  cycles.  the cost for administering  and  processing  the matching  funds  for  toe  Presidential  public  funding  prognuos 

has been as high as $600,000 when the Commissi on has hired  \IP  to  si ,x  part-time  employees to 

assist  in  the processing of  match111g  funds. although this last occurred in 1996 and 2000 e lectioo cycles. fn anticipation of fewer  candidates  accepting public funding in the 2012 Presidentiul cycle, the duties associated with administering  the  program were merged with  those  of  an  auuit 

manager position in early 2010. 

76.  /-low  are  these  cos/s  a//acated? 

The Audit Division  and  the  Office  of General Counsel absorb  the  Commission's costs associated with administering the Presidential Election Campaign Fund and the Presidential Primary Matching Payment Account. For the 2012 Presidential  cycle  to  date,  salaries and other  costs 

stemm ing from administoring  the  Presidential public funding programs are budgeted under  th1;: 

Audit Division. 

77.  From  January  J.  2007.  ro  the  presenr.  whm  i:1  the  averai:e  and  median  amoulll  of time for 

rm  audit  to  be  resolved? 

r, . For  Presidl!ntfal  campaigns? 

The  average  amount of t ime for Presidential campaign audits to  be  resolved is 1.02 years.  Tht: 

median amount  ofllmc  forthese audits to be  resolved  is  0.92  years .

The calculated figures represent audits of presidential candidates  forthc  2008 election  cycle 

staning  from  the  beginni ng  of  aud it  fieldwork Lo  the  approval of the Final Audit Report by  the 

Commission,  as  of July 25, 2011 . 

h.  For  swte  parties ?

The  average  amount  of time  for  state  party audits to  be  resolved is 1. 23 years.  The  median amount of time for state party audits  (o  be resolved is 1.67 years. 

J7 144         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00146 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 189 here 72282A.133 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

The calculated figures represent audits of  s(~te  pa11ies  during the 2008 election cycle  starting 

from  the  beginning of audit  fieldwork  to the  approval  of  the  Final  Audit Report by  the 

Commi~sion,  as  of July 25.2011. 

78.  What  ha~ · been  the  effect  af Cammissioners  reeelving  interim  audit  repons  instead of only 

final  audit  reports? 

To clarify, Commissioners have always received both interim and final audit  reports;  the process changes  concern  whether the  Commi~sion  votes  on  interim audit  r11ports.  Beginning with the 2008 election cycle, all  interim  audit  reports  for  party  committees  were  circulated  to the Commission ori  a "no  objection·•  basis,  which  pem1its  an  objecting Commissioncrto  Stop 

delivery  of  the  lnte(im  aud1t  report to  the  audited  party  committee until  the  Commission  can 

consider  the  interim  audit  reporL  Prior to  that  time, interim audit reports for party committees that contained no novel or  complex  issues  were  sent to the Commissioners on  an  informational basis al the time it was sent 10 the audited committee. Interim audit reports for party commiltees that did contain novel or complex issues were  circulated  to Commissioners on a "no -objectioh" basis. 

Since  this  procedural  change,  the Audit Division  has  circulated eight interim  audit  repo1ts for party committees to the Commission on  a '·no  objection''  basis, and  has  received no objections. The procedural change  has  not  significantly  impacted  the  processing  of  the interim-audit  reports. 

79. Has  stafffiwn  the  Audit  division  been  rt'ollocated?  If so,  lo  what  deparm!ent  nnd  why ?

If not. why 110/, in light  ,,Jthe  reduced  number  of  Presidential  campaigns  subject la  audil 

<if  use  qf prima,y  election  matchingfunds  or general election grants? 

No,  staff  from the Audit Division has not been realloca1ed. Jn addition to conducting audits  of 

those committees receiving public funds (Presidential and National Convention  Committees),  the Audit Division a l so conducts audits of committees under 2 U.S.C.  § 4)8(b) and assists the  Offlce 

of General Counsel with investigations that result in audits conducted pursuant to 2 U.S.C. 

§ 437g.  The  scope and complexity of section 438(b)  and  437g audits  currently  provide the  starr 

with an appropriate work  load.  As  always,  management will continue  10  evaluate and reallocate 

resources,  cas  needed. Additionally, the Comrnission is scheduled to  perform  an ana lysis and allocati on  overview  of1ts  workforce as  part  of its upcoming Strategic and Human Capital Planning  se~ions. 

80.  Whal  steps  are  taken  to  ensure  thnt  Audits  are  Mnducted  111  a co1wsten1  mnller  (both  111 

process ond  in  end  result)  acrO.(S  various  di.fferenl  actors? 

All  audits  are conducted according to 11  detailed,  step-by-step Audit Program.  The  Audit 

Program  is reviewed 11nd approved by the Commission each election cycle. The  Audit  Programs 

for Authorized and Unauthorized (non-candidate)  Committees  provide  detailed  guidance and instruction  lo  the Audit Division  staff  and is incorporated  i nto11n  audit/project  management 

38 145         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00147 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 190 here 72282A.134 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

software so that audit  work  papers  arl!  efficiently  stored  and  reviewed  . •  Any changes LO the Audit Programs  are  highlighteo  at  ,the  beginning  of the cycle  to  the Audit  stafT  via  training sessions. After each four-year e lection cycle, the Audit Division teams are re-organized in an effort to maximize the sharing of best  practices  and to assure Audit Division operating procedures are followed and applied consistently. Finally, to  assure  that  the  final audit reports are consistent among the  Auoit  Teams,  each  aud it r eport is  revjewed  by t he audit  team  leads and the Office of General  Counsel,  and  approved  by  the Commission.  The  Commissi on recently adopted  Directive  70to he lp achieve  a greater  degree of consistency.  both  in  process and resul!, in t he  final  audit reports issu ed by the Commission. 

Directive  70 is attached. 

81.  What  coordination  ncc11rs  be/ween  the  audit  division  s/aff and  lhe  Office  of General Counsel  staff during  rm  audit? 

Each  au dit  [s  assighed  an  attorney  from the  General  Law & Advice (GLA)  staff  in  the  Oflice  <.\( 

General Counsel. Coordination with GLA  can  occur at  ony  time throughout  the  audit  proces$ 

and varies from info rmal guidance to  a fonnal Legal Analysis of the Audit Report. This coordination can occur  a£  early as  when  an audit  is  approved by the Commission. In  cases  of President  in  I committees, there is coordination  as  ea rly as  a year  or  more before  the  start  of the aud it. In addition, the assigned attorney is present at meetings conducted with the audited committee throughout  the.audit  process.  GLA also works  closely  with  the  Audit Div ision  when 

audit mat t ers  are  conside?r cd  in Commission meetings. 

82. ls  the  Q[fice  o/Ge11eral  Counsel  per;niued  10  use  information developed  during  on  rmd/1 

in  lhe  conducr  of enforcement  aclions?  Please  provide  cm  11xpla11ntfon.for  your  answer. 

All Fi na l Audit  Reports,  and any Audit Findings,  are  approved by the Commission. Pursuant to 2 U.S.C.  § 437(g)(a)(2),  (he  Commission is  pennitted  to  base  its  findings  on •'information ascertained in the nom,al  cm 1rse  of  carrying  out its supervisory  responsibilities;·  which include infom,ation developed through  a Commission audit. Accordingly, any Commission-approved 

Audit  finding  that  a Committee is  in  substantial non-compliance with FECA  may  be subject to referral to  the  Office  of General Counsel. In 1hat instance, t he Committee is provided the  referral 

and report and may provide  a response prior to any recommendat ion to  the  Commission  by  the Office of General Counsel. 

83.  Does  !he FEC  disclnse  lhe  fnrmula  ii  uses  10 decide  when  lo  conducl  audils?  {f no/.  why 

not?  When  was  the  jol'm 11 la  last changed?  Please  provide a  c:1m·e111  copy  of the  jommla 

to  the  Comndttee  along  wilh  your  re~ 1Jonses  10  these  queslions. 

'fhe  cr iteria used for detcm,ini ng whothcr  a committee wi ll  be  referred for  an  audit  pl1rsuant  to?. 

U.S.C.  § 43-S(b)  is outlined in the Reports Analysis Division Review and  Refetral  Policy.  The 

criteria were revised in the201 1-2012 version of the  policy.  which  WR$  approved  by  the 

39 146         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00148 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 191 here 72282A.135 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Commission on  April  5, 2011,  While  this policy is not disclosed  to  the public. the  FEC  provides a general overview of  the  criteria  in seminar and conference workshops, and  the  Repons Analysis Division is  currently  working  on a Frequently  Asked  Questions page for the.  F6C 

website  which will include a  general  overview  of the audit criteria. The general  factor~  for determining  whether  a committee will be referred for an  audit  include  the level of  financial 

activity,  timely and adequate responses to  R.FA  l s,  and  the  vote margin (for candidate committees only),  which,  allows for a higher priority to  be  given  to closer  races.  Disclosing  the  specific criteria to the public would diminish  rhc  incentive to provide full and accurate disclosure. 

84 . When  an  1111df1  report  is  completed,  does  !he  vole  by  /he  01mmissioners  indicate 

agrcemenr  to  receire  the  audit  report  from the  a11di1  dl"ision,  or  does  ii indicate that  the 

Commissioners  have  adopred  !he  audit  reporl  as  n statement  by the Commission?  Ple1.1Se 

provide  an  e:q1la11atior,J(}r  yfJur  answer. 

The final audit repon issued by the Commissi on  reflects  both the  conclusions  of  the 

Commission, and the  legal  standards enunciated by th e Commiss i on and applied to  th e panicular circumstances  presented  by  the audit. Although in the past the Comm ission  had  occasionally voted 10  receive  the  audit  report. FEC  Directive  70  estabHshed  a procedural change  where  the 

audit rep ort now becomes the repon of the Commission  whh  1he  affirm~tive  vote  of four or more Commissioners.  Dlreclive  70 is  anached. 

Rulemaking 

85.  Whal  is  the  mle  of agency  staff in  drafting  proposed  r11/e11wkings? 

Attorneys in the  Office  of  General  Counsel draft proposed and  final  rules, and the accompanying explanatory  mater1als,  for the Co mmissio n's  con&idcration.  These documcnt.s  are  described in the answer to Question 87. These  attorne ys  may  draw  1.1pon  the  expertise  of other  PE.C  staff in 

performing  ~hcse  functions,  !hey  also handle all  other  aspects of the rulcrnaking process required by  the  Administrative Procedure Act and other  laws. 

86.  Whal  is  the FEC  ·s  appropriate  response  when  a cortrr  de/ermines  1hal a Commission 

regulalion  or  1h c stoN,te  upon  which  a Com mi ssion  regulation  is  based  is  in  vi11/atio11  of !h e Constitu/ion?  When  should  aclion  in  re,ponse  to  such  a determinalion  be  complele'.> 

When a  regulation  or  statutory  pro,1 1s ion  is  declared  unconstitutional,  the  Commission may  take 

a variety  of steps, including seek ing  fl.trther  judicial review. If  no  su ch  funher review  occurs,  th eCommission typically issues a press release  indicating  10 the public  the  precise provisions that it no longer intends to enforce, and its enforcement practices wi l I then follow the guidance it has issued to  lhe  public. Depending upon the provision and the coun's  tipinion,  the Commission may (a) simply  cease 

enforcing  tbe  provision  based  on the  oourfs  decision;  (b) repeal the  pmvi$ion  (if it is  a

40 147         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00149 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 192 here 72282A.136 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

regulation); (c) or  begin  a rulemaking  to  considet  revis ing  a regu lation.  It  ls  difficult  to determine when a response  to  a court  determination  of unc onstitutionality is  ·'co mpll'-le."  For exa mple, once the Supreme Court declares a statutory provision unconstitutional. the Commission will  cease  to  enforce it indefinitely, regardless of whether Congress  formally 

repeals the  statute. 

Regarding another example concerning a regulation,  after the decision  in  EMILY 's List v.  FE C. 

581 F.3d 1 ( D .C. Cir. 2009), the Commission issued press releases explaining the steps it was 

t11ki11g  to comply with that dec ision,. including  the  adoption of an  interim  rule  ~terting  the  publk 

that  t he  court had ordered that  three  regulations be  vacated. 2 The Commission then  repealed  the regulations that had been  invalidated.  See  http!l/www.fec.gov/~genda/20  I 0/mtgdoc I 015.pdf. Similarly, af ter  the  Supreme  Co urt's  decision in  Cilizens  United, the Comm ission issued  a press re lease explaining to the public and regulat ed community how ii wou ld comply with the 

decision. See http://www.fec.gov/prcss/pre ss2 0I0 /2 0100205Citizen sU nited.shtml. Among other things, the Comm ission told  the  public that  it  ·'will no longer enforce the statutory  prov i!lions  or 

its  regulations prohibiting  corporations  and labor organizations from making independent 

expenditurts  and electioneering  communications:· 

As also discussed  in• Questfon  88 below, the Commission recently has  issued  two Not ices of Avai lability addressing issues related to the  Citizens  Uniled  ruling,.  and  is  also prepari ng a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on  the  issues  addressed by the  EMILY' .f  f.ist  and  SpeechNow.org 

decisions. 

87,  The  FEC  lists  three  n1/emoliing  projecls as  "ongoing··:  hybrid  ads,  standards  of i• oniluct 

and public  disclosure  of closed MUR  malt ers.  What  are  the  steps  of/he FEC  rulem(l/cing 

process  and  at  which  .rlep  of/he  process  are  eac:h  of these  projects? 

To comply with the Administrative  Procedur.:  Act and  the  requirements ofother-stnrutes, the Commission's rulemakings typically consist of the following three  stages:J 

a)  Notice of Proposed Ru lemaking: The Notice of Proposed Rulemaking  (" NP R M")  is  the 

documen!  that  contains  the Commission's proposed revisi ons  to  its  rules introduced by ana rrative that  exp lains  the  changes  and seeks comment  from  the  public on the  proposed  rule s.' 

b) Public Comment Period  and  Public Hearing: The  second  stage of the  rulemaki ng  process 

provides  all interested persons with an opportunity to  review  the Commission's proposed rul es and to submit  written  comments to the Commission. Those who  submil  written  comments  may  

> See

h1tp: l/\ ,,v,.v,ftc.gov/ pre5 s/ pres,2009/2009Decl  7E milyli ,t,sh 1ml; 

http: // www.fec.gov/ press/press10  t 0/20  I00  t t2Emilylfs1sh1ml. 

Some  rulomakings  00nsis1  of  more  than  1hr<e  stag es  because  l~ey  begin  with  an  Adv•n ce  'llotice  or Propo sed  R\llemR~ing  (·'ANPRM"). The  Commission  publisltes  an  ANPRM to solicit  public  comments  <,1 n broad, 

general  iss ues  \hat  might  be  addressed in a subsequcnl  Notice  of  Proposed  Rulemokfog.  An ANPRM  does  no1 

oontain  proposed  regulatory  t~x1,  but  may  dcsc ri b•  possible  ahemalivts  lo  ~ddrcss  the  issues  presenled  for  comm•nl. 

Jo  cenain  very  lim ited si tuations , the  Commission  mby  omil  lhe  NPRM  ond  puh lfc  comment  st3g,os  and 

move direo1l y to final  Rules  by  i ls uing  Interim  Final  luJles  or  Diree1  Final  luJlcs. 

> 41

148         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00150 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 193 here 72282A.137 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

also be given an opportunity to  testify  at public hearings, including answering  Com,nission 

qveSt1ons  regarding  their  p0sitions.  All  public  comments  are  included in  the  public record. Public hearings are transcribe.d and also made pnrl of the rulemaking record. c) Final Rules: The  last  stage of the rulemaking process  is  lite  promulgation of  Final  Rules. 

together  with  their Explanation &  Justification  (''E&J'").  This document also  establishes  the effective date for the final Rules. Although the final  language  ofrev]sed rules  may  differ  from 

the proposed rules in the NPRM , the Final Rules must be  a logical outgrowth  of  the proposed 

rules  in order  for  the public to have had  .adequate  notice of , and opportunity to comment on,  what 

the Commission is considering. The E&J is a narrative that provides the  Commiss,on's  legal and policy reasoning for its final revisions to rules.  The  E&J summarizes the  pubHc  comments and explains how  the  final Rules address  the  commenters' concerns.  ll  also  explains  how and  why 

the  Final  Rules differ from the  ptcviouiiroles  and,  ff  appropriate,  from  the rules prop0scd in the 

NPRM,  and  may  provide  examples  of  the  application ofthe Final  R\1les.  The E&J  serves  as  the 

basis  for judicial review  of  the Final  Rules  if they are challenged in court. The Commission a lso sends the  f'inal  Rules  and  their E&J to Congress. For  t he- Hybrid Ads rulcmaking. the Commission completed  the  first  two  stages  of rulemaking  by 

publishing an  NPRM  and  receivlng  public input through  ,vrinen  comments and conducting an 

0(al  hearing. held on  July  11.  2007. 

The rulemaking on standards of  conduct  is a joint rulemaking that the Commission is conducting 

concurrently  with the  Offire  of Government Ethics. The  firs!  lwo stages of this  r11lemaking  have been completed. The Commission has also prepared Final Rules and an  Explanation  and 

Justification  for those  culcs,  which it will soon send  to  the  Office  of  Government  Ethjcs  for 

review. 

With respect to the ru lemnking regarding public disdosure of  closed  MURs , the Commission issued  a Statement  of Policy  Regarding  Disclosure of Closed  Enforc,emcnt  and Related  files  iu 

December 2003. While  it  may  still  be  useful 10  update  the regulations  regarding  the public release of MUR  files.  the  Commission has determined that other rulernakings take precedence 

over  this  one and  has  not issued a Notice of Proposed Rulcmaking regard  fog  the  documenrs  that 

are made public at  the  close of a MUR. 

88.  111  2010,  the  Commission  ,';elj:rcpor!ed  1h01  iJ comple!ed  rule makings  "wi1hin  specific 

lime.frames  1h01  reflect  the  importance  af 1he  topics addressed, proximily to upcoming 

elec/ions,  and  externally  es1abtrshed  deadlines "  50%  of the  time,  as  specified  by  1he 

Fiscal  Year  2010  Pe,formance  and  Accoumabilily  Report.  Why  are  rrtlemakings 

reg11lorly  delayed  under  !he  FF:C  's  sclf-reponed  metric? 

There are at several reasons for  delays  in rulemakings, Pirst, as  e-xplaincd  in the answer to Question  87,  the APA requires  r.hat  all  significant  rulemakings  be conducted  in  accordan~e  wi th certain procedures under which proposed  rule~  are published, 1he public  is  given an adequate amount of time to  com  meat on the proposals,  -and  1hen Final Rules are  prepared  together with a detailed  F.:-i:planation  and  Justification  fortheir  promulgation. In conducting rulemakings, the 

42 149         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00151 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 194 here 72282A.138 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Commission  strives to ensure that rules are not changed shortly before  elections.  Conscqu<!ntly, 

if a rulemaltlng  is  delayed  at  an  early  stage, it  is  unlikely that  t1me  can  be  made up later. Second, for projects like the standards of conduct rulemaking, two agencies must review and reach agreement at  each  stage  of  the  rulemaking  process. Hence, a concurrent  rulemaking  will 

inherently take longer than may initially  be  anticipated. Lastly, in 2010, the Commission began rulemakings to implement far-reaching judicial  decisions 

in the Citizens  Uniled  and  SpeecJuVon·.org  cases. While these court opinions resolved the specific  cases  before the courts, there arc certain signlficanc issues  that  might or might not also be addressed in the  Cilizen. 1·  United  and  SpeechNow.org  ru lemakings. The PECA specifies  that 

the  affirmative  vote of four members of the six-member Commission is  requirt.-d  to  take  any 

action  regarding  rulemakings. 2 U.S.C.  §§  437c(c)  and  437d(a)(8).  For  the  Citizens  Uniied 

rulernnking. the Commission has  considered  draft NPRMs on January 20  and  June  15 , 2011, bu t

has not yet reached a four-vote  majodty  as to the inclusion or exclusion  of  various  issues.  The 

Commission  has  al so  received  petitions for nllemakings prompted by the Citizens United 

decision and  given  the  absence of an  Nf>RM , on June 15, 2011, the Commission issued notices of availability to address  che  specific issues raised  by  those petitions.  See-PEC,  R11/emaking 

Petition Jndependenl  Expenrf[ture  Reporting, 76 Fed. Reg. 36000 (June  21,  2011); FEC, 

R11/emak.i11g  Petition:  Independent  Expenditure  ond  Electioneering  Comm11nicatio11s  bJ •

Cor/1(/rations  and  labor Organizations, 76 Fed. Reg. 36001 (June  21.10 11).  Public  commenis 

to the Notices are due to the Commission by August  22 , JO  I I.  Finally,  the  Commission is 

working  to issue an NPRM to  address  issues  raised  by the  SpeechNow. org  and  EMllY's  list 

cases, however the  nomial  process was beld in abeyance due to a lawsuit addressi ng one of the key issues. 

89. Can  you  give  1he  Cammi/lee  an  t1pd(lle  nf the  llllernet  rulemaking? 

The Commission is currently looking into beginning a  new  ru!emaking to  resolve  questions  thal 

have  arisen after the Commission completed  ils  last  Internet  ru!emaking  live years  ago. 

Although not ell of the topi cs to be  considered  in this project have been detennined. one  Hkely 

topic is the applicability of the disclaimer  requirement  for political  advertisements  on  space-

lfmlted media.  rhe  answer  to  Question 91  below  provides more details about the advisory opinions in  which  this  topic has been  addre~sed. 

Miscellaneous 90.  Does  1he FEC interpret  its  m1thori/y  to  administer  and  regulate  under  the Federal 

Eleclion  Campaign  Ac/  as  exclusive?  !(not,  where  else  does  such  authority  rt?side'? 

Yes. Pursuant to 2 U.S.C.  § 437c(b),  the  "Commission shall administer, seek ro obtain compliance  with,  and  fonnulale  policy with respect to,  thi~  Act and chapter 95  and  chapter 96 of title 26. The Commission shall have  exclusive  jurisdictiM  wfth  respect to civil enforcement of such provisions,"  The  FECA  abo  gives  lhe  Commission  exclusive  authority  1(1  rcridcr  advisory 

43 150         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00152 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 195 here 72282A.139 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

opinions, 2  U.S.C.  §§ 437d(a)(7). 437f; to make rul es  necessary  to  carry  Olll  the  provisions of the Act and chapters 95 and 96 of title 26, 2 U.S.C.  §§  437d(a)(8), 438(a)(8), 26 U.S.C. §§ 9009(b), 9039(b);  and  with one limited exception,  to  initiare  c.ivil actions to enforce the  Acr.  2 U.S.C. 

§ 437d(e). The Attorney General  does  have ju ri sd iction to prosecute criminal violations of  lhe 

Act.  See  28  U.S.C.  § 516; 2 U.S.C.  § 43 7g(d), and the Commission can refer a malter to the 

Attorney  Geae.ral  for  possible criminal prosecution under certain circumstances. 2  U.S.C. 

§ 437g(a)(5)(C). The Commission and the Department of  Justtee  entered into a Memorandum of Understanding  that  jointly outlines their respective roles in pursuing election  ltlw  viola ti ons. See 

43 Fed. Reg. 5441 (1978). In  addition,  when  cases arising under FECA  are  heard  by the 

Supreme  Court, the Solicitor  General  nonnally represents the Commission before the Court.  See 

FECv.  NRA  Political  Victory  Fu,,d,  513 U.S.  88  ( 1994 ): 2 U.S.C. §§ 437c(t)(4)  and  437cf(a)(6), 

91 . What  criteria  does  tht!  FEC  use  to  decide  when  th e ··small  item"  exception.from  the 

disclosure requirement  will  apply?  How  does  the  Commission  approach  advertis ing media  1h111  limit  the  number of characters  aw1ilable  for  advertising  conrent  and 

disdaimers  to  be  consistent  acra.1 ·s  different  advertisers  and  media? 

The fECA requires  polilical  committees to place s ta tements on  their  general public  political 

advertising  disclosiilg  who  authorized  and  paid for these. communications. 2 U.S.C. 44 id(a). 

Similar  statements  are  required when other persons make communicati ons  that  publicly  solicit 

contributions, or  expressly  advocate the election or  defeat  of clearly  identifit!d  candidates, or  rhal 

are e le cti oneering communications, Id.  The  Commission's  regulations  al  11 CFR 110.11  (I) 

create  exceptions to the disclaimer requirement for "bumper stickers. pins, buttons, pens.  and 

similar small item upon which the disclaimer cannot be conveniently  printed,''  The Commission is  guided  by  th is  regulaiion  and  its  previous  advisory opinions in dete rm ining in a specific case whether the  small  item exceplion applies. The Commission has been asked in  three  different  advisory opinion  requests  whether a particular advertising medium or advertiser  that  limits  the number of  characters  ava il able for advertising content will trigger an exception  to  the disclaimer requirement. Specifically, in 2002, th eCommission was  first  asked if either the sma ll item exception or the impraclicable  e,xceptioo 

applied to wireless telephone advertisements  sent  by  "shor1  messaging  service ,''  where  the text messages  are  limited to 160 characters per screen.  See  Advisory Opinion  2002-09  (Target Wireless). The Commission determined  that  the  small item  exception  applied.  Nel\1,  io 20 1O. 

Google requested an advisory opinion  as  to whether Google ad s purchased by candldales and politlcal  comminces  qualify for the small item exception  co  the disclaimer requirements  given 

that Google  limits  the ads  to  95 charac1ers.  See  Advisory  Opinion Request 2010-19 (Google). Although  the  Commission could not reach  a response  to1he  questions  presented  by the required 

folJr  affirmative  voles.  the  Commission did conclude  that.  under  the  circumstances described in the request, the conduct  ,is  not in violation of  !he  Act or regulations. This year, Facebook sought an advisory opini on  ssk.ing  if ads limited  to  160 or I 00 characters qualify for either the small item exception or the exception where a disclaimer is impracticable.  See  Advisory Opinion Request  2011-09  (F11cebook) . The Commission was unable to render an opini on by  the  requisilc 

affirmative vote of at  least  four Commissioners, as three Commissioners believed that  an 

excep ti on applied. and  three  believed  a disclaimer  was  required. 151         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00153 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 196 here 72282A.140 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

As noted in the  answet  to Q1 1estion 89,  in  light  oft11c  interest in this  developing  area,  the 

Commission  is  looking into beginni ng  a rulemaking  regarding  disclaimers on Internet advertisements. A rulemaking  may  provide  a means  of reaching an appropriate  resolution  of  the 

issue in  a way that could provide consistency for different advertisers  using  new  technol ogy  to reach their audiences. 

92  What  cri1eria  does  1!,e  FEC  use  lo  decide  whether  I()  grant  a reque.vt.for  a media 

e:x,•mption? 

The PECA, at 2 U.S.C. 431 (9)(B)(i),  creates  an  exemption  from the term  "expenditure·•  for  any 

· 'n ews  story,  commentary , or oditorial distributed through  the  facilities of any broadcasting station, newspaper,  maga:iine  or other  period1cal  publication unless such  facilities  are  owned or controlled by any political  party,  political commitiee, or  candidate.''  A sim.ilar  exception from the  term  "electioneering communication"  was  created by BCRA for communications appearing in news stories, commentaries, or  ed itorials  distributed through  the  facilities of broadcasting stations. 2 U.S.C.  434(i)(3)(B)(i).  By  regulation. the Commission has established a parallel excep tion from the definition of··contribution;' and has extended the  ·' media  exemption ..  to 

cable  television, web sites and Internet publications. It C.F.R. I00 .29(c)(2).  100.73,  and 

100.132. Those  who  w,sh  to engage in aclivities coming within the scope of the  media  exemption need  nnl 

ask  the Commission to grant an  eKemption  before proceeding with  their  activities.  Nevertheless, 

those who would like a Commission determination  as  to whether  they  are  media entities and whether their  prospective  activity  will  come  within  the  cxce.ption may ask the Commission for ah 

advisory opinion. The Commission  has  historically conducted a 1wo-stcp analysis to determine whether the media exemption applfes, which is guided by  several  court opinions.  Se~  Advisory Opinion 2011-11 (Colbert) and  advisory  opinions cited therein. First, the Commission asks whether the entity engaging in the activity is  a media entity. Second, the Commission applies the  rwo-pan  analysis  

> set

out  in  Readers  Digest  Ass 'n  v_  FEC, 509  F.  Supp. 12 1 0, 12 15 (S.D.N.Y. I 98 '1 ),  which 

requires it to  deteITTJine  (I) whether  the  entity ls owned or controlled by a political party. po litical committee,  or  candidate;  and  (2) whether the entity is  noting  as  a media entity in  conducting  the 

activity  at issue  (i.e.  whether the media entity is  acting  in its  " l egitimate  press  function").  See 

11/soFECv. Phi/fip .1·  Publishing.  517 F. Supp. 1308,  1312-13  (D.D.C. 1981). This lancr determination, in  turn.  resls upon two factors: (l) whether the media  enthy's  materials are available to  IJle  general public, and (2.) whether the materials  are  comparable in  fonn  Lo those ordinarily issued  by  the  media  entity.  &e  FEC,·.  Masmchusells  Citizens/or  Life, 479 U.S. 238,251 ( 1986). 

> 4j

152         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00154 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 197 here 72282A.141 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

93. The  Commissio11_frequently  waiw $ the  rule  requiring  timely  submi S$ iOn  of documents for open meellngs  cmd  allows consideration of documents  the public  c,nd  pc,rti es  to  adviso1y 

11pinio11  req11es1s  or  olher  malleN  have  not had an opporlunity lo  review  before  the 

meeling.  This  has  oc curred on  149  items  since  Janamy  I,  2009.  What  i.•  the reason.for these  frequent  waiwrs?  What  steps will the Commission lake, if an y,  lo  prnvide  more transparency for  documents  considered  al  open  meetings? 

To  provide  the most current  informat ion,  a ll agenda documents (excluding meeting minutes) for open Commission  mee t ing s he ld from J anuary 2009 through Ju ne 2011 were re viewed.  The 

chart below shows the total number of agenda document s each year and the numbe r and percentage of t ho se t hat were submi tt ed late  according  lo the Co mmis s ion's policy. Under the 

FEC's  Direc/f1•e  17,  a d oc umen t is l ate when it  is  submitted  le ss than 7  d ay s b efore  the  mcctfog. 

Total# of To t al  # of  Late 

v~-ar  Documents on Submitted %Timely % Submitted  Late 

Agendas Documents 

2009  98 65  34%  66.% 

20 10 82 55 33% 67% 

201  I 74 48 35%  65% 

# ·-JOT  AL  I 2~  168  34%  66% 

For the late documents, the cha rt below also  shows  how late  the  documents were submitted by 

number  of days  before  the  Cornmission·s public meeting. Submitted  5 -6  Submitted 3-4 Subm itt ed 1-2 Subm itteo  Day of 

Da.ys  Before  Dtiys  Before  Days  Before 

Yea t'  Meeting.  Mcetin_g  Meeting  Meeting 

(%of Late) (% of Late)  (%  of Late)  r1o  of  Late) 

2009 17  (26%)  5 (8%)  26(40%)  17 (26%} 20 10 17(3 1%) 2(4%) 16 (30%) 20 (37%) 

20 11 J4 (29%)  2(4%)  12(25%) 20  (42%) 

It is  important  10 bear in mind th at many  agenda  d ocu ments a re revi se d versions  of earlier agenda documents that have already  been  rclea:;ed  to the public. Fo r example , a dra ft  of  an 

adv isory opin i on might bave been submitted time l y. but  a subsequ~nt  revision to the  draft  might be sub m itted late. In fact,  $O mfc>  AO drafts are rev isions to  rencct  public comment on ear lier 

drafts . In this light, many late agenda documents may  mea n lhat l he  pub lic  ,s  gelling  no t ilied 

late  of  fi na l changes lo a documen t,  but  the issues before  the  Co mmission and at least some of the proposed dispositions of the issues have already been p ub licly released. To examine lhe agenda documents with this issue in mind , t he following chart presents  da ta  about  primary 

46 

> i

## I153         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00155 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 198 here 72282A.142 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

agenda  documents,  which are  the  first document  released  on an agenda item,  and  about supplemental documents, w hi ch are any later docume nt s. These data  show,  for example,  that  for 20 I I. 59% of the primary agenda documents were timely. while 89% of the supplemental documents were late. Total # o f   

> Do cumen ts

Primary  Supplement a l Year on Agend as  Doc um e nt s ¾T ime! )'  ~o  Late  Docs % Tim e ly  ¾ LMe 

2 00()  98  69  41%  (2 8)  59 % (41) 29  17 % (5)  8 3% ( 2. 4) 

> .

2010 82 57  4 4%  (25)  5()%  (3 2)  25  8%( 2)  9 2%  (2 3) 

WU  7-'I  37  5<) o/o  (2 2) 41% (15) 37  11%(4)  89 % ( 33) • Whal steps  will  the  Commission  take,  ifarry,  tn provide  more  M111spm·<mcy  for 

documents  considered  111  open  meerings 

The  Commissioners  and  staff  are increasingly  focused  on 1his issue and  are  making concerted efforts to in crease the percentage of agenda  documents  that  arc released under the Commission' s po licy. particularly with respect to  primary  documents. 

9-1.  When  a r eque., ·tor  submils  a reqllest  fi,r  an  advisory  opinion,  what  policies  or  procedures 

apply  regarding: 

a)  inrμtiries  thm  may  be  made of the  requestor  before  considering  the  advisory 

opinion  requesl: 

h)  the  time  Iha!  may  elopse  belll'een  the  origi11a/  submission  and consideration of 

the  req11es1 ; 

> c)

the  scope  ofi11/or111ario1,  rhal  1111))'  be  obtainedfrom  the  req11est or  beJqre 

c,msidering  !he  requesr;  and d) the use that may be  made  (Jf  information obtainedfrom !he req11estor  before 

conMdering  rhe  req11e s r'. 1

The policies and procedures that apply  to  the advisory op ini on process arc set out  at  2 U.S.C. 

437fand  in Commission regulatiorts  at  11 C.F.R. part 112.  The  Co mm issi on  has  also  issued  two 

Federal Register notices regarding advisory opinion policies  nnd  procedures. See  FEC.  Revision 

to  Adviso1y  Opinion  Co111111e11/  Procedure.  58  Fed.  Reg. 62259 (Nov, 26, 1993): FEC,  Notice  of 

New  Advisor;v Opi11ion  Procedwes  und  Explanarion  nf £xis1ing  Procedures.  74  Fed.  Reg. 32 160 

(July  7,  2009). 1,astly.  a plain  language  description of the  process  for  obtaining advisory op ini ons is posted on the  Cllmmissi on 's  website  in  u question and answer  forma l.  See 

http://www.  fec, gov /pages/brochu  res/ao.s htm  I. 47 154         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00156 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 199 here 72282A.143 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

a)  Inqu iries  may  be sent  to  the  req4eStor  at  any  point  during  the  advisory  opinion process 

These  inquires may seek 10  darify  the qucstion(s) the requestor is asking. or to clear up ambiguous or  connicting  statements in the  request er's  written submissions, or to obtain additional information necessary  to  the  resolution of the questions presen ted.  In  addition, oral inquiries may  be  directed to requestors. or counsel for the requestors. if they are present at  t he 

Commission  meeting  d l1ring  wh ich  their advisory oplnions  arc  considered, See FEC, Notice of 

New  Advisory Opinion  Procedures  and  Explanation  of faistlng  Procedures.  74  Fed.  Reg. 32 160 (July 7, 2009). 

b)  Comm ission rul es  ot  11 CFR 11 2.l(d) requ ir e the Office of General Counsel to review all advisory  opiniQn  requests  within IO calendar days from the  date  of  receipt  and co notify the rcq uestors of any  deficienci es  in  their  requests.  OGC meets th is deadline I 00% of the time, and usually respon ds to requestors in one to four days. Beginning on the  d ate  the  advisory  opinion 

request is complete, the  Act  di rects t he Cornmission to  i ssue  an advisory opinion within 60 days. 2 U.S.C.  437fta)(  I).  This  time period is reduced to 20 days when  a complete request is received from a Pcdcral candidate, or his / he r authorized  committee  if the request is submitted within  60 

days before a  Federal  election. If the  applicable  deadline falls on a wet>kend  or holiday, the dead l ine is moved  to  the  next  business day. 11 CFR.112.4(c). If the Commission cannot agree on an  adv isory  opin i on,  the requester must be so notified within the 60- or 20 -day pe riod. l l CPR 112.4(a). At  ti mes,  the  Comm ission  expedit es  certain  highly  significant,  time-sensitive requests and issues  these  advisory opinions within 30 days. c) The scope of  the  i nfomiation  th at may be  obtained  from the  requestor  consists of any information the Commission may consider  necessary  10 render an advisory opinion. d) Wr itten information obtained from  the  requestor is  made  a pare of  the  oflicial  record  and 

placed on the Commission's website. It may be relied upon in the advisory opinion  is~ucd  by  the 

Commission. This information may  also  be taken into consideration by other interested persons-in determining if t heir  own  transactions or  activities  ate  indistinguishable in  all  materia l  aspects 

from those addressed in the  advisory  opinion  such  that  they  are  entitled to  rely  on the opini on under 2 U,S.C. 437(1)(c)(l)(B). 

95.  )l'hat  efforts  are  taken  to  c/ar ifj•  which  prMs  of any  material  issued  by  the  FEC  are 

prepared by  career  smb" cmd  which  pans  are  p,·epared  or approved by  Commi.~Jfoners? 

Materials  issued  by  the  FEC  arc  largely produced by  ca r eer  staff at the direction or  guidance  of the Commissioners.  Histodc~lly,  the Commission has  not  specified  whether  certain  documents are prepa.red by career  staff  or Comm issioners.  Excepti ons  include  Comm issio n er's  statements 

of reasons, concurring and d issenting op inions, agenda documents with a cover memorandum indicating that  particu l.ir  Commissioners  are  placing the documents on the Agenda and remarks by individual Comm issioners. The  Cornmis~ioncrs  recognize the importance of this distinct[on in certain  cir c1.11n$tances  and continues to look at  ways  to make it  clearer  for  those  entities  that 

In teract  with  the Commiss ion . The attached  informat ion,  provided on a  Division  basis,  furthet 

explains how materials are developed at the Commission. 48 155         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00157 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 200 here 72282A.144 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

The  attachment includes a list of  all  the  document s issued by  the  Commission  in  the  folloviing 

procee.dings:  Advisory Opinions,  Ru lcmakings,  the Enforcement Program in OGC. Audit, APP, and ADR. The list also describes  the  process  of creating each of  the  documents and wbich are approved by  the  Commission,  Recent  offorts  to clarify  the  Commission's  approval of  documeJlts 

written  by staff include the Co mmission 's revision of  its  Direclive  70, which requires among 

other  changes  that  Flnal  Audit  Rep orts  be  entltled  Ftnal  Audit Report of  rh e Commission to emphasize the Commission's approva l of the  Pinal  Audit Report. 

96.  What  documenrs  exisl  /o  define  the  rol es  of staff and  Co mmission ers al  th e FEC?  Please 

provide  copies  of any  such  docu111e11tJ .

The position descriptions of Commission emp loyces deline the roles of  staff. 

97.  Since  Ja1111a1 y 1. 2007.  how  11u111y  adl'/sory  opinion  requests  result  in  the  c:ommis$ioners 

considering multiple  dref/  opinions giving conj/icli11g opinions  (e.g.,  one  draft saying 

' )'es"  and  another  saying  •'no'')?  Wll(IT  percentage  is  this  of the  10,a/  number  of 

advisory  opinion  requesrs  considered? 

l'rom  January I, 2007 through June 30. 2011,  'the  Commission  has  considered a total of J3 7

advi sory  opinions.  for  55 of the se  advTsory  opinio ns.  or  40%, the Commission  co nsidered 

multiple  drafts . This  percentage includes all advisory opinions in which the requestor asked two or more questions  where  the draft opinions differed in answering  al  le3st  one  question  but were the sa me, or very similar, in an swer ing other  questi ons.  Th ese 55  advisory  opinions also include some  advisory  opinions in which the conclusions in different drafts were the  same,  but the 

analysis  leading to those conclusions  differed  sig nificantly . These 55  advis-ory  opinions do nol include preliminary  drafts  that  were  never made pub lic. 

98.  Please  list all  seminars  held  by  tlte  FEC.for /he  public  since  Jonuory  I,  1007. 

The Response to Question I 00 below includes this infonnalion, 

99.  Please  provide  a graph  depicting  tlte  composition of the  background  CJfthC'  nllendees  of 

th t!Se  ,Mmlnors  in  rhefollowi11g  ca r~ gvr ics:  Corporatio1,s,  politico/  committees,  candida,e 

com mi/lees,  House  campaigns,  !:>'enate  campaigns,  and  governmenr-offiliated  ind1vid11a/s. 

The  gr3ph  below  depicts the background  of  those attend i ng Commission  outreach  programs 

between  January 1. 2007, and  the  present.  Some of the  categories  iden1Hicd  in  the  inquiry 

overlap  (e.g ..  House /Se nate campaigns are a subset of  qmdidate  committees , whtch  are themselves  a type  of political  committee).  The  percentage  of candidate  commit1ee~  can be derived by combining  the  adjacent  Senate,  House, and Presidential  categories.  Political 

> 49

156 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00158 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 201 here 72282A.145 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

committees would include all ca tegories except Consultants and Government, and the 

Consultants  li kely represent political committees. 

Background of FE C Outreach Attendees  2007 ~2011 

• Consultants 

• Corporate • Labor 

• Trade • Membership • Nonconnected • s enate 

> House

Presidential 

• Party 

> Government

JOO. For each  seminar,  please provide the  number  of a11endeesfor each irack (candida!e, party, PAC). 

The Commission hosts a variety of educational outreach programs, including conferences, seminars and roundtable workshops. Conferences provide the most detail ed information and typically l ast two days; the day -long seminars are more condensed; and roundtable workshops focus on  a specific topic and run about 90 minutes. The state outreach workshops he ld in 2007 and 2009 h ave been discont in ued, based on ongoing cost-benefit analyses. In 201 l , th ose analyses contributed to the decision to replace the annual Washington, DC. conferences with less expensive seminars held at Commission headquarters. 50 157 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00159 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 202 here 72282A.146 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

The lists below id en tif y all of the Commission·s ed uca ti ona l ou treach programs from 2007 to the 

present  and include the tota l attendance for each e ve nt, as well as a breakdown of PAC, candidate, and party repr ese ntatives. 

2007 FEC Outre ac h Da ta 

t PACs  Candidates  Parties 

11/17/07 -F EC  Re e_~ ing  an j E-Flling  R~~ tables  98  13  5

' Total Attendees: 124 

(4/11/07-FEC  Usi ng t he New On-Une Advisory Opinion  Search  System  0

Total  Atten d ees:  14  · ·- -- I

~ .

4/24-25/07-DC  Conference for  Cofj>Orati o ns  89 0 0

! - T~ I Atte~de~ s:  - 'm '. 

5/ 10-1/0 7- DC conference for  Candidate~  and Pollti  cal  Parties 0 51 30 I Total Attendee s: 103 

t6/~5/07 -_ DC  Conf~e'!_ce  f~  Trade,  Membershie  and  tabor  Organizations  and thei r PACs  11 9 0 0Total Attendees : 143 

6/20-21/0?.- Den ~~- CO State  Outr~•~h_Workshops  fo f candidates,  P!f f!! es  and PACs 7 9

Total Attendees: 

~ ---- 27 6/26-27/07-Phoenix,  AZ  State Out reach  Workshops  for candidates,  Part)es  and PACs  u s 7Total Attendees: 24 

7/16-17/07 - Atl ~ nt a,  GA State  Outreac h_ Wo rkshops  for candidates, Parties and  PACs  14 3 6- ,-Total Attendees : 22 9/26-27/07-Seattle, WA Regional Conference for Candidates, Parties and  PACs  46 14 4

To ta~ Attendees: 82 

rll/6-7/07-St. Lou is, MO Regional  Conf@'.ence  fo r Candi dates , Parties a nd PACs 45 21 10 Total Attendees: 84 

51 158 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00160 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 203 here 72282A.147 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

2008 FEC Outreach Data 

.3/11·12/08-0C  Conference  forCo~rations  and their PACs 

l Total Attend;es:  . · . 109  · - I 78 0

~/2 · 3/08-;0C  Conference  forcandldat !_s  and Political Parties · 1 jTOI!!  Attendees: 90 44 21 43_ 2

1';;;~~4/08_-0C  Co nference forTrad e,  ~mb_ershlp  a_ nd La bor  Organizati~ns  and their PACs 1 103 

I~.  .J!olal  Attendees: 120 ' , ! 0 0

jS/27/08-FEC~oun_ dtab~  on Pre-Election Communications 

!Tota l Attendees: 42 

i 33  0

52 159 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00161 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 204 here 72282A.148 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

!} 009  FE ~ Outreach  Oat _!_  -l  PACs  Candld«es  Pries 

13/'3.-4/ 09 -DCC onfe ren ce  for Candidates and Political Parties 0 52 20 

T~tal  Attendees:  ---:- - 105:  ----. 

'14/2·3/09-DC  Conference for  Corporatlo~s  and their PACs 87  _Q  0Total Attendees:  lJJ7 

. . "

14/'l'J/09- FEC  Roundtable on  New  l.ob'!,ylst Bundli_ ng Ru les  24  5 2Total Attendees: 60 I5/21-22/09-DC Conference for Trade, Membership  an<!  Labor Organizations  and  their PACs 110 0 0

- Total Attendees: 'uo 

'6/2t;.25/09-Tallahassee,  FL  St~•  Outre~ Work;hops  forOl_r;!.dldates,  Parties and PACs s !6 

Total Attendees : 20  I

7 /8/09-FEf  Reportinl{_ and  E-F lllng Roundtables  39  13 

Total Attendees:  79 

7/2&-'19/09 -Co lumbus,  OH State  Outrea~h  Workshop~  for Candidat es, Parties and PACs _ 35 4 11 Total Attendees:  SO 

8/ _S-6/09- Kansa!  Qty, _MQ  State Outre_ach  Worltsho, ps  forCandidate _s,  Parties  and PACs 7 l2  11 

Total Attendees:  '19 

9/lS-16/09-Ch icago,  ILRegiona l Conference  forCandi~aies,  Parties  and PACs 38  22  lS Total Attendees : 80 

110/2&-'l'J/09-San  Francisco, CA Regional Conference for Candidates,  Partiesand  PACs  ' 45 20 21 

---- -- - . __........,--- -- -- --- --• 

Total  Attend,!!es:  101 1

53 160 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00162 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 205 here 72282A.149 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

# r Parties 

0

1

....!B  t 0 - .2._ 

13  ~

0

~ 3-_4_L10-:QC  ~on~r•~~~fo~Cand]dat~and  PolitlcaJ  Parties  rl Tota l Att e~dees:  --. 66 t i35 34 

16/8-9/10- DC _~f_erence  f<:>r  Trade,  Me":be"hip  •~d  Labor  Organizations  and their PACs 'Total Atten dees:  129 

0

6/30/ 10 - FEC Re porting  a_nd  E-Flling Roundtables 16 6

Total  Attendees:  41 -

26 2

4~  4

~nt  Name:  1_.l/17/10-FEC  Roundtable  ?n  Winding Down  the  campaign Total Attendees:  26 ' 

> .'

0 12 0

54 161 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00163 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 206 here 72282A.150 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

(2011 FECOutreach  ~~ta 

l

f!_/!2/!!_:- FEC ~ rtin~ ~~ ~ _

l Total Attendees: 57 0 41 

00

> 1

~/8/~1-FEC  Sf!.'!'_ lnar ~rTrad_e,  Me_!TI~f!hi P, and _l, abor  ()~n ~ ti2ns  '!!I d ~h !! r !'~ Cs 

'Total Attendees: SS 4S 0- t-

9 4

55 162         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00164 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 207 here 72282A.151 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

101  Were  1he  seminarsallf,11/y  funded  by  the  fees  co/lec1ed 7 Was  the  sta.b-lime  e:,;pended  /11 

preporingfor,  ntlending,  and teaching at the corferences fu nded by 1he  seminarfees? 

Please  provide  explanations  fo r your  answers. 

While many of  the- costs associated with the Comm issi on 's co nf erences are defrayed using registration  fees,  none o f the  Commiss1on·s  outreach programs is  fully  funded by the fees collected. The agency 's conference coordinator collecls  and  spends  conference  registration fees, under the  1erms  of a no-cost  contract  with the Commission. The  fees  cover a vari ety of ex penses, including  rcnia l  of  facilitie s, ca tering, and the coordinat or's  ree.  Curren tly.  the agency' s annual appropriation funds all staff time and travel, as  well  as any  expenses  forthe sem inars and roundtable worksh ops . However. beginning in FY 2012. the agency's co nfer ence coor dinator wilt a·lso manage registration fo r seminars an d roundtables, and will use th e fee sco ll ected to  cover  some of the  related  expenses.  Neve11hcless,  the Commission  expects  that  all 

st aff time and  travc-l  wi ll  con ti nue to  be  paid for with appropriated funds. These seminars  afe  an essential component to the  Commission's  efforts to  assist  candidates and committees in complying with  th e  stature and  regulations.  As noted  1n  the  answer  below,  the feedback  from  the semin ars is positive. I 02 . Please  provide  ony  s11m mar ie. ~prepared  nf evalrwtiom  ,1rjeedbm·k  recei ued /ram 

pnrticipanls  in 1h e seminar.,. 

Th e Com mission  seeks  feedback from a ll of  its  outreach  participants,  and uses  thar  information to improve  i ts  programs.  As detailed in the  attached  eva luation summar ies fo r all  outreach 

programs from January I. 2007, to the present, participants have cons istently rated the wo rkshops higher than 4 0 11 a 5 -p oinl scale. 

I 03.  Please  provide  a list  of nil  the  hot lines  t/101  Jhe  FEC  operates. 

a. For  each  hotline, plea.1 ·e provide  the  call volume by month since  January  1, 20() 7, b,  Please  pr(J\/ide  an  estimate  qj' th e amount of staff-hours  spenl  per  month  ro 

operate  each  hotlin e. 

c.  Please  provide  a list  oft he  issue  ar eas  covered by  each  ho/line. 

Th.e  Co mmi ssion  maintains  a toll-free telephone information line (8 00 -4 24-9530) that cal lers  can 

use to  reach.  any office  within  the  age nc y. Over the  years.  the Information Division and Public Records  Office  have  been among the most popular d est inations for  c.aller s.  Responses  rega rding the In fo rmation Division and lhe Public Disclo.sure Division are below. followed by dala and a discussion of  the  010  hot  lint . 163         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00165 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 208 here 72282A.152 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Inforrnation D i vis ion The Information Division's Communicatio ns Specialists rely on the statute,  regulations, 

Commission precedents, and other legal  resources  to provide inrormal gu idance co ca ll ers  with 

compliance questions. Topics range fr om the basics of contributions and filing deadlines lo the complexities of coordination and express advocacy. The amount of time a Specialist spends resea r ching  and  rcsp ohdihg  m phone inquiries va ries based  on  a number of  factors,  including proximity to  the  e iecti on,  changes  in the  law,  and the  Specialist 's  own level of experience. In the 

past.  phone inquiries could dominate a Speciali st's work day. As  iHustratcd  by  the  c hart below. 

the  growth of the  Int ernet  and  e- ma il  has changed that.  Now,  constituents can oft.en  find  answers 

w their questions on  the  Commiss illn's  website, or  they  may prefer  to  ~end  an  e-mai l,  rather than 

ca l l.  As a result. on average , Specialists now spend little more than half  their  time responding to phone ca lls. The rema i nder of the work day is spent working on otl1cr projects, including drafting responses to (he increasing numb er of email inquiries or  creating  and  updating the web content that answers constituents' questions. Tnfonnntion 2007 2008 2009 2010 20 11 Soecial ist Ca lls January 1,330 J.796 1,215 1,674 861 

Febniarv  1,042  1,559  83 2 985  578 

March  1,128  1 , 465 l.081 1,782 875 Aoril 1,120 1.756 921 1.606 809 

May  1,054  l,164 740 1.236 686 June- 1,171 1,638 1,01 I 1,389 993 Julv 1.152 1,727  J,064  1,266  -

Au~ust  l.095  1,376  820 1,2 81 -

September  1.047  _1,481  1,107 1,330 -

October 1,396 2.401 1,061 2,046 .

November  871 l , 879 78[ 885 -

December  989 7 13 864 563 -

TOTAL:  13 ,3 95 18,955 11,497 16,043 4, 802 Public Disclosure Divi sio nThe four Public Informati on Specialists of the Public Records Offi ce respond to requests rece ived by phone, email and letter, for campaign  linance  reports and data  and  Comm issi on documents. The requests  val)'  ill  complex ity  and  the time needed to  fuily  re.spolid.  Some requests arc handled in one  call  while others require the s ta fTto conduct research or make copies of documents. In re sponse to the requests, th e staff  provide  explanations of the di sclosu re 

requirements  and  av3ilahility  of campaign finance  data.  tutoria ls on d ownloading databases and electronic  filings,  customized  database searc he s. copies of  campaign  finance reports not availab le  on  the website (prio r to 1996), assistance with webs ite  navig:ation  to access  campaig n

finance  infomrntioo.  asslstance  with  an~iyzing  data  across  election cycles,  copies  of historical 

Commission  documents not  avitilnble  on the website {for example. Commission meeting 57 164         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00166 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 209 here 72282A.153 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

documents prior to 2000). When not responding to requests, the staff time is spent on  other 

office projects such as tracking federal candidates on the ballots of each state. collecting and publish ing the vote results of each electi on for federal office.  L1pdating  the directory of federal and state offices that provide campaign  linance,  e lection, and lobbying information and data , and processing documents for posting to the website. Public Di sclosure Division Phone/Letter /E mail Requests 2007 2008 2009  2010  2011 January 328  332  169 195 106 Feb ruary 432 264  200  159 154 March 432 243 204 215 219 April 346 269 209 231 17 4

May  448 230 218 231 190 June 296 261 221 208 197 July .318 365 209 193 August 243 256 \96 202 .September 382 275 183 148 October 33 1 211 220 198 November 359  165  196 174 December 264 207 195 206 

TOTAL: 4179  3078 

,-, .. 

2420  2360  1040 

> -··

Office  of Inspector Genera l 

The Offi ce of the Inspector Ge neral provided the fo ll owi ng respon se to Question 103: 

The OIG operates a hotline. a. The OlG has only separately tracked the volume of hotline contacts  (including  telephone calls, emails, and other methods of communicati on) since October  I,  20 I 0. Until October I, 20 I 0, hotline contacts  were  grouped with other outside contacts for tracki ng purposes. Both 58 165 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00167 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 210 here 72282A.154 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

hotline and other co nt acts were tr acked together on a monthly basis between January I, 2007, and March 31, 2008, after which time they were tracked on a semiannual basis until October  1, 

20 I 0. With these limitations in mind, the following data are provided; Combined hotline and ot her contacts tracked on monthly basis through March  2008: 

January 2007 160 

February  2007 46 March 2007 53 April 2007 202 May 2007 157 June 2007 94 July2007 l47 August2007 128 Sep t ember 2007 120 October 2007 81 November 2007 72 

December 2007 90 January 2008 109 

February  2008 196 March 2008 237 Comb ined hotline and other contacts tracked on semi-annual basis between Apr il 2008 and September 20 10: April I, 2008, through September 30, 2008 533 October I. 2008, through March 31, 2009 1,044 59 166 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00168 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 211 here 72282A.155 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 

April  I. 2009,  t"rough  September 30, 2009 856 October I. 2009. through March 31. 2010 200 April I, 2010, though Sepiember  30,  2010  126 Hotline contacts s ince October I, 2010: October 20 I 0 15 (all emai Is) November 20 I 0 7 (all emails) December20l0  4 (3 emails; r u_  S. Mail) January 20 I I 4 (3  emails;  I U. S. Mail) 

February  20 I I 3 (2.emails:  l facsimi le) 

March  201 l  i (teleph one call) April 2011 over 6,700  (all  emails which concerned the  Wtsconsln  Supreme Court  election, 

which is ou tside  the  iurisdiction of the FEC Olm May 201 l 77  (all emails, all but I concen1ing Wisconsin Supreme Court election) 

June'201  i 66 (1  telephone  l-a ll;  65 emails concerning Wisconsin Supreme  Cour1  election) b.  Approx.imately  two to  six.  OIG staff hours per month are spent to operate the hotline . c. The types of issues covered by t he FEC OIG hotl in e include a llegations of fraud, misconduct, or othe r i ss ues concerning FEC programs and operations, including vi ola ti ons  "of  law, rules. or regulations, or  mismanagemerit.  gross waste offut1ds, and  ~buse  of authority:· 5 U.S.C. app. 3 §§ 2, 7(a). 

I04 . The  FCC  run.r  seve1·al  regional  conferences  each  yea r to  educate  cmnpoign~  about 

pitfolls 10  m:oid  and  slay  clear  of having 10 be contacted later.for violotio11s.  Haw  is the program?  Are  there  changes  thal  youjiJresee  in  ih e near  future?  What  is the  percentage 

of campaigns that  panicipate  in the  cor,ferences?  Is  attendance  greater  in DC  or  al  the 

regional  conferences? 

The Co mmi ssio n' s rwo-day regional  co nlerences  have  long  been a cen1erpiece  o[' its  educational outreach program, and they continue to be popular and well-received. Attendees have consistently rat ed the conferences (and all of the out reach  progr'dmS)  higher th an 4 on a 5-point 60 167         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00169 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 212 here 72282A.156 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

scale. The challenge  has  been  to  match that quality  with  quantity.  While  anendance varies, regional conferences  have  typically  drawn  about  90  people  per event,  and  the DC c onf erences 

about  120. While  these  11t1mbers  are certainly  respectable  and often fill  thc  venue. they represent a very small percentage or those invo lved in  federal  campaigns. Overa ll. l ess than 20% of campaigns send  staff  to a Commission conference. Of  course,  as  noted  previously,  these 

conferences represent only a portion  of the public education program. Nevertheless,  attendance 

stalistics did figure prominently in the decision to replace  the  annual  two-day conferences in Washington,  DC,  with  considerably  le ss expensive one-day  seminars  held  at  the Commission. By  redm:ing  the cost.  the  Commission hopes to attract more attendees. Additionally, hosting these seminars at the Commission will enable it to offer constituents  the  option to  participate  ll\ 1e

on-line,  beginning in 20)2, By eliminating travel costs for those outside the DC area,  th e

Commlsslori  may be able to reach even more  of an  audience. The l nitial  response  to the 

sem inars  has  been positive, but some attendees have  c)(pressed  a preference  for the more  formal 

co,,ferences.  As always, the Commission 's outreach  p-rogram  will  continue  lo be  evaluated  and improved. Should these latest changes warrant additional  modifit-ations,  appropriate adjustments will be made. 

Ollir:f!  oflnspec1 or  Geneml 

105 The 0/G  recently  decided  to  revise  its policyfor  re\•iewlng  and  eva/11n li11g  hotline 

complaints.  Who/,  exactly,  were  these  revisions?  Whal  was  the  reasoning  behind the 

decision  lo  revise  the  policy?  f/01• · has  ii  affected  the  responses  lo  complaints? 

Th e Office of the In spec t or Genera l prov ided  the  rc.$pO n se  to  QueBtion  105. The FEC OIG G11idelinesfor  Evalziating  O/G Hotline Comp laints became effective July  8,  2009. The new pol i cy provides guidance for reviewing  nnd  evaluating hotline complaints, and classifies hotline  cum  plaints -as either high or low priority. The: reasoning behind the decision lo 

revise  che  hotline policy was to  standardi,zc  and formalize the hotline complaint review and evaluation process. Specifically, the revised policy provides for specific timeframes  for  OlG investigative staff to review hotline complaints and recommend a  decision  on  the  appropriate 

course  of action.  The  policy  also provides specific cr iteria to categorize hotline complaints  as 

either high or low priority.  thereby  helping to ensure that hi gh priority hotline complaints are provided the necessary resources  and  attention. The revised policy provides the OJG  itivestigator 

wirh  specific  criter1a to  prloritize  the OIG  investigative  caseload to ensure all complaints  are 

rcspoi1dcd  to  In a timely  and appropriate manner  and  has  effected  the  response;  by providing a more  effective  and  efficient  investigative process. 

6\ 168         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00170 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 213 here 72282A.157 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

I 06.  The  O/G participated  in  an Enterprise Content Management  re,·iew  of 1h e FEC,  Wha( 

were  the  res 11lt Y of1his  revi•-w?  Whot  we1·e  the  result~  of the  following  planning  S/l'ss ion 

held to  discuss  OJG  processes  and  business  needs? 

The Office of the In spector Genera l prov ided  th e following  respon~e  to Ques ti on 1 06: 

The  PEC (age ncy) co ntracted with a consulting co mpany to conduct an enterprise content manngemenl (ECM)  system  study  of  the  agency. The purpose of tho  ECM  syst em study was to identify ECM requirements and associated business processes; provide consulting expertise on 

requirements  analysis, potential technical solutions, and bosiness proce ss  improvemen t,;  and to pro pos e implementation strategies that  effectively  bahm ce  cost  schedule, and  risk  to deliver 

ECM solutions that solve busin ess  problems  and pro vide meas urable val ue . Spec ifi ca ll y, the scope of the ECM  system  st ud y project  was to rec ommen d a trustworthy, ECM  and  electronic re co rd k ee ping syst em for the entire FEC.  As  a matter of  clarification,  the ECM review  was  aproje ct managed by the agency, a nd not the OIG. The OlG  staff  was  interviewed, along with other  FEC  offices,  during planning sess ions by the consulting company to determine  the  OIG's bus iness processes a nd needs.  The  results  of rhis  planning session  were.  a 0 owc hart  of  tho  OIG's busine ss processes a nd a description of  how  the  OIG's information is stored electronically and i n paper form, 

The FEC p rovid ed the  foll ow ing  respo n se to Quest ion 106: 

The  results of the ECM system study and  the  0 10  fo ll owing planning session  arc  co ntained  in 

the  attach ed  documents. 

107.  Please  provide  a copy1Jj the  new  OIG Hollineposter.  How  effec/ii-e  have  !he  new 

posters  been  in  encouraging  FEC  employees  a nd Agency  con rra c1 ors  10  report 

allegations  Lo  the  OIG? 

T he  O ffi ce  of  th e Inspector  Ge ne ral  p r ov i ded l he res p onse to Q u estion J07. A copy  01 1h c-OIG's  ho tline poster  is  being provided  with  th is response  as  a separate documenL The  PEC  OTG does not track the imp etus for complaints made to rh e OIG. Although  a direct 

correlation  between the use  of  tho  hot line posters a nd number of complaints is n ot feasible, sin ce 

the  fraud posters have been  distrlbuted,  the OIG  received  six  hotllne  complaints,  and  of  these  six 

hotline complaints, o ne investigation  ,vas  opened.  The  Hotline posters have been part of  a

br oade r outreach effort that  ))as  received positive comments from FEC employees. Dur ing 20 I 0and early 20 11 , the OIG  conducted  a series  of outreac h  briefings  through out the agency Jo discuss the OlG hot line, mission, and o th er topics related to  !he  OIG .62 169 Mr. HARPER . I will now recognize myself for some additional questions, and this time we will make sure we stay on the clock. So first thing that I would do is direct a comment back to the ranking member’s questioning about the EAC and the cost. I be-lieve Chair Bauerly mentioned that she did not know some of the figures, of what they would be. But just to make the commissioners aware, according to the CBO score of the bill, the net effect after cost to the FEC would be $33 million less spending over 5 years. So those figures are available in the CBO report, to let you know. And I would like to ask you about, I ask the chair, when you were answering questions by Mr. Schock earlier, there was a ques-tion about the FEC policy that was adopted back in 1999—obvi-ously, you were not on the Commission at that time—about the fact that at that point that there was a different enforcement, depend-ing on which Federal Circuit district you were in. My question would be, is that policy still being used or has that—just so that I am clear, is that still the policy, to have it dif-ferent in different districts or is it uniform now, according to your enforcement? Ms. B AUERLY . Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my knowledge, at this point in time the Commission is not en-gaging in what—the legal doctrine of intercircuit nonacquiescence, which is a very fancy way of saying what you just said, that in dif-ferent circuits different law might govern the Commission’s actions. At this point in time, again, I don’t know of any that we are ac-tively engaging in. Mr. H ARPER . Could you confirm that and let us know? Ms. B AUERLY . Sure, we would be happy to. Mr. H ARPER . Thank you very much. Now, there was some talk that the enforcement manuals were outdated, that releasing those would be confusing; and my question is, if it is outdated, what is being—we were saying, what is the en-forcement manual? What is that document when we are saying the current enforcement? What is that? Is that available? Ms. BAUERLY . Our enforcement division operates its standards with a number of documents that are not housed in one thing. The thing that we were talking about, the thing that is in a binder that is called the enforcement manual, has not been updated on paper simply because that is not how agencies work anymore. As we all know, we store things electronically. Mr. H ARPER . May I interrupt just very briefly? Because some-where within your written responses that were submitted I believe there was a statement that said the enforcement manual was up-dated via memos and emails. Is that where you are going? Ms. B AUERLY . Yes, that is—and, again, obviously I don’t have an office within the enforcement division, so I don’t have personal ac-cess to those. I don’t have those sitting on my desk, either. But that—again, Commissioner Walther’s effort a couple of years ago was to try to compile all that information in a usable way for peo-ple who are engaging in our process. Mr. H ARPER . Okay, and I will ask this question for the chair and the vice chair. I believe all have publicly stated there is an agree-ment on a large portion of the needed changes to the FEC regula-tions post-United Citizens—or Citizens United, excuse me. Why         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00171 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

170 hasn’t the Commission acted on those points of agreement and up-dated its regulations since that decision? And then when might we expect that to be updated, since that is going back to the decision, I believe, in January of 2010? Ms. B AUERLY . Yes, Mr. Chairman. In January of 2010, of course, the Supreme Court struck down several provisions of the statute, and we have corresponding regu-lations that were enacted as part of those. The Commission has on two occasions put out documents suggesting an NPRM, of course, notice of proposed rulemaking, the very beginning of our rule-making process; and, as I think Commissioner Walther referenced, we were unable to reach agreement on the parameters of that. I think, frankly, there is disagreement amongst Commissioners in terms of what issues are raised by that case. Because the Court decision struck down the statute and not our regulations, there is some overlap in our regulations in terms of some of those provisions at issue. For example, after Wisconsin Right to Life, we provided a regulation regarding how to report that activity. The Citizens United decision, of course, overtakes Wisconsin Right to Life, so one question that some of us would like to ask is whether we should rethink that or consider making any changes. So we were unable thus far to be able to do that, but, as the vice chair mentioned in her opening statement, we do have pe-titions pending before us with respect to some of the provisions at issue in Citizens United, and I am hopeful we may be able to take action on that soon. Mr. H ARPER . My time is up. Perhaps one of the others will ask you to follow up on that in just a moment. Now I will recognize the ranking member, Mr. Gonzalez, for a second round of questioning. Mr. G ONZALEZ . Thank you. I am only going to take a couple sec-onds, because the chairman and I could go for days on the EAC being subsumed by you. But I have just been handed this, and this is a quote from the CBO: Enacting H.R. 672 would have no significant effect on reve-nues. They are accountants, and I understand that, and they can put a pencil to things, but, given your schedule, your duties, what it would take to assume those other responsibilities, I think today’s testimony clearly indicates that you can’t put a dollar figure on it so that we can make representations to the supercommittee that it is going to result in savings. I am also a strong proponent of the focus and energy that the EAC brings to a specific area of campaign or elections. But I am going to ask Vice Chair Hunter and Commissioners McGahn and Petersen, because your response to my question about are the dis-closure laws adequate today in order for you to do your job, and each of you said yes. So I would just ask you, beyond the obvious, to identify a donor, we establish whether they legally can donate or not. Beyond that, what is the value to identifying donors to any endeavor, entity that can impact an election in this country? Ms. H UNTER . The value is that the public has the ability to know who gave to a candidate’s committee or to a political committee and to all committees that are required to disclose their donors under         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00172 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

171 the law. I believe some of the committees you may be referring to are not currently—they are not considered political committees; and, therefore, they do not have to disclose their political donors. Mr. G ONZALEZ . And do those committees, by the legal nature that you just referred to that exempt them or whatever it is, do they impact political campaigns in this country today? Ms. H UNTER . I believe that the Supreme Court has held that if they are making independent expenditures that are not coordi-nated with candidates or party committees that it is not possible for those independent expenditures to corrupt or to have the poten-tial to corrupt those candidates or party committees. Mr. G ONZALEZ . Do they influence elections? I mean, this is a practical question. We can sit here and say what is the Supreme Court going to say. I mean, they have already equated a corporation to an individual. We can go from there. But I am just asking everyone in this room, my colleagues and such, do these entities impact and make a difference in elections today in this country? Ms. H UNTER . Yes, they do. Of course. Just as my neighbor does when he is talking to me as I walk down the street. There is a mul-titude of different factors that affect elections. Mr. G ONZALEZ . I think there is a huge difference between you talking to a neighbor and the moneys that these groups raise and spend to influence elections. I mean, it is obvious what is going on, and you may say it is the Supreme Court and the legal nature of an entity that exempts them. My point is, what is a rose by any other name? Mr. McGahn, you answered yes. Mr. Petersen, you answered yes. What is the value? I mean, why should we know who is contrib-uting to organizations or entities that influence our elections? Mr. M CGAHN . Well, for those who give to candidates, I think we need to know because of corruption or appearance. I think the vot-ers have a right to know who is taking money from whom before they vote for the person. With respect to noncandidates, I think the argument is that the voter can factor in how they view the message based upon who is paying for the message. Some say there is value to that. Some say that that actually just clouds the message. The message ought to stand on its own. You know, there is case law in both sides. Anonymous speech is still protected in some instances. Some in-stances it is not. There could be harassment against the donors and all that. But there is some value. The courts have recognized it in some sort of subjective way. Certainly we all agree there is some value there. The question is whether it is enough of a value to com-pel people to say who they are when they speak. There is argu-ments on both sides. The Court has drawn lines on this. Mr. G ONZALEZ . I only have a couple of seconds. I want to give Mr. Petersen a chance. Mr. P ETERSEN . I mean, the value of disclosure—just to repeat some of what has been said but to add some additional—when money is given to a candidate—disclosure serves an anti-corruption purpose. When we are in the realm of independent speech, the Supreme Court starting in Buckley talked about the value is for the public         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00173 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

172 who is receiving the message to be able to take into account the person who is funding that message. That is a piece of information that they can take into account when evaluating the merits or the lack thereof of that particular speech. It is a different interest in the independent realm than it is when we are talking about disclo-sure of donors to candidates. Mr. G ONZALEZ . Different interest, same result. Mr. Chairman, I know I have run out of time, but I ask unani-mous consent to tender into the record Mr. Brady’s statement. Mr. H ARPER . Without objection. Thank you. [The statement of Mr. Brady follows:]         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00174 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

173         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00175 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 222 here 72282A.158 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

Opening Statement of Rep.  Robert  A. Brady Committee on House Administration Subcommittee on Elections Hearing on: "Federal Election Commission: Reviewing  Policies,  Processes and Procedures" November 3, 2011 

10:00mi 

l want to thank the chairman for holding this oversight hearing on the Federal Elections Commission. The  comminee  has exercised  its  oversight role of the FEC over the years by approving committee reports on legislation and including oversight findings, reviewing  reports  sent to Congress, infonnally and fonnally meeting with  the 

commis~iooers,  meeting with the inspector General,  the  General Counsel and Congre.ssional Relations office to gather more clarity on issues and  work  to improve the functions of the agency. And let me be clear  - the PEC is an agency that needs to improve. 

It  is timely that we have the FEC here  today,  just as  a new trend is starting to emerge in campaign finance: the Super PAC. Prior to the Supreme Court's decision in Citizen's United, and subsequently SpeechNow.org, the Super PAC  did 

not  exist.  There is now roughly one Super PAC registering  with  the FEC per day .Officially known as " independent-expenditure only  committees,"  Super PAC's are not subject to the same contribution limits as other fundraising  groups  and while they must disclo se their donors, it is not always clear, as a result of tactics such  as 

shell corporations, exactly who is donating. A lack of meaningful disclosure 

ooupled  with unlimited contribution limits is a dangerous mix lo a democracy. Never before in  our  history has the role of money in elections been more influential than it is today. This new  form  of outside spending has dramatically increased the cost of federal elections. As a result, it is imperative that the FEC ensure the integrity and fairness in our electoral system. It must level the playing field. Since 2003, the Com.mission's percentage of split votes -- votes that did  not 

result in a decision on enforcement actions -- skyrocketed from less than I% in 2003 to more than I 0% today. Further, the percentage of split advisory opinion votes is  at  its  highe st level, 29%, since 2008, when it was 22%. While few will debate the merits of the FEC's mission, it is the  agency"s 

propensity to deadlock, sometimes on the most mundane of issues, that has me 174         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00176 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert offset folio 223 here 72282A.159 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

concerned. It is an agency full on controversy and dissension often times the  result 

of panisan po litics rather than a genuine disagreement of ideas.  Ir  has been jokingly observed that the  PEC  cannot even agree on which day of the week it is. I am not inclined to believe this  is  a result of thoughtful debate but rather a strict and blind adherence to  partisan  beliefs. We cannot afford to continue this political charade at the expense of much needed enforcement and regulation. Not only are  the  percentages of split votes increasing, but the n umber of total votes taken decreasing. Since 2003, the number of  total  votes taken in enforcement actions  is  down from 1.036 to 139. With respect ro audits,  tile  number is down  from 

59 to  13.  Regulation votes have seen a decrease from 29 to 11. Advisory opinion votes are down from 51 in 2003 to 41 in 2010. This is a troubling trend. This Committee, and Congress, have taken up several pieces of legislation  that  are within the FEC's purview. Some, like the administrative fines program, have become law, while others, such as the DISCLOSE Act. were never enacted. America wiU continue to  hold  scheduled elections, regardless of inaction or deadlock  at  the FEC and those elections require rules and protections for their continued  safety  and integrity. This Committee has always encouraged disclosure and I would  a5k  that we continue to embrace the sunlight that should be cast upon 

all  elections. Prior to the FEC's creation. Congress sought to limit the effect that wealthy individuals and special interests could have on elections  through,  among  oth _er 

things,  laws  mandating disclosure of campaign coan·ibutions. When Congress  saw 

these  laws  were not enough, the FEC was created to enforce them. We are already in  the  midst of presidential primaries. ln little more  than  a year,  we will have another presidential election. We, as voters, are in an era of uncertainty when it comes to our elect ions and who is  funding  them. The Supreme Court , whose Justices are appointed by the President to lifetime terms, has already drastically transformed the face of  campaign  finance by al lowing for Super PA C's , and more change is inevitable. As such. it  is  critical that the  FEC  fulfills  its intended m1ss10n. I would again like to thank the Chairman for calling this hearing and I look forward to hearing  the  testimony of our witnesses. 

> 2

175 Mr. H ARPER . I now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Schock, for additional questions. Mr. SCHOCK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will run through some here. Mr. Chairman, you had asked specifically about why there hadn’t been changes. The commissioners said there will be changes. My question is when. Is there a timeline on Citizens United? Ms. B AUERLY . Oh, thank you. I think we weren’t sure which timeline you were looking for. We are in the process of considering when we might schedule that. We are hopeful by the end of the year. We are looking at each other because, frankly, these processes are complex and we want to make sure that we consider all of the options when we do put things out for public comment. Mr. S CHOCK . Okay. I want to be clear there is consensus among you that in addition to the manual you support also releasing the fee schedule or the penalty schedule. Ms. B AUERLY . Representative Schock, if I could make sure I un-derstand your question, you are asking whether there is consensus among us about releasing our penalty schedule? Mr. S CHOCK . Yes. Ms. B AUERLY . Again, I believe that you heard consensus among us that we think that should be public. I think the challenge will be making it for some set of documents, some pieces of paper that at least four of us can agree on to make public. There are some dis-agreements over what the formula should be. And, again, we would want to also make sure that any docu-ments released do indicate that the Commission has discretion to make modifications in either direction and also to note that we must conciliate with people and so penalties at the end of the day may look different than they do on these formulas. Mr. S CHOCK . Okay. Well, I just want to state for the record, with all due respect to the commissioners, Mr. Chairman, I would sup-port your subpoena request so that we are sure that we get all the information that we are requesting. Finally, I want to follow up on my last question about the re-quest for more information. You stated that there is really no pen-alty for people to—for committees that don’t respond to the request for more information, there is no specific penalty. However, I will tell you, as a candidate, when you receive the request for additional information, it states specifically on that document from the FEC that if a candidate does not respond with the information that you are requesting, we will then be subject to an audit. So I would suggest that, again to Mr. Lungren’s point about ap-pearances for a candidate who is trying to spend as much time get-ting to know the voters, when we get a document from you request-ing information that we are not required to produce based on law, based on statute, followed by a statement that if we don’t compel to provide that information we will be subject to an audit, I would suggest to you that that is inconsistent. It is not helpful. And I would urge the commissioners to review that practice, quite frank-ly. Ms. BAUERLY . Thank you. If I might, Representative Schock, clarify what I said. I didn’t mean to suggest—I agree with you that         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00177 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

176 an audit certainly would be viewed by some as certainly some con-sequence, perhaps a penalty. What I was, I think, responding to was your statement about due process; and, as I mentioned, we do have a process by which com-mittees may come directly to the Commission to seek further guid-ance on whether they need to respond to that letter. If information in a letter can be resolved easily, the public record is complete; and there is nothing further taken with respect to that request for in-formation. If the information remains inadequate, the discrepancies in the report are not corrected, for example, if there are mathematical er-rors, cash on hand does not match, for example, those things may over the course of time if a committee demonstrates an inability to comply with their disclosure requirements, then that committee may be referred to a number of different processes within the building, including ADR enforcement or audit. So I apologize if I wasn’t clear about the process—the full process that is involved with request for information. Mr. S CHOCK. But you can understand where we are coming from. If you are being requested to provide information that you are not required to provide and then also the dangling audit is hung above your head, there might as well not be a law that says what you can provide. You might as well be able to request whatever it is you want so long as you have the audit to be able to hang over our heads if and when we don’t provide the information requested. Ms. B AUERLY . Representative Schock, we send requests for infor-mation when there are discrepancies on reports that indicate that there may be more information required. All of that is based on the existing law and the regulations. There is no—not in RFAI—— Mr. S CHOCK. Let me give you one example where I think there is a discrepancy. In June of 2011, the FEC sent a letter to Cross-roads GPS requiring more information, demanding that they dis-close their donors. By law, groups are only required to disclose this information to the FEC if the contributions are earmarked for spe-cific independent expenditures. That is the law. Crossroads has made it clear publicly throughout the press as well as in documents to you that their response to the FEC would be that its reports were full and complete and that they had no do-nors to report because no contributions were earmarked for a par-ticular election. So it was out there, it is public, it has been stated, and yet the FEC sent them a request for more information requir-ing them to submit—to provide their donors, and then once again stating if you don’t provide the information requested, you will be subject to an audit. So I would just encourage you that your legal counsel should make sure that what you are requesting is, in fact, required by law before you compel them because—and not in every instance as you are suggesting is it just a clerical error or some clarification that needs to be made on a filing statement. I believe my time has expired. Thank you. Mr. H ARPER . I will now recognize the gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Rokita, but I am going to give you an opportunity to answer, Madam Chair. Ms. B AUERLY . Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00178 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

177 I just wanted to make clear to Mr. Schock that requests for infor-mation are sent based upon the review of the reports. The RAD an-alysts don’t go out and look for information about committees that they might—whose reports they might be reviewing. So I just want to make clear that the report analyst is looking at the report being filed by the committee. They would not go out and look at other information about the committee. In certain instances, you might view that as a det-riment to the committee. In other instances, committees might view that as unfair to them. So what we look at is the report that is filed with us. So I just wanted to clarify what our process is. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. H ARPER . Thank you. I will now recognize Mr. Rokita for questioning. Mr. R OKITA . Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the way the discussion is going. I would like to yield 2 minutes to Congressman Schock. Mr. S CHOCK . Well, Mr. Rokita, thank you for your generosity. Mr. R OKITA . I am new. Mr. SCHOCK . Shifting gears here, last year, the Commission issued an advisory opinion which gave Google permission to run po-litical ads, yet denied Facebook an advisory opinion on nearly an identical type of ad. Can you explain why? Ms. BAUERLY . Congressman Schock, the advisory opinion in Google indicated that there were, I believe, four commissioners who agreed that the way that the ad was presented on Google would comply with the law. My view of that one was that because of the way the Google ad was structured that it would be going to a land-ing page where there was a full disclaimer on it. My view was that that satisfied our alternative disclaimer requirement. I won’t speak for other commissioners who may have voted in favor of that Google opinion. I think there were obviously different ways that different commissioners got to that result of saying that that was an appropriate course of conduct for the Google ads. With respect to Facebook, that was a different type of ad. Facebook has a different format, and the request indicated that they thought they were entitled to an exemption from the dis-claimer requirements. Again, I will speak only from my view. Others may want to in-clude theirs. I did not think that it met the existing exemptions for a disclaimer requirement. Of course, when the Internet rulemaking was conducted a few years ago, the one area where the Internet is part of our regula-tions is for ads placed for a fee on another’s Web site. We have at-tempted—we understand that technology is changing. These are very important innovations for campaigns and candidates and vot-ers to use, and we recently put out an advance notice of rule-making to try to gather input on whether the Commission should or should not engage in a rulemaking to address this issue. We think this is very important. The Commission obviously can’t adopt a Twitter rule and aFacebook rule and a Google rule, but we do want to make sure that we are trying to keep up with innovation if we can, and we wel-come public comment on that notice. It is out for public comment         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00179 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

178 right now, and comments are due in the next few weeks. So we are looking forward to some guidance not only from users of this tech-nology but other providers. Mr. R OKITA . Reclaiming my time. Mr. S CHOCK . Thank you very much, Commissioner. Mr. H ARPER . Reclaiming his time, Mr. Rokita. Mr. R OKITA . If I knew Congressman Schock was going to ask my question, I wouldn’t have yielded any time. Mr. S CHOCK . I have more. Mr. R OKITA . With my remaining time, I would like to go to the vice chairwoman and see if you want to respond at all to any ques-tion that Mr. Schock may have asked or Mr. Harper may have asked. Ms. H UNTER . Thank you, Congressman. I would like to follow up on the RFAI question. While it is true that the letters are sent out pursuant to the RAD manual that we have been discussing a lot this morning, you have to have four votes to get the RAD manual to be approved. Several years ago, several of the commissioners brought up the exact letter that you are referring to, Congressman, the letter that was sent to American Crossroads. But years ago it was sent to a different group—and I can’t remember what the organization was—and we, too, had an issue with the letter saying that this is information that the FEC is not entitled to ask. And you are right. The letter does end by saying you could end up in an enforcement proceeding or an audit proceeding, because that is absolutely true. But we didn’t have a fourth vote to change that letter. So we are aware of that issue. It is just there is only so much we are able to do. And something that came to mind as you were talking, I think it would be a helpful improvement to add a sentence to the RFAI letter. As the chair notes, we have a new policy now that outside groups and the public can ask the Commission to weigh in on out-standing legal issues. So I think it would be helpful to reference that policy in the RFAI letters so people are fully aware that they can contest the premise of those letters. Thank you. The C HAIRMAN . Mr. Rokita, would you yield for a second? I was just thinking that maybe you can take care of this by in-cluding RFAI letters in the Anti-Bullying Act that is coming through the Congress. Mr. R OKITA . So noted. Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Mr. H ARPER . I will now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Nugent, for additional questions. Mr. N UGENT . Thank you, Mr. Chairman; and I concur with the chairman’s idea. You know, the comment has been made about, you know, we are worried about, particularly as I relate to a candidate, that there is a threshold that you don’t want them to know about because they may violate it up to a threshold. I will tell you that I don’t know any candidate that wants to get a letter from the FEC saying that you are in violation of anything. Because that in and of itself, I will tell you, is a sanction that most of us as candidates always were         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00180 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

179 concerned about, whether you are running in a State but also par-ticularly in a Federal election. Let me ask, on the RFAIs, do you believe that is part of the en-forcement action? And each commissioner I would like an answer, do you believe that is part of the enforcement action, starting with Commissioner Walther. Mr. W ALTHER . Well, I think the issue is that it could be the be-ginning of it. I think the RFAIs serve a purpose because it offers somebody who has filed—and there is a lot of people who file and they don’t really understand our reg book very well, make mis-takes, and it gives us the opportunity to communicate informally on ways in which they might be able to comply. So there is a ben-efit to that. I think—and I asked the question right now of my assistant. I thought we had sent out—when we sent out an RFAI—a warning— that they do not have to answer anything. And I was just told now that that is only in the case where we think that is so, and some-times they really have to answer the question because it is re-quired by law. I don’t support that. I think we ought to have a warning, at least, that you are not obligated to answer anything if you don’t want to. Mr. N UGENT . So—— Mr. W ALTHER . So I am not sure exactly how that—— Mr. N UGENT . Do you believe that is an enforcement action or not, the RFAI? Mr. W ALTHER . At that particular time, no. Mr. N UGENT . Okay. Commissioner Weintraub. Ms. WEINTRAUB . I view the RFAIs primarily as a disclosure mechanism to ensure that the reports that are filed contain all the information that the law requires. Mr. N UGENT . Okay. Chairman. Ms. B AUERLY . I agree with Commissioner Weintraub. It is the way that we ensure that we are enforcing—that we are complying with our duty to ensure that the reports are accurate when they are filed. As Commissioner Walther noted, at some point, if there are enough discrepancies or there are enough problems with someone filing, it may later move further down the process. But, again, that would have to be a substantial number of problems and ongoing problems with reports in order to get there. We have an obligation to make sure the public has access to accurate information, and when we see problems, that is the step in doing so. Mr. N UGENT . Commissioner Hunter. Ms. H UNTER . They are absolutely part of the enforcement proc-ess, as there are consequences; and if one doesn’t answer them, you know, in total, you can be referred for enforcement—or for audit. Mr. N UGENT . Commissioner McGahn. Mr. M CG AHN . I think the FEC has wanted it both ways. On the one hand, it is not enforcement when it is convenient; on the other hand, it is. It is enforcement when we talk about the manual be-        

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00181 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

180 cause all of a sudden the manual is secret, but it is not enforce-ment because it is in the public record. Personally, I think they are a form of enforcement. I think it is a form of branding someone without an opportunity to be heard. When they were only available in the public records room, okay, they are public. But now they are on the Internet and, as you know, they end up in 30-second TV ads and you don’t really have a meaningful opportunity to respond. It is a very real issue, and I think they are a form of enforcement. Just if I could take one second, there are examples of things the Commission in the past has asked for that they don’t—that they aren’t entitled to ask for. Party committees used to get an RFAI all the time when they did a coordinated expenditure and an inde-pendent expenditure, saying, we see you have done both, you know, please explain how you can do both. Well, the Supreme Court in Colorado Republican said you could do both. It was an old letter that predated Colorado Republican that really had never been updated. A lot of this has been fixed. There is more work to be done, but there are things that are being asked for that still are on the cusp beyond the letter to Crossroads. So I just want to echo that. But I think the answer is it is part of the enforcement process. Mr. N UGENT . Mr. Petersen. Mr. P ETERSEN . I agree, I think it also is part of the enforcement process. Even though it may not be part of the formal process where a matter under review number is assigned to it and so forth, it can definitely lead to that. And I have often wondered why we do make those public, and I think as a result of them leading to or potentially leading to an enforcement matter, I think we should question whether or not they should remain public on the Web site. Mr. N UGENT . And I agree. I think the question was, and you may—panel members—some panel members may disagree that it is an enforcement action, but if I am held accountable to the public in regards to something that you are just—you are saying it is just—well, we are just trying to clarify a possible mistake in num-bers in addition. It could be, you know, you had 228 or you had 230 donors. The damage has already been done once you release that on your Web site. It then becomes—that is enforcement, I guess, through omission on your part by just releasing it. And part of what the chairman had mentioned about the bullying aspect of it, particularly for those first-time candidates, it can be a crusher to their viability, and so the unintended consequence is it is an enforcement. It may not be the way you sought, but it is to the candidate. I am over time. Mr. H ARPER . The gentleman yields back. I now recognize the gentleman from California, chair of the full committee, Mr. Lungren, for questions. The C HAIRMAN . My observation would be if I received a letter from a government agency that said if you don’t answer this, you could be audited, that sounds like a threat. You may not see it that way, but I can certainly see a reporter saying candidate A received a letter from the FEC threatening an audit. Boy, boom, that kind of puts a negative connotation on it, I would think. So when you         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00182 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

181 put words like that in there, I think you ought to realize what the impact is. I was just thinking from Mr. Gonzalez’s questions about Citizens United and influencing and so forth, does anybody here know who financed the original publication of the Federalist Papers? Mr. M CG AHN . Publius. The C HAIRMAN . Did he pay for it? Mr. M CG AHN . It is anonymous. The C HAIRMAN. Well, I am just saying, should that have been disclosed? Mr. M CG AHN . No. The C HAIRMAN . I think that probably influenced the founding of this Republic, if I am not mistaken. And they used other names, and they didn’t tell anybody where they got their money, and it was done to persuade legislatures to adopt the Constitution to give us protections under the First Amendment. Maybe they didn’t un-derstand. Let me just ask this question, Madam Chair. Under current law, could a candidate designate an individual other than their treas-urer of their campaign to dispose of campaign assets if they were to pass away? Do you have any flexibility in allowing a campaign— a candidate to say it is not my treasury. I want—in the unfortu-nate situation that I might pass away, somebody else might know a better idea of how I would want those campaign funds to go to charitable institutions than my campaign manager who—I mean my campaign treasurer who I may hire because he or she speaks your language and knows how to make sure I don’t get one of those audit letters. Ms. B AUERLY . Chairman Lungren, if I understand your question, the question is, were a candidate to pass away, could a new treas-urer be assigned for that committee? The C HAIRMAN . Yeah, could they designate, in other words, one person for purposes of campaign treasury but if in the untimely event they passed away someone else to dispose of the campaign assets other than the designated treasurer? Ms. B AUERLY . Of course, a campaign may designate a treasurer and an assistant treasurer at any point in time. It wouldn’t require any other circumstances. So there could always be sort of a backup person, and we frankly encourage that because that is very useful in case something were to happen to the treasurer rather than the candidate. At this point in time, I don’t believe we have specific regulations on that. Were such an unfortunate event to occur, I think the Com-mission would make every effort to work with a committee in terms of ensuring that whatever the wishes of the candidate were could be carried out. The C HAIRMAN . Okay. Thank you. Mr. H ARPER . I want to thank everyone, and also we do look for-ward to seeing those manuals and penalty schedules. We think that that is an important issue for us today. I think it is good that we have had this hearing after many years of not having one, and I want to thank each of the witnesses for their testimony and the members for their participation, and I now adjourn the subcommittee.         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00183 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

182 [Whereupon, at 11:39 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.] 

VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00184 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING 183         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00185 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 241  72282A.160 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

# • FEDERAL  ELECTION COMMISSION   

> WASHINGT ON, 0 .C, 2°"63

November  18,201  lThe Honorable Gregg  Harper 

Chairman Subcommittee on Elections,  Committee  on House Administration U.S. House of Representatives 1309 Longworth House- Office Building 

Washington,  D.C. 20515 

Dear  Chaionan  Harper: 

On November 3, 2011, the Subcommittee on Elections of the Committee on House 

Administration  held a  beapng  entitled:  Federal Election Commission: Rearing on Policies, Processes and  Procedures.  I am pleased to provide additional information about two of the questions that arose  durit\g  that hearing. Both  you,  Mr. Chairman,  and  Representative Schock  asked  about intercircuit nonacquiesence.  l'indicated  at the hearing that I knew of no cases in which the Commission  was  currently engaging in intercircuit nonacquiesence and that I would 

oonfum  that fact for you. As  you  know,  federal  agencies may encounter situations in which circuit courts reach different legal conclusions and thus must therefore engage  in 

such nonacquiescence, a doctrine which was implicitly approved by  the  U.S. Supreme Court in United States v.  Mendoza.  464 U.S. l 54  (1984). I can  confirm  that the 

Commission  is  not currently engaging in  intercircuit  nonacquiesence. The Commission did invoke the doctrine of intercircuit nonacquiesence with regard to  a regulation defining express advocacy that, while based on an earlier decision of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, was rejected by the Courts of Appeals for the First and Fourth Circuits. Faced with the apparen t disagreement  among  the Circuit  Courls,  the  Commission  limited 

its  observance of the decisions from the  First  and Fourth Circuits to those circuits. In 2003, in McConnell  v.  FEC.  the  Supreme Court held  that  its prior  construction  of  express 

advocacy was not a constitutional requirement;  since  then, the Fourth Circuit  has 

preliminarily held that the regulation is constitutional  in  light of the Supreme Court's decision in  Wisconsin  Right to Life.  Thus,  the regulation  currently  applies nationwide. 

Chairman  Lungren  also asked whether a candidate could designate an ind ividual other than his or her treasurer to dispose of campaign assets in the event of  the  candidate's death. Please al low me to provide additional in formation regarding this question. The 

Federal Election Campaign Act  (FECA)  specifies broad categories  of  permissible  uses of campaign funds while prohibiting the  conversion  of campaign funds to the personal use of any person. 2 U.S.C. § 439a.  FECA  also specifies that a campaign  committee's 184         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00186 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 242  72282A.161 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

The Honorable Gregg  Harper 

Page2 treasurer must authorize any expenditure of caiilpaign  funds. 2 U.S.C.  § 432(a). These provisions continue to apply to the use of campaign funds after a candidate's death. 

FECA  does  not, however, specify who in .a  c;unpaign  committee is empowered to decide how campaign funds should be used at any time. Generally speaking, campaign committees  arc  separate legal entities that survive the death of a candidate. For example ,campaign committees that are incorporated for liability  pUiposes  would  look  to  the relevant state law to determine which committee/corporate officers  may  direct the treasurer on the disposition of campaign funds. When campaign committees are being established and  incorporated,  the arrangements made at that point might include appointment of officers in addition to the candidate or treasurer, and these other officers may  be  empowered by state law to direct the campaign committee in the event of the candidate's death. Additionally, in 1992, former Representative Dan Burton sought  an  advisory opinion from the Commission on whether  FECA  and Commission regulations  pennit  him to issue instructions to his  .treasurer  about how campaign  funds  should be distributed in  the  event 

ofRepresentative Burton's death. The Commission recognized that state law may preclude such a designation, but found that if it was permissible  under  state  law , FECA 

and Commission regulations permit candidates to issue instructions to treasurers about 

the  distribution of campaign  funds  in the event of the  candidate's  death. I have  enclosed a copy of this  Advisory  Opinion 1992-14 (Burton) for  your  convenience. As you are aware,  FECA  permits  similarly situated candidates to rely on advisory opinions issued to other candidates when considering activities that are indistinguishable  in  all  tnaterial 

respects. 2 U.S.C. § 437f. Finally, a bill pending before the Comm1ttee on House  Administration  would amend 

FECA  in this regard. Introduced by Representative Walte r B.  Jones.  Jr., H.R. 406 would amend FECA to provide a mechanism for candidates to designate an individual and an 

alternate  who  would be empowered to  disbwse  campaign funds  in  the event of the candidate's death and specific instructions for the disposition of campaign funds in the event of their death. All of  this  infonnation  would be publicly disclosed on Statements of Candidacy filed with the Conunission. As you know. similar bills were passed by House of Representatives in the 111  th  and  110 th  Congresses . (H.R  749  and  3032, respectively). Commission staff worked with Representative Jones's  staff  and House  Administration 

staffon technical questions related to these bills, and the Commission stands ready  to 

implement the bill should it become law. Thank you for the opportunity to provide this additional infonnation.  As  always, the Commiss ion seeks to maintain  an  open  dfalogue  with  the  Committee, and to be responsive to the  Committee's  concerns about enforcement processes. 1 can assure you 

that  it has always been the Commission's intent to be conscientious in  responmng  to questions and concerns raised by the Committee  as  it exercises its oversight responsibilities. Although it appears there may have been insuffi cient opportunity to 

discuss  the content and nature of the Commission's response to a handful of the Committee 's inquiries  prior  to the hearing, I am pleased that, since then, the Commission's  General  Counsel and Staff Director have been ab le to  work  with 185         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00187 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 243  72282A.162 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

The Honorable Gregg  Harper 

Page3 Committee  staff  to establish a framework to ensure  that  the Commission  fully  responds to the concerns expressed by you and the other Committee Members .The Commission looks forward to continuing to work with the Committee. If you or your  staff  have any additional questions or oversight concerns, please do not hesitate to contact me at (202)  694.  J020 or Duane Pugh, the FEC's Director of  Congressional 

Affairs , at (202)  694-1002. 

Sincerely. 

cc: The Hon. Daniel E. Lungren 

Chairman,  Committee  on  House  Administration 

The Hon.  Robert  A Brady 

Ranking  Member, Committee on House Administration The Hon. Charles A.  Gonzalez 

Ranking  Member, Subcommittee on Elections 186         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00188 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 244  72282A.163 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

May 15, 1992 CERTIFIED MAIL. 

FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION Washington, DC 20463 

RETURN RECEIPT  REQUESTED 

ADVtSORY OPINION 1992-14 The Honorable Dan Burton 120 Cannon  House  Office Building 

WashingtOn,  D.C . 20515 Dear Mr . Burton: 

This  responds to your  letter  dated April  15,  1992 requesting an  advisory  opinion  concerning  the application of  the  Federal  Election  C81llpaign  Act of 1971, as  amended  ("the Act"),  and 

Commission  regulations to  a proposed  transfer  of your campaign funds to  a clwitBble 

organization. 

You state thatyou would  like  to arrange to have your  excess  campaign  funds  transferred  to a nonprofit,  taic-exempt  foundation in the event of your unforeseen death.  Yo11  wish  to prepare written  instructions  now  directing  your campaign  treasurer  to make  this  transfer  upon your  death. 

You  state  that the foundation will be established to provide student scholarships or to  make 

gJ"ants  to colleges or other charitable institutions. You indicate that  the  instructions you  intend  to 

prepare  would not involve any testamentary  device,  and that  your  personal estate  would'Jlot 

receive  IIIIY  direct or indirect financial  b~cfit  from  the  foundation.  You  ask  whether the Act and Commission regulations allow you to  designate,  in  advance,  that  your  excess  camplli_gp  funds  be put to  thls  use after your  death. 

The Act and Commission regulations  define  ''excess  campaign funds" as  amounts  received  by  a

candidate as contributions which  are  in  excess  of any  amo110t  necessary 10  defray  campaign expenditures.  2 U. S.C.  439aand  11  CFR 113.1. Excess campaign  funds  may be used for avariety of specified  purposes  that  are  expressly  made  lawful: they may be  used  to defray any ordinary and necessary  expenses  incurred in connection with the candidate's duties  as  a holder of Federal office; they may be  conlributed  to any organization described in section l 70(c) of Title 26, United  States  Code; and  tb.ey  may be used  "for  any  other  lawful  purpose,"  inolulling  transfetS 187         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00189 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 245  72282A.164 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

without limitation to  any  national,  State,  or  local  committee of any political  party.  11 CFR l  l3 .2 

and  Advisory  Opinions  1987-11, 1986-39, 1985-9 and  1981-15. 

Thus,  the  Act and regulations  specifically  authorize  transfers  of excess campaign funds to organizations  described  1n  26 U.S.C. I 70(c). The  Commission  concludes  that,  if the foundation described in your  request  is one described in  section  l 70(c),  transfers  of  excess  campaign funds from your  campaign  committee to the foundation would  be  permissible  undor  the  Act. See,  for 

example,  Advisory Opinion 1985-9. Tbe distribution of the campaign funds lo an entity that does not qualify  under  26  U.S .C. 170(c) 

may  nonetheless be a transfer  "for  any  other lawful  purpose"  under the Act. Advisory Opinion 1986-39 (private  trust  for sole benefit of minor child not related to former  candidate  would not confer financial benefit to former candidate). Such a use  may,  however, have  adv=e  Federal 

io,come  tax  conseqllences. 11

You  ask  whether  the  Act and regulations  permit  you to issue instructions  to  your  treasurer  now on how your funds are to be  distributed  after your  death.  Previous advisory opinions authorizing transfers of excess funds to  charitable  foundations, and a private trust, did not involve designations by the candidate of how funds were to be  distributed  at  some  time in the  future.  See 

Advisory Opinions 1987-11 and 1986-39.  However,  the Act and the regulations do not  limit  the 

time  whep  these  transfers may be made. Therefore,  absent  any applicab1e  State  law precluding 

such  a designation,  you  may  issue instructions to  yotu  treasurer  now on the distribution of  your 

excess  campaign  funds at a later  date.2 1

The Commission notes that your committee is required to  report  all  disbursements  of  its excess 

campaign  funds. 2 U.S.C. 434(b)(4), 434(b)(5).  and  11  CFR  104.3(b). Payments to  a charitable 

organization  are  reportable as other  disbursements.  See 2 U.S.C. 434(b)(4)(G)  and  434(b)(6)(A). 11 CFR 104.3(b)(2)(vi) and 104.3(b)(4)(vi). The  CoJlllilission  expresses  no opinion about the Federal or other  tax  ramifications  of  this 

activity, nor on the application of any other State or Federal law outside the  Commission's 

jurisdiction. 

This  response  OC1l$1ltutes  an  advisory  opinion concerning application of the  Aot,  or regulations prescribed by the Commission, to  tho  specific  transaction  or  ac;tivity  set  forth  in  Y0\11'  request. See 2 U.S.C. 437f. 

Sincerely, 

(signed) Joan D.  Aikens 

Chainn. an.for  the  FedGral  Election Commission Enclosures (AOs I 987-11, 1986-39, 1985-9, 1983-27,  and  1981-1  S) 188         

> VerDate Mar 15 2010 04:26 Jan 28, 2012 Jkt 072282 PO 00000 Frm 00190 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6602 E:\HR\OC\A282.XXX A282 Insert graphic folio 246/300 72282A.165 jbell on DSK7SPTVN1PROD with HEARING

ENDNOTES: 

1/  For  example,  26 U.S.C . 527(d) provides,  in  part,  that  campaign  funds donated to an entity 

described  in 26 U.S.C. 509(a)(l) or (a)(2), which is  ex.e mpt  from  tax  under 26 U.S.C.  50l(a),  are ·not  treated  as  diverted for the personal use of the candidate or any other person. The  implication 

is  that  donations to other entities, not similarly exempted by section 527(d), may result in  taxable 

income. 

2/ Your  request  states  that your personal estate will not receive  any  direct  or  indirect  finan cial 

benefit  from  the  foundation.  C-Onsequently,  the  Commission does not  address  ~Y  question 

involving  tl'le  conversion of excess  campaign  funds to personal use.  2U.S,C.  439a, Advisory 

Opinions  1986-39 and 1983-27 .
