Title: IOC Member Li Lingwei believes Paris 2024 will be ‘true get-together’

URL Source: https://oca.asia/news/5240-ioc-member-li-lingwei-believes-paris-2024-will-be-true-get-together.html

Markdown Content:
Paris, France, July 21, 2024: China’s IOC Member Li Lingwei believes the Paris 2024 Olympic Games will be a cause for extra celebration now that the covid pandemic is history.

The previous Olympic Games were due to be held in Tokyo in 2020 but were delayed one year due to covid. Even when they were staged in the summer of 2021, severe restrictions were in place regarding spectators in the venues and the movement of accredited personnel around Tokyo, as well as regular testing and quarantine measures in place.

But now, the free Olympic world is gathering in Paris – and Li Lingwei was visiting the Chinese delegation in the Olympic Village on Sunday afternoon ahead of the 142 nd IOC Session on July 23-24.

“I believe the Olympic Games in Paris will be a celebration – a true get-together after covid,” she said.

“I think people will enjoy the atmosphere, especially in such a beautiful and romantic city as Paris.”

Li, who became an IOC Member in 2012, won 13 world championship badminton titles during her illustrious career and 48 gold medals in international and national badminton competitions from 1980-1989.

However, she never played in the Olympic Games because badminton was only introduced at Barcelona 1992 – three years after her retirement.

“I retired in 1989 and badminton became an Olympic sport in 1992 – that’s life,” she said, with a smile.

“As a former athlete, just try your best - and good luck to all the athletes. We are very happy with the preparation of the Chinese team.”

China will be represented by 405 athletes in Paris, and one of the first group of athletes to arrive on Saturday was the badminton team led by defending women’s singles champion Chen Yufei.

Captions:

Li Lingwei (second from left) with Chinese Olympic Committee HQ staff in the Olympic Village on Sunday afternoon. (Photo: OCA)

The COC HQ in the Olympic Village.
