Title: 

URL Source: https://apps.ipcc.ch/eventmanager/documents/93/230920250511-INF.%202%20-%20Progress_Report_Comms_and_Outreach.pdf

Published Time: Tue, 23 Sep 2025 15:11:10 GMT

Markdown Content:
IPCC Secretariat   

> c/o WMO • 7bis, Avenue de la Paix • C.P. 2300 • 1211 Geneva 2 • Switzerland telephone : +41 (0) 22 730 8208 / 54 / 84 • email : IPCC-Sec@wmo.int • www.ipcc.ch

SIXTY-THIRD SESSION OF THE IPCC 

Lima, Peru, 27 to 30 October 2025 

IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2 

(19.IX.2025) 

Agenda Item: 9.10 

ENGLISH ONLY 

PROGRESS REPORTS 

Communications and outreach activities 

(Submitted by the Secretary of the IPCC) IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2, p.1 

PROGRESS REPORTS 

Communications and Outreach Activities 

This report on IPCC’s media, outreach and other communication activities covers the period since the Sixty-second Session of the IPCC (IPCC-62) held in Hangzhou, China from 24 - 28 February 2025. 

During this reporting period, the communications, media and outreach work prioritised planning, preparations and delivery of IPCC overall media relations and outreach activities at the 62 nd Session of the IPCC (IPCC-62) held in Hangzhou, China in February and those on the margins of the Short-lived Climate Forcers (SCLF) First Lead Author meeting (LAM1) in Bilbao, Spain, in March. 

In March and April, a comprehensive communications effort was run in support of mobilising nominations of experts worldwide to serve as authors of the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report, as well as in support of the global call for nominations of experts to serve as Co-Chairs and members of the Task Group on Data Support for Climate Change Assessments (TG-Data). For both critically important calls, a comprehensive set of communications assets was translated into all six United Nations (UN) languages and released along with videos featuring members of the Executive Committee. Both calls were sustained communications efforts and ran until the closing deadline on 17 April 2025. 

Over May, June and July, the work also shifted towards planning and preparations and delivery of series of IPCC’s engagement and outreach in key international fora, namely at the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Subsidiary Bodies (SB62) in Bonn in June 2025, at the Twentieth Ordinary Session of the African Ministerial Conference on the Environment (AMCEN20) conference in Nairobi from 14 to 18 July and at the Sixth Forum of Ministers and Environment Authorities of Asia Pacific from 26 to 29 August in Nadi, Fiji. 

During this reporting period, the communications, media and outreach work also prioritised planning, preparations and delivery of IPCC overall media relations and outreach activities through a major outreach event in Africa on the margins of the IPCC Special Report on Climate Change and Cities (SRCities) Second Lead Author meeting (LAM2) in Mombasa on 25 and 26 July and preparations for the 63 rd Session of the IPCC (IPCC-63) held in Lima, Peru in October and 30 th Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC (COP30) in November. 

Throughout the reporting period, the Communications team at the Secretariat has been dealing with a steady flow of incoming media and public queries and interview requests. Additionally, the team has been managing overall outreach engagements and has played a crucial role in identifying and supporting IPCC speakers at various events and conferences as well as supported the recording and postproduction of Chair’s video messages and addresses for a number of international conferences and meetings. 

In addition to this Panel progress report, the Secretariat’s Communications and Outreach team also provided regular reports to the IPCC Bureau and monthly reports to the IPCC’s Executive Committee. 

1. Media Relations 

Proactive media relations work during this period focused on raising the profile of the successful outcomes of the IPCC’s 62 nd Session of the IPCC (IPCC-62) in Hangzhou, China, namely agreement on outlines of the three Working Group contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7), including an ad hoc press conference by the IPCC Chair was organized for the selected group of top-tier Chinese media outlets immediately after the formal closure of IPCC-62. A global press release was issued covering the Panel´s key decisions. The team also drafted opening statements and prepared messaging and lines for topics of anticipated media interest. Overall, IPCC’s media messaging focused on stressing IPCC’s resilience, the continuity of IPCC’s multilateral work and its effective processes as well as the important decisions reached by the Panel through consensus. IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2, p.2 

During March and April, media work also supported the global call for nominations of experts to serve as authors for AR7 and addressed related media queries. Following media work on SB62 and AMCEN-20 in June and July, most of the media relations work in August focused on announcing and publishing the list of authors for AR7. Subsequent queries ranged from questions about the composition of the selected authors, regional and gender balance, as well as about authors from individual countries. Some inquiries also involved comparisons between past and current cycles. There was a notable interest in the statistics relating to the U.S. authors selected for AR7 and previous cycles. Additional media requests sought factual information to support climate explainers on topics such as tipping points and the 1.5°C threshold, inquiries related to tropical forests and climate-resilient buildings. 

In preparation for IPCC-63, planning and coordination with the hosts of IPCC-63 intensified during early September (at the time of writing of this report) and the team opened coordination with the hosts regarding media arrangements for IPCC-63, opening ceremony and potential outreach, as well as preparatory work on setting up of dedicated IPCC-63 media pages, coordination of media release and preparations for global distribution of speeches, videos, visuals and B-roll footage to facilitate media reporting from IPCC-63. 

Note: A list of issued releases is provided in Annex I. 

2. Outreach 

Since IPCC-62, IPCC communications and outreach efforts have focused on a rich programme of high-impact outreach activities that advanced public engagement and supported the development of the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7). 

Following the conclusion of the IPCC-62 in Hangzhou, China, the Co-Chairs of the three Working Groups and the Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (TFI) presented the agreed outlines of their contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report as well as provided a briefing on the Special Report on Climate Change and Cities to an audience of students, experts, and media at the Zhejiang Meteorological Disaster Prevention and Mitigation Centre. The event featured remarks by senior figures, including the Deputy Administrator of the Chinese Meteorological Administration, the Deputy Secretary-General of WMO, and the IPCC Secretary and Deputy Secretary. 

In support of the LAM1 meeting for the Methodology Report on Short-lived Climate Forcers (SLCF), an outreach event was hosted at the Bizkaia Aretoa Centre, University of the Basque Country in Bilbao, Spain, on 27 March. The Co-Chairs of the Taskforce on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (TFI) presented the outline of the SLCF Report for the audience, including experts, students, and media. Moderated by TFI Bureau Member Maria José Sánz. The event also included briefings on the role of the IPCC from Coordinating Lead Author Sophie Szopa and the IPCC Head of Communications. 

The IPCC had a high-profile public presence at the 62nd session of the Subsidiary Bodies (SB62) of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Bonn from 16 to 26 June. In addition to Chair’s and Bureau’s active role and contributions to several mandated and other events, including the Chair’s keynote address at the opening of the Seventeenth meeting of the Research Dialogue, Chair’s opening of the joint SBSTA Chair-IPCC event on adaptation during which the Working Group II Co-Chair Bart van den Hurk and the WGII Bureau members presented an extensive update on the WGII activities, the IPCC also delivered a side event titled “Informing Climate Action: The science & cross-cutting topics of IPCC’s Seventh Assessment Report” which covered a comprehensive overview of IPCC’s seventh assessment cycle and presentations by the three Working Groups, including a segment on cross-cutting topics. The IPCC Secretary´s statement for the opening plenary of SBSTA 62 and SBI 62 was submitted in writing to the UNFCCC Secretariat. 

July witnessed intense IPCC outreach efforts in Africa. During the week of AMCEN20 ministerial conference in Nairobi in mid-July, the IPCC held an outreach event on 13 July entitled “Informing climate policies in Africa: The science of the IPCC’s Seventh Assessment Report and its relevance IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2, p.3 

for the continent” with participation of IPCC Chair, IPCC Vice-Chair Ladislaus N’Changa, Working Group Vice-Chairs Aïda Diongue-Niang, Cromwel Lukorito, Gervais Itsoua Madzous, TFB member Hamid Abakar Souleymane and IPCC Deputy Secretary Ermira Fida. This event also featured a segment on the engagement of youth and Early-Career scientists, as well as a panel discussion on inclusivity and diversity within the IPCC. This was followed by a public lecture by the Chair at the University of Nairobi titled “Assessing Climate Change: Scientific Needs for Africa and Beyond” on 14 July. The 45-minute lecture included an extensive Q&A. A half-day event also included presentations on the scientific content of the three Working Group contributions to AR7, as well as methodology reports delivered by the African Vice-Chairs of the three Working Groups and the TFI. 

The Pan-African Regional Outreach event in support of the IPCC process in Africa was organized on 25 and 26 July 2025 at the Technical University of Mombasa in Kenya, on the margins of the Second Lead Author Meeting for the Special Report on Cities and Climate Change. In agreement and coordination with the Kenyan IPCC Focal Point, Patricia Nying'uro and the WGII Vice-Chair Cromwel Lukorito, the objective was to increase awareness of and opportunities to contribute to the IPCC processes in Africa throughout the seventh assessment cycle and beyond. In total, over 120 participants attended the event, including policymakers, national focal points, representatives from science and research institutions, funding agencies, postgraduate students, early-career scientists and researchers interested in contributing to the IPCC processes, as well as scientific experts and academics from five African sub-regions. The two-day programme included presentations and panels focused on IPCC processes, ways to engage with the IPCC, relevant IPCC findings for Africa and scientific content of the upcoming three Working Groups’ contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report. A follow-up survey showed overwhelmingly positive feedback. Overall, the event achieved its objectives and was appreciated for its professional organisation, inclusivity, and knowledge-sharing impact. Participants particularly highlighted that they gained a clearer understanding of the IPCC processes (84%) and showed readiness to apply knowledge and maintain professional connections with newly established contacts and IPCC (over 80%). Respondents recognised this outreach initiative as a catalyst for strengthening Africa’s engagement with the IPCC process, particularly in AR7 and future climate assessments. 

During July and August, the work shifted also towards preparations and support to IPCC Vice-Chair Ladislaus Chang’a, who represented the IPCC at the Sixth Forum of Ministers and Environment Authorities of Asia Pacific from 26 to 29 August 2025, held in Fiji. In coordination with the UNEP Asia-Pacific Office and the Vice-Chair, the IPCC Secretariat developed supporting documents and background materials. During the Forum, the Vice-Chair delivered three keynote addresses on behalf of the IPCC, participated in two speaking engagements, held an informal discussion, and attended several bilateral meetings. 

Regarding upcoming outreach activities, at the time of the writing of this progress report (early September) the team is preparations for IPCC engagement at the 9th Asia-Pacific Climate Change Adaptation Forum taking place from 29 September to 3 October 2025 in Bangkok, Thailand, the preparation for outreach options at the IPCC-63 in Lima, Peru and planning of IPCC public-facing engagements at the UNFCCC’s COP30 in Belem, Brazil. 

Note: A list of selected outreach events is provided in Annex II. 

3. Communications (and Outreach) Action Team 

During this reporting period, based on the strategic guidance from the Executive Committee, the work of the Communications (and Outreach) Action Team (COAT) focused on the development of the IPCC Side Event at SBSTA-62 in June in Bonn, where IPCC presented the agreed outlines of the three Working Group contributions to AR7 as well as a selection of topics cutting across the Working Group contributions. COAT also discussed the coordination of outreach engagement on the margins of the SRCities LAM2 meeting in Mombasa, the IPCC's presence on dominant social media platforms, and COP30 preparations. IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2, p.4 

4. IPCC Newsletter 

Two issues of the quarterly newsletter have been issued since the previous progress report. Issue 24 was released in April 2025 (covering the first quarter of 2025) and Issue 25 in August 2025 (covering IPCC activities in the second quarter of 2025). The next issue covering July to September 2025 is scheduled for early October. The IPCC Newsletter serves as an internal communication tool to update the Focal Points from governments and observer organizations on IPCC activities in between Sessions. 

5. Impact and Statistics 

5.1 IPCC Media Coverage 

The IPCC was mentioned over 1,660 (1,666) times from 1 January to 31 August 2025, in the top-tier 100+ news sources, as monitored by Meltwater. Comparatively, during the same period in 2024, IPCC was mentioned 1,689 times in the top-tier media. 

Note: A list of top news sources is provided in Annex III. 

5.2 IPCC Website Statistics 

From mid-January 2025 to the time of writing of this report (8 September 2025), the IPCC website recorded a slight increase in audiences with just over 2, 2 million users compared to about 2. million during the same period in 2024. 

Of the 2,245,075 users in the current reporting period, 1,001,318 came through direct visits to the website, 859,579 from organic searches, 322,757 were from referral sites, and 31,946 were from organic social media links. 

Source: Google Analytics IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2, p.5 

5.3 IPCC Social Media Statistics 

Since the last Progress Report to the Panel at its 62 nd Session, IPCC social media platforms have been consistently focused on raising awareness about the IPCC’s scientific findings, ongoing activities, and opportunities for public engagement. 

During the reporting period content published across all IPCC-managed platforms gradually shifted from thematic posts on the findings of the Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) towards the activities and narrative of the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7), amplifying the calls for nominations of experts to serve as authors for the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7) and the call for the TG-Data experts, as well as institutional messaging around main IPCC events, including the First and Second Lead Author Meetings for SRCities and SLCF and coverage of key outreach events. 

One of the main highlights during this period was the sustained effort to raise the global profile of the call for nominations of experts to serve as authors for the Seventh Assessment Report. To support the call, tailored multimedia content, including videos with Bureau Members, was produced in all six official UN languages. A series of regionally based webinars organized by Bureau Members to support the call for nominations was also amplified via IPCC social media accounts. 

IPCC social media also covered IPCC’s participation at SB62 in Bonn, Germany, and AMCEN-20 in Nairobi, Kenya. Multimedia posts were developed from key outreach events, including LAM-1 SLCF in Bilbao and the Pan-African event, which took place alongside the Second Lead Author Meeting for SRCities in Mombasa, Kenya. 

IPCC performance on social media platforms remained strong, with steady growth in the number of followers. By the end of August 2025, IPCC had over 1.456 million followers across five key platforms (X, Facebook, LinkedIn, Instagram and Bluesky). Key moments of engagement were reflected in “post impression” figures, which peaked at over a million in March 2025, during the height of the AR7 author nominations campaign. Videos shared in April garnered over 29,000 views. 

The growth in audience engagement and platform reach reflects the continued relevance of IPCC content, particularly in relation to calls for participation and public-facing outreach. The Secretariat’s multilingual approach and strategic alignment with significant events and announcements contributed to both visibility and traffic on the IPCC’s website and related information portals, as well as to a high number of incoming nominations for AR7 authors and TG-Data experts. IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2, p.6 

Annex I 

The following media releases were issued between February and September 2025: 

03 Feb 25: Press release - Authors for the IPCC Special Report on Climate Change and 

Cities selected 

6 Feb 25: Vacancies - Head of Communication in the IPCC WG I TSU  and  Information 

and Graphics Designer - IPCC WG I TSU 

18 Feb 25: Media Advisory- Upcoming IPCC Plenary meeting in Hangzhou 

24 Feb 25: Press release - IPCC gathers in Hangzhou to agree on outlines of the key 

contributions to the Seventh Assessment Report 

Speech - Opening remarks by IPCC Chair Jim Skea, during the 62nd Session 

of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

01 Mar 25: Press release - IPCC agrees on outlines of three key contributions to the 

Seventh Assessment Report 

10 Mar 25: Press release - IPCC holds First Lead Author Meeting in Japan for the Special 

Report on Climate Change and Cities 

11 Mar 25: Press release - IPCC calls for nomination of authors for Seventh Assessment 

Report  [Arabic ] [ Chinese ] [ French ] [ Russian ] [ Spanish ]

21 Mar 25: Press Release –  First Lead Author Meeting of the 2027 Methodology Report 

on Short-Lived Climate Forcers 

24 Mar 25: Press Release –  IPCC calls for the nomination of experts for its Task-Group on 

Data Support 

11 Apr 25:  Obituary:  Dr Mannava V.K. Sivakumar 

13 May 25:  Programme Officer, IPCC Task Force on Inventories Technical Support Unit 

13 Jun 25: Announcement:  IPCC calls for the nomination of participants to the Workshop 

on Engaging Diverse Knowledge Systems and the Workshop on Methods of 

Assessment .

17 Jun 25:  Keynote speech by IPCC Chair Jim Skea at the Seventeenth Session of the 

Research Dialogue .

19 Jun 25: Press Release - IPCC and AGU partner to expand access to publications for 

work on Seventh Assessment Report .

21 Jun 25: Press Release - IPCC authors gather in Kenya to develop the first draft of the 

Special Report on Climate Change and Cities .

18 Aug 25: Press Release - IPCC concludes selection of authors for its Seventh 

Assessment Report .IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2, p.7 

Annex II 

Selected outreach activities in chronological order 

(this is not an exhaustive list; as notified to the Secretariat, apologies for any omissions) 

13 Jan 25 Atlas Critical Tourism Studies 2025 Conference, IPCC Working Group II Co-Chair 

Winston Chow (In-person), Hainan, China; 

16 Jan 25 Expert Workshop on International Climate Change Adaptation Best Practices Urban 

environment risks and solutions with a focus on multi-risk and adaptation concepts, 

tools and policy frameworks, IPCC Working Group II Co-Chair Winston Chow 

(virtual), Germany; 

16 Jan 25 European Commission and ECB conference, IPCC Chair Jim Skea (In-person), 

Brussels, Belgium; 

17 Jan 25 Meet the Leader Dinner with the Global Shapers Community, IPCC Vice-Chair Diana 

Ürge-Vorsatz (In-person), Budapest, Hungary; 

17 Jan 25 Meeting with the UK Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, WGIII Co-Chair Joy Pereira (in-

person), Edinburgh, United Kingdom; 

20 Jan 25 Geneva Environment Network High-Level 25th Anniversary Celebration, (in-person), 

Geneva, Switzerland; 

23 Jan 25 Road to OEWG 3.2 Relevant examples from other panels for the establishment of a 

science policy panel to contribute further to the sound management of chemicals and 

waste and to prevent pollution, IPCC Chair Jim Skea, IPCC Deputy Secretary Ermira 

Fida (virtual),Geneva, Switzerland; 

27 Jan 25 GIZ interns visit to the IPCC Secretariat, IPCC Head of Communications Andrej 

Mahecic (In-person), Geneva, Switzerland; 

28 Jan 25 Civil Service Climate and Environment Network, IPCC Chair Jim Skea (virtual), 

United Kingdom; 

30 Jan 25 iExplore lecture at Imperial College, IPCC Chair Jim Skea (hybrid), United Kingdom; 

03 Feb 25 Resilient Cities Network Fireside Chat, WGII Co-Chair Winston Chow, in-person, 

Singapore; 

05 Feb 25 Economist Impact's Carbon Capture Summit 2025, Pre-recorded video, IPCC Chair, 

The Netherlands; 

06 Feb 25 Conversation about Indigenous Knowledge in IPCC AR7 with Senior Associate of UN Foundation (UNF), Virtual, IPCC Vice-Chair Ramon Pichs-Madruga, IPCC Working Group I Vice-Chair Sherilee Harper, US; 

17 Feb 25 MEIG Programme 2024-2025, Module IX - Climate Change, IPCC Deputy Secretary, in-person, Geneva, Switzerland; 

25 Feb 25 International Energy Week, Pre-recorded video, IPCC Chair, London, UK; 

25 Feb 25 Cities in Action Forum 2025, WGII Co-Chair Winston Chow, in-person, Dubai, UAE; IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2, p.8 

02 Mar 25 Climate Science: Insights & Future Directions – outcomes of IPCC 62nd Plenary, in-person, WGI Co-Chair Xiaoye Zhang, WGI Co-Chair Robert Vautard, WGII Co-Chair Bart van den Hurk, TFI Co-Chair Takeshi Enoki, WGIII Vice-Chair Şiir Kilkiş, WGIII 

Vice-Chair Eduardo Calvo, IPCC Deputy Secretary Ermira Fida, IPCC Secretary 

Abdalah Mokssit, WMO DSG Ko Barrett, Hangzhou, China; 

05 Mar 25 World Sustainable Development Summit, in-person, IPCC Chair, London, UK; 

07 Mar 25 The Economic Times Energy World Solar Power Congress 2025, in-person, IPCC 

Chair Jim Skea, New Delhi, India; 

10 Mar 25 Communication, Humanitaire & Solidarités du Master 2 de communication des organisations de l’université Lumière Lyon 2, IPCC Secretary, Geneva, Switzerland. 

19 Mar 25 Japan-IIASA Joint Seminar in Yokohama: How Japan’s Experience will be able to Contribute to the IPCC Special Report on Climate Change and Cities, WGII Co-Chair Winston Chow, in-person, Yokohama, Japan; 

21 Mar 25 Model UN Climate Change Conference, Good COP bad COP, in-person, IPCC Chair 

Jim Skea, London, UK; 

24 Mar 25 EDITS Quarterly Meeting, in-person, IPCC Vice-Chair Diana Ürge-Vorsatz, Vienna, 

Austria; 

25 Mar 25 Guest class related to IPCC and Tourism (Macao University of Tourism), in-person, WGII Co-Chair Winston Chow, Macau, China; 

26 Mar 25 Benelux Seminar on Climate Education, in-person, WGII Co-Chair Bart van den 

Hurk, Luxembourg; 

26 Mar 25  Understanding Climate Science: The Role of the IPCC and its Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (TFI), in-person, TFI Co-Chair Takeshi Enoki, TFI Co-Chair Mazhar Hayat, TFB Member Maria Jose Sanz, Head of Communications Andrej Mahecic, in-person, Bilbao, Spain; 

27 Mar 25 UK Health Alliance on Climate Change Meeting, IPCC Chair Jim Skea, London, UK; 

28 Mar 25 One Earth Summit, in-person, WGII Co-Chair Winston Chow, Hong Kong, China; 

31 Mar 25 East Africa outreach webinar for IPCC AR7, IPCC Vice-Chair Ladislaus Chang’a, WGII Co-Chair Bart van den Hurk, WGII Vice-Chair Cromwel Lukorito, hybrid, 

Arusha, Tanzania; 

01 Apr 25 Webinar to provide assistance in applying to be an author for AR7, virtual, IPCC Vice-Chair Diana Ürge-Vorsatz; 

01 Apr 25 Speaking engagement with Oxford Climate Journalism Network, virtual, WGII Co-

Chair Winston Chow, Oxford, UK; 

02 Apr 25 EOP as Policy Enabler Workshop, European Space Policy Institute, in-person, IPCC Vice-Chair Diana Ürge-Vorsatz, London, UK; 

02 Apr 25 Model UN Climate Change Conference, Good COP bad COP, in-person, IPCC Chair Jim Skea , London, UK; IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2, p.9 

02 Apr 25 South Africa outreach webinar for IPCC AR7, AGNES, virtual, WGII Co-Chair Bart 

van den Hurk; 

03 Apr 25 Regional LAC Outreach Webinar on AR7 Nominations, organized by IPCC and IAI, virtual, presentation: Introduction to the IPCC, Ramon Pichs-Madruga, Ines Camilloni, Laura Gallardo, Carlos Mendez; 

04 Apr 25 In conversation Climate change in 2025: What science is telling us, Great Hall, University of Helsinki, Finland; in-person, IPCC Chair Jim Skea; 

07 Apr 25 EDF Europe High-Level Methane Action Event, virtual, IPCC Vice-Chair Diana Ürge-

Vorsatz, London, UK; 

07 Apr 25  SW Pacific outreach webinar for IPCC AR7, virtual, WGII Co-Chair Winston Chow, WGIII Co-Chair Joy Pereira, WGII Vice-Chair Mark Howden; 

07 Apr 25 Outreach Webinar on AR7 Nominations for representatives of Indigenous Communities, virtual, IPCC Vice-Chair Ramon Pichs-Madruga, WGI Vice-Chair 

Sherilee Harper; 

07 Apr 25 LAC Regional event on Climate Justice. Speaker on Climate change and Development: IPCC key messages; IPCC Vice-Chair Ramon Pichs-Madruga, Lima, 

Peru; 

07 Apr 25 UNICEF Klímakonferencia és EXPO fiataloknak, in-person, IPCC Vice-Chair Diana Ürge-Vorsatz, Budapest, Hungary; 

11 Apr 25 23 rd meeting of the IPBES MEP , virtual, IPCC Deputy Secretary Ermira Fida, Bonn, Germany; 

17 Apr 25 Interview by Prof. Hannah Hughes (UK) on Learning lessons from the IPCC for establishing an independent panel on antimicrobial resistance (AMR), virtual, IPCC Vice-Chair Ramon Pichs-Madruga; 

27 Apr 25 Governance of Arctic Climate Interventions Workshop, in-person, IPCC Vice-Chair Diana Ürge-Vorsatz, Boston, United States; 

01 May 25 Introduction to IPCC, Hofstra University (Long Island, NY, US), IPCC Head of Communications, virtual; 

05 May 25 National Day on Meteorological and Climate Services “Climate Services and Early Warning: Towards Enhanced Resilience”, IPCC Secretary, Rabat, Morocco; 

13 May 25  Lecture at National Technical University of Athens, IPCC Chair, Athens, Greece; 

14 May 25  All Energy2025, IPCC Chair pre-recorded video message, University of Glasgow, UK; 

22 May 25  IPBES Biodiversity Day celebration – Panel, IPCC Chair, Paris, France, virtual; 

04 Jun 25  EuroMobi Conference, in-person,  IPCC Vice-Chair Diana Ürge-Vorsatz, Warsaw, 

Poland; 

10 Jun 25  International Energy Workshop, in-person,  IPCC Vice-Chair Diana Ürge-Vorsatz, 

Nari, Japan; IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2, p.10 

16-26 Jun 25  62 nd Session of SBSTA, in-person, IPCC Chair Jim Skea, I PCC Vice-Chair Diana 

Ürge-Vorsatz, Ladislaus Chang’a, WGI Co-Chair Robert Vautard, WGII Co-Chair 

Bart van den Hurk, IPCC Deputy Secretary Ermira Fida, Bonn, Germany; 

23 Jun 25  SIWW Spotlight 2025 High Level Panel , in-person, WGII Co-Chair Winston Chow, 

Hong Kong, China; 

23 Jun 25  Living Planet Symposium, in-person,  IPCC Vice-Chair Diana Ürge-Vorsatz, Vienna, 

Austria; 

26 Jun 25  Energy Transitions Commission meeting , in-person, IPCC Chair Jim Skea, London, 

UK; 

04 Jul 25 World Cities Summit Mayor’s Forum, in-person, WGII Co-Chair Winston Chow, Vienna, Austria; 

08 Jul 25 China Executive Leadership Programme (CELP), in-person, IPCC Chair Jim Skea, Cambridge, UK; 

12 Jul 25 AMCEN - African Ministerial Conference on the Environment, in-person, IPCC Chair Jim Skea, IPCC Vice-Chair Ladislaus Chang’a, IPCC WGI Vice-Chair Aïda Diongue-Niang, IPCC WGII Vice-Chair Cromwel Lukorito, IPCC WGIII Vice-Chair Gervais Itsuoa Madzous, TFI Bureau Member Hamid Abakar Souleymane, Nairobi, Kenya; 

14 Jul 25 University of Nairobi, Public Lecture, in-person, IPCC Chair Jim Skea, IPCC Vice-Chair Ladislaus Chang’a, IPCC WGI Vice-Chair Aïda Diongue-Niang, IPCC WGII Vice-Chair Cromwel Lukorito, IPCC WGIII Vice-Chair Gervais Itsuoa Madzous, TFI Bureau Member Hamid Abakar Souleymane, Nairobi, Kenya; 

16 Jul 25 Scenarios Forum (Leeds), in-person, IPCC WGII Co-Chair Bart van den Hurk, Leeds, UK; 

18 Jul 25 From practice to science: Inputs for consideration to the IPCC SRCities, UN Habitat G-Com; in-person, IPCC WGII Co-Chair Bart van den Hurk, Nairobi, Kenya; 

25 Jul 25 Pan-African Regional Outreach Event in Support of the IPCC Process, in-person, IPCC WGI Co-Chair Robert Vautard, IPCC WGII Co-Chairs Winston Chow and Bart van den Hurk, IPCC WGI Vice-Chair Nana Ama-Browne Klutse, IPCC WGII Vice-Chair Cromwel Lukorito, IPCC WGIII Vice-Chair Gervais Itsuoa, Siir Kilkis, TFI Bureau Member Hamid Abakar Souleymane, Nairobi, Kenya;Nairobi, Kenya; 

22 Aug 25 International Junior SeaKeepers Programme: Sustainability and Climate Change Adaptation, in-person, WGII Co-Chair Winston Chow, Singapore; 

22 Aug 25 Fireside chat: SRSG Damilola Ogunbiyi and Professor Winston Chow SMU, in-person, WGII Co-Chair Winston Chow, Singapore; 

26 Aug 25 Sixth Forum of Ministers and Environment Authorities of Asia Pacific, in-person, IPCC Vice-Chair Ladislaus Chang’a, Nadi, Fiji; 

27 Aug 25 ASECCC 2025: Harnessing Solar Energy for Climate-Resilient Cities: A Pathway to Mitigation and Adaptation, virtual, IPCC WGII Co-Chair Winston Chow; 

28 Aug 25 Progress on COP 29 outcomes and expectations for COP 30, virtual, IPCC WGII Co-Chair Winston Chow, Singapore; IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2, p.11 

8 Sep 25 Introduction to the IPCC, in-person, IPCC Head of Communications Andrej Mahecic, Geneva, Switzerland. 

## *** IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2, p.12 

Annex III 

List of top news sources: 

1.  Reuters 

2.  Associated  Press (AP) 

3.  Agence France-Presse (AFP) 

4.  German Press Agency, DPA 

5.  KYODO NEWS 

6.  Bloomberg News 

7.  Washington Post 

8.  New York Times 

9.  The Guardian 

10.  The Telegraph 

11.  Mail and Guardian 

12.  Deutsche Welle 

13.  BBC News 

14.  Al Jazeera 

15.  CNN 

16.  Sky News 

17.  Thomson Reuters 

18.  Agence AEF 

19.  Channel Africa 

20.  E-News Africa 

21.  New Scientist 

22.  Financial Times 

23.  The Wall Street Journal 

24.  Agencia EFE 

25.  Xinhua News Agency 

26.  RIA Novosti 

27.  Agencia FAPSESP 

28.  Agencia LUSA 

29.  China.org 

30.  CCTV (China Central Television) 

31.  Australian Associated Press 

32.  Interfax 

33.  National Geographic 

34.  The Weather Channel 

35.  Time Magazine 

36.  USA Today 

37.  Fox News 

38.  ABC News (USA) 

39.  ABC News Australia 

40.  Euro News 

41.  Pacific Islands News Association 

42.  Blick CH 

43.  Neue Zürcher Zeitung 

44.  Tages-Anzeiger 

45.  Basler Zeitung 

46.  St. Galler Tagblatt 

47.  Le Temps 

48.  Le Matin 

49.  La Liberté 

50.  France Soir 

51.  La Croix 

52.  L´humanité 

53.  La Tribune IPCC-LXIII/INF. 2, p.13 

54.  Le canard enchainé 

55.  La Depeche 

56.  24 Heures 

57.  Le Monde 

58.  Le Figaro 

59.  L’equipe 

60.  Libération 

61.  Le Parisien/aujourd´hui en France 

62.  Moskovskij Komsomolets 

63.  Izvestia 

64.  Moscow Times 

65.  Le Soir 

66.  Le Libre 

67.  The Globe and Mail 

68.  Toronto Star 

69.  La Presse 

70.  Le Journal de Montreal 

71.  24 Heures Toronto 

72.  Metro Toronto 

73.  National Post 

74.  Journal Metro 

75.  Le Journal de Quebec 

76.  The Vancouver Sun 

77.  Clarín 

78.  Buenos Aires Herald 

79.  La Capital 

80.  La Prensa 

81.  Ámbito Financiero 

82.  La Voz del Interior 

83.  La Nación 

84.  Daily Sun (South Africa) 

85.  SABC News 

86.  The Star (South Africa) 

87.  Sowetan 

88.  The Times (South Africa) 

89.  The Citizen (South Africa) 

90.  News 24 (South Africa) 

91.  The Nation (Kenya) 

92.  La Repubblica 

93.  Libero 

94.  Corriere della Sera 

95.  Altervista 

96.  La Gazzetta dello Sport 

97.  La Stampa 

98.  Il Sole 24 Ore 

99.  Il Meddaggero 

100.  Il resto del Carlino 

101.  Folha de S.Paulo 

102.  Hindustan 

103.  The Times of India 

104.  The Canberra Times 

105.  The Sydney Morning Herald 

106.  The Age 

107.  The Australian
