Title: National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence

URL Source: https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2023-03/National-Strategy-for-Artificial-Intelligence.pdf

Published Time: Mon, 27 Mar 2023 14:03:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 114

Markdown Content:
National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 2

This page has been intention ally left blank National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 3

Acknowledgments 

In writing this Report, Arnab Kumar , Punit Shukla, Aalekh Sharan and Tanay Mahindru of NITI Aayog 

have made valuable contributions. 

Inputs were also provided by Dr. Avik Sarkar, Dr. Ashish Nayan and Kartikeya Asthana of NITI Aayog. 

The valuab le contributions of Mr. P. Anan dan and his team from Wadhwani Institute for AI, Dr. Manish 

Gupta of Videoken, Prof. Ramesh Raskar of MIT Media Labs, nVIDIA, Intel, IBM, NASSCOM, McKinsey 

and Accenture are also thankfully acknowledged. Special contribution of Accenture in the production of 

this report is also acknowledged .

Anna Roy 

Advisor (Industry) 

NITI Aayog National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 4

# Contents 

INTRODUCTION 5

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 7

WHAT IS ARTI FICIAL INTELLIGENCE? 12 

GLOBAL DEVELOPMENTS IN ARTIFICIAL INTELL IGENCE 16 

ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGE NCE AND INDIA 18 

FOCUS AREAS FOR AI I NTERVENTION 24 

Healthcare 24 

Agriculture 30 

Education 35 

Smart Cities and Infrastructure 39 

Smart Mobility and Transportation 41 

KEY CHALLENGES TO AD OPTION OF AI IN INDI A 46 

WAY FORWARD TO HARNE SS THE POWER OF AI 48 

RESEARCH 50 

SKILLING FOR THE AI AGE 64 

ACCELERATING ADOPTIO N 71 

ETHICS, PRIVACY, SEC URITY AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 85 

ACTIONS FOR THE GOVE RNMENT 91 

APPENDIX I: ARTIFICI AL INTELLIGENCE EXPL AINED 96 

APPENDIX II: GLOBAL COUNTRY STRATEGY REV IEW 100 

APPENDIX III: DATA E COSYSTEM 110 National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 5

# Introduction 

# #AIforAll: Technology Leadership for Inclusive Growth 

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is poised to disrupt our world. With intelligent machines enabling high -level 

cognitive processes like thinking, perceiving, learning, problem solving and decision making, coupled 

with advances in data collection and aggregation, analytics and compute r processing power, AI presents 

opportunities to complement and supplement human intelligence and enrich the way people live and 

work. 

India, being the fastest growing economy with the second largest population in the world, has a significant 

stake in the AI revolution. Recognising AI’s potential to transform economies and the need for India to 

strategise its approach, Hon’ble Finance Minister, in his budget speech for 2018 – 2019 , mandated NITI 

Aayog to establish the National Program on AI , with a view to guiding the research and development in 

new and emerging technologies. In pursuance of the above, NITI Aayog has ad opted a three -pronged 

approach – undertaking exploratory proof -of -concept AI projects in various areas, crafting a national 

strategy for buil ding a vibrant AI ecosystem in India and collaborating with various experts and 

stakeholders. Since the start of this year, NITI Aayog has partnered with several leading AI technology 

players to implement AI projects in critical areas such as agriculture a nd health. Learnings from these 

projects, under various stages of implementation, as well as our engagement with some of the leading 

institutions and experts have given a better perspective to our task of crafting the national strategy for AI ,

which is the focus of this discussion paper. 

This strategy document is premised on the proposition that India, given its strengths and characteristics, 

has the potential to position itself among leader s on the global AI map – with a unique brand of #AIforAll .

The appr oach in this paper focuses on how India can leverage the transformative technologies to ensure 

social and inclusive growth in line with the development philosophy of the government. In addition, India 

should strive to replicate these solutions in other sim ilarly placed developing countries .

#AIforAll will aim at enhancing and empowering human capabilities to address the challenges of access, 

affordability, shortage and inconsistency of skilled expertise; effective implementation of AI initiatives to 

evolve scalable s olutions for emerging economies; and endeavors to tackle some of the global challenges 

from AI’s perspective, be it application, research, development, technology, or responsible AI. #AIforAll 

will focus on harnessing collaborations and partners hips, and aspires to ensure prosperity for all. Thus, 

#AIforAll means technology leadership in AI for achieving the greater good. 

While evolving the national strategy for AI, the underlying thrust was to identify applications with maximum 

social impact, a willingness to learn from the best of the world when it comes to the recen t technology 

advancements in AI, and leveraging approaches that democrati ze access to and further development of 

AI. 

From an applications perspective, the approach is to identify sec tors that may have the potential of 

greatest externalities while adopting AI solutions, and hence require the government to play a leading 

role in developing the implementation roadmap for AI. For example, the agriculture sector in India, which 

forms the b edrock of India’s economy, needs multi -layered technology infusion and coordination amongst 

several stakeholders. Efforts from private sector may neither be financially optimal nor efficient on a 

standalone basis, and hence sustained government interventio n to tackle the existing challenges and 

constraints is needed . Hence, India’s approach to implementation of AI has to be guided by optimi sa tion 

of s ocial goods, rather than maximis ation of topline growth. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 6

From a technology perspective, the strategy is to maximi se the late -movers’ advantage. Acknowledging 

that India is some distance away from consistently delivering home grown pioneering technology 

solutions in AI, adapting and innovating the technology for India’s unique needs and opportunities would 

help it in leap frogging, while simultaneously building the foundational R&D capability aimed at ensuring 

competitiveness in the long run. 

Solving for India, given the complexity and multi -dimensional aspects of most of our economic and 

societal challenges, can easily be extended to the rest of the emerging and developing economies. An 

integral part of India’s strategy for AI involves tackling common and complex global challenges that can 

be solved through technology intervention, and India’s scale and opportuni ty landscape provides the ideal 

test -bed to ensure sustainable and scalable solutions .

The purpose of this paper is to lay the ground work for evolv ing the National Strategy for Artificial 

Intelligence . While this paper includes several recommendations, so me of which may be deemed 

disruptive, specifics (e.g. execution and financial implications) have been consciously avoided, since 

wider consultations and consensus building is needed to refine these recommendations. This document 

is intended to serve as an “essential pre -read” in building a truly transformative approach in pursuit of 

#AIforAll. 

Amitabh Kant 

CEO, NITI Aayog National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 7

# Executive S ummary 

# India’s Approach to L eadership in AI 

AI refers to the ability of machines to perform cognitive tasks like thinking, perceiving, learning, problem 

solving and decision making. Initially conceived as a technology that could mimic human intelligence, AI 

has evolved in ways that far exceed its orig inal conception. With incredible advances made in data 

collection, processing and computation power, intelligent systems can now be deployed to take over a 

variety of tasks, enable connectivity and enhance productivity. As AI’s capabilities have dramatical ly 

expanded, so have its utility in a growing number of fields. 

The truly transformative nature of the technology, yet the nascent stage of its adoption worldwide, 

provides India with an opportunity to define its own brand of AI leadership. #AIforAll - the brand proposed 

for India implies inclusive technology leadership, where the full potential of AI is reali se d in pursuance of 

the country’s unique needs and aspirations. The strategy should strive to leverage AI for economic 

growth, social development and inclusive growth, and finally as a “Garage” for emerging and developing 

economies. 

While AI has the potential to provide large incremental value to a wide range of sectors, adoption till date 

ha s been driven primarily from a commercial perspective . Technol ogy disruptions like AI are once -in -a-

generation phenomenon, and hence large -scale adoption strategies, especially national strategies, need 

to strike a balance between narrow definitions of financial impact and the greater good. NITI Aayog has 

decided to focus on five sectors that are envisioned to benefit the most from AI in solving societal needs :

a) Healthcare: increased access and affo rdability of quality healthcare, 

b) Agriculture: enhanced farmers’ income, increased farm produc tivity and reduction of wasta ge, 

c) Education: improved access and quality of education, 

d) Smart Cities and Infrastructure: efficient and connectivity for the burgeoning urban population, 

and 

e) Smart Mobility and Transportation: smarter and safer modes of transportation and better traffic 

an d congestion problems. 

To truly reap the benefits of deploying AI at scale, the report identifies the following barriers that need to 

be addressed in order to achieve the goals of #AIforAll: 

a) Lack of broad based expertise in research and application of AI, 

b) Absence of enabling data ecosystems – access to intelligen t data, 

c) High resource cost and l ow awareness for adoption of AI, 

d) Privacy and security, including a lack of formal regulatio ns around anonymis ation of data, and 

e) Absence of collaborative approach to adoption and application of AI. 

Superior research capabilities have been the cornerstone of leadership aspirations in emerging 

tec hnologies and effectively realis ing the growth potential requires expertise in both core and applied 

research. Despite indicat ions of recent positive efforts in this aspect of technology, AI research in India 

is still in its infancy and requires large scale concerted and collaborative interventions .

The paper proposes a two -tiered structure to address India’s AI research aspirat ions: 

a) Centre of Research Excellence (CORE) focused on developing better understanding of existing 

core research and pushing technology frontiers through creation of new knowledge; 

b) International Centers of Transformational AI (ICTAI) with a mandate of developing and deploying 

application -based research. Private sector collaboration is envisioned to be a key aspect of 

ICTAIs. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 8

The research capabilities are proposed to be com plemented by an umbrella organis ation responsible for 

providing direction to research efforts through analysis of socio -economic indicators, studying global 

advancements, and encouraging international collaboration. Pursuing “ moonshot research projects ”

through speciali se d teams, development of a dedicated supranation al agency to channel research in 

solving big , audacious problems of AI – “CERN for AI”, and developing common computing and other 

related infrastructure for AI are other key components research suggested .

As technology increasingly disrupts the nature of jobs and shifts the benchmarks of technological 

aptitude, skilling and reskilling of workforce forms an integral part of our approach to adopting AI. There 

is an emergent need for reskilling the existing workforce and developing future talent in accordance with 

the changing needs of the job market. This could be done via the adoption of decentrali se d teaching 

mechanisms working in collaboration with the private sector and educational institutions to prescribe 

certification with value. Furthermore, promotion of job creation in new areas, like data annotation needs 

to be identified and promoted, as these would have the potential of absorbing a large portion of the 

workforce that may find itself redundant due to increasing automation. 

Adoption of AI across the value chain viz. startups, private sector, PSUs and government entities, will 

truly unlock the potential by creating a virtuous cycle of supply and demand. The barriers to AI 

development and deployment can effectively be addressed by adopting the marketpl ace model – one 

that enables market discovery of not only the price but also of different approaches that are best suited 

to achieve the desired results. A three -pronged, formal marketplace could be created focusing on data 

collection and aggregation, data annotation and deployable models. There could be a common platform 

called the National AI Marketplace (NAIM). 

Furthermore, for accelerated adoption of a highly collaborative technology like AI, the government has to 

play the critical role of a catalyst in supporting partnerships, providing access to infrastructure, fostering 

innovation through research and creating the demand by seeking solutions for addressing various 

governmental needs .

As AI -based solutions permeate the way we live and do business, questions on ethics , privacy and 

security will also emerge . Most discussions on ethical considerations of AI are a derivation of the FAT 

framework (Fairness, Accountability and Transparency). A consortium of Ethics Councils at each Centre 

of Research Excel lence can be set up and it would be expected that all COREs adhere to standard 

practice while developing AI technology and products. 

Data is one of the primary drivers of AI solutions, and thus appropriate handling of data, ensuring privacy 

and security is of prime importance. Challenges include data usage without consent, risk of identification 

of individuals through data, data selection bias and the resulting discrimination of AI models, and 

asymmetry in data aggregation. The paper suggests establishing d ata protection frameworks and 

sectorial regulatory frameworks, and promotion of adopti on of international standards. 

In order for India to ride the AI innovation wave, a robust intellectual property framework is required. 

Despite a number of government in itiatives in strengthening the IP regime, challenges remain, especially 

in respect of applying stringent and narrowly focused patent laws to AI applications – given the unique 

nature of AI solution development. The importance of data to development of usef ul models is one such 

example. To tackle these issues, establishment of IP facilitation centers to help bridge the gap between 

practitioners and AI developers, and adequate training of IP granting authorities, judiciary and tribunals 

is suggested. 

The AI s trategy is aimed at primarily guiding an inevitable wave of change for quicker and better impact. 

The AI ecosystem is rapidly evolving and taking societies into uncharted territory. For now, we can begin 

to ask some of the big questions that each society m ust answer for itself: are we ready to manage data 

ethically? How do we bridge the digital divide? Which innovations are worthy of public funds and National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 9

partnerships? Bringing these questions into the open is the most important step in ensuring that AI 

advances create a better society. 

There has been tremendous activity concerning AI policy in different countries over the past couple of 

years. Governments in USA, UK, France, Japan and China have released their policy and strategy papers 

relating to AI. In order to establish a leadership role, it is important for India to take the plunge and start 

by releasing a Strategy Paper to initiate the roll out of an ambitious programme that would ensure for 

India its rightful place in this transformational era. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 10

This page has been intention ally left blank National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 12

# What is Artificial Intelligence? 

# A technical primer 

AI might just be the single largest technology revolution of our live times, with the potential to disrupt 

almost all aspects of human existence. Andrew Ng, Co -founder of Coursera and formerly head of Baidu 

AI Group / Google Brain, compares the transformational impact of AI to that of electr icity 100 years back. 

With many industries aggressively investing in cognitive and AI solutions, global investments are forecast 

to achieve a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 50 .1 % to reach USD 57.6 billion in 2021 1.

AI is not a new phenomenon, with mu ch of its theoretical and technological underpinning developed over 

the past 70 years by computer scientists such as Alan Turing, Marvin Minsky and John McCarthy. AI has 

already existed to some degree in many industries and governments. Now, thanks to virt ually unlimited 

computing power and the decreasing costs of data storage, we are on the cusp of the exponential age of 

AI as organis ations learn to unlock the value trapped in vast volumes of data. 

AI is a constellation of technologies that enable machines to act with higher levels of intelligence and 

emulate the human capabilities of sense, comprehend and act. Thus, comput er vision and audio 

processing can actively perceive the world around them by acquiring and processing images, sound and 

speech. The nat ural language processing and inference engines can enable AI systems to analy se and 

understand the information collected. An AI system can also take action through technologies such as 

expert systems and inference engines or undertak e actions in the physic al world . These human 

capabilities are augmented by the ability to learn from experience and keep adapt ing over time. AI 

systems are finding ever -wider application to supplement these capabilities across enterprises as they 

grow in sophistication. 

Irrespective of the type of AI being used, however, every application begins with large amounts of training 

data. In the past, this kind of performance was driven by rules -based data analytics programs, statistical 

regressions, and early “expert systems.” But the explosion of powerful de ep neural networks now gives 

AI something a mere program doesn’t have: the ability to do the unexpected.  

> 1Worldwide Semi -annual Cognitive Artificial Intelligence Systems Spending Guide from International Data Corp. (IDC), 2017

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 13

Figure 1: What is Artificial Intelligence 

AI technology has experienced a checkered history of waves of optimism followed by disappointment and 

periods of inertia, dubbed as “ AI winters ”. Each previous breakthrough has only ever partly lived up to 

the hype it generated, and none has managed to kick -start the technology into the mainstream .

Figure 2: Evolution of AI 

The big change today is that we are in an unprecedented period of technology innovation across so many 

different fields tha t gives us the belief that the “ AI Spring ” has not only arrived but is here to stay. Key 

developments responsible for this optimism are :

> Source:
> Accenture
> Source:
> Accenture

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 14

a) Unlimited access to computing power : The worldwide public cloud services market is projected 

to grow 21.4% in 2018 to total USD186.4 billion, up from USD153.5 bi llion in 2017, according to 

Gartner, Inc. The access is amplified by rapid increase in computational power. 

b) Huge fall in cost of storing data : We are in an age where the hard drive cost per gigabyte of data 

has been falling exponentially, to the extent th at we are approaching near zero marginal cost for 

storin g data (down from USD500,000 a gigabyte in 1980 to 2 cents a gigabyte in 2017). 

c) Explosion in data that is digiti se d: As per IDC forecasts, by 2025 , the global data sphere will grow 

to 163 zettabytes (that is a trillion gigabytes) 2, or ten times the 16.1ZB of data generated in 2016. 

As Barry Smyth, Professor of Computer science at University College Dublin, says: "Data is to 

AI what food is to humans. " So, in a more digital world, the exponential growth of data is 

constantly feeding AI improvements .

Co nsider, for example, the vastly increased processing power that comes from using Graphics 

Processing Units (GPUs) in place of Central Processing Units (C PUs). Google , in May 2017 ,

announced that its Tensor Processing Unit (TPU) delivered 30 -80 times higher performance -per -watt 

than contemporary CPUs and GPUs. When you add the decreasing cost of storage to the mix, plus 

the exponential growth in data volume s, together with the emergence of open source platforms and 

frameworks, you have got a uniquely potent combination of technologies and capabilities. It all adds 

up to a very powerful foundation to give AI its critical mass for mainstream adoption .

## Box  1: Machine Learning and Deep Learning 

Machine Learning, a term coined by Artur Samuel in 1959, meant “the ability to learn without being 

explicitly programmed.” Machine Learning involves the use of algorithms to parse data and learn from it, 

and making a  determination or prediction as a result. Instead of hand coding software libraries with well -

defined specific instructions for a particular task, the machine gets “trained” using large amounts of data 

and algorithms, and in turn gains the capability to per form specific tasks .

“Deep Learning is a technique for implementing Machine L earning. Deep L earning was inspired by the 

structure and function of the brain, specifically the interconnecting of many neurons. Artificial Neural 

Networks (ANNs) are algorithms  that are based on the biological structure of  the brain. In ANNs, there 

are ‘neurons’  which have discrete layers and connections to other “neurons”. Each layer picks out a 

specific feature to learn. It’s this layering that gives deep learning its name, dep th is created by using 

multiple layers as opposed to a single layer 3.”

Figure 3:  AI, ML and Deep Learning    

> Source: nVIDIA
> 2Data Age 2025: “The Evolution of Data to Life -Cr itical whitepaper by International Data Corporation, 2017”
> 3Medium.com: “The Difference Between Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning”

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 15

For a detailed analysis of major types of Machine Learning, algorithms and use cases, please refer to 

Appendix I: Artificial  Intelligence Explained .

AI gets categori se d in different ways and it may be useful to understand the various categories, their 

rationale and the implications. 

a) Weak AI vs. Strong AI : Weak AI describes "simulated" thinking. That is, a system which appears 

to behave intelligently, but doesn't have any kind of consciousness about what it's doing. For 

example, a chatbot might appear to hold a natural conversation, but it has no sense of who it is 

or why it's talking to you. Strong AI describes "actual" thinking. That is, behaving intelligently, 

thinking as human does, with a conscious, subjective mind. For example, when two humans 

converse, they most likely know exactly who they are, what they're doing, and why. 

b) Narrow AI vs. General AI : Narrow AI describes an AI that is limited to a single task or a set 

number of tasks. For example, the capabilities of IBM's Deep Blue, the chess playing computer 

that beat world champion Gary Kasparov in 1997, were limited to playing chess. It wouldn't have 

been able to win a game of tic -tac -toe - or even know how to play. General AI describes an AI 

which can be used to complete a wide range of tasks in a wide range of environments. As such, 

it's much closer to human intelligence. 

c) Superintelligence: The term "superintelligence" is often used to refer to general and strong AI at 

the point at which it surpasses human intelligence, if it ever does. 

While big strides have been made in Artificial Narrow Intelligence – algorithms that can process 

documents, drive vehicles or beat champion chess players, no one has yet claimed the first production 

or development of General AI. The weight of expert opinion is that we are a long way off the emergence 

of General AI. 

Figure 4: Narrow AI vs. General AI 

> Source:
> Accenture

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 16

# Global  Developments in Artificial Intelligence 

# Benchmarking s elect countries 

Countries around the world are becoming increasingly aware of the potential economic and social 

benefits of developing and applying AI. For example, China and U.K. estimate that 26% an d 10% of their 

GDPs respectively in 2030 will be sourced from AI -related activities and businesses. There has been 

tremendous activity concerning AI policy positions and the development of an AI ecosystem in different 

countries over the last 18 to 24 month s – the US published its AI report in December 2016; France 

published the AI strategy in January 2017 followed by a detail ed policy document in March 2018 ; Japan 

released a document in March 2017; China published the AI strategy in July 2017; and U.K. rele ased its 

industrial strategy in November 2017. 

Infrastructural supply side interventions have been planned by various countries for creating a larger 

ecosystem of AI development. Creation of “data trusts”, rolling out of digital connectivity infrastructur e

such as 5G / full fiber networks, common supercomputing facilities, fiscal incentives and creation of open 

source software libraries are some of the focus areas of various governments as committed in their 

strategy papers. 

In the area of core research i n AI and related technologies, universities and research institutions from the 

US, China and Japan have led the publication volume on AI research topics between 2010 and 2016. 

Universities in USA, primarily Carnegie Mellon University, Massachusetts Institu te of Technology and 

Stanford, took an early lead in AI research by offering new courses, establishing research facilities and 

instituting industry partnerships. Off late, Chinese universities, especi ally Peking and Tsinghua 

Universities have caught on to the race by utilising large scale public funding and extensive research 

partnerships with private companies. 

For building the future workforce for AI, countries are also significantly increasing the allocation of 

resources for Science, Technology, Enginee ring and Math s (STEM) talent development through 

investment in universities, mandating new courses (e.g., AI and law), and offering schemes to retrain 

people. For instance, U.K. has planned to build over 1,000 government supported PhD researchers by 

2025 a nd set up a Turing fellowship to support an initial cohort of AI fellows while China has launched a 

five -year university program to train at least 500 teachers and 5,000 students working on AI technologies. 

Governance structures for enabling all the above mandates vary across countries. Many countries have 

instituted dedicated public offices such as Ministry of AI (UAE), and Office of AI and AI Council (U.K.) 

while China and Japan have allowed existing minist ries to take up AI implementation in their sectoral 

areas. Not just national governments, but even local city governments have become increasingly aware 

about the importance and potential of AI and have committed public investments. 

National governments h ave significantly increased public funding for AI through commitments such as 

increasing the R&D spend, setting up industrial and investment funds in AI startups, investing in network 

and infrastructure and AI -related public procurements. China, USA, Franc e and Japan have committed 

significant public spending for AI technology development and adoption. 

These countries are also leveraging different combinations of public -private -academia to develop and 

promote AI. Development of technology parks, and connec tin g large corporations with start ups and National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 17

forming “national teams” with large private players to undertake fundamental and applied research are 

some of the public -private partnership approaches various national governments have espoused. 

AI technology dev elopment and applications are evolving rapidly with major implications for economies 

and societies. A study by EY and NASCCOM found that by 2022, around 46% of the workforce will be 

engaged in entirely new jobs that do not exist today, or will be deployed in jobs that have radically 

changed skillsets 4. If some countries decide to wait for a few years to establish an AI strategy and put in 

place the foundations for developing the AI ecosystem, it seems unlikely that they would be able to attain 

and match up to the current momentum in the rapidly changing socio -economic environment. Therefore, 

the need of the hour is to develop a policy framework that will help set up a vibrant AI ecosystem in India. 

A detailed study of various country strategies for AI is pl aced in the Appendix II: Global Country Strategy 

Review . 

> 4Future of Jobs in India: A 2022 Perspective, 2017

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 18

# Artificial  Intelligence  and India 

# Identifying priority areas for India’s efforts in Artificial Intelligence 

A national AI strategy needs to be premised on a framework which is adapted to India’ s unique needs 

and aspirations, while at the same time, is capable of achieving the country’s full potential of leveraging 

AI developments. Such a framework could be seen as an aggregation of the following three distinct, yet 

inter -related components: 

a) Oppo rtunity : the economic impact of AI for India 

b) AI for Greater Good : social development and inclusive growth 

c) AI Garage for 40% of the world : solution provider of choice for the emerging and developing 

economies (ex -China) across the globe 

Opportunity: the economic impact of Artificial Intelligence for India 

AI is emerging as a new factor of production, augmenting the traditional factors of production viz. labor, 

capital and innovation and technological changes captured 

in total factor productivity. AI has the potential to overcome 

the physical limitations of capital and labour, and open up 

new sources of value and growth. From an economic impact 

perspective, AI has the potential to drive growth through 

enabling: (a) intelligent automation i.e. ability to au tomate 

complex physical world tasks that require adaptability and 

agility across industries, (b) labo ur and capital 

augmentation: enabling humans to focus on parts of their 

role that add the most value, complementing human 

capabilities and improving capita l efficiency, and (c) 

innovation diffusion i.e. propelling innovations as it diffuses through the economy. AI innovations in one 

sector will have positive consequences in another, as industry sectors are interdependent based on value 

chain. Economic value is expected to be created from the new goods, services and innovations that AI 

will enable. 

Accenture, in its recent AI research reports 5, provides a framework for evaluating the economic impact 

of AI for select G20 countries and estimates AI to boost Indi a’s annual growth rate by 1.3 percentage 

points by 2035.   

> 5Rewire for Growth: Accelerating India’s Economic Growth with Artificial Intelligence, Accenture

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 19

Figure 5: Unlocking innovation through AI 

AI for Greater Good: social development and inclusive growth 

Beyond just the headline numbers of economic impact, a disruptive technology such as AI needs to be 

seen from the perspective of the transformative impact it could have on the greater good – improving the 

quality of life and access of choice to a large section of the country. In that sense, the recent 

advancements in AI seem to be custom -made for the unique opportunities and challenges that India 

faces. Increased access to quality health facilities (including addressing the locational access barriers), 

inclusive financial growth for large sections of population that have hitherto been excluded from formal 

financial products, providing real -time advisory to farmers and help address unforeseen factors towards 

increasing productivity, building smart and efficient cities and infrastructure to meet the demands of 

rapidly urbani si ng population are some of the examples that can be most effectively solved through the 

non -incremental advantages that a technology such as AI can provide .

AI Garage for 40% of the world 

In addition to providing unique opportuni ties, India provides a per fect “ playground ” for enterprises and 

institutions globally to develop scalable solutions which can be easily implemented in the rest of the 

developing and emerging economies. Simply put, Solve for India means solve for 40% or more of the 

world. An advance d AI based solution for early diagnosis of tuberculosis (one of the top -10 causes of 

death s worldwide), for example, could easily be r olled out to countries in South East Asia or Africa, once 

developed and refined in India. Beyond healthcare, AI technologi es in the other sectors including 

agriculture, education and mobility are set to transform the world. The commonality of issues with regard 

to the above sectors across developing countries provides the ideal use case of developing AI solutions 

that could b e adapted for multiple markets. Hence, AI technologies suited for the Indian agricultural sector 

could easily be customised for other developing nations based on their local climatic conditions. 

Education continues to be a major concern in almost all devel oping countries. AI technologies that are 

capable of imparting quality education to India’s linguistically diverse population could prove very useful 

in other developing nations. 

Another aspect of India’s potential as a leader in AI is it proven track rec ord in technology solution provider 

of choice. Solved in India (or more accurately, solved by Indian IT companies) could be the model going 

forward for Artificial Intelligence as a Service (AIaaS). Indian IT companies have been pioneers in bringing 

technol ogy products and developments as solutions across the globe. As AI matures and generalised 

applications become common place, its advantage India when it comes to large scale implementation. 

Furthermore, India’s competence in IT combined with opportunities, such as interoperability between 

> Source:
> Accenture

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 20

multiple languages, provides the much needed impetus for finding scalable solutions for problems that 

have global implications, such as NLP. 

Artificial Intelligence has the potential to provide large incremental value to a wide range of sectors 

globally, and is expected to be the key source of competitive advantage for firms. 

a) Healthcare : Application of AI in healthcare can help address issues of high barriers to access to 

healthcare facilities, particularly in rural areas that suffer from poor connectivity and limited supply 

of healthcare professionals. This can be achieved through implementation of use cases such as 

AI driven diagnostics, personali se d treatment, early identification of potential pandemics, and 

imaging dia gnostics, among others. 

b) Agriculture : AI holds the promise of driving a food revolution and meeting the increased demand 

for food ( global need to produce 50% more food and cater to an additional 2 billion people by 2050 

as compared to today). It also has th e potential to address challenges such as inadequate demand 

prediction, lack of assured irrigation, and overuse / misuse of pesticides and fertilis ers. Some use 

cases include improvement in crop yield through real time advisory, advanced detection of pest 

attacks, and prediction of crop prices to inform sowing practices. 

c) Smart Mobility, including Transports and Logistics : Potential use cases in this domain include 

autonomous fleets for ride sharing, semi -autonomous features such as driver assist, and predic tive 

engine monitoring and maintenance. Other areas that AI can impact include autonomous trucking 

and delivery, and improved traffic management. 

d) Retail : The retail sector has been one of the early adopters of AI solutions, with applications such 

as impro ving user experience by providing personali se d suggestions, preference -based browsing 

and image -based product se arch. Other use cases include customer demand anticipation, 

improved inventory management, and efficient delivery management. 

e) Manufacturing : Man ufacturing industry is expected to be one of the biggest beneficiaries of AI 

based solutions, thus enabling 'Factory of the Future' through flexible and adaptable technical 

systems to automate processes and machinery to respond to unfamiliar or unexpected situations 

by making smart decisions. Impact areas include engineering (AI for R&D efforts), supply chain 

management (demand forecasting), production (AI can achieve cost reduction and increase 

efficiency), maintenance (predictive mainte nance and increased asset utilis ation), quality 

assurance (e.g. vision systems with machine learning algorithms to identify defects and deviations 

in product features), and in -plant logistics and warehousing. 

f) Energy : Potential use cases in the energy sector include energy sy stem modelling and forecasting 

to decrease unpredictability and increase efficiency in power balancing and usage. In renewable 

energy systems, AI can enable storage of energy through intelligent grids enabled by smart meters, 

and also improve the reliabili ty and affordability of photovoltaic energy. Similar to the manufacturing 

sector, AI may also be deployed for predictive maintenance of grid infrastructure. 

g) Smart Cities : Integration of AI in newly developed smart cities and infrastructure could also help 

meet the demands of a rapidly urbani si ng population and providing them with enhanced quality of 

life. Potential use cases include traffic control to reduce congestion and enhanced security through 

improved crowd management. 

h) Education and Skilling : AI can potentially solve for quality and access issues observed in the Indian 

education sector. Potential use cases include augmenting and enhancing the learning experience 

through personali se d learning, automating and expediting administrative tasks, and predict ing the 

need for student intervention to reduce dropouts or recommend vocational training .National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 21

Adoption of AI by various sectors have been influenced by , among other factors, technical and regulatory 

challenges, but commercial implications has been the biggest determinant. While technic al feasibility, 

availability of structured data, regulatory barriers, privacy considerations, ethic al issues, preference for 

human relationship have all played their roles in determining the readiness of a sector for large scale AI 

adoption; compelling business use cases (e.g. improved efficiency, a ccuracy, speed, forecasting and 

accurate decision making) that lead to direct impact on revenue and profitability have been the biggest 

driver for companies to pursue accelerated adopti on of AI. As illustrated in McKinsey Global Institute’s AI 

adoption and use survey, sectors leading the AI adoption today also intend to grow their investment in AI 

the most, thus further reinforcing the varying degree s of AI adoption across sectors. 

Figur e 6: Current AI adoption and future AI investments by sector 

It comes as no surprise that Banking and Financial Services sector has been one of the leading sectors 

globally when it comes to AI adoption, and India has also seen a steep increase in AI based 

implementation in recent times. Existing and potential use of Artificial Intelligence in this sector include 

improved customer interaction through personali se d engagement, virtual customer a ssistance, and 

chatbots; improved processes through deployment of intelligent automation in rule based back -office 

operations; development of credit scores through analysis of bank history or social media data; and fraud 

analytics for proactive monitoring and prevention of various instances of fraud, money laundering, 

malpractice, and the prediction of potential risks. AI in this sector has also been employed in wealth 

management viz. robo -advisory, algorithmic trading and automated transactions. 

Similarly , manufacturing sector, primarily automotive and assembly, has been one of the first sectors to 

implement advanced robotics at scale. The manufacturing sector in India hasn’t been far behind, as 

reflected in a recent study by BCG, where India was ranked 3 rd in the world in AI implementation in 

> Source:
> McKinsey
> Global
> Inst itute AI
> adoption and
> use survey

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 22

manufacturing, ahead of nations such as Germany, with 19% of companies in the sector already using 

AI to a significant extent 6.

These trends have also been reflected in the nature of investment in research in India, wi th private sector 

initiatives such as the Robert Bosch Centre for Data Science and Artificial Intelligence (RBC -DSAI), 

choosing to focus their efforts in applied research on sectors such as manufacturing analytics and 

financial analytics. 

Figure 6 also rev eals that sectors like Healthcare and Education have quite a lot of ground to cover as 

far as AI adoption is concerned. Healthcare, despite being one of the hottest areas of AI startup 

investments ( Appendix IV : What Do the Markets Say ), is tricky, especial ly in the Indian context. 

Agriculture doesn’t even feature in the analysis above. Another analysis by McKinsey Global Institute 

indicates that potential value of AI for agriculture was in the bottom tercile of 19 sectors evaluated 7, and 

could be a possible explanation for diminished private sector led AI adoption in agriculture. In sectors 

such as these, externalities from adoption of AI far outweigh the economic returns reali se d by private 

initiatives, and hence the role of government becomes pivotal in en suring large scale AI intervention. 

NITI Aayog has evaluated various sectors that will be impacted by AI and has taken a conscious decision 

to focus on a select set of sectors where only private sector led initiatives will not lead to achieving desired 

so cietal outcomes. In addition to Healthcare and Agriculture, focus sectors include Education (preparing 

tomorrow’s generation to leverage the global AI revolution to India’s advantage), Smart Cities and 

Infrastructure (solving for India’s rapidly urbani si ng population) and Smart Mobility and Transportation 

(solving for challenges congestion, pollution, high rates of road accidents leading to economic inefficiency 

and enormous human cost). 

An unrelated but interesting paradi gm for AI application is the “AI + X” approach. Despite its vast potential, 

the capabilities of AI today are limited to tasks for which it has been specifically trained, and are still many 

years from achieving human like consciousness. AI today should thus be regarded as an enhancement, 

or enabler of increased efficiency in previously existing processes, rather than capable of a complete 

overhaul of traditional tasks. Deployment can be viewed through the paradigm of “ take an existing 

process, and add AI” or “AI + X”; where “X” can range from tasks such as driving a car, where AI can 

provide incremental value through improved routing and energy management, to act of sowing seeds, 

where AI can help inform decision making and improve productivity. 

Similar to the effects of electr icity, AI can increasingly be seen as an intelligent, additive utility that can 

be deployed at will, but remain largely invisible to the tasks performer. This vision is perhaps best put by 

author Kevin Kelley: 

“There is almost nothing we can think of that cannot be made new, different, or more valuable by infusing 

it with some extra IQ. In fact, the business plans for the next 10,000 startup s are easy to forecast: Take 

X and add AI ” . 

In applying this paradigm to the development o f a national strategy, it is thus important to consider the 

challenges faced by individual sectors , or various manifestations of “X” to best identify the incremental 

value that AI can provide. The paradigm also cements the need for collaboration with secto rial 

stakeholders in the application of the technology. The paradigm provides a useful framework to analyse 

what is possible in terms of technology intervention today.   

> 6BCG “AI in the Factory of the Future”
> 7McKinsey Global Institute “Notes From The AI Frontier: Insights From Hundreds Of Use Cases”

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 24

# Focus areas for  AI  intervention 

# Sectoral deep dives 

# Healthcare 

Healthcare is one of the most dynamic, yet challenging, sectors in India, and is expected to grow to 

USD280 billion by 2020, at a CAGR of upwards of 16%, from the current ~USD100 billion 8.

Yet, it faces major challenges of quality, accessibility and affor dability for a large section of the population: 

a) Shortage of qualified healthcare professionals and services like qualified doctors, nurses, 

technicians and infrastructure : as evidenced in 0.76 doctors and 2.09 nurses per 1,000 

population (as compared to WH O recommendations of 1 doctor and 2.5 nurses per 1,000 

population respectively) and 1.3 hospital beds per 1,000 population as compared to WHO 

recommended 3.5 hospital beds per 1,000 population 9.

b) Non -uniform acce ssibility to healthcare across the country wi th physical access continuing to be 

the major barrier to both preventive and curative health services , and glaring disparity between 

rural and urban India. 

Figure 7: Accessibility of Healthcare across India  

> 8

FICCI -KPMG study  

> 9

WHO website, PwC analysis 

> Source:
> PwC
> Analysis,
> World Bank
> data (2017)

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 25

With most of the private facilities concentrated in and around tier 1 and tier 2 cities, patients have to travel 

substantial distances for basic and advanced healthcare services. ( Box 2: What TMH’s Cancer heat map 

tells us about the availability of heal thcare in India ?)

The problem is further accentuated by lack of consistent quality in healthcare across India, most of the 

services provided is individual driven rather than institution driven, and less than 2% of hospitals in India 

are accredited. 

## Box 2 : What TMH’s Cancer heat map tells us about the availability of 

## healthcare in India? 

Tata Memorial Hospital, one of the leading cancer hospitals in India, registered more than 67,000 new 

registrations for cancer treatment in 2015. While the hospital is loca ted in Mumbai, less than 23% of the 

new patients were geographically based in Maharashtra, with a whopping 21.7% of patients traveling 

from the states of UP, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal to TMH .

Figure 8 : Geograp hic location of  TMH  cancer patients 

That these patients had to travel more than 1,800 km , on an average,  to avail cancer treatment is an 

unfortunate tale of lack of access to quality healthcare. In addition to battling a potentially life threatening 

disease, the patients are saddled by the s tress and financial implications of traveling long way away from 

home. While the data is not available to such an effect, it wouldn’t be surprising to find that most of these 

patients choose to travel to TMH when cancer has developed to an advanced stage,  thus further reducing 

the chances of successful cure and treatment. 

> Credit : Tata Memorial Centre

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 26

c) Affordability remains a problem with private expenditure accounting for ~70% of healthcare 

expenses, of which ~62% is out -of -pocket expenditure, probably  one  of the highest in the world. 

Significant  portion of hospital costs  in  both  rural  (~47%)  and urban India  (~31%)  are financed by 

loans and sale of assets.  Poor  and marginali se d are hit the most, and as  per  the  Government 

estimates, a sizeable part of the  population (~63 million) are faced with poverty every year 

because of their healthcare expenditure 10 .

d) Reactive approach to essential healthcare largely due to lack of awareness, access to services 

and behavioral factors implies that majority of patients app roach a hospital / physician only when 

a disease has reached an advanced stage, thus increasing the cost of care and reducing the 

chances of recovery. 

The Government of India has been making a series of large scale interventions to address India’s 

healthc are challenges, viz. transformation of 1.5 lakh Health and Wellness Centers, developing district 

hospitals to cater to long -term care for non -communicable diseases, Ayushman Bharat Mission, 

promoting e -Health etc. 

## Box 3 : Government of India’s push for Univ ersal Healthcare Coverage 

The  Government of India , through its recent policy interventions, has shown a bold commitment to 

achieve Universal Health Coverage and increased access to comprehensive primary health care. 

Through  the Ayushman Bharat programme  announced in Union Budget 2018, probably the world’s 

largest government funded health care programme, the  Government of India  has embarked on a path 

breaking journey to ensure the affordability and accessibility of healthcare in India. The Ayushman Bharat 

– National Health Protection Mission (AB  – NHPM) aims t o provide insurance cover of INR  5 lakh per 

family per year for second ary and tertiary care hospitalis ation. Ayushman Bharat is targeted at more than 

10 crore families (approximately 50 crore beneficia ries /  ~40% of India’s population) belonging to th e poor 

and vulnerable sections  based on the SECC database, and doesn’t impose any limitations on family size 

or age limit for the beneficiaries to avail benefits. The benefits package covers most medical an d surgical 

conditions with minimal exclusions , covers pre and post hospitalis ation expenses, and covers all pre -

existing conditions from day one  – thus simplifying availing requisite healthcare by the beneficiaries. The 

benefits of the Mission will be avai lable at public hospitals as well as empaneled private health care 

facilities. 

The Union Budget 2018 a lso included a commitment of ~INR 1,200 crore for Health and Wellness Centres 

(HWC), which will lay the foundation for India’s health system as envisione d in the National Health Policy 

2017. These HWCs, to be set up by transformi ng 1.5 lakh Health Sub Centres from  2018  to  2022, are 

aimed at shifting primary healthcare from selective (reproductive and child health / few infectious 

diseases) to comprehensive  (including screening and management of NCDs; screening and basic 

management of mental health ailments; care for common ophthalmic and ENT problems; basic dental 

health care; geriatric and palliative health care, and  trauma care and emergency care) . NCDs a ccount 

for ~60% of mortality in Indi a,  55% of which is premature. NCDs are predominantly chronic conditions 

and impact the poor most adversely, given the high costs of treatment involved. Prevention and early 

detection are therefore of the essence in reduc ing the disease burden attributable to these conditions as 

well as ensuring long -term follow -up and manage ment of symptoms for patients.  The HWCs, under the 

new implementation plan, will provide 12 basic healthcare services, expanding from the current pack age 

of 6 services. Crucially, these centres will provide preventive services to improve healthy behaviours for  

> 10 National Health P olicy 2015 Draft

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

27 

family health and control the incidence of communicable and non -communicable diseases among  the 

population covered by HWCs.  A key component of HW Cs will be universal screening for NCDs. 

Screening for five NCDs and associated risk factors has been prioriti se d given the high burden o f disease 

associated with them.  These include hypertension, diabetes, as well as three common cancer s - oral, 

breast  and cervical.  Screening for othe r conditions such as  Chronic Obstructive Disease will be added 

subsequently. The HWCs will be operated by a mid -level health service provider, auxiliary nurse 

midwives, accredited social health activists and a male health w orker responsible for comprehensive 

primary health care services for a population of about 5,000. 

Figure  9: Features of HWC 

The NHPM and HWC, in unison, are aimed at holistically addressing the health needs of the population, 

including health promotion and disease prevention as well as the delivery of primary, secondary and 

tertiary services. 

In addition,  the  government aims a t leveraging technology to improve healthcare facilities through the: 

a)  the  National eHealth Authority (NeHA)  which will strategi se  eHealth adoption, define standards and a 

framework for the health sector, put in place electronic health  exchanges for in teroperability, 

b)  the  Integrated Health Information Program  (IHIP) to provide EHR to all citizens of India and provide 

interoperability to existing EHR/EMRs ,

c)  the  Electronic Health Record Standards  for India 

Despite the obvious economic potential, the healthcare sector in India remains multi -layered and 

complex, and is ripe for disruption from emerging technologies at multiple levels. It is probably the most 

intuitive and obvious use case primed for interventi on by AI driven solutions, as evidenced by the 

increasing activity from large corporates and startups alike in developing AI focused healthcare solutions. 

Adoption of AI for healthcare applications is expected to see an exponential increase in next few yea rs. 

The healthcare market globally driven by AI is expected to register an explosive CAGR of 40% through Care in pregnancy and child-birth   

> 1234
> Neonatal, infant health care services Childhood and adolescent healthcare Family planning / reproductive healthcare Communicable diseases (TB, Malaria etc.)
> 56Screening, prevention and control of NCDs Common ophthalmic and ENT care
> 78910
> Out-patient care for acute simple illnesses / ailments Basic oral healthcare Manageable emergency medical services Screening / management of mental health ailments
> 11 12 Elderly and palliative health care services Comprehensive primary health care through HWCs Robust IT system, MLHP and payment reforms Expansion to 12 basic services, integration with AYUSH, health promotion
> Hub and spoke model for connecting HWCs with PHCs Drug storage and dispensation, waiting area for 30+ people Telemedicine facilities and point of care diagnostics Equipped with consulting spaces and wellness rooms

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 28

2021, and what was a USD600 million market in 2014 is expected to reach USD6.6 billion by 2021 11 . The 

increased advances in technology, and interest and activity from innovators, provides opportunity for 

India to solve some of its long existing challenges in providing appropriate healthcare to a large section 

of its population. AI combined with robotics and Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) could potentia lly be the 

new nervous system for healthcare, presenting solutions to address healthcare problems and helping the 

government in meeting the above objectives. 

Figure 10 : Potential use cases of AI in Healthcare 

AI solutions can augment the scarce personnel and lab facilities; help overcome the barriers to access 

and solve the accessibility problem; through early detection, diagnostic, decision making and treatment, 

cater to a large part of India. 

Cancer screenin g and treatment is an area where AI provides tremendous scope for targeted large scale 

interventions. India sees an incidence of more than 1 million new cases of cancer every year, and early 

detection and management can be crucial in an optimum cancer trea tment regimen across the country. 

NITI Aayog is in an advanced stage for launching a programme to develop a national repository of 

annotated and curated pathology images. Another related project under discussions is an Imaging 

Biobank for Cancer. 

## Box 4 : AI  for India’s cancer woes 

Cancer screening and treatment is an area where  AI  provides tremendous scope for targeted large scale 

interventions. India sees an incidence of more than 1 million new cases of cancer every year, a number 

that is likely to increase  given the increasing age of Indian population and lifestyle changes. Early 

detection and management can be crucial in an optimum cancer treatment regimen across the country. 

Good quality pathology service is the essential building block of cancer care, wh ich unfortunately is not 

easily available outside select Indian cities. For an annual incidence of more than 1 million new cancer 

diagnosis every year, India has barely 2,000 pathologists experienced in oncology, and less than 500  

> 11 Frost & Sullivan, “From $600 M to $6 Billion, Artificial Intelligence Systems Poised for Dramatic Market Expansion in
> Healthcare”
> Source:
> PWC, “No
> longer
> science
> fiction,
> AI and
> robotics are
> transforming
> healthcare”

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 29

pathologists who could be  considered an expert oncopathologist. Machine learning solutions aimed at 

assisting a general pathologist  in making quality diagnosis  can very well plug this gap in providing 

essential healthcare. An essential pre -requisite in implementation of such a sol ution is availability of 

quality annotated pathology datasets. NITI Aayog is in an advanced stage for launching a programme to 

develop a national repository of annotated and curated pathology images. The components of such a 

repository include a move towar ds “Digital Pathology”, which entails all glass slides generated being 

scanned at high resolution and magnification, followed by accurate, precise and comprehensive 

annotation of the scanned images using various data sources & levels of clinical & patholog ical (gross 

pathology, histopathology and molecular) information available from day -to -day patient care. 

Another related project under discussions is an Imaging Biobank for Cancer. Human cancers exhibit 

strong phenotypic differences that may be visuali se d noninvasively by expert radiologists (using imaging 

modalities). Recent literature suggests that certain image based features may correlate to molecular and 

clinical features like known mutations (KRAS, EGFR, etc.), receptor status, prognostic power, intr a-tumor 

heterogeneity, gene expression patterns, etc. Reports have shown an association between radiographic 

imaging phenotypes and tumor stage, metabolism, hypoxia, angiogenesis and the underlying gene 

and/or protein expression profiles. These correlation s, if rigorously established, may have a huge clinical 

impact as imaging is routinely used in clinical practice. Moreover, this provides an unprecedented 

opportunity to use artificial intelligence to improve decision -support in cancer treatment at low cost 

especially in countries like India.  AI  based Radiomics is an emerging field that refers to the 

comprehensive quantification of tumor phenotypes by applying a large number of quantitative imaging 

features. It has resulted in improvement to existing biomark er signature panels by adding imaging 

features. 

> Credit : Tata Memorial Centre for developing the concepts for Digital Pathology and Imaging Biobank

NITI Aayog is working with Microsoft and Forus Health to roll out a technology for early detection of 

diabetic retinopathy as a pilot project. 3Nethra, developed by Forus Health, is a portable device that can 

screen for common eye problem. Integrating AI capabilities to this device using Microsoft’s retinal imaging 

APIs enables operators of 3 Nethra device to get AI -powered insights even when they are working at eye 

checkup camps in remote areas with nil or intermittent connectivity to the cloud. The resultant technology 

solution also solves for quality issues with image capture and systems che cks in place to evaluate the 

usability of the image captured. 

AI based healthcare solutions can also help in making healthcare services more proactive – moving from 

“sick” care to true “health” care, with emphasis on preventive techniques. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 30

# Agriculture 

While India has come a long way from being categorised as purely an agrarian economy, agriculture and 

allied sector still accounts for 49 % of India’s workforce, 16% of the country’s gross domestic product 

(GDP) 12 , and ensures food security to roughly 1.3 bil lion people. 

Agriculture and allied sector is critical to India’s growth story. To achie ve and maintain an annual growth 

rate of 8 –10% for the India n economy, agriculture sector must grow 4% or higher rate. The Government 

of India has recently prioritise d Doubling Farmers’ Income as a National Agenda ; putting considerable 

focus on supply chain perspectives in agriculture and market development in addition to productivity 

augmentation. 

Despite making impressive progress and receiving government attention, the sector continues to be 

dependent on unpredictable variables, has weak supply chain and low productivity. 

India has not been able to completely remove its exploitative dependence on resource intensive 

agricultural practices. Degradation of land, reduction in soil fertility, increased dependence on inorganic 

fertilizers for higher production, rapidly dropping water tables and emerging pest resistance are some of 

the several manifestat ion s of India’s unsustainable agricultural practices . As global climate becomes 

more vulnerable and unpredictable, dependence on unsustainable and resource intensive agriculture will 

only heighten the risks of food scarcity and agricultural distress. 

The sector suffers from poor resource utilis ation, with the production quantum and productivity still being 

quite low. For example, yield of cereals, comprising a major share of food grain production, in terms of 

magnitude is significantly lower than that of C hina and the USA . Technology adoption and efficient 

resou rce usage in these two countries are far higher , thus resulting in higher yields. 

Similarly, use of water in agriculture continues to be high and sub -optimal . The practice of growing water 

intensive crops, and inefficient water management, makes India a net exporter of water and puts India’s 

long run agronomic sustainability in question. Despite having just one -third of the gross cropped area 

under irrigation, agriculture consumes 89% of our extracted groundwater. 

Figure 11 : Comparison of yield and water footprint 

Agrarian distress in India has increased over time due to a multiplicity of factors. Fluctuating agric ultural 

growth rate , globalised value chains leading to variability in commodity prices, unpredictable changes in  

> 12 Economic Survey 2018
> Source:
> World Bank
> and
> UNSECO -
> IHE Report
> on Water
> Footprint
> 2010

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 31

monsoon rainfall over years and structurally inefficient domestic agricultural markets are just some of the 

reasons for income variability of farmers. Various Na tional Sample Survey rounds have shown the 

reduction in proportion of value share of crops to overall agricultural value from 78% to 69% since the 

Green Revolution 13 . Thus income disparity between a farmer and non -agricultural worker has increased 

over the years. 14 

Figure 12 : Income disparity 

On the market side, non -existent functional end -to -end agriculture value chains have caused the price 

realisation for farmers to remain low. Access to , and timely availability of services , across agricultural 

value chain at the farmers’ end thus becomes a challenge. At present, there is no functional mechanism 

to track the capacity of storage facilities available to the farmer. Value chain is not integrated through its 

entire length – procurement to market, including ICT , and banking services.  The following figure 

effectively captures the present scenario. 

Figure 13 : Agri -Commodity value chain in India    

> 13 Doubling Farmers Income Committee Estimates
> 14 Chand, R., R. Saxena and S. Rana; Estimates and analysis of farm income in India (2015)
> Source:
> Doubling
> Farmers
> Income
> Committee
> Estimates

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 32

AI will have significant global impact on agricultural productivity at all levels of the value chain. 

An e stimate by Markets and Markets R esearch valued AI in agriculture to be USD 432 million in 2016 and 

expects it to grow at the rate of 22.5% CAGR to be valued at USD 2.6 billion by 2025 15 .

According to CB Insights, agricultural tech startups have raised o ver USD800million in the last 5 years. 

Deals for startups using robotics and machine learning to solve problems in agriculture started gaining 

momentum in 2014, in line with the rising interest in AI across multiple industries like healthcare, finance, 

and commerce. From analy si ng millions of satellite images to finding healthy strains of plant microbiome, 

these startups have raised over USD500 million to bring AI and robotics to agriculture. 

Globally, digital and AI technologies are helping solve pressing issues across the agriculture value chain. 

The r elative role of each technology in creating impact is dependent on the nature of the work, and the 

issues at hand. India has ~30 million farmers who own smartphones, which is expected to grow 3 times 

by 2020 and 315 million rural Indians will be using i nte rnet by 2020 16 . An Accenture study says – digital 

farming and connected farm services can impact 70 million India n farmers in 2020, adding USD 9 billion 

to farmer incomes . These are not futuristic scenarios, they are in play today, enabled by a vast digital 

ecosystem which includes traditional Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM), software and services 

companies, cloud providers, open source platforms, startup s, R&D institutions and others. Future growth 

is interdependent on the close partnership among thes e players. 

Figure 14 : Ecosystem crucial for benefits of Precision Agriculture 

In 2016, approximately 50 Indian agricultural, technology based startup s (‘AgTech’) raised USD 313 

million 17 . For the first time, this sector is seeing widespread participation by startup s. Intello Labs, for 

example, uses image -recognition software to monitor crops and predict farm yields. Aibono uses agri -

data science and AI to provide solutions to stabilise cr op yields. Trithi Robotics uses drone technology to 

allow farmers to monitor crops in real time and provide precise analysis of their soil. SatSure, a startup    

> 15 MarketsAndMarkets
> 16 Forbes.com “For India's Farmers It's Agtech Startups, Not Government, That Is Key”
> 17 Agfunder.com
> Source:
> Accenture
> Research

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 33

with roots in India, uses ML techniques to assess images of farms and predict economic value of t heir 

future yield. 

Use of AI and related technologies have the potential to impact productivity and efficiency at all of the 

above stages of the agricultural value chain. 

 Soil health monitoring and restoration : Image recognition and deep learning models h ave enabled 

distributed soil health monitoring without the need of laboratory testing infrastructure. AI solutions 

integrated with data signals from remote satellites, as well as local image capture in the farm, have 

made it possible for farmers to take im mediate actions to restore soil health. 

## Box 5 : Application for soil care 

Berlin -based agricultural tech startup PEAT has developed a deep learning application called Plantix  that 

reportedly identifies potential defects and nutrient deficiencies in the soil. The analysis is conducted by 

software algorithms which correlate particular foliage patterns with certain soil defects, plant pests and 

diseases. The image recognition app  identifies possible defects through images captured by the user’s 

smartphone camera. Users are then provided with soil restoration techniques, tips and other possible 

solutions. 

 Crop health monitoring and providing real time action advisories to farmers : The Indian agriculture 

sector is vulnerable to climate change due to being rain dependent. Varying weather patterns such 

as increase in temperature, changes in precipitation levels, and ground water density, can affect 

farmers especially in the rainfed are as of the country. AI can be used to predict advisories for sowing, 

pest control, input control can help in ensuring increased income and providing stability for the 

agricultural community. For example, many agronomic factors (such as vegetation health and soil 

moisture) can be monitored up to the farm level through remote sensing. Using remote sensed data, 

high resolution weather data, AI technologies, and AI platform, it is possible to monitor crops 

holistically and provide additional insights to the exte nsion workers/farmers for their farms as & when 

required. 

 Increasing efficiency of farm mechani sation : Image classification tools combined with remote and 

local sensed data can bring a revolutionary change in utilis ation and efficiency of farm machinery, in 

areas of weed removal, early disease identification, produce harvesting and grading. Horticultural 

practices require a lot of monitoring at all levels of plant growth and AI tools provide round the clock 

monitorin g of these high value products. 

## Box 6 : AI sowing app 

Microsoft in collaboration with ICRISAT, developed an AI Sowing App powered by Microsoft Cortana 

Intelligence Suite including Machine Learning and Power BI. The app sends sowing advisories to 

participating farmers on the optimal date to sow. The best part  – the farmers don’t need to install any 

sensors in their fields or incur any capital expenditure. All they needed was a feature phone capable of 

receiving text messages. The advisories contain ed essential information including the optimal sowing 

date, soil test based fertilizer application, farm yard manure application, seed treatment, optimum sowing 

depth, and more. In tandem with the app, a personali se d village advisory dashboard provided imp ortant National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 34

insights into soil health, recommended fertilizer, and seven -day weather forecasts. In 2017, the program 

was expanded to touch more than 3,000 farmers across the states of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka 

during the Kharif crop cycle (rainy season) for  a host of crops including groundnut, ragi, maize, rice and 

cotton, among others. The increase in yield ranged from 10% to 30% across crops. 

## Box 7 : AI for herbicide optimis ation 

Blue River Technology has designed and integrated computer vision and machine  learning technology 

that enables farmers to reduce the use of herbicides by spraying only where weeds are present, 

optimi si ng the use of inputs in farming  – a key objective of precision agriculture .

 Increasing the share of price realisation to producers : Current low levels of price realisation to farmers 

(as low as 20% in fruits and vegetables 18 ) are primarily due to ineffective price discovery and 

dissemination mechanisms, supply chain intermediary inefficiency and local regulations. Predictive 

analytics us ing AI tools can bring more accurate supply and demand information to farmers, thus 

reducing information asymmetry between farmers and intermediaries. As commodity prices are 

interlinked globally, big data analysis becomes imperative. Data from e -NAM, Agri cultural Census 

(with data on over 138 million operational holdings), AGMARKET and over 110 million Soil Health 

Samples provide the volumes required for any predictive modelling. 

## Box 8 : AI for Precision Farming 

NITI Aayog and IBM have partnered to develo p a crop yield prediction model using AI to provide real time 

advisory to farmers. IBM’s AI model for predictive insights to improve crop productivity, soil yield, control 

agricultural inputs and early warning on pest/disease outbreak will use data from re mote sensing (ISRO), 

soil health cards, IMD’s weather prediction and soil moisture/temperature, crop phenology etc. to give 

accurate prescriptions to farmers. The project is being implemented in 10 Aspirational Districts across 

the States of Assam, Bihar,  Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.  

> 18 DFI Committee Report

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 35

# Education 

An effective education sector has the ability to transform a country through development of human 

resources and increase d productivity. In the context of emerging countries particularly, levels of education 

and literacy of the population play an important role in development and overall transition to an advanced 

economy. 

In India, the importance of a developed education sec tor is amplified by a large youth population .

Estimates indicate that currently over half the population of the country is below the age of 25. As the 

adoption of digital means of gathering data increases, it is important that these methods are effectively 

leveraged to deliver i mproved education and teaching. 

The adoption of technology in education is improving, though not at the pace required. It is estim ated that 

schools globally spent nearly USD 160 billio n on education technology, or ‘E dT ech’, in 2016, a nd forecast 

spending to grow 17% annually through 2020. Private investment in educational technology, broadly 

defined as the use of computers or other technolo gy to enhance teaching, grew 32% annually from 2011 

through 2015, rising to USD 4.5 billion global ly. Adoption of new technologies is still lacking, however, 

often attributed to unwillingness of teachers and students to adopt technology. 

School education in India has seen substantial progress in recent decades, with efforts at both the Central 

and St ate levels, and substantive gains in enrolment have been achieved – Gro ss Enrolment Ratio (GER) 

is 97 % at elementary level and 80% at secondary level, as per recent figures. However, low retention 

rates and poor learning outcomes mar the impact of gains in enrolment. 

a) Low retention rates : Enrolment of children is of little use if children are not retained in the schooling 

system. Retention rate of 70.7% at elementary level indicates that one -third of enrolled children drop 

out before completing Class 8. Rete ntion rate at secon dary level is also poor at 57.4 %. Low quality 

of education is one of the causes of poor retention. 

b) Poor learning outcomes : There is increasing concern about the poor learning levels of children in 

school, and a new National Achievement Survey (NAS) was recently conducted in November 2017. 

Previous rounds of NAS results provide an insight into longitudinal performance over time – average 

performance of States / UTs on previous round s showed that over 60% of Class 5 students scored 

below 5 0% across subjects; and for majority of the 31 States / UTs tested, performance significantly 

deteriorated in NAS Cycle -4 versus Cycle -3. Assessments from the perspective of basic foundational 

skills also indicate poor learning outcomes – in rural areas, o nly 47.8% of Cl ass 5 children could read 

Class 2 level text and only 26% could do Class -5-level arithmetic. 

The above scenario is a consequence of a complex interplay of factors that pose challenges to improving 

the quality of education: 

a) Multi -grade and m ulti -level classrooms : For a large proportion of schools, especially in small or 

remote villages, it is not viable to have separate classrooms and teachers for different grades /

classes. Consequently, the teacher is faced with a heterogenous group of children in the same 

classroom, with wide variations in their classes, ages, abilities and learning levels. This large variation 

poses a huge challenge to the teacher and is a common cause of poor teaching -learning, thus leading 

to poor learning outcomes. 

c) Lack of interactive pedagogy and ineffective remedial instruction : Teaching -learning processes in 

most classrooms are highly rote -based and non -interactive. Remedial instruction, where conducted, 

typically lacks customisation to the child’s learning level, abilities, and pace of learning. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 36

d) Inadequate attent ion / action for likely drop -outs : Several children may be at risk of dropout due to 

various factors, such as inadequate school infrastructure, poor teachers, poor school readiness, 

language barriers, la rge learning gaps with respect to grade le vel, family circumstances (e.g. migrant 

families), poor nutritional or health status, etc. 

e) Large teacher vacancies due to uneven distribution across locations : Large number of teacher 

vacancies are mostly not due to an overall shortage of teachers in a State – instead, they are due to 

uneven distribution across different geographical areas within the State. For instance, recent figures 

for Uttar Pradesh revealed 1.74 lakh teacher vacancies at elementary school lev el, but a

simultaneous surplus of 0.66 lakh teachers across the s tate. 

f) Professional development courses / training do not cater to real needs and have poor coverage 

Existing teacher training is typically a generic kind of an exercise. It is not linked to the specific 

weaknesses / requirements of a teacher – for instance, a teacher with poor arithmetic understanding 

requires corresponding training to clarify arithmetic concepts. Consequently, most teacher training 

exercises end up as wasted public expenditu re, with little or n o benefit to the teacher and her / his 

students. Similar issues exist with respect to trainin g of other staff such as school 

headmasters/principals. The coverage of existing training programs is also extrem ely low, typically 

less than 2 0% annually. 

g) Low adoption of existing technologies : A recent survey found that level of adoption of technology in 

schools is lacking, and can be largely attributed to lack of teache r training, despite provision of the 

ICT infrastructure. While 83% of the teache rs surveyed use computers, the use is limited primarily to 

audio / visual display, or student practice . A meagre 41% and 27% use technology for tracking 

student data and participating in forums respectively. This trend is even more pronounced in the low 

fee school segment surveyed 19 . Another trend observed is that trained teachers are much more likely 

to use technology in the classroom. 88% o f trained teachers reported making use of available 

computers as compared to only 53% of untrained teachers. Tra ined teachers were found to be nearly 

twice as likely to report using technology for communication purposes and for online forum 

participation 20 .

According to EdTechXGlobal , EdTech is becoming a global phenomenon, and as distribution and 

platforms scale in ternationally, the market is projected to grow at 17.0% per annum, t o USD 252 billion by 

2020. India’s digital le arning market was valued at USD 2 billion in 2016 and is pr ojected to grow at a 

CAGR of 30%, reaching USD 5.7 billion in 2020 as per estimates fro m Technopak. 

As per Forbes, in 2017, across every market involved in EdTech, international f unding reached a new 

record of USD 9.52 billion, and 813 different EdTech companies received funding s last year. These 

EdTech investments mark a gain of 30% from 201 6. VC interest in the education space continues to 

grow. For example, one of India’s leading Ed Tech startups Byju’s raised USD 40 million from Tencent in 

July 2017, jus t four months after raising USD 30 million from Belgium -based Verlinvest. Among Byju’s 

oth er investors include Sequoia Capital and The Chan Zuckerberg Foundation. 

AI has the potential to bring about changes in the sector by supplementing pedagogy and establishing 

systems to inform and support decision making across stakeholders and administrati ve levels. However,   

> 19 Cross Square Foundation, Ed Tech Adoption Survey
> 20 Econom ic Survey, 2016 -17

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 37

implementation of AI must be preceded by efforts to digiti se records of teacher performance, student 

performance, and curriculum. Several AI tools are being successfully used in other parts of the world, 

and they can be adapted to the I ndian context to target specific challenges. 

a) Adaptive learning tools for customi se d learning : While AI may not completely replace a teacher, it 

has the potential to greatly assist teacher s in efficiently and effectively managing multi -level / multi -

grade classrooms, by judging learning levels of individual students, and allowing automated 

development of customi se d educational content adapted to each child’s class and learning level. 

Assessing time spent by a student on each part / page of the l earning material, for example, would 

allow real -time feedback on student performance to help the teacher appropriately tailor her guidance 

to the child. This concept can be extended to automatic grading of tests, as well. 

b) Intelligent a nd interactive tuto ring systems : Intelligent Tutoring Systems can provide great benefit to 

students through delivery of learning materials adapted to the child’s proficiency level, learning style, 

and pace of learning. In -built pop -up questions tailored to students, for exam ple, can help increase 

interactivity, and catch student’s attention and interest. It can also help in assessment of student’s 

level of attention or comprehension to appropriately design remedial instruction. GradeGuardian, for 

example, uses predictive mode ls and visuali sations for student performance with an interactive 

dashboard showing anticipated effect of policy changes. Submission includes 3 componen ts 

packaged as a single web app – a Chatbot that inputs student information, an Adv isor Console that 

sho ws students at risk, and a prediction module for policymakers. 

## Box 9 : Creating ‘smart content’ for improved interactivity 

Content Technologies Inc. (CTI), an AI research and development company, develops AI that creates 

customi se d educational content. Usi ng deep learning to absorb and analy se  existing course materials, 

textbooks, and course curriculum, the technology creates custom learning materials, including textbooks, 

chapter summaries, and multiple -choice tests. 

A recent hackathon conducted by NITI A ayog also featured ‘ReadEx’, an android application that does 

real -time question generation using NLP, content recommendations, and flashcard creation. 

c) Predictive tools to inform pre -emptive action for students predicted to drop out of school : Analysis of 

test results and attendance records using AI can be used to predict probable student activities and 

inform pre -emptive action. For instance, in a recent preliminary experiment conducted in Andhra 

Pradesh, AI applications processed data on all students based on parameters such as gender, socio -

economic factors, academic performance, school infrastructure, teacher skills, etc., with the objective 

of helping the government identify students likely to drop out. Test results could inform suggestions 

to enroll students in vocational studies. Additionally, redressal mechanisms could be put in place to 

identify students whose performance c an be improved by focus of existing schemes to their family. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 38

## Box 10 : Microsoft is helping in predicting drop outs in Andhra 

## Pradesh 

The AP government  is  making concerted efforts to bring down the  school  dropout rate in the state. It has 

tied up with  Microsoft to address this complex challenge. Based on specific parameters, such as gender, 

socio -economic demographics, academic performance, school infrastructure and teacher skills, an 

application powered by Azure Machine Learning processes the data pert aining to all students to find 

predictive patterns. 

With these data insights,  the district education officials can intervene and help students  who are most 

likely to drop  out. A variety of programs  and counselling sessions  could  be conducted for these stud ents 

and their parents. 

The Andhra Pradesh government, based on machine learning and analytics, has identified about 19,500 

probable dropouts from government scho ols in Visakhapatnam district for  the next academic year (2018 -

19) .

d) Automated rationalisation of teachers : AI tools can be used to develop automated teacher posting 

and transfer systems, using analytics based on demand – supply gaps across schools in the State, 

candidate’s prior postings, candidate preferences, etc. This would help in plugging of g aps in teacher 

distribution more effectively. 

e) Customised professional development courses : To tackle issues of poorly designed professional 

development courses with poor coverage, adaptive AI tools can be used to design automated, 

customi se d professional d evelopment training content for the teacher based on their performance, 

identification of their knowledge and skill gaps. This could then be continuously adapted as 

teacher’s skills and concepts improve. 

## Box 11 : WriteToLearn by Pearson 

Pearson’s WriteToLe arn software uses natural language processing technology to give students 

personali se d feedback, hints, and tips to improve their writing skills. In describing his experience using 

WriteToLearn, one 7th -grade English language arts teacher said, “ I feel it’ s pretty accurate. … Is it 

perfect ? No. But when I reach that 67 th  essay, I’m not [really] accurate, either. As a team, [WriteToLearn 

and I] are pretty good .” Essay grading technology cannot substitute for a teacher’s ability to provide 

feedback and coachi ng on particular words and sentences: the software merely rates students’ essays 

in genera l areas — such as organis ation, idea development, and style —and then provides generic 

suggestions for improvement in these areas. But when teachers use the software as  a first pass at grading 

and then interject their detailed feedback to address the improvement areas identified by the software, 

essay grading becomes a much less time -consuming and laborious process. The net result is that 

teachers can spend less time gra ding and more time teaching, while also giving students more 

opportunities to receive customi se d feedback on their writing. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 39

# Smart Cities and Infrastructure 

India is currently in the midst of a surge of urbanis ation. While the percentage of the population living in 

urb an areas was estimated to be 31% in 2011 21 , recent research on satellite data indicat es that this figure 

is close 45% today 22 , and predicted to rise to up -to 60 percent by 2050 23 . Though seen as an important 

aspect of a country’s economic growth and a major step in the overall development of the country, 

unplanned urbanis ation presents challenges such as congestion, over pollution, high crime rates, poor 

living standards, and can potentially put a huge burden on the infrastructure and administrat ive needs of 

existing Indian cities. 

To tackle these challenges, the Government of India has embarked on an ambitious initiative to set up 

Smart Cities across India, aimed at driving economic growth and improving the quality of life , by 

harnessing IT solut ions . As part of the Smart Cities Mission, 99 cities have been selected with expected 

investment of INR 2.04 lakh crores. The strategic components of these Smart Cities include city 

improvement (retrofitting), city renewal (redevelopment) and city extension (greenfield development) in 

addition to a pan -city initiative in which smart solutions are applied covering large parts of the city. The 

Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) is another related initiative which 

targets improving t he infrastructure of existing cities. 

Smart cities attempt to address the challenges of urbanis ation through development of features based 

on IT solutions, some of which are listed below. 

a) Poor urban planning 24 : Smart cities aim to solve challenges of inefficient land use, improper land use 

categoris ation, area based development and lack of open spaces such as parks, playgrounds, and 

recreational spaces in order to enhance the quality of life of citizens, reduce t he urban heat effect, 

and generally promote improved ecological balance. 

b) Inefficient utility distribution : Through large scale deployment of smart meters in both electricity and 

water, smart cities being developed are trying to solve challenges such as low visibility on usage of 

utilities such as electricity, water, and waste management. This is also targeted to help address 

issues of leakages in electricity and water distribution, and improper disposal of waste, and have the 

potential to significantly redu ce cost associate with administration and management. 

c) Improved delivery of citizen services: In the domain of service delivery, smart cities aim to harness 

data to solve issues in low accountability and transparency. By using digital channels, they can help 

address challenges in administration of offices, and long wait times. Today, poor standards of 

grievance redressal form another pressing issue that may be addressed by increasing adoption of 

technology based solutions. 

d) Improving public safety: Cities in India today are hotbeds for a range of crimes. Smart cities aim to 

address the issues of inc rease in crime and increased risk of urban emergencies through improved 

city design and surveillance analytics. 

Some Smart Cities have already begun implementing these features through specific projects. Pune, for 

example, has launched The Pune Street Lig ht Project to setup energy efficient street lights that can be 

remote controlled through a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems. Surat has built 

a network of more than 600 surveillance cameras which will be expanded to all major locatio ns in the     

> 21 Census 2011
> 22 LiveMint: “How much of India is actually urban?”
> 23 LiveMint: “60% of India’s population to live in cities by 2050: government”
> 24 Smartcities.gov.in

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 40

city, as well as collaborated with Microsoft to develop solutions for water management and urban 

planning. 

Due to the large amount of data they can create, smart cities are especially amenable to application of 

AI, which can make sense of the da ta being generated, and transform it into predictive intelligence – thus 

transitioning from a smart city to an ‘intelligent city’. 

However, the wide range of connected devices also gives rise to increased risks in cyber security, with 

harmful actors such as hackers now capable of affecting city scale infrastructure. 

Some use cases of AI that can augment the features of a smart city are listed below. 

a) Smart Parks and public facilities : Public facilities such as parks and other spaces contribute 

substantial ly to a city’s liveability. Use of AI to monitor patronage and accordingly control associated 

systems such as pavement lighting, park maintenance and other operational conditions could lead 

to cost savings while also improving safety and accessibility. 

b) Sm art Homes : Smart homes concept is creating buzz with AI technologies being developed to 

optimise human effort in performing daily activities. Extending this concept to other domestic 

applications such as smart rooftops, water saving applications optimising domestic water utilisation 

for different human activities etc. 

c) AI driven service delivery : Implementation of AI to leverage data on service delivery could see 

application such as predictive service delivery on the b asis of citizen data, rationalis ation o f

administrative personnel on the basis of predicted service demand and migration trend analysis, and 

AI based grievance redressal through chat -bots. 

d) Crowd management:  Use of AI in providing effective solutions in crowd management in recent times 

have be en in vogue and given fruitful results in averting city -scale challenges such as managing 

mega footfall events, emergency and disasters. Accenture worked with the Singapore Government 

during their SG50 Celebrations (50 th  anniversary of Singapore’ independe nce), and developed 

solution aimed at predicting crowd behavior and potential responses to incidents. The solution 

resulted in 85% accuracy in high crowd activity, crowd size estimation and object detection. Closer 

home, the “Kumbh Mela Experiment” is aime d at predicting crowd behavior and possibility of a 

stampede. Similar Big Data and AI solutions could help with advance prediction and response 

management. 

e) Intelligent safety systems : AI technology could provide safety through smart command centres with 

so phisticated surveillance systems that could keep checks on people’s movement, potential crime 

incidents, and general security of the residents. Social media intelligence platforms can provide aid 

to public safety by gathering information from social media and predicting potential activities that 

could disrupt public peace. In the city of Surat, the crime rate has declined by 27% after the 

implementation of AI powered safety systems. 

f) Cyber -attacks: Cyber -attacks seem to pose a great threat to our institutio ns and public systems, 

today. AI technologies possess the capability to detect vulnerabilities and take remedial measures to 

minimise exposure of secure online platforms containing highly sensitive data from being targeted by 

unscrupulous social elements. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 41

# Smart Mobility and Transportation 

Mobility and transportation form the backbone of the modern economy due to their linkages with other 

sectors and importance in both domestic and international trade s. Today’s society demands a high 

degree of mobility of various kinds, so as to enable efficient and safe transportation of both people and 

goods. As a major contributor to overall emissions, this sector must also be sensitive to ideas of 

environmental sust ainability. 

In India, majority of both passenger and freight traffic is carried through roads and railways. As of 2007 –

08, roads and r ailways accounted for almost 87% of total freight traffic i n the country and almost 90% of 

total traffic as of 2011 -12 25 . As the economy grows, it is expected that this reliance on these modes of 

transport shall continue unless there are major shifts in the policy initiatives in the area. The fact that 

these modes of transport are particularly pollution intensive compared t o shipping and air transport, 

further increase the need to implement smart practices in their deployment. 

Even apart from issues in poor modal mix, the Indian transportation sector faces a variety of issues. 

a) Congestion and road accidents : Despite having one of the most extensive transportation networks in 

the world, various sub -sectors sector continues to be underdeveloped leading to economic 

inefficiency and enormous human cost. Congestion and its associated costs in India are co ntinually 

on the rise. St atistics from Government of India and a study conducted by IIT Madras suggest the 

following growth patterns over the years, respectively. 

Figure 15 : Total registered motor vehicles per 1,000 population  

> 25 NTDPC, India Transport Report: Moving India to 2032

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 42

Figure 16 : Projected cost of congestion (USD million / year) 

b) High number of traffic deaths: According to a PIB release by the Ministry of Road Transport and 

Highways (MORTH) in Mar ch 2017, the total number of road accidents in the countr y during 2015 

was 5 01, 423 which resulted to 1 46,133 fatalities. The National Highways (NHs) accounted for about 

29.1 % share o f total road accidents and 35.0 % of total fatalities . Although the existing NHs comprise 

approximately 1.9 % of total road network, they carry about 40% of total road traffic. According to 

MORTH statistics, there has been a steady increase in the number of o n-road accidents over the 

years. 

c) Lack of public transportation infrastruc ture : Public transport infrastructure development remains 

laggard in the overall discourse of transport policy design, either at national and regional levels, with 

focus directed towards promoting and improving private car and associated infrastructure. Th e

following statistics from MORTH indicates the modal share of public transport (buses) over the years 

which has seen, but minimal increase over the years. 

> Source:
> Cost
> Estimates
> for Road
> Congestion
> in Delhi, IIT
> (Madras)

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 43

Figure 17 : Total numbers of public buses per 1,000 population 

d) Assisted vehicle technologies : Autonomy is not economically viable in India currently as driver costs 

per kilometre is too low. However, investing in the suite of autonomous vehicle technologies and 

exporting such vehicles represents a significant economic opportunity for India and since the same 

technologies can play a large role in reducing fatalities and decreasing congestion, it would be wise 

for Indian manufactures to invest in research and development of the broader suite of technologies 

that are esse ntial for assistive AI. These technologies can assist the driver by taking driving decisions 

which the system has a high degree of confidence in and alerting the driver in case it has a low 

degree of confidence in any decision. A prime example of such prod ucti se d, assistive AI is the 

advanced cruise control used in Tesla vehicles today. This can follow highway traffic and the curves 

in the road as well as start and stop in response to traffic. However, the moment the driver gives any 

input, the system is ta ken over by the driver. This hybrid approach is much safer than an unassisted 

human driving, without the potential drawbacks of having a completely autonomous system. There 

is another reason why India should not completely ignore assistive vehicle technolo gy research, and 

it has to do with the development of new public infrastructure. Since we have only recently begun 

building a large share of the total requirement of greenfield infrastructure, we have the benefit of 

hindsight. 

e) Need for sustainable transportation : The  recent initiative of the Government of India for announcing 

development of 100 Smart Cities is aimed at addressing this anomaly and catalyse smart strategies 

for urban planning which promote sustainable land use design and multimodal i ntegration. While new 

initiatives could take time to show realisable impact, the existing issues in urban mobility related to 

congestion, efficient traffic flow, movement of goods e tc. can indeed be solved using  AI technology. 

AI can power multimodal integration by assisting with scheduling public transportation systems, 

improved accessibility to public transportation infrastructure based on users’ choice behaviours, while 

also suggesting real -time travel mode adv isory based on predicted traffic situation.  AI enabled 

mobility solutions can ameliorate several of the challenges being faced by the Indian automotive and 

transportation sector. 

f)  Efficiencies in design of greenfield infrastructure  – Autonomous -ready traff ic will have significant 

impacts on greenfield road infrastructure design and consequently on greenfield city design. Lane 

size, lesser traffic congestion and reduced costs in upgradation of highway infrastructure are some 

of the externalities which will b enefit the sector of assisted vehicle adoption. 

> Source:
> MORTH

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 44

Listed below are some of the major applications of AI on the mobility front beyond autonomous cars: 

a) Autonomous trucking : Autonomous technology in trucking has the potential to transform the way we 

move goo ds today. AI can help increase safety and hauling efficiency through intelligent platooning, 

wherein trucks form platoons giving drivers the liberty to rest while the platoon keeps moving. Such 

a method also ensures optimal road -space utilisation, helping improve road infrastructure capacity. 

b) Intelligent Transportation Systems : Through the use of an intelligent traffic management system 

including sensors, CCTV cameras, automatic number plate recognition cameras, speed detection 

cameras, signalised pedestr ian crossings and stop line violation detection systems and the use of 

AI, real time dynamic decisions on traffic flows such as lane monitoring, access to exits, toll pricing, 

allocating right of way to public transport vehicles, enforcing traffic regulati ons through smart ticketing 

etc. can be made. Accident heat maps could be generated using accident data and driver behaviour 

at specific locations on the road network related to topology, road geometric design, speed limit etc. 

and suitable measures could be pre -emptively taken to prevent possible accidents. Also, AI could 

help to design sophisticated urban traffic control systems that can optimise signal timings at the 

intersection, zonal and network level, while also facilitating services such as automati c vehicle 

detection for extension of red/green phase or providing intermittent priority. 

c) Travel route/flow optimis ation: With access to traffic data at the network level, AI can help make smart 

predictions for public transport journeys by optimising tota l journey time including access time, waiting 

time and travel time. Considering factors such as accessibility to nearest mode of travel, most 

convenient access path based on local conditions and one’s preferences, AI can revolutioni se first -

last mile trave l which could change the way we perceive public transport journeys, today. About 

private car usage, AI could utilise a range of traffic data sets and one’s own preferences to make 

human -like decisions on route selection. With information on dynamic tolls a nd traffic flows on links, 

the dependency on overhead Variable Messaging Systems (VMS) could be minimised, reducing 

substantial infrastructure costs. On the systemic level, AI can help predict flow of traffic at the network 

level and suggest alternative fl ow strategies in order to contain congestion, alleviating cities of this 

major issue. 

d) AI for Railways : According to official figures, more than 500 train accidents occurred between 2012 -

2017, 53% of them due to derailment. Train operators can obtain situational intelligence through real -

time operational data and analyse them in three different dimensions: s patial, temporal and nodal. 

Fleet management and asset maintenance including that of rolling stock are pertinent AI use cases. 

Recently, the Ministry of Railways, Govt. of India has decided to use AI to undertake remote condition 

monitoring using non -intru sive sensors for monitoring signals, track circuits, axle counters and their 

sub -systems of interlocking, power supply systems including the voltage and current levels, relays, 

timers. 

e) Community Based Parking : The availability of parking is a major issue for Indian cities. AI can help 

optimi se parking, likely by minimi si ng vehicle downtime and maximi si ng driving time. With the advent 

of electric vehicles, AI will be needed to mediate the complex vehicle grid interactions(VGI) as well 

as for charging optim is ation. Parking guidance systems help drivers to find vacant parking spaces 

while they are using the road network and have approached close to their destination. Community National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 45

based parking using AI helps cars in traffic to collect data on vacant parking spac es, and allocates 

cars to spaces such that the demand is always met. 

## Box 12 : Effect on R&D 

Globally, research on autonomous vehicle has spurred advances, especially in AI fields of computer 

vision and robotics. Due to the extremely high market potential, o ver the past two years, most of the large 

investments in AI have been made in the field of autonomous vehicle as it is widely tipped to be the first 

large scale commercial application of AI to be adopted. 

Moreover, due to the congestion and chaotic conditi ons of Indian traffic, AI algorithms trained on Indian 

driving data have the potential to be very robust. 

Error rates of object class ification have fallen from 28.5% to 2.5%  since 2010 according to the Stanford 

AI index. Therefore, current techniques are  mature enough to be used in Indian conditions.  Also, within 

AI, the core technologies used have high transference potential. The same template used to identify 

objects on a road can be used to identify cancerous cells in a pathological image. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 46

# Key challe nges to adoption of AI in India 

# Commonality of problems mandate an integrated approach 

The preceding analysis of focus sectors – Healthcare, Agriculture, Education, Smart Cities and 

Infrastructure, and Smart Mobility and Transport, highlight the potentia l of AI tools and technologies in 

transforming the sectors and state of Indian economy as a whole. The analysis, however, also detail a 

multitude of challenges that India needs to overcome to reali se the full potential of a disruptive technology 

like AI. 

Adopting a narrow view and focusing on the challenges for a specific sector, the barriers to developing a 

robust set of AI applications may seem contextual and limited to that sector. Taking Healthcare sector as 

an example, enabling large scale adoption wou ld require at least the following factors to be addressed: 

a) absence of collaborative effort between various stakeholders: while India has adopted electronic 

health record (EHR) policy, sharing of data between various hospital chains still remains a work 

in progress, since different hospital chains have adopted different interpretations of ‘digiti si ng 

records’; 

b) relevant data is unavailable and there is absence of robust open clinical data sets; and 

c) concerns on privacy and security of data, including lack of formal regulation around 

anonymis ation of data. 

However, analy si ng across the focus sectors, the challenges are concentrated across common themes 

of: 

a) Lack of enabling data ecosystems 

b) Low intensity of AI research 

i. Core research in fundamental technologies 

ii. Transforming core research into market applications 

c) Inadequate availability of AI expertise, manpower and skilling opportunities 

d) High resource cost and low awareness for adopting AI in business processes 

e) Unclear privacy, security and ethical regulations 

f) Unattractive Intellectual Property regime to incentivi se research and adoption of AI 

These challenges, while by no means exhaustive, if addressed in an expeditious manner through 

concerted collaborative efforts by relevant stakehol ders, with government playing a leading role, could 

lead to fundamental building blocks that form the core to India’s march towards leadership in AI. The next 

section of the paper attempts to solve some of these challenge through specific interventions and 

recommendations. These recommendations have been formulated as fundamentally infrastructural in 

nature, and hence span across sectoral use cases. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 48

# Way Forward to Harness the Power of AI 

# Recommendations 

India’s unique challenges and aspirations , combined with the advancement in AI , and a desire to assume 

leadership in this nascent technology means India’s approach towards AI strategy has to be balanced for 

both local needs and greater good. The way forward for India in AI has to factor in our cur rent strengths 

in AI, or a lack thereof, and thus requires large scale transformational interventions, primarily led by the 

government, with private sector providing able support. 

This section lays down a set of recommendation to address the biggest challe nges and opportunities for 

India in the field of AI. The preceding analysis of focus sectors lead us to the assertion that the efforts 

need to be concentrated across major the mes of research, data democratis ation, accelerating adoption 

and reskilling – wit h privacy, security, ethics and intellectual property rights permeating as common 

denominators for all our recommended initiatives. These challenges, while by no means exhaustive, if 

addressed in an expeditious manner through concerted collaborative effort s by relevant stakeholders, 

with government playing a catalytic role, could lead to fundamental building blocks that can form the core 

to India’s march towards achieving its goal of #AIforAll .

India’s capabilities in AI research are rather limited, both in quantity (distant 5th globally) and especially 

in quality (disappointing impact of research produced). The research community is rather confined to a 

handful of academic institutes, and relies on individual brilliance rather than institutional competence. 

Acerbating the problem is the fact that private sector’s contribution to AI research has remained meagre. 

Despite some encouraging recent developments, viz. Government of Karnataka’s intention to set up a 

Centre of Excellence in AI in partnership with NAS SCOM, a lot of ground needs to be covered. The first 

set of recommendations focus on turbocharging both core and applied research. In addition, two 

frameworks for solving some of AI’s biggest research challenges through collaborative, market oriented 

appro ach have been proposed. 

The new age of AI and related frontier technologies would disrupt the nature of jobs of tomorrow and the 

skills required to reali se the true potential of these transformative technologies. The changes and 

challenges anticipated for the workforce will come from both the demand and supply side: demand for 

capabilities for jobs that don’t even exist today and diminished demand for some of the jobs that could 

be automated, supply of newly minted STEM graduates, a large portion of whom ma y struggle to be 

gainfully employed. Given our strength in advanced IT sector and the strength of favorable demographics, 

India may seem more equipped for workforce disruption that AI will bring, however our large numbers 

may soon turn from potential asset s to liabilities if right structures are not put in place. Our next set of 

recommendations focus on reskilling of existing workforce and preparing students for developing applied 

set of skills for the changing world of technology. 

Early adoption of AI – be it the research community building technology infrastructure, the startup 

community developing applications and corporations deploying solutions for their business needs, would 

be one of the key determinants in ensuring leadership in AI. Adoption of AI in India has remained rather 

limited, less than a quarter of firms in India are using AI in any form for their business processes and 

startup ecosystem in AI is virtually non -existent. Among the several impediments towards large scale National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 49

adoption of AI in India , the primary ones include difficulty in access to data (more specifically, structured 

and intelligent data), high cost and low availability of computing infrastructure, lack of collaborative 

approach to solving for AI combined with low awareness. Our reco mmendations to address these 

challenges include developing large foundational annotated data sets to democrati se data and multi -

stakeholder marketplaces across the AI value chain (data, annotated data and AI models). 

One of the key aspects of our ambition of # AIforAll includes responsible AI: ensuring adequate privacy, 

security and IP related concerns and balancing ethical considerations with need for innovation. Our final 

set of recommendations lay down the challenges and suggestion for addressing some of these not so 

straightforward implementational challenges of AI. 

The recommendations in the following chapters are aimed at initiating an informed conversation on India’s 

future roadmap for AI , and are descriptive rather than prescriptive by design. The pa per should be seen 

as providing framework for developing National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence, and as such, we have 

consciously avoided providing specific funding targets and funding mechanisms, as these require broad 

based stakeholder consultatio ns. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 50

# Research 

# Incentivi si ng  Core and A pplied research in  AI 

Advanced research, both core and applied, pro vides the basis for commercialisation and utilis ation of 

any emerging technology, more so for technologies like AI .

Where does India stand in Artificial Intelligence research? 

India has the necessary building blocks to develop a thriving AI research and development ecosystem, 

viz. availability of highly educated talent pool, world class educational institutes and an illustrious list of 

top notch IT companies dominating the global IT landscape. Despite these advantages India sees itself 

lagging considerably in producing world -class research and innovation in most technology fields, more 

so in AI. 

India produced a whopping 2.6 million 26 STEM graduat es in 2016, second only to China and more than 

4 times the graduates produced by USA, thus producing the requisite talent pool to drive innovation in 

emerging technologies. Disappointingly though, an overwhelming majority of this talent pool is focused 

on routine IT development and not so much on research and innovation. Exacerbating the problem 

further, a majority of the small population focused on research almost always prefers to pursue advance 

degrees (Masters or PhD degrees) to subsequently apply their expertise abroad. 

An analysis of India’s competence in core research in AI paints a somber picture. As per the Global AI 

Talent Report 2018, which crawled LinkedIn for its analysis, India only has 386 of a total of 22,000 PhD -

educated researchers worldwi de , and is ranked 10 th globally. The report also looks at leading AI 

conferences globally for presenters who could be considered influential experts in their respective field 

of AI. On this met ric, India was ranked 13 th globally, with just 44 top -notch pre senters. While these two 

approaches have their limitations and inherent biases, anecdotal evidence based on discussions with top 

researchers reveals that serious research work in India is limited to less than 50 researchers, 

concentrated mostly at institut es like IITs, IIITs and IISc. 

In terms of the citable documents published in the field of AI from 2010 - 2016, India ranks a distant 5 th ,

far behind the likes of China and USA and just about edging ahead of Germany and France who have 

considerably smaller STEM population . 

> 26 World Economic Forum

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 51

Figure 18 : Citable documents in Artificial Intelligence (2010 - 2016) 

Diving deeper into these numbers, if we look at the country wise H -Index (a metric that quantifies a 

country’s scientific productivity and scientific impact), India ranks a dismal 19 th globally. In other words, 

while India may be producing research pieces in numbers, their utility has been rather limited .

Figure 19 : H Index for Artificial Intelligence (1996 - 2016 )

Looking at the research coming out of academic institutes, the numbers are heavily skewed in favour of 

top -15 institutes, that in total have contributed more than 42% of all research publications from 2 001 –

2016 27 . IISc dominates the research publications, with 7.5% of all publications coming from this institute. 

For a country that has more than 750 universities and close to 40,000 colleges, this concentration of 

publication is a worrying sign. 

The India n IT services companies, the likes of TCS, Wipro and Infosys, have been the flag bearers of 

India’s competence in implementation of cutting edge technology solutions, yet their contribution to 

research has been limited. Given that these IT giants have been working closely with businesses globally 

and anticipating the trends in emerging technologies, it wouldn’t be unreasonable to expect a sizeable 

volume of research work coming out of these companies. Yet, looking at all the research publications 

from 2001 – 2016, only 14% of all publications have come from industry, with universities contributing 

86% of all publications. Even this limited research publication universe by industry is dominated by Indian 

subsidiaries of international companies (~70%), with on ly one Indian company in top -10 (TCS) 28 .  

> 27 Neel Shah: “Research trends of AI in India”
> 28 Neel Shah: “Research trends of AI in India”
> Source:
> Scimago
> Journal and
> Country
> Rank (SJR)
> Source:
> Scimago
> Journal and
> Country
> Rank (SJR)

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 52

## Box 13 : What India can learn from other economies in terms of AI 

## Research 

The US Governm ent is estimated to have spent USD 1.2 billion in non -classified research in 2016 -18 and 

the Defence  Advanced Research Projects Agency  (DARPA) is seeking a budget of USD 3.44 billion in 

fiscal  year  2019 -20 , an increase of 8.5% compared wit h its request for fiscal 2018 -19.  However,  US 

leadership in AI investment  has largely been driven by the private secto r. The world’s leading companies 

in AI research in 2016 were Microsoft, Google and IBM, all US companies. According to CB Insights, 

based on 2017 figures, Amazon, Google and Microsoft dominate enterprise AI  – again all US companies. 

It is estimated that mo re than half the world’s unicorns are  from the US. The digital eco systems around 

the hubs of Silicon Valley, Seattle, Boston and New York, which bring together talent and research 

capabilities from leading universities, private investment and cross -science  / industry collaboration, can 

be considered to have played an important role in developing the US’s AI capabilities. 

While still behind the US in terms of overall investment, China has clear ambitions to be at the same level 

as the US by 2020 and the worl d leader in AI by 2030, supported by a ne w development plan to create 

a USD 150 billion domestic AI industry. Its plans to build a new AI industry include a national fund that 

supports research, f rom the most basic research to  critical AI projects. The top  9 universities have 

received government funding to each establish an AI school and the remaining 32 to include an AI 

programme as part of their curriculum. The Ministry of Industry and Information Techno logy is planning 

to put nearly USD 950 million dollars  per year into strategic AI projects for State Owned Enterprises and 

the public sector. In addition to state investment, the government is expected (at the time of writing) to 

publish Next Generation AI Development Guidelines immanently. The guidelines are  expected to include 

a clear governance structure, with allocation of responsibility and plans for research, industry and 

legislative action or each of 2020, 2025 and 2030. 

While China’s approach  is not necessarily replicable  in other parts of the world,  there are two key 

learnings from its programme: 

• Public sector investment, particularly in R&D, helps drive private investment. 

• It has a plan with a governance structure and clear milestones. Having a plan instils confidence in 

inward investors. Based o n interviews Accenture carried out with inward investors in the UK, there 

was consensus that the governments’ public messaging had a significant impact on companies’ 

confidence and therefore willingness to invest in a country. 

In the UK, the universities o f Cambridge and Oxford are considered centres of AI innovation; having 

already stimulated three  startup s that made major AI breakthroughs and later became prime acquisition 

targets. Google in 2014 bought DeepMind, Apple in 2015 purchased VocalIQ, and Micro soft bought 

SwiftKey in 2016. This success is supported by funding from organisations like the Leverhulme Trust, 

which provides  annual funding of GBP 80 million for research. Other capabilities include The Alan Turing 

Institute: the national institute for d ata science. The Institute was established in 2015 by five founding 

universities (Cambridge, Edinburgh, Oxford, UCL and Warwick) and the UK Engineering and Physical 

Sciences Research Council. The Institute’s researchers work across disciplines and look at  theoretical 

development and application to real world problems. It was announced as the national centre for AI in 

November 2017 and six new universities will join the institute 2018. 

The German Research Centre for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI  – Deutsches  Forschungszentrum für 

Künstliche Intelligenz) is one of the world’s largest AI research institutes. It has facilities in the German 

cities of Kaiserslautern, Saarbrücken, Bremen and Berlin and is partnering with companies on application 

oriented basic rese arch to develop product functions, prototypes and patentable solutions. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 53

The EU’s Robotics Public Private Partnership, launched in 20 13, has seen the allocation of EUR 700 

million for research to 2020. This is coupled with private invest ment for an overall b acking of EUR 2.8 

billion. 

It is believed to be the biggest civilian research programme in this area in the world and could be 

considered instrumental in the strong presence of Europe among service robot manufacturers. Clearly, 

public -sector investment has  paid -off.  

> Source :Reali si ng the economic and societal potential of responsible AI, Accenture

The research ecosystem in India has seen some green shoots in recent years. Encouraging is the fact 

that the number of papers published has jumped 10 fold in last 10 years, from 331 papers in 2006 to 

3,301 papers in 2016 29 . IISc, almost all the IITs, some of the IIITs and central / state universities have 

increased their research efforts in various foundational and applied fields of AI. IIT Bombay and IIT Patna 

have entered into a joint research collaboration with industry to focus on the applied aspects of AI. The 

research, focused on IT services and social good, will aim to provide powerful AI insights and 

recommendations for improved productivity. It also incl udes software analytics – building, testing, 

managing and mode rnis ation of applications, solving real -life social issues such as malnutrition, human 

trafficking and climate change through prediction and recommendation models using AI. 

Another research grou p at IISc is working on the theory and application of reinforcement learning (RL), 

an aspect of machine learning used in optimis ation problems. They are particularly interested in traffic 

handling —both the vehicular kind on our roads, as well as the digita l kind in our wireless networks. 

Furthermore, there have been some encouraging efforts from both government and private sector in 

facilitating top quality research in recent times. Government of Karnataka is setting up a Centre of 

Excellence for Data Scien ce and Artificial Intelligence in partnership with NASSCOM. Wadhwani 

Foundation has set up India’s first research institute dedicated to developing AI solutions for social good 

in Mumbai in Feb 2018 .

However, the research ecosystem still has several obviou s gaps. The Detailed Project Report of 

Inter -Ministerial National Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical Systems has highlighted some of 

these as: 

a) Lack of collaborative / interdisciplinary approach: research is mostly focused in silos in academic 

in stitutions 

b) Lack of scale for experimental validation: due to various practical and financial reasons, university 

research is largely restricted to theoretical or laboratory scale. This needs to be augmented with pilot 

projects / large scale test beds / lab oratories 

c) Lack of facilities to support large scale experimental test beds: Large scale experimental test -beds 

are difficult to construct, maintain and operate, solely by academic institutions 

d) Lack of connect with stakeholders and practitioners to convert outputs to outcomes: The views of the 

stakeholders in terms of what application problems to focus on will be of great importance to ensure 

practical applicability of the research. At the same time, this should be facilitated in a way which does 

not constra int/suffocate the academic researchers in order for them to make foundational advances. 

Involving “technology translators” at an early stage, i.e. entrepreneurs/agencies/companies which 

can convert the research technologies to commercial products is needed . 

> 29 Scimago Journal and Country Rank (SJR)

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 54

e) Lack of large scale mission mode project management capabilities: Academic researchers usually 

work best individually (with a small team of students and research project staff). Current approaches 

to research and related facilities may not be suited for large scale experimental projects. 

While the numbers point to a small yet encouraging base, a concerted effort is needed to build a 

comprehensive research focused AI strategy for India, one that will position India towards global 

leadership in this emergin g area of technology. What is evident though is that incremental changes would 

not suffice and there is need for transformational changes to boost research major push coming from the 

government. 

Framework for promoting Artificial Intelligence Research in I ndia 

The Detailed Project Report of Inter -Ministerial National Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical 

Systems (IM -ICPS) has suggested the following four -tier framework for promoting research focused on 

all aspects of technology life -cycle: research, technology deployment, translation and management :

a) ICON (International Centres of New Knowledge): focusing on creation of new knowledge through 

basic research, 

b) CROSS (Centre for Research On Sub -Systems): focusing on developing and integrating core 

technologies developed at ICON layer and any other sources 

c) CASTLE (Center for Advanced Studies, Translational research and Leadership): focusing on 

development and deployment of application based research and 

d) CETIT (Centre of Excellence in Technology Innovation and Transfer): focusing on commercialis ation 

of technologies developed 

While the above structure has significant advantages, a far more simplified and agile approach is required 

to ensure seamless, target ed and accountable framework for promoting research. Hence the following 

two -tier integrated approach to boost both core and applied research in AI is proposed :

a) COREs (Centres of Research Excellence in Artificial Intelligence): CO REs will focus on core re search 

of AI, and will take on the mantle of executing the responsibilities of both ICON and CROSS as per 

the IM -ICPS framework. Thus, CO REs will speciali se in creating new knowledge through basic 

research and will source for fundamental knowledge / techno logies that will be needed to keep India 

prepared for the next generation of technologies. Furthermore, CO REs will also emphasi se on 

development infrastructure tools for direct application of basic research, including development of 

new areas of AI archite cture / platforms. 

b) ICTAI (International Centre for Transformational Artificial Intelligence): ICTAIs will provide the eco -

system for application based technology development and deployment, and will take on the mantle 

of executing the responsibilities of both CASTLE and CETIT as per the IM -ICPS framework. This will 

be an industry -led initiative and expec ted to take on the top -level challenges identified or inter -

ministerial projects calling for AI based solutions. Furthermore, ICTAIs will also be responsible for 

delivering commercial technology, and taking ideas / concepts or prototypes and turning them i nto 

marketable products by way of proactive coordination, communication and interfacing for technology 

transfer to the industry. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 55

Figure 20 : Proposed integration of COR Es and ICTAIs 

In summary, COREs will be focused on core research, in ev olving and new areas of AI, and will act as 

the technology feeders for ICTAIs which will be focused on creating AI based applications for, and 

accelerating early adoption in, domains of societal importance .

In addition, an umbrella organis ation should be established to address issues relating to access to 

finance , social sustainability and the global competitiveness of the technologies developed. This body, 

which shall be recognised as the Centre for Studies on Technological Sustainability (CSTS) , could be 

established on the lines of the Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise 

(CREATE), Singapore program or Innovate UK. The major responsibilities of CSTS could be on the 

following lines: 

a) to monitor the impact of the AI technologies developed at the consumer level through social indices 

and recommend necessary modifications for a better market penetration 

b) to study the financial viability of the AI technologies developed such that it caters to the target 

consumer base, while proposing improved pricing models for a pan India reach 

c) to study best practices on pricing models and social penetration of AI technologies across the world 

and recommend strategies to foster globally competitive technological development 

d) to catalyse international c ollaborations for CO REs and ICTAIs 

e) to study the AI landscape in other nations and design strategies for customisation and deployment 

of developed AI technologies as per their specifications for a global impact 

f) to provide a knowledge management platform for AI technologies by organising international 

workshops and conferences, promoting the confluence of thought leaders, practitioners and 

authorities 

Centres of Excellence for Artificial Intelligence 

CO REs for AI will focus on core research, in evolving and new areas of AI. Physical AI Cognitive AI Sensory AI General AI 

> 38%
> ICTAIs in priority domains of Agriculture, Health, Education, Smart Cities and Infrastructure and Smart Mobility and Transportation
> International Centres for Transformational AI
> Centres of Research Excellence

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 56

To start with, COREs could be established at IISc, ISI and top IITs and IIITs. Given that the research in 

AI needs to be multi -disciplinary, linkages need to be established with premier institutions in other 

disciplines viz. AIIMS for hea lthcare, TISS for arts and social science etc. Furthermore, these COREs 

should also act as a guide and mentor for other institutes researching in AI, in a hub -and -spoke model, 

to enable broad based development of AI research capabilities across India. 

The COREs would have to build on both the short -term and the long -term capabilities of these research 

centers. In the short -term, given the paucity of quality faculty in India in AI, appropriate incentivis ation 

mechanism (which could be a com bination of promis e of topnotch infrastructural facilities and 

remunerations matching in ternational standards) to bring top -tier international faculty, especially the 

Indian diaspora, needs to be develop ed. Furthermore, the top Indian PhD aspirants, who would otherwise 

purs ue their studies from top universities abroad, will need to be retained in India, again through 

appropriate incentivis ation mechanism. One possible way could be to institute National AI Fellowships. 

In the long -term, successive PhD classes of these CO REs c an increase the faculty pool and work towards 

a sustainable operational model for CO REs. 

Possible focus area for the COREs for AI could be: 

a) Sensory AI (Computer Vision, IoT etc.) ,

b) Physical AI (Robotics, Industrial Automation etc.) ,

c) Cognitive AI (NLP, worker training etc.) ,

d) General AI ,

e) High precision learning from small data sets ,

f) Research on new algorithms (e.g. advance cryptography, security), data sets etc. , and 

g) Explainable AI 

An application based model may be followed to selected COREs wherein an applicant institute would 

have to demonstrate a viability plan, in terms of faculty and other capabilities, before being anointed an 

CORE. A CORE can choose to work on one or multiple focus areas. The COREs will be encouraged to 

pursue projects across other COREs, to promote linkages and cross -functional technologies. The 

financial component of COREs for AI, which could be to the tune of INR 50 crore – INR 100 crore per 

CORE, should als o include large scale funding for specific projects .

International Centers for Transformational Artificial Intelligence 

International Centers for Transformational Artificial Intellig ence (ICTAIs) are envisioned as institutions 

focused on creating AI based applications for, a nd accelerating early adoptions in, domains for societal 

importance. These applied resear ch and development institutions should be set up with the elements of 

domain or industry “p ull” baked into their structure and operation. While cor e (or fundamental AI) research 

and teaching may not be seen as their priority areas, some flexibility might be built in the structure .

From both funding and operational perspective, the ICTAIs are envisioned to be a truly public private 

partnership. A pro fessionally managed society / s ection 8 company (“ ICTAI Inc.”) should be set up and 

trusted with the initial contri bution from the government. The management team for ICTAI Inc. should 

comprise of suitable representation from the government, but should hav e a majority of independent 

private sector representation. The mandate for ICTAI Inc. would be to select the ICTAIs to fund and 

oversee their progress. In addition, ICTAIs may commission “ moonshot projects ” that may span across 

multiple ICTAIs or may need limited term independent project teams to be set up .

ICTAIs are expected to leverage the strength of AI technologie s to solve for application in a specific focus 

sector areas. Suggested focus sector areas to begin with, as identified in this report, are H ealthcare, National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 57

Agriculture, Education, Smart Mobility and Transportation , Smart Cities and Infrastructure. ICTAI Inc. 

however should have the autonomy to decide on sectors to focus on and sequencing of sector selection. 

ICTAI Inc. should work proactively with private sector institutions to seek partnerships to set up the ICTAIs 

in priority domains .

Furthermore, ICTAIs should have well -defined linkages with the COREs. As a technology feeder for 

ICTAIs, COREs should be incentivi se d to commerciali se their research at ICTAIs .

The key to success for the ICTAIs would be their leadersh ip teams. The decision on which ICTAIs to 

invest in could involve believing in capability and the vision of the proposed CEO and rest of the 

management team who have appli ed for ICTAI fun ding. Alternatively, ICTAI Inc. may also search and 

select a CEO and entrust her with running a particular ICTAI .

The initial funding for a ICTAI would constitute the seed funding (in the range of INR 200 crore – INR 500 

crore per ICTAI ) f or first 5 years to cover the major operational expenses of the ICTAI, in addition to the 

physical infrastructure and technology / computing infrastructure. The seed funding should be a 

combination of funding from the government and private participation, preferably in equity/grant sharing 

mechanism. Corporates should be free to take a predetermined amount of ownership. One corporate 

should be partnered with for each ICTAI based on a “ challenge method ”. The incentive for corporates to 

participate would aris e from the following points that the government should endeavour to ensure :

a) Access to high quality training data 

b) Computational and physical infrastructure 

c) A chance for staff at corporates to be part of a national mission and work on challenging 

problems wi th a higher gestation period than traditional commercial problems 

d) Ability to count expenditure incurred towards CSR 

e) Boost in visibility received by working on AI for social good directly with top government 

institutions 

The ICTAIs should raise additional f unding beyond this base funding, through philanthropic / private 

contributions, preferably in equity sharing mechanism as well. ICTAI Inc. may also award further 

contributions to ICTAIs based on measures of success .

Each ICTAI should have a Governance Boar d, comprising of industry leaders, academic luminaries and 

global thought leaders. The CEO and / or the industry partner (if one is there) may suggest the 

Governance Board, which may be vetted and agreed by ICTAI Inc. An industry partner with sizeable 

cont ribution may have a reasonable say in selection of the Governance Board. The responsibilities of 

Governance Board will be akin to a Board of Directors / Board of Governors of any suitably large 

successful corporation i.e. provide overall guidance and direc tion, and oversee the output for the ICTAI. 

While ICTAI Inc. may lay down the success criteria for ICTAIs in general, specific targets for each ICTAI 

should be decided between the Governance Board and leadership team of individual ICTAIs .

The ICTAIs should ideally be located close to top engineering institutes / close to large cities, so that 

attracting the best talent from across the world is plausible. ICTAIs should also seek to leverage the 

availability of students / research scholars from the engineerin g institutes close to them for specific 

projects etc. (through internships etc.) to build the talent pool for future. ICTAIs should aim to involve the 

successful AI researchers / practitioners of Indian origin from across the world in either full time or 

advisory capacity. If finances are a constraint for ICTAIs to attract the best talent, ICTAI Inc. may consider 

National AI Fellowships for the benefit of ICTAIs .National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 58

PRAIRIE Institute, rece ntly established by the French g overnment in collaboration with academia and 

industry, is a good potential implementational model for CTAIs. 

## Box 14 : The PRAIRIE Institute 

The PRAIRIE Institute (PaRis  Artificial Intelligence Research Institute)  is a collaboration of industry and 

academia supported by the French government to create an institution which becomes an international 

benchmark in AI. 

The partners (CNRS, Inria and PSL University, together with  Amazon, Criteo, Facebook, Faurecia, 

Google, Microsoft, NAVER LABS, Nokia Bell Labs, PSA Group, SUEZ and Valeo) in PRAIRIE institute 

are pursuing three goals: 

• to drive progress in fundamental knowledge creation in AI (AI) freely distributed among the 

in ternational scientific community; 

• to take part in solving concrete problems with a major application -related impact; 

• to contribute to training in the field of AI. 

The five -year objective is to bring together AI scientific and industrial leaders and mak e the PRAIRIE 

Institute a world leader in AI. 

The aim of the PRAIRIE Institute is to act as a catalyst for exchanges between the academic and industrial 

worlds, to train new generations of researchers in AI and to play a role in leading and coordinating t he 

community. Transfer and innovation will be among its duties, along with scientific progress. The work 

done will highlight an integrated approach to the two traditional branches of research: 

• upstream research, calling on partner facilities of excellenc e in France and abroad; 

• research focusing on companies and applications, drawing on industrial partners, who are often also 

world leaders in their fields. 

Integration between research topics will facilitate synergy between the two branches of the PRAIRIE 

Institute and will enable researchers to make the transition easily from one to the other. 

At an international level, the PRAIRIE Institute will draw on a network of partnerships with centres of AI 

excellence to promote exchanges and leverage impact. Coll aborative agreements have already been 

signed with the  Center for Data Science  at NYU, the  AI laboratory  of UC Berkeley (BAIR), the  Robotics 

institute  at Carnegie -Mellon University in Pittsburgh,  MILA  in Montréal, the  Max Planck institute  in 

Tübingen, th e CIIRC  (Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics) and the  Turing Institute  in 

London. 

Common Compute Platform for CoEs / CTAIs 

For COR Es and ICTAIs to discharge their duties effectively, pooled cloud infrastructure for AI applications 

shou ld be made available. All the COR Es and ICTAIs should be connected to the National Knowledge 

Network (NKN) and from there via a very high -speed lin k to a pooled cloud computing environment. This 

approach will reduce infrastructural requirements due to pooling efficiencies and reduce operational and 

maintenance costs while keeping national data secure ( Box 15 : AIRAWAT )National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 59

## Box 15 : AIRAWAT (AI Research, An alytics and knoWledge 

## Assimilation plaTform) 

Scope 

AIRAWAT will be a cloud platform for Big Data Analytics and Assimilation , with a large, power -optimi se d

AI Computing infrastructure using advanced AI processing. The proposed Infrastructure will be  equipped 

with facilities for world’s leading machine learning including deep learning, high performance high 

throughput supercomputing, infrastructure to store, process, simulate and analyse big data sets like 

images, video, text, sound, speech.  AIRAWAT wi ll support advancement of AI -based developments in 

image recognition, speech recognition, natural language processing for research, development and 

creation of varieties of new applications for the support of advancements in the fields of Agriculture & 

Hea lthcare. 

Infrastructure Requirements 

1.  AI Infrastructure: High throughput processing supercomputing systems to train the machines learn 

the data sets using AI deep learning.  We propose to set up a 100 -AI petaflop computing 

Infrastructure, like the one as  JAPAN’s ABCI AI Supercomputing facility. 

2.  Multi -tenant multi -user computing support through resource partitioning and provisioning, dynamic 

computing environment deployment, etc. 

3.  Energy -saving, high Teraflops per Watt per U rack space designed compu ting systems with low TCO 

4.  Deep Learning Software stack  – Training and Inferencing development kit, frameworks, libraries, 

cloud management software and portal for data labelling, data analytics, data transfer & data model 

exchanges 

5.  Low latency High b andwidth network 

6.  Mass Storage System  to collect, store and share mu lti-petabytes of big data 

Utili sa tion 

Big data Labelling, Annotating, Anonymi sa tion, Analytics, Skills development, job creation, support R&D, 

Academia,  startup s, entrepreneurs and end  users for agriculture & healthcare advancements. 

intelligence. 

> Credit : nVIDIA

Pursuing excellence in research in Artificial Intelligence 

To achieve technology leadership in AI, India also needs to pursue “moonshot” projects – ambitious 

explorations that aim to push the technology frontier and that would req uire the pursuit of world class 

technology development and leadership in ap plying AI technologies to solve some of the biggest 

challenges. A potential project could be teste d on a twin criteria of wheth er it is (a) a new technology or 

scientific area that has emerged or gained traction and has the capability of solving, often in new ways, 

practical problems of importance, and (b) whether it addresses emerging user needs that existing and 

availa ble technology solutions cannot address. An example could be development of advanced na tural 

language processing (NLP) infrastructure for Indian languages, with features of sent iment and semantic 

analysis, or imaging biobank for early cancer detection .National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 60

Som e experts believe that such ambitious projects should be driven by the i ndustry, since they have the 

requisite resources, technical expertise and are attu ned to practical use cases; and should rarely be 

pushed forward by government initiative s. Google’s ad vances in NLP, as underlined by Duplex, is one 

such example of private sector led innovation that pushes the realis able boundaries of technology. 

However, the inherent ris k and ambition of such projects does not necessarily lay themselves well to the 

funct ioning and methods of most corporations .

ICTAI Inc., the overall governing body for ICTAIs, coul d be the DARPA (see Box 16 ) equivalent of AI 

research in India. ICTAI Inc. should have the full autonomy on selecting the projects of importance and 

executing t hese projects, and sh ould be trusted with a separate budget for pursuing such projects. Some 

of the key elements of execution include :

a) Projects with pre -defined durations and tenures : Although ICTAIs could adopt the moonshot 

approach to select projects, th e projects shall have pre -defined durations for efficient management, 

timely reali sa tion of research deliverables and financial sustainability. The type of project could 

govern the timeline, for example a project that requires integration of existing AI te chnologies to solve 

a specific problem could have a shorter duration, whereas projects which would require a unique 

technological development could be allocated a timeline suitably. 

b) Teams of contractors : Speciali se d teams of contractors who have proven cr edentials in advanced 

technological development shall be chosen to undertake the projects. Focus could be laid more on 

the qualitative impact of past research activity, and less on the size or global recognition. 

c) Special emphasis on selecting the right project leaders : Project leaders with the right skill sets to lead 

projects of national importance shall be key to drive the research output of projects undertaken at 

ICTAIs. They shall be people with proven capabilities in applied research, and the acumen to deliver 

technology in the form most suitable for India and the developing world. 

d) Independence : Independence to select projects, design timelines and deliverables and allocate 

budgets shall fall within the ambit of the ICTAIs with no intervention of any government agency. 

Selection of the project teams based on credentials while collaborating with premier research 

institutions with full independence shall ensure a robust technological development that creates 

impact. 

e) Fail fast model : ICTAIs shall be g iven the autonomy to shut down projects and shift resources to 

other operational projects. With the moonshot approach for project selection, it is plausible that 

certain research projects do not provide expected results in terms of efficiency, scalability or cost. In 

such cases, diverting resources to other operational projects with higher probability of research 

output delivery would ensure financial efficacy. 

Projects could be housed at one ICTAI, but could involve working across multiple ICTAIs and CO REs .

The algorithms and data used in an AI powered application are key elements in ensuring operational 

success. Therefore, it is imperative that the Intellectual Property Regime in the context of AI be robust 

and enforceable for innovators to have the con fidence that they will be able to make profits from and take 

credit for their work. This is essential for the promotion of innovation, entrepreneurship and core and 

applied research in the field of AI. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 61

However, IP in the context of AI has some key differen ces with IP in the context of generic computer 

programs or other content due to the way such algorithms are designed and trained with large datasets. 

The data fed to an AI algorithm during the training step is key to its success. Keeping this and other 

is su es in mind, the g overnment may set up a task force, comprising jointly of Ministry of Corporate Affairs 

and DIPP to examine and issue appropriate modifications to the IP regulatory regime pertaining to AI. 

## Box 16 : Defense Advanced Research Projects Agenc y

Pentagon’s Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) was created in 1958 as response 

to increased US concerns that Soviet Union may have achieved technological superiority following its 

successful launch of Spuntnik. DARPA’s founding mission was  simple and nimble, “to prevent and create 

strategic surprise”. 

For the past 60 years, DARPA has been the beacon of scientific breakthroughs and radical innovations. 

Amongst its success stories include the internet, RISC computing; global positioning satell ites; stealth 

technology; unmanned aerial vehicles, or “drones. While originally created for US military, the agency 

has played a pivotal role in giving genesis to several multi -billion dollar industries. 

What is even more impressive is DARPA’s agility and  swiftness despite a small team and modest 

budgetary allocations. DARPA’s total support staff is only 120 strong, an d its annual budget is only USD 3

billion. DARPA accomplishes most of its programs through a “speciali se d project” model  – assembling 

project  specific teams of experts from universities, industry, government and non -profit, with well -defined 

targets and tenures. 

The three essential elements of DARPA are: 

a)  ambitious goals:  the projects pursued by DARPA are designed to solve real -world problems  or create 

new opportunities. The problems are such that they can’t be solved without pursuing new frontiers or 

cataly si ng new developments. Urgent need for application underlines the problems. 

b)  temporary project teams:  teams of world -class experts from industry and academia are assembled 

to work on well -defined projects of relatively short duration, led by accomplished technical managers. 

Given the intensity, sharp focus and reputation attached, these projects attract h igh caliber talent 

who achieve extraordinary levels of collaboration. 

c)  independence:  DARPA has complete autonomy in selecting and running projects.   

> Source: Harvard Business Review article “Special Forces” Innovation: How DARPA Attacks Problems published October 2013

CERN for AI 

Gary Marcus, Professor of Psychology at NYU, mooted the idea of a CERN for AI at the #AIforGood 

Summit in Geneva in June 2017. In an OpEd for the New York Times, Gary further elaborated on the 

idea: 

“I look with envy at my peers in high -energy physics, and in particular at CERN, the European 

Organi sa tion for Nuclear Research, a huge, international collaboration, with thousands of scientists and 

billions of dollars of funding. They pursue ambitious, tightly defined projects (like u sing the Large Hadron 

Collider to discover the Higgs boson) and share their results with the world, rather than restricting them 

to a single country or corporation.” National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 62

## Box 17 : European Organi sa tion for Nuclear Research aka CERN 

CERN, established in 1954 by 1 2 founding European nations, had its origins in establishing a truly 

international scientific collaboration to pursue world class research in particle physics. Among the biggest 

of the several achievements to come out of this remarkable collaboration, home  to the world’s biggest 

atom smasher (the Large Hadron Collider) include the development of World Wide Web and the discovery 

of the Higgs boson (the ‘God Particle’), W and Z bosons, Antimatter etc. 

CERN’s current 21 member states each contribute to the ove rall CERN budget (CHF1,240 million in 

2013). Special contributions are made to specific projects, like Large Hardon Collider, by interested Host 

States and non -member states. The biggest chunk of CERN’s budget is spent on the construction of its 

enormous s cientific installations, most of which are too expensive for a single country to afford. 

The current state of AI, which is focused on solutions to narrow applications, and grappling with questions 

around next phases of development, ethics, security and pri vacy may benefit from a global public AI 

research institution advancing the field for the good of humanity, the “People’s AI” 30 .

To achieve #AIforAll, which gives the mandate for inclusive AI for the world, the Government of India 

should take the lead in b ringing together the relevant parties to create People’s AI, the CERN for AI. India 

has a proven track record for leading projects with ambitions of greater good. India is already playing a 

leading role in climate leadership, with Hon’ble Prime Minister Na rendra Modi vowing to go “above and 

beyond” India’s commitment on Paris Agreement on climate change. Similarly, India has been a pioneer 

in a sustained push for clean energy revolution by leading the International Solar Alliance, and setting an 

ambitious t arget of 100GW of installed solar energy capacity by 2022. With 20GW of installed solar 

capacity, India is well and truly on its way to achieving this target. With the Government of India ’s focus 

on inclusive growth which saw several transformational refor ms in the last few years, India is poised and 

most suited to wear the mantle of leading the #AIforAll movement. Furthermore, India offers the best 

possible test bed and a plethora of use cases for building AI solutions fulfilling the inclusive AI criteria, be 

it in healthcare, education or agriculture. 

While the modalities of funding and mandate for this #AIforAll should be the subject of further 

deliberations, the proposed centre should ideally be funded by a mix of government funding and 

contributions fro m large companies pursuing AI (GAFAM, BATX etc.). Where should this centre be 

located? Nowhere and everywhere. While the CERN had the requirements of physical facilities such as 

the Large Hadron Collider, #AIforAll could be distributed across different reg ions and countries. The 

Government of India, through NITI Aayog, can be the coordinating agency for initial funding and setting 

up the requisite mandates and human and computing resources. 

The mandates of the #AIforAll should include challenges of AI that are common to other countries and 

large corporations and startups alike, and the foundational components that could truly make AI inclusive 

and good for all. Suggestive technology topics could include: 

a) General AI; 

b) Opening the Black Box / Explainable AI; 

c) Advanced anonymi sa tion protocols for data security and privacy;  

> 30 Medium.com “The People’s AI: democratizing AI research and development”

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 63

d) Ethics in AI; and 

e) AI approach to solving world’s biggest problems in healthcare, education, urbanisation, agriculture 

etc. 

A start has been made by OpenAI, set up by the likes of Elon Musk and Sam Altman, with a mission to 

discover and enact the path to safe artificial general intelligence. Similarly, Declaration on Cooperation 

in Artificial Intelligence was signed by 25 states of European Union on 10 th April 2018. What is needed 

though is a co mmitment and collaboration of truly international standards to develop and ensure #AIforAll .National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 64

# Skilling for the AI age 

# Getting  India ready for the AI wave 

History suggests how technology has disrupted the nature of jobs and the skills required to perform them, 

requiring the global workforce to continuously adapt. Advent of AI has accelerated this disruption to a 

pace that has not previously been seen , due to the wide range of capabilities it offers and speed at which 

it is developing. 

NASCCOM predi cts that by 2022, a startling 46% of the Indian workforce will be engaged in entirely new 

jobs that do not exist today or jobs that have radically changed skill sets 31 . Some other sources estimate 

that demand for AI and machine learning specialists in India is expected to see a 60% rise by 2018 32 . In 

the data domain as well, an independent study estimated that India will face a demand -supply gap of 

2,00,000 data analytics professionals by 2020 .

In the IT -BPM sector, traditional software developer roles are set to transition to roles such as computer 

vision engineers, Robotic Process Automation (RPA) engineers and cloud architects, among others. At 

the same time, completely new job roles such as language processing specialists and 3D modelling 

engineers are s et to arise as the technologies are increasingly adopted and deployed 33 . With AI, such 

transition would move beyond the IT sector and affect sectors such as education, health, agriculture, 

finance etc, requiring the underlying skill sets.    

> 31 Future of Jobs in India: A 2022 Perspective, 2017
> 32 KellyOCG, India
> 33 Future of Jobs in India: A 2022 Perspective, 2017

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 65

Figur e 21 : Transition in jobs and skill sets 

The demand for new -age jobs is accelerating in India, and can be attributed to three major factors 34 , viz. 

increased adoption of technology; shift in market demographic s and de -acceleration of globali sa tion .

Figure 22 : Impact of primary forces on jobs in 2022 

As technology adoption increases across sectors, so will the demand for skills required to implement 

them. India’s growing middle class and millennial demographic form a major part of the market for 

technology enabled products. As the size of these demographics increases, so will the demand for these 

products, and thus the workforce that can enable their creation. Increased globali sa tion played a major 

part in the creation of jobs in the services sector. However, as the permeation of automation increases,  

> 34 Future of Jobs in India: A 2022 Perspective, 2017
> Source:
> Reworking
> the
> Revolution,
> Accenture
> Source:
> Future of
> Jobs in
> India: A
> 2022
> Perspective,
> 2017

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 66

and protectionism among previous markets for these services becomes predominant, it is important to 

recogni se  that these jobs will see a large overhaul. 

India may appear to be relatively well positioned to take advantage of the AI disruption by virtue of its 

advanced IT sector and large youth demographic potential to establish itself as the future hub fo r AI 

related activities. However, given the poor availability of qualified faculty and researchers, this advantage 

could fast transform into a liability without urgent government interventions towards promoting access to 

such skills. This is a critical com ponent of AI development, and should be a national priority. 

Changing nature of the global service sector, uncertain impact of automation in manufacturing, and poor 

infrastructure can pose a challenge to the task of enabling up -skilling or re -skilling. 

Shifts in the outsourcing  needs of developed economies have the potential to impact India dramatically. 

As multinational companies move toward ‘in -shoring’ or ‘no -shoring’ due to development of automation 

technology and increasingly protectionist measures globally, it is of critical importance that the 

outsourcing industry (which cur rently accounts for roughly 15%  of India’s total labour force) adapts to 

these changing needs accordingly .

Figure 23 : India IT -BPM sector 

As indicated below , automation could affect even traditional sectors in a variety of ways. Agriculture is 

predicted to see a net decrease in jobs due to automation, while the job opportunities in the construction 

sector are predicted to improve significantly. These large scale shifts in employment depend largely on 

the nature of technology being developed as well as deployed, and are very hard to predict for any 

informed policy intervention .

> Source:
> NASSCOM,
> ICRIER,
> McKinsey
> analysis

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 67

Figure 24 : Impact of automation 

Multiple studies have underlined the lack of employment readiness of STEM graduates, thus highlighting 

the poor standard of education in engineering colleges in India. A s per some est imates, almost 80% of 

engineering graduates are unemployable on graduation . Low availability of speciali se d faculty; lack of 

flexibility in curriculum revisions in engineering and computer science courses to keep up with rapid 

advancements in technology; a nd low levels of interdisciplinary research in AI related fields to facilitate 

an AI education for non -computer science engineering (and vice versa), are just some of the factors that 

have led to this scenario. 

At the school l evel as well, poor outcomes i n M aths and reading are particularly troubling , since these 

subjects form the foundation of knowledge required to move to an AI related education, and later jobs in 

the domain .

Recommendations 

For addressing issues relating to skilling, a two -pronged approach is warranted, one set of interventions 

aimed at the workforce and the second for the students. 

1. Workforce 

Re -skilling of the current workforce will require integration with relevant existing skilling initiatives, buildin g

of new platforms that can enable improved learning, and novel methods of allowing large scale 

employment generation through promotion of AI .

a) Incentivi si ng creation of jobs that could constitute the new service industry : To tackle the challenge 

of shifts in the services industry, it is important to identify and promote creation of jobs that may 

replace traditional IT -BPM sector jobs in the future. These jobs would ideally be a part of the AI 

solution development value chain, but require a relatively low l evel of expertise so as to create 

employment at scale . Tasks such as data annotation, for example, have the potential to employ a 

large quantum of human resources, and serve countries all over the world in otherwise capital 

> Source:
> McKinsey,
> Jobs Lost,
> Jobs
> Gained:
> Workforce
> Transitions
> in a Time of
> Automation

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 68

intensive projects. Tasks such a s image classification or speech transcription require low levels of 

expertise and present an opportunity to exploit labour cost arbitrage to serve companies globally. 

Specific policy interventions could be considered like tax holidays, inclusion under CSR activities, 

etc. to help solve the dual problem of workforce job displacement and creation of expertise in 

fundamental sections of the solution development value chain. 

## Box 18 : Impact sourcing through Samasource 

Samasource is a pioneer in impact sourcing  of technology services, the practice of hiring people from the 

bottom of the income pyramid and directly raising them out of poverty by providing digital work for 

companies like Google, Walmart, eBay, and many startups. 

About two -thirds of their work is  in managed services for image capture and annotation. They need a 

large pool of skilled, detail -oriented workers to identify the appropriate images or video frames and 

manually tag the scene, specific regions (a forest), or objects (a wolf) with the specif ic keywords the 

customer requires for their application. 

Samasource quotes its top objective as ‘creating technology jobs for the impoverished while delivering 

the highest quality work in a cost -effective manner’. This  guided Samasource to focus on E ast Af rica, 

where the majority of the population has completed secondary or high school , and has a good 

understanding of basic English language . They have a dedicated training organi sa tion that works within 

the local communities to identify qualified men, women  and youth in need and assess them for key skills. 

For those with strong visual acuity, there is general computer and business skills training and a 3 -week 

dedicated machine learning and image annotation training track with example projects and ongoing 

asse ssments that lead to graduation 

As workers get moved to projects, there is another set of qualification tests and project -specific training. 

Once they pass those, they are moved into production for the project and their work is reviewed daily by 

the QA tea m to correct mistakes and resolve interpretation or requirements issues (do you want to tag a 

traffic light facing away from the camera?). These reviews are done both locally and in the US, allowing 

real -time feedback with many checkpoints throughout the p roject lifecycle, reinforcing Samasource’s 

tightly managed approach to quality. 

Samasource reportedly provide jobs and digital skills training to people below the poverty line in Kenya, 

Uganda, Haiti, and India. Since the company started in 2008, Samasourc e has been able to hire nearly 

8,000 people. As a result, they’ve could transition themselves and their dependents out of poverty and 

provide living wages, transforming over 30,000 lives. 

b) Recognition and standardi sa tion of informal training institutions : The increasing demand for AI or 

data related job positions has not gone unnoticed by the Indian workforce, with a large percentage 

of them opting for training institutions to bridge their knowledge gaps. In technology hubs such as 

Bengaluru, this has led to many traditional IT training institutions establishing courses in new age 

technologies. However, their standard of education is hard to assess for companies looking to hire. 

Implementation of recogni se d certificate courses through higher education institu tions could be a 

major boost to recogni si ng resources spent on re -skilling, and holding these institutions to standards 

in delivery of knowledge. International School of Engineering (INSOFE), for example, provides 

certification recognised by the Language T echnologies Institute of Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) 

for a post -graduate program in data analytics and optimisation. Jigsaw Academy’s data science post -

graduate program gets its students certified from the University of Chicago Graham School .National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 69

Integrat ion and application of existing standards such as laid out by the National Skill Qualification 

Framework (NSQF) should also be explored. Given that standards in areas such as big data exist 

but are not used by institutions for certification also highlights the need for them to be designed in 

closer collaboration with the private sector. 

c) Creation of open platforms for learning : Initiatives such as the NASSCOM Future Skills Platform will 

play an instrumental role in large scale dissemination of requisite ski lls to some major sections of the 

employed workforce. Online and self -learning platforms, such as Coursera and edX, are able to 

connect learners to the best universities and institutions from around the world, and can play a crucial 

role in this scenario. There is need to bring out guidelines for promoting these while ensuring 

uniformity, standards and usability. As in the promotion of MOOCs, large scale deployment and 

adoption of these platforms requires stringent measuring of quality, and recognition of their 

certification. 

d) Creating financial incentives for reskilling of employees : Initiatives in reskilling of employees or 

allowing employees to undergo reskilling initiatives have a high opportunity cost for private 

companies, and may affect their willingn ess to let their employees engage in the process at scale. It 

is thus suggested that co -funded models between the government and companies be explored, in 

the IT sector particularly. Financial incentives for private companies could include payroll taxes wh ich 

are dedicated to subsidi si ng training opportunities, income tax deductions for companies participating 

in reskilling initiatives, special taxes to be paid if a minimum training budget is not disbursed, as well 

as public grants for subsidi si ng training especially for smaller sized firms. Considering also the time 

required for reskilling, and the cost it entails to employers, financial incentives may also be tied to 

mandatory allocation of time for reskilling activities by companies for their workforce. H owever, in the 

absence of standardi sa tion of training modules and institutions , such initiatives could be prone to 

misuse .

2. Students 

The education sector needs to be re -aligned in order to effectively harness the potential of AI in a 

sustainable manner. In primary and secondary schools, there is a need for transition to skill based 

education in subjects relevant to AI. Often critici se d for being overly knowledge intensive, Indian 

education is in urgent need of transition particularly in subjects relevant to STEM, or computer based 

education. As jobs based on technology become prominent, so will the need to develop applied skills in 

a continuously changing environment .

Increased amount of project related work across education levels, promoting schemes lik e the 

establishment of ATLs (Atal Tinkering Labs) in schools, necessary change in curricula in schools, are 

some of the steps that need to be considered to promote early adoption of technology organically. 

In higher education institutions there is need for increased collaboration between industry and academia 

through creation of channels of communication between faculty and industry to promote exchange of 

ideas and expertise. Various avenues of collaboration need to be explored, including workshops, 

incenti ves for guest lectures by professionals and institutional arrangements for regular re -design of 

courses in collaboration with the private sector. 

Lack of qualified faculty that poses a serious problem in the present scenario can be addressed through 

innov ative initiatives like credit -bearing MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses). Acceptability and 

adoption of these decentrali se d teaching mechanisms can be ensured through prescribed certification in 

collaboration with the private sector and educational instit utions. Initiatives such as the SWAYAM National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 70

platform 35 , are in the right direction but these need to be further reinforced through additional investment 

and collaboration with the private sector and educational institutions in order to meet the market 

demand. 

Countries like the USA , that have a thriving student and research community engaged in AI, have 

effective bridge courses, generally at post graduate levels for non -related fields. Thus at a post -graduate 

level, the focus shifts to creating incentives to conduct research in domestic institution s and allow cross -

disciplinary collaboration and education . Similar initiatives are required in Indian educational space with 

bridge courses in AI for post -graduates in non -computer science or data science domains t o encourage 

cross -domain research and the ‘AI + X’ paradigm. One year courses could be explored that will enable 

students of a range of subjects to build foundations of knowledge in the AI space, and effectively apply 

domain expertise to solve pressing pro blems. 

This is an ever evolving area and needs to go beyond the one time solutions with an institutional 

framework in place that is responsive to changing scenarios. Such a framework would enable a more 

sustainable and customi se d solution. A standing comm ittee or task force comprising of all stakeholders 

may  be constituted by the  government  with the objective of examining and reporting the changes in 

employment caused by AI in India. This taskforce would consider not only IT related activities, but the job 

ecosystem as a whole. As AI continues to evolve, this will facilitate evidence based d ecisions in funding 

of educational institutions, promotion of specific sectors, and channelling of human resources to be most 

efficiently utili se d.  

> 35 developed by the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and the Min istry for Human Resource Development
> (MHRD)

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 71

# Accelerating Adoption 

# AI across the value chain 

Global Context 

Adoption of AI globally is still in its nascent stages, but growing rapidly. A 2017 survey by Statista finds 

that 78% of firms globally are either using AI extensively, or have plans for use in near future. Firms in 

China and the US especially, are proactively engaging with their research co mmunities to enable early 

adoption and position themselves competitively .

Figure 25 : Survey of global firms on adoption of emerging technologies in 2017 (In which of the 

following new and emerging technologies is your organi sa tion making investments over the next year?) 

A McKinsey report on “AI: The next digital frontier” concludes that AI adoption outside of the tech sector 

is at an early and often experimental stage and deployment at scale has been rare. In the survey of 3,000 

AI -aware top management executives, across 10 co untries and 14 sectors, only 20% use any AI related 

technology at scale or in a core part of their businesses. 

As the field is rapidly evolving, investments made in cor e AI research and product development is another 

indicator of adoption. The McKinsey report estimates that organisations invested around USD26 – USD39 

billion in AI while USD6 – USD 9 billion was invested in startups in the year 2016. 

Adoption of AI in In dia has  been slow  and remains limited.  Estimates indicate that only 22%  of the firms 

in India use AI in any business process 36 . Indi an  startup s have been able to  raise just  USD 87  mil lion in 

2017, as against over  USD 28 billion raised by the Chinese  startup s in 2017 37 .

Low adoption of AI technologies in India is particularly troubling , given the country’s prominence in 

the global IT industry that could have given it the natural first mover’s advantage in AI . However, the IT 

industry in India has remained conte nt in delivering traditional IT services and has been slow to adapt to 

new digital technologies compared to its  counterparts in China and the US.   

> 36 Intel and IDC Survey Report, dated
> 37 XinhuaNet “AI sector sees big investment, financing in 2017”
> Source:
> Accenture

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 72

Despite its sectoral leadership and programming talent, India’s IT industry with over USD 160 billion 

annual revenue, has yet to build pioneering AI / ML capabilities commensurate with its potential. 

Nevertheless, the top 5 IT service companies have begun to use AI to cut costs and automate business 

processes. Wipro has built Holmes , an AI platform that deploys “ bots” to carry out repetitive and mundane 

tasks. TCS has created its own AI platform, Ignio , and Infosys has built Nia , improving upon its earlier 

Mano platform. While promising, these early efforts remain far from revolutionary. 

The limited success of Ind ian technology players to effectively adapt and carry forward the AI revolution 

suggests the need for government intervention to promote AI adoption, lest India lose the chance to 

secure a prominent position on the global AI map. While acknowledging the ne ed to promote AI, 

governments at different levels, along with their various instrumentalities, should adopt proactive 

measures to accelerate AI adoption in various processes .

The major market segments for the increased AI adoption are: 

(a) Private enterprises : mostly driven by marke t and enterprise considerations, 

(b) Public Sector Undertakings : imperative to drive up the operational efficiency of PSUs, and 

(c) Government : improve process efficiency, reduce human discretion, eliminate middlemen, advance 

pre diction, pro -active and predictive service delivery to citizens .

The steps taken by the g overnment, in terms of incentives or in providing infrastructural platforms, will 

have varying control and influence on all these segments – least on private enterpris es to most on 

government agencies. 

AI adoption in India will face the following challenges: 

(d)  Lack  of adequate talent to build and deploy AI systems at scale . An estimate claims that only 4% of 

AI professionals in India have worked on emerging technologies  such as deep learning and neural 

networks. There is also a significant gap of PhD  research scholars in the field. 

(e)  Difficulty  in access to industry specific data required to build customi se d platforms and solutions 

currently concentrated in the hands of a f ew major players . I t is difficult for new entrants to deliver 

tailor made services that can compete with data rich incumbents such as Facebook or Google. This 

phenomenon results in the creation of a virtuous cycle which reinforces the hegemony of the big f ew, 

creating a huge entry barrier for  startup s. 

(f)  High  cost and low availability of computing infrastructure required for development, training and 

deployment of AI based services . Cloud infrastructure, though growing  rapidly, has limited capability .

Also la cking are AI -as -a-service models of cloud platforms. Lack of infrastructure has led to many 

Indian AI  startup s to incorporate their business outside the country, which makes AI outside the reach 

of Indian researchers in government labs and many industries.  Initiatives like GI Cloud (MeghRaj), 

are in the right direction. 

(g)  Low  awareness of AI  for resolving business problems in most public enterprises and government 

agencies, especially given the scarcity of AI professionals, is obstructing adoption. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 73

Follow ing specific initiatives are recommended for promoting AI adoption in the country: 

Recommendation 1: Creating a multi -stakeholder Marketplace 

To encourage the development of sustainable AI solutions at an appropriate price point for sectors such 

as health, education, and agriculture, it is necessary that a level playing field be ensured and a supportive 

environment be created for all players in the value chain. The development of any working AI -based 

product is a long process with very different speciali se d activities that are necessary for final delivery, just 

like any other product or service value chain. 

Figure 26: AI Value Chain 

It is exceedingly difficult for a small or medium business / startup to vertically integrate all these processes 

and have the internal capacity to deploy them simultaneously before even entering the market. Therefore, 

this acts as a barrier to entry for new players. On the other hand, for different firms to take up different 

activities and still deliver useful products, a strong , stable price discovery mechanism has to exist for 

incentives to align and sustainable business models to come up for the different parts of the value chain. 

Another well documented and substantial barrier to entry is the difficulty of acquiring the raw m aterial 

(data) in the first place since as noted above, most usable data is in the hands of a few players. 

Towards providing a level playing field, addressing information asymmetry, and incentivi si ng and 

simplifying collaboration between the various stakeh olders in the AI ecosystem, a marketplace may prove 

to be a potent tool provided it enables the following: 

(a) Discovery of required AI component : ability to reference assets , be it data or ML models, and 

services, such as annotation, and enable curation and rating of these assets. 

(b) Platform to execute transactions : with mechanisms to exchange value of a specific good and service 

for currency or subscription models for APIs. 

(c) Verification of transactions : ability to verify the occurrence of transactions and the receipt of goods or 

services in exchange for currency. 

Such a marketplace model would benefit by: 

a) Re ducing asymmetry of information: With a reasonable volume of transactions, aberrations caused 

due to data oligopoly will reduce, thus reducing the spread i n pricing and effectively incentivi si ng 

both data owners and AI model creators. 

b) Encouraging speciali sa tion in different niches by firms and creation of novel business models : Easy 

availability of raw components required at different stages of the AI solution development cycle 

would allow firms to focus on specific problems, rather than attempt to build capability across the 

value chain. For example, a new segment of startup s co uld entirely focus on the problem of curating 

raw data to be put on the marketplace, rather than attempting to do all the above at once. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 74

Consequently, such startup s will see a better market for VC funding as they will be able to 

substantially mitigate thei r business risks, if an easily accessible, formal market for raw data exists. 

c) Unlocking new sources of data and enabling more efficient use of computational and human 

resources : Estimates suggest that only 1% of data today is analysed due to its existence in various 

unconnected siloes. For example, medical imaging / diagnostic centres today are collecting valuable 

data. It is currently not used to its potential as there is no way for diagnostic centres to build predictive 

disease models without hiring AI e xperts, renting computational expenditure, and indeed shifting 

gears completely to become an AI company. In the presence of a formal market with a fair 

mechanism of price discovery, such diagnostic centres would have an incentive to collect this data, 

have it curated, and place this data in the market with appropriate permissions and safeguards. 

Concurrently, machine learning experts in AI firms would be more productive as they could focus on 

the problem of creating the model rather than that of sourcing th e data and curating it. 

d) Address ethical concerns regarding data sharing : Today, transactions and buying of data occur in 

an informal marketplace. However, there is no mechanism currently to ensure that appropriate 

permissions are taken from the actual dat a owners before data custodians share the data. Going 

back to the example of diagnostic centres (which are data custodians in this case), it would become 

necessary for firms to take consent of individuals getting imaged to aggregate and sell their data. 

Th is could create mechanisms through which individuals are ultimately compensated. In this way, 

the informal market for data could be nudged towards entering the formal econom y. 

Recommendation 2 : Facilitating creation of large foundational annotated data set s

In India, lack of annotated data in the domestic context has emerged as a major impediment in 

development of AI solutions for both startup s and core research alike. Availability of general data corpora 

which can be applied across product functions can serve to provide a ready source of data (in ‘plugin’ 

mode) to startup s and enable solutions customi se d to the Indian context. There is evidenc e to suggest 

that ready availability of large corpora can spur research and innovation in the field of machine learning .

Figure 27 : Breakthroughs in AI 

By its very nature, this task is laborious and despite innovations in automatic annotation, such as the 

development of GoogleNet object classification, human annotation and training of data sets are not National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 75

expected to be replaced in the near future. This is b est exemplified by the thriving investments and 

startup s in this area. As lately as 2017, Alegion, Scale, CloudFactory, Mighty AI, and CrowdFlower, all 

companies that enable human intervention to data a nnotation, have received about USD 50 million in 

invest ment funding. 

Given the nature of this task, it is necessary for the government to explore assistance in building of large 

corpora of data across domains, as a means of laying the foundation for startup s and enterprises to build 

applications and services which are tailor -made to the Indian context, and in the process lowering entry 

barriers for startup s and academia while also encouraging international expertise to focus on problems 

in the Indian context. 

In areas such as native language NLP (Natural Lang uage Processing) for diverse Indian languages, for 

example, the funding for creation of these data sets can add incremental value to existing services across 

many domains, ranging from e -commerce to agricultural advisory. Co -funding by the government would 

also enable enforcing of standards across development of data sets, and allow interoperability at a large 

scale. A collaborative approach w here the g overnment acts as a catalyst is recommended as a way 

forward .

Recommendation 3 : Partnerships and collabor ation 

AI is a highly collaborative domain, and any framework aimed at promoting AI needs to be aligned 

accordingly. A multi -pronged approach, involving various stakeholders and promoting a collaborative 

approach is required for promoting development of AI tools as well as adoption of AI in different fields of 

activity. 

Perkmann and Walsh (2007) studied different degrees of partnership in research and categorised them 

in three categories, each having different characteristics. 

Figure 28 : Categories of partnerships in Research 

In India, Academic Entrepreneurship is being taken up through mechanis ms such as the development of 

dedicated e -cell s in institutions such as IIT Bombay, IIT Madras and IIM Ahmedabad, among others. Low 

degrees of partnership , suc h as direct transfer of knowledge , is being taken up by MNCs and startup s

that make use of scientific publications and informal interaction to develop. Research partnerships are National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 76

also being explored, but in a very limited capacity. Other partnership mechani sms, however, are all but 

absent. 

(h) Collaboration between Research Organi sa tions is required to promote the ‘AI+X’ paradigm where 

the AI researcher works in close collaboration with the researcher in other domains like healthcare, 

manufacturing, agriculture , etc. Several successful US universities have co -located departments 

which enabled close collaboration. DARPA in the US A has close linkages with research facilities 

housed in academic institutions, and has taken up major initiatives for promoting research and 

innovation in collaboration with private enterprises and startup s alike. In India these domains are not 

naturally connected, primarily due to the structural nature of both academia and research labs. To 

promote AI in the country, and fully realise th e ‘AI+X’ paradigm, it is also necessary to enable such 

cross -sectoral collaboration, e.g. between a medical doctor and a computer scientist, to lead research 

for application of latest technology in solving medical problems and also making real data availab le 

in the process. 

(i) Industry -Research Collaboration is required to help continuously scale and improve the initial 

research output based on user feedback from the market. For example, in the domain of search 

engines , several search datasets like TREC, SMART , etc. were made available by the US universities 

during the 1970 -80s to develop the technology of information retrieval and search. This in turn led to 

development of several search engines such as Yahoo! and Alta Vista during this period. Over time ,

this led to improved smarter systems until Google became the market leader in the late 1990s. 

(j) Collaboration with trade bodies and Venture Capitals is essential for successful functioning of a 

profitable business which involves various other elements , like deriving the optimal business model, 

managing human resources, advertisement / marketing and many varied functions depending upon 

the type of technology and underlying business. Trade bodies and associations are very important 

for collaborating with other people in similar businesses , as they can share information about the 

common problems, possible solutions and access to learning from the ground. Such bodies help in 

collectively identifying new international markets for such products / technologies and in 

lobbying/negotiating for favourable trade norms with the national and international bodies. 

Recommendation 4 : Spreading awareness on the advantages AI offers 

Another major hurdle in adoptio n is low visibility for the work being done across the count ry. Unless 

known through networks, work is often duplicated without knowledge of previous work done in the area 

and consultation with experts. There is a need for an AI Database on an online portal for registered people 

to access and find this information. This database, primar ily managed by the government, c ould serve as 

a single source of truth for experts and projects being implemented. The resources can include details 

like researchers stating their expertise , and professionals with hands -on experience on developing AI 

solutions showcasing their credentials . This knowledge base can also become a forum for sharing various 

discussion related to research collaboration, and finding relevant collaborators and finding professionals 

to deliver on AI projects. 

There is need to make senior level officials among government agencies, public sector undertakings, and 

other domestic firms aware of the numerous advantages that AI offers, by organising workshops and live 

demonstrations of possible AI applications and how its implementation can help augment the human 

workforce, rather than displace it. The constitution of an annual ‘AI Readiness Index’ may also be 

considered, as highlighted in the DIPP Task Force report on Artificial Intelligence. This may also be further 

expanded to highlight best practices across states, to be shared in various fora. NITI Aayog, given its 

mandate of competitive and cooperative federalism, could undertake this task. It has already collaborated National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 77

with organisations such as Google to organise capacity building training and workshops for government 

functionaries .

Recommendation 5 : Supporting startup s

Startup s and smaller firms are the engine for growth in a dynamic evolving economy like India, and are 

constrained in the AI space, thus requiring targeted government interventions. 

(a) Incubation hubs specifically for AI startup s in collaboration with State Governments and private sector 

stakeholders need to be set up to provide space, and other infrastructure facilities for new startup s

to incubate along with interacting with other startup s at various levels of maturity in order to interact 

and provide advice. 

(b) Establishment of fund to provide grant funding to startup s to facilitate their operation and business. 

This should be aimed at assisting startup s to sustain the initial years of business when they are 

unable to generate venture capital funds or have to sacrifice a large share of the business for early 

stage seed funds .

Proposed modules of the National AI Marketplace (NAIM) 

It is proposed t hat the marketplace , called here as National AI Marketplace (NAIM), be divided into 3 

distinct modules, at least in early stages of development. These are as follows: 

a)  Data  marketplace 

b)  Data  annotation marketplace 

c)  Deployable  model marketplace  / Solutions mar ketplace 

The AI development value chain, discussed above, is supported by these three modular marketplaces in 

terms of easing collaboration, reducing time and cost of collecting & annotating data, and bringing multiple 

solutions deployment at one place for scale and network effect. 

Figure 29 : Enablers for AI value chain 

The marketplace mechanism being proposed here will be aimed at easing the adoption efforts of all 

participants – private enterprises, PSUs, governments, startups and academia. A common pl atform which 

brings together enterprises and AI solution builders will trigger off the initial collaboration towards building 

AI solutions and adopting them at scale. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 78

Figure 30 : Stakeholders for the proposed NAIM 

Data marketplace 

Today, incumbents continue to enjoy an oligopoly in building sustainable business models i n AI for two 

main reasons: (a) t hey can successfully buy data in the informal market setting due to availability of 

resources and reach to negotiate one -time contracts continually , and (b) they have speciali se d

departments to work on different facets of the development value chain. In the process of informal data 

acquisition as well, there is no proper price discovery mechanism in place. Compounded with the issue 

of a huge asymmetry of information in the sector between data providers and buyers, data providers are 

likely to be substantially unde rpaid. 

This further compounds the problem of data access and thwarts the creation of a healthy marketplace as 

well as incentives. In a formal ma rketplace being proposed here, new entrants in the AI model creation /

training space will find it easier to raise resources for buying data. This will be due to VCs having enough 

information to verify the funding demands and a lower risk resulting from a more level playing field and 

equita ble access to new data sources. 

While data has been compared to oil ad nauseam, there are a few differences which must be highlighted: 

a) Reusability : Copied data is as valuable as the ‘original ’. Therefore, traceability of ownership is a 

challenge for a viable marketplace model where the originators of the data should get compensated 

from resale of the data. 

b) Compounding value : Unlike oil, the value of a dataset increases not just with quantity but also 

structural complexity. For example, the value of a health dataset of a million individuals and an 

education dataset of the same individuals is more than the sum of its parts because of the value 

added by the connections between the different elements. Therefore, it is difficult to quantify the value 

of new datasets as it is dependent on the existing datasets one has and how one plans to connect 

the new data with the existing data. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 79

c) Permanence : Unlike the oil , the inventory of data continually increases with time. However, this r aises 

the complexity in transporting larger and larger datasets. 

d) Ubiquit y: Since data is ubiquitous and continually increasing in quantity, it follows that a way to 

automatically curate new datasets is needed so that any market does not overwhelm users wi th 

outdated or irrelevant data. 

The fundamental properties of data and its collection outlined above create challenges which make the 

creation of a centrali se d data marketplace difficult. The primary assumption of a data marketplace in 

operation is that d ata custodians will share the data on the marketplace. Organisations may be reluctant 

to do so. Further, the operations of the data exchange, financially sustained by transaction fees and rigid 

pricing models, also add to inefficiencies and discourage data sharing. 

Features of a viable data marketplace – how it can be implemented? 

To incentivi se a larger supply of AI training data sets and services, it is necessary to ensure availability 

of data, an audit trail mechanism to curb reselling of the same data, and ways to address security and 

privacy concerns. One solution is to have a centrali se d, t rusted party to host the data on behalf of data 

providers and enforce the rules of the game. However, this is not practical for a variety of reasons, not 

the least because most data providers will not agree to let a replicable resource such as data be stor ed 

somewhere else, but also because of co st, control and trust concerns. 

A more effective way to address these concerns is a decentrali se d data marketplace that is based on 

blockchain technology. 

The exchange platform should have the following features fo r data providers to share data: 

a) Traceability, 

b) Access Controls ,

c) Compliance with local and international regulations , and 

d)  Robust price  discovery mechanism for data 

The proposed data exchange marketplace will attract data providers and model builders / trainers to build 

AI products. The process of exchange, with enforced provisions of privacy and anonymi sa tion, brings a 

market determined value to data and thus forces the existing informal data exchange economy, without 

any privacy protection, to move tow ards a formal economy. 

The g overnment can establish a committee of experts, researchers, AI developers and regulators to 

create the standards the data marketplace will adhere by and explore how can it be put in implementation. 

The unique approach that on e such initiative, i.e., Ocean Protocol has taken is to create what they call a 

Proofed Curation Market with two subcomponents: (a) Data exchange validation on blockchain, (b) Data 

curation market based on a derivative token. The former lays out a mechanis m for data and value 

exchange, the latter enables the market to decide which datasets are important and creates an incentive 

for even free data to be put on the platform. Essentially, data consumers can bet on the viability of even 

free data and thereby ea rn money. 

See Appendix III for more on data ecosystems as enablers. 

Data annotation marketplace 

Of the three marketplace modules defined, the data annotation marketpla ce is perhaps the most mature. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 80

Given the large costs associated with the annotation exercise, a popular mechanism that has emerged 

is that of crowdsourcing using un -trained or non -expert anonymous annotators on the internet. Though 

this gives rise to its own set of challenges, it may be considered a solution to the problem of cheaply and 

quickly acquiring annotations for the purposes of constructing a variety of models. To understand the 

potential of crowdsourcing, consider the observation of a research paper in 2004 38 : a crowd of 5,000 

people playing an appropriately designed computer game 24 hours a day, could be made to label all 

images on Google (425,000,000 images in 2005 ) in a matter of just 31 days. 

However, some challenges that emerge in the annotation crowdsourcing process are as follows. 

a)  Creation  of verification mechanisms : Depend ence on untrained professionals gives rise to issues in 

ensuring high accuracy in annotation and thus potentially higher accuracy of the trained algorithm. 

Verification mechanisms such as multiple annotation, verification of samples by trained professional s, 

etc. are some of the ways to solve this problem. 

b)  Establishing  verified traceability:  Mechanisms must thus be put in place to  identify poor annotators, 

and create mechanisms to reduce the effect of error generated. 

Features of a data annotation marketp lace – how it can be implemented? 

Platforms such as Amazon’s MTurks, Figure -Eight (previously known as CrowdFlower) or ClickWorker 

are perhaps the most popular crowd -sourced annotation platforms. Each allows for building of 

mechanisms of verification such as multiple annotations, creation of test cases, sample verification by 

professionals, etc. to inc rease accuracy of annotations. 

Analysis indicates that most annotation tasks can be categori se d on the basis of sensitivity to expertise 

of annotators. This is defined as the degree to which annotator expertise can affect the accuracy of 

annotation. The figure below considers how approaches to the annotation process could differ with 

changing natur e of the task. 

Figure 31 : Approaches to annotation        

> Sensitivity to
> degree of expertise
> Example of task Motivation Potential
> annotators
> Verification mechanism
> Low
> Classification of
> object in
> presented image
> GWAP, ML,
> ALTR
> General
> population Multiple annotations
> High Classification of
> medical scans ML College students,
> professionals,
> Multiple annotations,
> Verification by professionals
> GWAP = Games with a purpose, ML = Mechani se d labor for financial incentives, ALTR = Altruistic motivation

Simple object classification or regional language translation are examples of tasks that have low barriers 

to annotator expertise. However, tasks such as classification of medical images, requires robust 

mechanisms to verify annotations, and also ensure ve rified traceability to identify poor annotators, and 

create mechanisms to reduce the effect of error generated. 

In India, vast public datasets are available at organi sa tions such as ISRO (India Space Research 

Organi sa tion), ICAR (Indian Council of Agricul tural Research), All India Radio (AIR) and NIC (National     

> 38 Luis von Ahn and Laura Dabbish ,200 4, Labeling images with a computer game

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 81

Informatics Center) among others, but are unfortunately largely unused due to lack of proper annotation, 

prohibitive cost associated with the process, and lack of proper mechanisms for acquis ition. I t is 

envisaged that these data sets be used to create initial corpora of data sets, and encourage enterprise 

action in the area. A crowdsourced platform for annotation, on the lines of the highly popular government’s 

citizen participation platform myGov.in , can be established by the government (to be operated by a private 

player) where seed data for annotation can be provided by the organisations mentioned above. 

Deployable Model Marketplace 

Given the level of market for AI tools, AI -as -a-Service business model, and a plethora of standardi se d

problems faced by enterprises at scale, a deployable model segment in the marketplace, which brings 

together the buyers and suppliers of AI solutions, can greatly ease and expedite the adoption of AI. It 

would give vis ibility to the existing solutions, address information asymmetry and generate awareness 

amongst the relevant constituents. This AI -as -a-Service model segment would further build upon and 

synergi se with the previous two layers of the marketplace model viz. data and annotation. 

Many objectives aimed to be achieved by AI algorithms can now be categori se d as standardi se d

problems. The following are some of the standardi se d and ubiquitous  problems most of organi sa tions 

face in their activity streams: 

a) object dete ction in images or video streams; 

b) conversational smart chatbots (text and speech); 

c) speech -to -text and text -to -speech; 

d) assistive diagnostic solutions; 

e) language recognition and transcription; 

f) contextual data mining to discover complex patterns; 

g) price optimi sa tion; 

h) data collection, curation and annotation for specific business use; 

i) supply and demand forecasting; and 

j) server, app and web uptime/downtime prediction .

Here models refer to the weights of the AI model trained on the data , which contains the predic tive power. 

The inferencing of the model will require integration with other IT stacks and will be a customi se d process. 

Hence, this module of the marketplace should focus on defined deployable models that can be bought or 

sold. These models could either b e bought and sold as data, or more likely, as a service or an API layer 

that can be charged per use. 

The model marketplace will attract enterprises which can post problems which they are seeking to be 

solved using AI tools. Governments can be another party to announce specific problems which they 

intend to be solved. This demand side will be supported by the community of AI solution developers 

(consisting of startups, enterprises, individual researchers etc.) who will either showcase their existing 

develope d and tested product suites, or customise their products as per the demand placed by 

enterprises. Academic researchers will be another major beneficiary of the marketplace as they will get 

valuable insights about problems faced by the industry and will get access to real industry data. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 82

Figure 32 : Stakeholders of NAIM 

Challenges to adoption of a marketplace model for AI models are as follows: 

a) Ensuring quality : Marketplaces require continuous monitoring and maintenance of quality. For 

example, Amazon enforces this on vendors, and this goes beyond user ratings. Continuous scrutiny 

of products, sellers and buyers will be required. 

b) Responsive product development required : The correct set of features of this platform will have to be 

discovered through iteration and adaptation, since there isn ’t precedent of such AI platforms to draw 

from. The platform should allow for trial based access to models to allow for iterative product 

evaluation by buyers. 

c) Sophistication of PSUs for data sharing and evaluation against specs: If data is to be provided over 

the platform, solution -seekers will need to know how to provide clean datasets, balance data to 

sufficiently represent infrequent occurrences, hide test data for evaluation of solutions while sharing 

training d ata, define appropriate specs, decide on appropriate evaluation methods, etc. The platform 

should be able to prescribe some basic standards for data sharing which will allow non -ML savvy 

PSUs to post problems and data. 

d) Incentives for seeding network effect : The marketplace needs a certain critical mass of solution 

seekers and providers for gaining traction, to subsequently trigger network effects. This is true of all 

marketplaces. Incentives to attract both seekers and providers initially will need to be fi gured out. 

PSUs and government agencies may act as initial seeders/users of the platform with right incentives 

and mandates. 

e) Potentially rich feature set needed for adoption: Such platforms can work well when there are systems 

like a credible rating syste m, payment escrow, search and sort to aid discovery, recommendation 

engines, etc. These will need to be established at NAIM also. 

How can the stakeholders engage in NAIM? 

NAIM, as a marketplace for enterprises, will encourage all business entities, govern ment agencies, 

startups, AI researchers, system integrators and academic research institutions to sign up on the 

platform. Following may look like a snapshot of the marketplace where all the stakeholders engage in 

their respective activities on the platfor m: National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 83

Private / public sector enterprises 

a) Hospitals: assistive diagnostics for physicians and radiologists .

b) Distribution companies: predict peak load, identify default prone customers .

c) Travel and tourism: predict peak traffic routes, pricing optimi sa tion cust omers, offer alternative 

routes/modes for traffic optimization. 

d) Large industrial or real estate establishments: smart power management, utilities management, real -

time failure detection and analysis .

e) Cinema: automated subtitles in regional languages (speec h-to -text and translation) .

Government authorities 

a) Traffic authorities and police: real -time object detection in CCTV video feeds, face detection and 

object tracking, number plate detection .

b) Citizen engagement: conversational chatbots (speech and text) in Indic languages for grievance 

redressal and query management .

c) Document analysis and management: text recognition and sentiment analysis from physical 

documents, analysis and summary .

d) All India Radio and Prasar Bharti: speech -to -text services for transcription and analysis .

e) Road and rail transport: face and eye movement detection (at the edge) for analysing driver fatigue 

and alarm signal, freight route optimization. 

f) Agriculture: crop health and soil health analysis through remote sensing and IoT, farmer advisory 

services for input control and market demand prediction .

AI Solution Providers 

a. India AI startups: solutions for natural language processing and Indic languages, diagnostic 

assistants, image recognit ion/object detection .

b. Industrial Internet -of -Things: capturing data from machines and providing insights in areas of energy 

management, retail and inventory management .

c. On Edge AI devices: CCTV video feed monitoring and warning signals .

d. Academic Research I nstitutions .

e. Centers of Excellence: access to industry data for various use cases, model training and evaluation .

## Box 19 : Why the focus on PSUs 

Private enterprises run on the basis of market conditions and business drivers of revenues and profits. 

Due to  either  absence of markets or failure of efficient markets, many sectors of operation of PSUs are 

for achieving socio -economic goals of equality and distribution of wealth. There is not much incentive for 

PSUs for improving operational efficiency; they are f urther constrained by regulations imposed on publicly 

funded entities in activities of procurement, manpower hiring etc. 

Technology adoption, especially AI, can significantly improve operational efficiency and drive down 

operational costs incurred by PSUs  operating in  financially unsustainable but socially critical  areas. This National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 84

improvement in operational costs will make them financially more viable. The NAIM allows the public -

sector firms to directly scout for solutions which they can use in their business  operations by significantly 

easing their information search for solutions. Additionally, PSUs and government agencies can also be 

the first driver of the network of the NAIM where initial pool of problems and industry data is shared by 

them which will attr act several solution developers, especially startups and researchers to sign up for the 

platform .

Mechanisms to reali se marketplace model 

It is proposed that a decentrali se d data marketplace based on distributed ledger technology be set up. In 

the future , such a platform can enable advanced privacy preserv ing AI techniques such as multi -party 

computation directly on individual pieces of data. 

Instead of attempting to build such marketplaces, which it is not equipped to do so , the government 

should come out with enabling regulations , such that these marketplaces can be set up by private players. 

These would include regulations and standard permissions for any personal data being sold, standards 

for anonymi sa tion, standards for ensuring annotation accuracy, an d cybersecurity standards for the 

module dealing with deployable model s.

An ini tial effort may be made by the g overnment to build the NAIM platform where all relevant 

stakeholders can sign up. However, open market competition will allow other marketplace operators to 

come in with innovative services and up -to -date data on suppliers and buyers on the marketplace. NAIM 

will lead to a more engaging collaboration, quicker and easier data access and accelerated adoption of 

AI among enterprises and public author ities in the country. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 85

# Ethics, Privacy, Security and  Artificial 

# Intelligence 

# Towards a “Responsible AI” 

AI is going to be the tipping point in technological evolution of mankind , with human dependence on 

machines and algorithms for decision making never been such deep. Thus , any strategy document on 

promoting AI, necessarily needs to be conscious of the probable factors of the AI ecosystem that may 

undermine ethical conduct, impin ge on one’s privacy and undermine the security protocol. Appropriate 

steps to mitigate these risks need to be an integral part of any such strategy. 

While the issue of ethics would concern the biases that an AI system can propagate, the privacy concerns 

are largely on collection and inappropriate use of data for personal discrimination. Issue of securit y arises 

from the implications and the consequent accountability of any AI system. 

While addressing the above issues, one needs to be conscious of the poten tial vulnerabilities of our 

extant regulatory and societal structures which are dependent on human judgment and control , and thus 

subject to inherent biases and discrimination. Thus , to say that extant decision making systems –

individual, societal, regula tory or even judicial – are entirely devoid of these shortcomings would be a 

fallacy as these are dependent upon human limitations of knowledge, precedent, rationale and bias 

(explicit or subconscious). Delegation of some aspects of that decision making to algorithms, which may 

well be able to ingest and process many more parameters as compared to a human, may likely result in 

systems with reduced bias, discrimination and improved privacy protection. However, even if a

technological intervention helps us de legate that responsibility to an algorithm with improved outcomes, 

it is extremely important that we set much higher standards for privacy and protection in case of AI tools. 

Ethics and AI 

Fairness / tackling the biases AI 

Based on the premise that a large set of well -diversified data may be an accurate description of the world, 

most of the developer community takes a technocratic attitude that data -driven decision making is good 

and algorithms are neutral. However, this argument does not recogni se the fact that the existing data 

may have biases, which may have got reinforced over time . The issue of fairness is at the forefront of 

discussion in academic, research and policy fora, and definitely merits a combined dialogue and 

sustained research to come to an acceptable resolution. One possible way to approach this would be to 

identify the in -built biases and assess their impact, and in turn find ways to reduce the bias. This reactive 

approach, use -case based, may help till the time we find techniques to bring neutrality to data feeding AI 

solutions, or build AI solutions that ensure neutrality despite inherent biases. 

Transparency / opening the “Black Box ”

Presently, most AI solutions suffer from what is commonly known as the “Black Box Phenomenon”, with 

very l ittle or no understanding of what happens in between and only the input data and results being the 

known factors. This is due to the reliance in most current AI systems to incrementally improve the 

performance as defined by a narrow set of parameters, with developer’s emphasis being less on how the National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 86

algorithms are achieving the requisite success. However, calls for explaining the decision -making 

process will gain momentum as AI systems are increasingly relied upon for decision making that has 

significant con sequences for a large section of population. 

Opening the Black Box, assuming it is possible and useful at this stage (there is considerable debate on 

that as well), should not aim towards opening of code or technical disclosure – few clients of AI solutio ns 

would be sophisticated AI experts - but should rather aim at “ explainability ”. With extended disclosure 

though, what needs to be balanced is whether the algorithm’s parameter may induce the individuals and 

companies to change their behavior and in turn game the system. Clearly, more collaborative research 

is required in this area. 

## Box 19 : Decoding Explainable AI 

Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) is an evolving area of research which has received a lot of attention 

from the research community and  the broader society alike. XAI project by DARPA is one such project 

which has shown substantial progress in explaining how and why machine learning algorithms work in a 

certain way. The aim of the XAI  project, as described by DARPA is: 

The Explainable AI  (XAI) program aims to create a suite of machine learning techniques that: 

• Produce more explainable models, while maintaining a high  level of learning performance ; and 

• Enable human users to understand, appropriately trust, and effectively manage the eme rging 

generation of artificially intelligent partners. 

The machine learning algorithms of tomorrow should have the built -in capability to explain their logic, 

enumerate their strengths and weaknesses and specify an understanding of their future behavior. 

Figure 33 : XAI Concept 

XAI is one of a handful of current DARPA programs expected to enable “third -wave AI systems”, where 

machines understand the context and environment in which they operate, and over time build underlying 

explanatory models that allow  them to characteri se  real world phenomena. 

In May 2018, XAI researchers are expected to demonstrate initial implementations of their explainable 

learning systems and conduct pilot studies of their Phase 1 evaluations. Full Phase 1 system evaluations 

are  expected in November 2018 .

> Credit : DARPA Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI)

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 87

Privacy and AI 

AI models, solutions and their application depend on generation, collection and processing of large 

amounts of data on individual, entity and community behavi our. Data collection without proper consent, 

privacy of personal data, inherent selection biases and resultant risk of profiling and discrimination, and 

non -transparent nature of AI solutions are some of the issues requiring deliberation and proper recours e. 

However, the current debate on data usage have two distinct aspects. Firstly, there are concerns that 

companies are harvesting significant amounts of consumer data and using it inappropriately to gain 

insights about consumers. Key here is that the cons umer may not have access to these insights or the 

ability to derive value from them. Beyond compliance, companies can consider how to create awareness 

of how they use consumer information and the value they provide in return, which can build trust in their 

brand and services. 

Secondly, there are concerns that companies are amassing large data sets and thereby building an unfair 

competitive advantage. Datasets themselves have little intrinsic value without the ability to extract 

meaning from them. The datase t is a necessary, but not the only, component of delivering meaningful 

insights from data. Having the tools to analyse it and the experience to understand its meaning are the 

others. While those that have access to large datasets and by the nature of their business models have 

data network effects, which enables them in turn to build a first mover advantage when it comes to 

perfecting their algorithms and driving business value, this does not necessarily negatively impact the 

consumer. 

Dealing with privacy issues 

a. Establish a data protection framework with legal backing : The work being done by Justice 

Srikrishna Committee on data protection law is very opportune and timely. The 7 -core principles 

of data protection and privacy – informed consent, technology agnosticism, data controller 

accountability, data minimisation, holistic application, deterrent penalties and structured 

enforcement – are quite comprehensive and should provide a strong privacy protection regime 

in the countr y once enacted. 

b. Establish sectoral regulatory frameworks : Apart from having a central privacy protection law, due 

to diverse and fast changing nature of the technology, sectoral regulatory frameworks may also 

act as additional protection to user privacy a nd security. Japan and Germany have developed 

new frameworks applicable to specific AI issues such as regulating next generation robots and 

self -driving cars respectively. 

c. Benchmark national data protection and privacy laws with international standards : European 

Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) guidelines, which have been enforced in 

May 2018, encourage design of less -privacy invasive systems. French laws give a right to 

explanation for administrative algorithmic decisions, making it much more comprehensive than 

GDPR on administrative decisions. India’s privacy protection regime will have to be continually 

updated to reflect understanding of new risks and their impact. 

d. Encourage AI developers to adhere to international standards : Leaders a nd practitioners from 

across the world have come together to frame standards for safe and privacy preserving AI. The 

Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems of the IEEE has a chapter on 

‘Personal Data and Individual Access Control in Ethically Aligned Design’. Indian enterprises and 

developers need to build these standards into AI design itself. 

e. Encourage self -regulation : Data Privacy Impact Assessment Tools can be used by AI developers 

and enterprises adopting AI solutions to mana ge privacy risks. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 88

f. Invest and collaborate in privacy preserving AI research : New mathematical models for 

preserving privacy are being researched upon where risks of data exploitation and personal 

identification (from an anonymi se d dataset) can be reduced b y limiting information one can gain 

from released data, irrespective of amount of side information available otherwise. India should 

collaborate on areas of research like Differential Privacy, Privacy by Design, Safety -Critical AI 

and Multi -Party Computati ons which enable protection of privacy despite data sharing at a wide 

scale. 

g. Spread awareness : Privacy has been termed as a fundamental right by the Supreme Court of 

India. The protection of this right with its multiple facets in a fast -changing technolog ical 

environment will not just depend on State enforcement b ut by also making the citizens aware of 

their rights and how they can protect them. People often unknowingly give consent to sharing 

their data which they would not have ordinarily done had they k nown the purpose their data were 

being put to. There is an urgent need to spread awareness among the individuals about the 

importance of consent, ethics and privacy while dealing with technology. A pan -India campaign 

in multiple languages, and inclusion of privacy rights in school and college curriculum can serve 

as effective mass outreach mediums to spread awareness. 

## Box 20 : Differential Privacy 

A concept developed by Cynthia Dwork in 2006, Differential Privacy aims at preserving identifiable user 

informat ion irrespective of any outside information the aggregator agency holds. The dilemma of giving 

personali se d service to users based on their individuali se d preferences while at the same time ensuring 

that user is not uniquely identifiable, using the data co llected or any other public data, is not solved by 

traditional privacy preserving methods of cryptography. Differential privacy describes a promise, made 

by a data holder, or curator, to a data subject: “You will not be affec ted, adversely or otherwise, by 

allowing your data to be used in any study or analysis, no matter what other studies, data sets, or 

information sources, are available.” It addresses the paradox of learning nothing about an individual while 

learning useful information about a population. 

Security in AI 

The accountability debate on AI, which in most of the cases today is aimed at ascertaining the liability, 

needs to be shifted to objectively identifying the component that failed and how to prevent that in the 

future. An analogy can be drawn to how the air lines have become a relatively safe industry today. Every 

accident has been elaborately investigated, and future course of action has been determined. Something 

similar is needed to ensure safe AI .

One possible framework that can be mooted involves the fol lowing components: 

a. Negligence test for damages caused by AI software, as opposed to strict liability. This involves 

self -regulation by the stakeholders by conducting damage impact a ssessment at every stage of 

development of an AI model. 

b. As an extension o f the negligence test, safe harbo urs need to be formulated to insulate or limit 

liability so long as appropriate steps to design, test, monitor, and improve the AI product have 

been taken. 

c. Framework for apportionment of damages need to be developed so that the involved parties bear 

proportionate liability, rather than joint and several liability, for harm caused by products in which National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 89

the AI is embedded, especially where the use of AI was unexpected, prohibited, or inconsistent 

with permitted use cases. 

d. Actua l har m requirements policy may be followed, so that a lawsuit cannot proceed based only 

on a speculative damage or a fear of future damages. 

India can also take a leaf out of UK’s playbook, where GBP 9 million is being invested to establish a new 

Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation, aimed at enabling and ensuring ethical, safe and innovative uses 

of data, including AI. This will include engaging with industry to explore the possibilities of establishing 

data trusts to facilitate easy and secure sharing of data. A consortium of Ethics Councils at each Centre 

of Excellence may be set up to define the standard practice (on the lines of OpenAI charter). It would be 

expected that all Centres of Excellence adhere to standard practices while developing AI technolo gy and 

products. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 91

# Actions for  the  Government 

Achieving the goal of #AIforAll requires long term and engaged institutional collaboration between all 

the stakeholders including the citizens. However, while playing the primary role in ensuring that this 

collab orative strategy succeeds, the g overnment needs to be mindful of not crowding out t he private 

sector. Role of the g overnment thus needs to be one of a facilitator, an active promoter and wherever 

required, of an own er. 

This section summari se s the key recommendations, and the role of the government. 

Figure 34 : Government’s role 

Area  Recommendation  Government role 

Research and Application 

Core Research  Setting up Centre of 

Research Excellence for 

AI (COREs) 

Identify  academic institutions, provide fiscal 

support to establish COREs focusing on core 

technology research in AI .

PhD Scholarships  Institute National AI  Fellowships  to retain 

outgoing PhD students and attract researchers 

from foreign universities with  attractive 

incentives and challenging projects .

Inter -academia 

collaboration 

Incentivi se  research collaboration between 

premier academic institutions through special 

grants while facilitating the formation of a global 

expert pool for core AI research .

Faculty Fellowships  Provide Faculty Fellowships or Chairs in 

academic institutes to promote research in AI. 

Applied Research  Setting up  of 

International Centres for 

Transformational AI 

(ICTAIs) 

Invite Expression of Interests (EoIs) from 

industry players  to lead ICTAIs in various 

sectors (health, education, agriculture, smart 

mobility and smart citi es), in collaboration with 

the g overnment and academia. Build 

governance structure, provide fiscal support, 

formulate an IP model  for ICTAIs  and set up the 

IC TAIs under a PPP model  through “challenge 

method” .

Setting up ICTAI Inc., 

overarching entity for 

ICTAIs 

Establish  “ICTAI Inc.” as either  society / section 

8 company , with initial contribution from 

government and private sector representation, 

to select  and fund ICTAIs .

Common Compute 

Platform 

Setting up AI Research, 

Analytics and 

knoWledge Assimilation 

platform (AIRAWAT) 

Set up a common cloud platform for Big Data 

Analytics and Assimilation with a large, power -

optimi se d AI Computing infrastructure 

connecting all COREs, ICTAIs and other 

academic institutions with National Knowledge 

Network .

Intellectual Property  Building an attractive IP 

regime for AI innovation 

Set up a task force, comprising jointly of Ministry 

of Corporate Affairs and DIPP , to examine and National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 92

issue appropriate modifications to the IP 

regulatory regime pertaining to AI .

Supra -national 

collaboration 

Setting up CERN for AI  Take the lead in bringing together the relevant 

parties to create People’s AI, the CERN for AI  –

national  governments, industry, academia and 

international community of researchers .

Reskilling and Training 

Workforce  Promote formation of 

future service sector 

jobs 

Incentivi se  creation of service sector jobs of the 

future such as data annotation through tax 

holidays or inclusion in CSR activities .

Recognition and 

standardi sa tion of 

informal training 

Set up AI  / Data Science training standards, as 

per National Skills Qualifica tion Framework, and 

provide certifications to training institutes .

Promote employee 

reskilling 

Incentivi se  investment in training of employees 

through  tax breaks  and grants  for employer s.

Colleges  Expansion of quality 

education in data 

science and AI 

Incentivi se  colleges  / universities to adopt 

credit -bearing MOOCs in their curriculum .

Promote cross -

disciplinary AI education 

Introduce Bridge Courses in AI for post -

graduates in non -computer science or data 

science domains .

Schools  Introducing AI  / ML  in 

schools 

Introduce AI modules in Atal Tinkering Labs .

Overall  Continuously assess the 

changing nature of jobs 

Constitute a standing committee or taskforce to 

examine and report on changes in employment 

induced by adoption  AI .

Accelerating Adoption of  AI 

Data Sharing  Opening up government 

datasets 

Establish platforms for making datasets in the 

area of social sector (either collected during 

implementation of a scheme or in normal 

business processes) available for open public 

use in a machine readable  form .

Data Annotation  Creating and making 

India specific annotated 

datasets public (on the 

lines of ImageNet) 

1.  Catalyse partnerships with the various 

academic institutions and public  /

private agencies in making annotated 

India specific data available for 

advancing AI research. 

2.  Explore partnerships and co -fund 

building  of large corpora of data across 

domains, as a means of laying the 

foundation for  startup s and enterprises 

to build applications and services  tailor -

made to the Indian context .

Crowdsourcing 

Annotation 

Annotation of data  –

images, text, speech 

etc. via crowdsourcing 

Announce grand  challenge  tasks for tagging of 

images, text or videos,  and  devising reward 

based  mechanisms  through data market place 

to aggregate  the content from the various 

part icipating members .

Nation -wide 

adoption 

Enabling a multi -

stakeholder owned and 

Create governance guidelines, explore 

partnerships and co -fund the establishment of: 

1.  Data marketplace National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 93

managed National AI 

Marketplace 

2.  Data annotation marketplace 

3.  Deployable  model marketplace 

to develop the data supply ecosystem, ease 

collaboration, reduce time and cost of collecting 

& annotating data, and bring multiple solutions 

deployment at one place for scale and network 

effect. 

Visibility in 

Collaboration 

Making  information 

search for collaborations 

easier 

Set up an AI Database portal for easy 

dissemination of information on projects being 

implemented via collaboration among 

government -academia -industry -researchers -

startups to enable resource matching .

Awareness  and 

Adoption in 

Government 

Making decision makers 

aware about 

transformative potential 

of AI 

1.  Workshops, live  demonstrations ,

2.  AI Readiness Index to highlight best 

practices across states , and 

3.  Create Central -State shared fund for AI 

led development projects  to be taken  up 

by  States. 

Government and 

PSUs as seeders for 

network effect 

Making g overnments 

and PSUs leaders in 

adoption of social AI 

tools 

Help  create a pipeline of AI research projects for 

the  COREs, ICTAIs  through  grand challenges to 

be given by  the g overnment and PSUs. 

Incentivi se  public agencies to adopt and  employ 

AI in delivering service through  financial 

support ; extra budgets for R&D ; tax incentives 

and  awards .

Partnerships and 

Collaboration 

Industry  – Academia  –

Trade Bodies  – Venture 

Capital Collaboration 

Encourage close collaboration between 

industry, academia, trade bodies and venture 

capital to implement “AI+X” paradigm .

Startup Support  Support systems for AI 

based startups 

Establish  incubation hubs  and venture funds 

specifically for AI  startup s in collaboration with 

State Governments .

Responsible AI Development 

Ethical and 

Responsible 

Research in AI 

Making  COREs  and 

ICTAIs  adopt ethical 

practices 

Set  up a consortium of Ethics Councils at each 

CORE  and  ICTAI  to define the standard 

practices  and  monitor their adoption .

Privacy and Security  Instituting a data privacy 

legal framework 

Address and implement data protection 

framework,  which protects human rights and 

privacy without stifling innovation in India .

Creating sectoral 

regulatory guidelines 

Collaborate with industry to come out with 

sector specific guidelines on privacy,  security 

and ethics  – on  manufacturing, financial 

services, identity, telecommunication, robotics 

etc. 

Collaborating on privacy 

preserving technology 

research in AI 

Support  COREs  to do research in new 

mathematical models and technology for 

preserving privacy ; encourage international 

collaboration .

Sustainable 

Research 

Setting up Centre for 

Studies on 

Technological 

Sustainability  (CSTS) 

Set up CSTS to address issues relating to 

ethics, privacy, legal aspects, social 

sustainability  and global  competitiveness of the 

technologies developed .National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 94

Financial implication of recommendations 

A greater understanding of the financial implications of the recommendations made in this report will be 

reali se d after consultations with the different stakeholders. Given the emphasis on research, skilling 

and creation of the ecosystem, the recommendations would involve a significant budgetary allocation 

by the government. This would be in addition to funds being provided as part of the Digital India and 

Startup India initiatives. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 95

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 96

# Appendix I: Artificial Intelligence Explained 

# An Executive Guide to Artificial Intelligence 39 

Machine Learning: a definition 

Most recent advances in AI have been achieved by applying machine learning to very large data sets. 

Machine l earning algorithms detect patterns and learn how to make predictions and recommendations 

by processing data and experiences, rather than by receiving explicit programming instruction. The 

algorithms also adapt in response to new data and experiences to improve efficacy over time.   

> 39 Replicated from McKinsey Analytics An Executive Guide to AI

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 97

Understanding the major types of machine learning 

Supervised Learning  Unsupervised Learning  Reinforcement Learning 

What it is?  An algorithm uses training 

data and feedback from 

humans to learn the 

relationship of given 

inputs to a given output 

(e.g., how the inputs “time 

of year” and “interest 

rates” predict housing 

prices) 

An algorithm  explores input 

data without being given an 

explicit output variable 

(e.g., explores customer 

demographic data to 

identify patterns) 

An algorithm learns to 

perform a task simply by 

trying to maximi se  rewards 

it receives for its actions 

(e.g., maximi se s poin ts it 

receives for increasing 

returns of an investment 

portfolio) 

When to 

use it? 

You know how to classify 

the input data and the 

type of behavior you want 

to predict, but you need 

the algorithm to calculate 

it for you on new data 

You do not know how to 

classify the data, and you 

want the algorithm to find 

patterns and classify the 

data for you 

You don’t have a lot of 

training data; you cannot 

clearly define the ideal end 

state; or the only way to 

learn about the 

environment is to interact 

with it 

How it 

works? 

1.  A human labels every 

element of the input 

data (e.g., in the case 

of predicting housing 

prices, labels the input 

data as “time of year,” 

“interest rates,” etc.) 

and defines the output 

variable (e.g., housing 

prices) 

2.  The algorithm is 

trained on the  data to 

find the connection 

between the input 

variables and the 

output 

3.  Once training is 

complete  – typically 

when the alg orithm is 

sufficiently accurate  –

the algorithm is 

applied to new data 

1.  The algorithm receives 

unlabeled data (e.g., a 

set of data  describing 

customer journeys on a 

website) 

2.  It infers a structure from 

the data 

3.  The algorithm identifies 

groups of data that 

exhibit similar behavior 

(e.g., forms clusters of 

customers that exhibit 

similar buying 

behaviors) 

1.  The algorithm takes an 

action on  the 

environment (e.g., 

makes a trade in a 

financial portfolio) 

2.  It receives a reward if 

the action brings the 

machine a step closer 

to maximis ing the total 

rewards available (e.g., 

the highest total return 

on the portfolio) 

3.  The algorithm optimi se s

for the b est series of 

actions by correcting 

itself over time National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 98

Deep Learning: a definition 

Deep learning is a type of machine learning that can process a wider range of data resources, requires 

less data preprocessing by humans, and can often produce more accurate results t han traditional 

machine learning approaches. In deep learning, interconnected layers of software -based calculators 

known as “neurons” form a neural network. The network can ingest vast amounts of input data and 

process them through multip le layers that learn increasingly complex features of the data at each layer. 

The network can then make a determination about the data, learn if its determination is correct, and use 

what it has learned to make determinations about new data. For example, o nce it learns what an object 

looks like, it can recogni se the object in a new image. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 99

Understanding the major types of deep learning 

Convolutional neural network  Recurrent neural network 

What it is?  A multilayered neural network with a 

special  architecture designed to extract 

increasingly complex features of the data 

at each layer to determine the output 

A multilayered neural network that can 

store information in context nodes, 

allowing it to learn data sequences and 

output a number or another s equence 

When to use 

it? 

When you have an unstructured data set 

(e.g., images) and you need to infer 

information from it 

When you are working with time -series 

data or sequences (e.g., audio 

recordings or text) 

How it 

works? 

Processing an image 

1.  The  convolutional neural network 

(CNN) receives an image  – for 

example, of the letter “A”  – that it 

processes as a collection of pixels 

2.  In the hidden, inner layers of the 

model, it identifies unique features, 

for example, the individual lines that 

make up “A” 

3.  The CNN can now classify a different 

image as the letter “A” if it finds in it 

the unique features previously 

identified as making up the letter 

Predicting the next word in the 

sentence “Are you free …..?” 

1.  A recurrent neural network (RNN) 

neuron receives a  command that 

indicates the start of a sentence 

2.  The neuron receives the word “Are” 

and then outputs a vector of 

numbers that feeds back into the 

neuron to help it “remember” that it 

received “Are” (and that it received it 

first). The same process occurs 

wh en it receives “you” and “free,” 

with the state of the neuron updating 

upon receiving each word 

3.  After receiving “free,” the neuron 

assigns a probability to every word 

in the English vocabulary that could 

complete the sentence. If trained 

well, the RNN will  assign the word 

“tomorrow” one of the highest 

probabilities and will choose it to 

complete the sentence National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 100

# Appendix I I: Global Country Strategy Review 40 

# What is happening around the world in AI? 

Countries around the world are becoming increasingly aware of the potential economic and social 

benefits of developing and applying AI. For example, China and U.K. estimate that 26% and 10% of their 

GDPs respectively in 2030 will be sourced from AI -related acti vities and businesses. There have been 

tremendous act ivity concerning AI policy positions and the development of an AI ecosystem in different 

countrie s over the last 18 to 24 month – the US A published its AI report in December 2016; France 

published the AI strategy in January 2017 followed by a detail ed poli cy document in March 2018 ; Japan 

released a document in March 2017; China published the AI strategy in July 2017; and the U.K. released 

its industrial strategy in November 2017. 

Governments are reviewing and developing their po sition on the following area s to rapidly grow AI 

ecosystems: 

a) Trigger demand in socially relevant sectors / segments 

b) Gear up t he supply side to fulfil demand – infrastructure (including data ecosystem, data stacks, 

high speed computing, etc.), talent, research 

c) Set up an enabling system —governance, funding, partnerships 

Trigger demand in socially relevant sectors 

Different countries have identified different focus areas fo r AI development and deployment: 

a) the USA: a reas of interest include economic prosperity, educational opportuni ties, quality of life, 

nati onal and homeland security. The USA is focusing on growing the AI ecosystem through public 

spending on contracts, e.g., the US Department of Defens e spent over USD 2.4 billion on AI -

related technology in 2017 (2x increase from 201 5) .

b) China: a reas of interest include education, healthcare, energy, transport, quality of life, city 

planning /IoT / robotics. China is focusing on developing and using AI for delivery of public 

services through financial support, developing talent pipelin e, and leveraging international 

cooperation. 

c) Japan: a reas of interest include industrial productivity improvement, healthcare, medical care 

and welfare, mobility and information security. Japan is focusing on moving from the "Industry 

4.0" paradigm to "Soc iety 5.0" through the development of AI use cases for delivering public 

services. 

d) France: a reas of interest include healthcare, environment, transport mobility, defence -security. 

The government is planning to support AI startup s through data availability, public spending and 

talent reskilling.  

> 40 McK insey

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 101

e) U.K.: a reas of interest include services, life sciences, agriculture and public -sector applications. 

The government is focused on growing innovative tech firms and making deals with the private 

sector to solve AI use -cases for delivery of public services. 

Gear up the supply side to fulfil demand 

Infrastructure 

Most governments have taken the following two action steps, in varying degrees of engagement, to 

upgrade infrastructure and build a data ecosystem: 

a) Creation o f a data -solutions marketplace 

b) Invest in upgrading computing infrastructure, 5G networks, etc. 

Many countries have been reviewing a range of initiatives to facilitate creation of these marketplaces and 

upgrading computing infrastructure as well as connectivity. For example: 

a) U.K. is exploring the feasibility of creating data trusts where the process of data sharing and 

storage is underwritten by the government. There is also a focus on defining data rights for 

potential participants on the platform . There are plans to invest GBP 1 billion to upgrade digital 

infrastructure including rolling out 5G and full -fibre networks. 

b) Japan has announced expanding its R&D tax exemption to include AI and big data as well as 

subsidies for building new robots with int egrated AI. Its focus is on developing sector -specific 

platforms for public and private development of AI, followed by interlinking of different platforms 

to create an integrated AI ecosystem. 

c) France is trying to streamline its innovation track with "inno vation sandboxes" which would 

provide an open platform for innovation and offer resources for use in field -testing, etc. AI 

research institutes would have supercomputers specifically designed for AI usage and devoted 

to researchers and their economic partn ers during their shared initiatives. 

d) China is focused on developing open source innovation platforms in partnership with private 

players like Baidu, Alibaba, and Tencent. Funding is available for 5G networks to enable 

"intelligenti sa tion " and deployment o f supercomputers, high performance semiconductor chips 

for AI use. 

e) the USA is facilitating the creation of open source software libraries and toolkits, e.g., Open NLP, 

Weka toolkit, etc. 

Talent 

Countries are also significantly increasing allocation of resources for STEM talent development through 

investment in universiti es, mandating new courses (e.g. AI and law), and offering schemes to retrain 

people. 

a) U.K. is planning to increase its R&D spend to 2.7 % of its GDP by 2027, investing GBP 42 million 

in t eacher development and GBP64 million in the retraining scheme including digital training. 

They are planning to make it easier for Tier -1 applicants working on AI subjects to obtain work 

permits and h ave a path to residency. They are also planning to build over 1,000 government 

supported PhD institutions by 2025 and set up a Turing fellowship to support an initial cohort of 

AI fellows. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 102

b) France is trying to triple the number of AI graduates in three yea rs by offering new courses and 

doubling the starting salary of researchers in public institutions. They also want to attract talent 

from across the world by offering substantial salary hikes, supporting improvements in the quality 

of life and reducing admi nistrative formalities. Further, France and the US have labs and panels 

to assess the impact of AI on the workforce. 

c) U.S. is p lanning a USD 200 million grant for STEM education focusing on co mputer science 

matched by a USD 300 million industry grant. 

d) Japan has convened a “ national consultative body ” with 3 universities and the Japan business 

foundation to develop education programs for reskilling. 

e) China has launched a five -year university program to train at least 500 teachers and 5,000 

students working on AI technologies. The program is a collaboration between government 

bodies, private companies and universities including Sinovation Ventures. Chin a has set in 

motion a plan to develop 50 world -class teaching institutes and research institutions, 50 national -

level high quality online open courses and 50 AI faculties by 2020 as part of the “AI+X” program. 

Research 

Universities and research institution s from the US A, China and Japan have led the publication volume 

on AI research topics between 2010 and 2016. In the US, Carnegie Mellon University (CMU), 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Stanford are the top three universities in mean count 

of papers published across AI, systems, theory and interdisciplinary areas 41 . These universities have 

been pioneers of AI research in the US and have more than 100 faculty members across different areas 

of AI research. 

a) CMU has one of the oldest AI progra ms in the world – it was also one of the first to offer an 

undergraduate program. It has started the CMU AI program which is a collaboration forum for 

faculties across seven departments to work on multidisciplinary AI topics. 

b) MIT has launched the Intelligenc e Quest to discover the foundations of human intelligence and 

its application to develop technology and tools. 

c) Stanford has a AI4ALL program to increase diversity in AI research and education. 

These three universities also feature on the top of any list o n infrastructure and industry relations, e.g., 

IBM’s Watson was developed in research collaboration with CMU :

> 41 CSRankings.org

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

103 

Source: Press search 

Chinese universities have also established extensive research partnerships with Baidu, Alibaba and 

Tencent: 

a) Bai du has announced a USD 104 million partnership with the Peking University to further research 

in AI -related topics including information science and medicine. 

b) An AI centre for law and legal issues was also unveiled at the Peking University to research on 

applicat ions to improve legal efficiency while decreasing burden on judges. 

c) Alibaba’s Aliyun is working with the National Engineering laboratory on big data systems and 

software at the Tsinghua University. 

Japanese research has historically been hardware centric with robotics as one of the major focus areas 

of development. With the growing demand for AI, academia in Japan is rapidly reorienting itself to 

theoretical and applied research in the sector . Riken Centre for Advanced Intelligence Project and 

Advanced In dustrial Science and Technology are the nodal research institutes for industry collaboration. 

With AI led disruption of multiple industries, it is imperative for traditional industry players to increase 

speed and agility of insight generation, design and digiti se customer journeys as well as develop 

efficiency in delivering journey transformations. Consequently, traditional players like GE and Merck are 

investing heavily to power their offering through AI interventions .▪ 80+ faculty across 17  

> research focus areas

▪ Andrew Ng is an adjunct 

> associate professor for
> Machine learning

▪ AI4ALL programme to 

> increase diversity in the field
> of AI research

▪ 100+ faculty members 

> across departments

▪ 1000+ students engaged in 

> AI research and education

▪ Launched undergrad degree 

> in AI

▪ IBM’s Watson , World 

> champion robot soccer
> players, etc.

▪ CS & AI lab has 1200+   

> people working on 900+
> projects

▪ Research ranges from   

> algorithm and theory to
> applied AI and machine
> learning

▪ Launched MIT Intelligence  

> quest to discover the
> foundations of human
> intelligence and develop tools

▪ JD.com 

▪ Google 

▪ DiDi 

▪ Panasonic 

▪ UST Global 

▪ Tencent 

▪ Samsung 

▪ $240 million investment from 

> IBM for 10 years

▪ 60+ member companies  

> across telcos , finance,
> consumer electronics

▪ U.S. department of defence 

▪ NASA 

▪ Amazon 

▪ Google 

▪ Microsoft 

▪ Oculus 

> Research and
> course -work

▪ Stanford AI lab – Toyota 

> center for AI research

▪ Computational genomics lab 

▪ Distributed robotics lab 

▪ Vision lab 

▪ State of the art robotics 

> institute

▪ AI stack 

▪ Design for AI lab 

> Research
> facilities
> Research
> partnerships

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

104 

Source: Press search 

Set up an en abling system 

Governance 

Most of the governments have established / utilised existing centrali se d umbrella body for budgetary 

planning of AI interventions and for formulating strategy and drafting policies. The National Science and 

Technology Cou ncil in t he USA , Strategic Council for AI technologies in Japan, AI council in the U.K. are 

nodal agencies for planning and designing AI initiatives. These central bodies typically consist of 

ministers, representatives from industry and nominated members from acade mia, e.g., the UAE has a 

Minister of State for AI. Similarly, for implementation and delivery of AI initiatives: 

a) U.K. has a dedicated department "Office of AI" to collaborate with multiple departments, 

ministries and other stakeholders to deliver AI projects 

b) France has a shared specialist centre of 30 members to help provide specific inputs and 

implement projects in other departments 

c) In China and Japan, individual ministries and departments are responsible for implementing AI 

solutions across differe nt sectors. For example, 

i. China: National Development and Research Commission, Ministry of Science and 

Technology, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology, Central Military -Civil Fusion 

Development Commission Office, the Central Military Commission (CMC) Science and 

Technology Commission, and the CMC Equipment Development Department, etc. 

ii. Japan: Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport 

and Tourism, and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, etc .▪ Provides AI based face recognition software  

> and robotics, e.g. KoalaCam

▪ Developed an autopilot system allowing 

> automatic emergency breaking and traffic -
> aware cruise control

▪ Optimizing vaccine 

> yield using ML on
> huge quantities of
> manufacturing data

▪ Uses Al -driven 

> predictive
> maintenance tools in
> mining activities to
> halve operations and
> maintenance costs

▪ Use Al and ML to 

> predict ATV and to
> generate
> personalized
> recommendations

▪ Tesla DC accelerator 

▪ Deep Learning SDK 

▪ Tegra mobile 

> processor

▪ DL supercomputer 

> DGX -I

▪ Watson, its Developer 

> Cloud Platform and
> Watson based APIs

▪ TrueNorth : chip 

> structure for neural
> networks testing

▪ Offers predictive 

> analytics on buying
> potential and B2B
> pricing to current
> service users through
> Einstein

▪ Amelia: NLP based 

> intelligent customer
> services

▪ Offers ML based healthcare big data platform 

> for personalized health analysis and prediction

▪ Intelligent employee 

> management, e.g.
> city -wise intelligent
> scheduling
> Face/voice
> recognition for cash
> deposit, customer
> profiling
> Make existing
> operations
> more efficient
> Offer new
> services and
> products to
> existing
> customer
> Develop
> disruptive
> business
> models

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 105

While due importance is given to the central planning and implementation entities, the role of local 

governments in solving area -specific challenges through application of AI is becoming increasingly 

important. For example, 

a) London has a Smart City boar d and a Chief Digital Officer to apply best practices in smart 

infrastructure and AI .

b) Over 19 Chinese cities, including Beijing, Shanghai, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, Tianjin, have been 

mandated to develop their own city -level AI agenda. 

Utili si ng AI -related solu tions at the grass -roots level to solve real local challenges has the potential to 

truly democrati se its use. 

Funding 

Governments are significantly increasing the funding for the AI ecosystem. 

a) Apart from the increase in R&D spend to 2.7 % of its GDP, U.K . has created a GBP 725 million 

industri al strategy challenge fund, GBP 1.7 billion for transforming cities fund, reforming 

enterprise investment scheme and ventu re capital trusts to unlock GBP 7 billion over 10 years. 

Additiona lly, they have instituted a GBP 2.5 billion investment fund at the British Business Bank 

to incubate tech startup s and reforming rules for pension funds to mandate inclusion of AI in their 

investment portfolio. 

b) Japan is planning to increase its scien ce and innovation budget by JPY 900 bil lion by 2020 for AI. 

Different Japanese ministries are also funding R&D centres, e.g., Ministry of Economy, Trade 

and Industry (METI) is funding R&D centres at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial 

Science and Technology (AIST). 

c) France is planning to spend EUR 1.3 billion to develop AI -led interventions. 

d) China is funding a massive growth in network infrastructure and creating megaprojects. 

e) the USA is increasing its spend on AI -related contracts with the Departmen t of Defense alone 

spending USD 2.4 billion . Other large spenders include departments of agriculture, veteran affairs 

and homeland security. 

Private companies have dominated the investment in AI with internal corporate investments as the 

biggest mode of spend. Other large sources of funding for startup s within the sector include venture 

capital (VC) and private equity (PE). The two biggest areas funded are machine learning and computer 

vision, followed by natural language processing, autonomous vehicles and smart robotics. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

106 

Source: McKinsey Global Institute report on ‘Artificial Intelligence and the next digital frontier’ 

Digital native companies in the US A and China are exploring new areas for the development and 

application of AI to solve customer -centric use -cases. These range fro m developing smart AI game 

systems like Google’s AlphaGo, to virtual assistants like Amazon’s Alexa and Apple’s Siri. There is also 

a push to develop open source AI platforms like Google’s TensorFlow to Baidu Brain. Alibaba has also 

partnered with the Mala ysian government to launch the first smart city AI platform outside China 

(Hangzhou was the first example). Apart from internal incubation and development, these tech giants and 

VCs are also investing heav ily in startup s focused on AI. Technology giants dominate investment in AI    

> 1Estimate of 2016 spend by corporations to develop and deploy AI -based products. Calculated for top 35 high tech and advanced m anufacturing companies investing in AI. Estimate is
> based on the ratio of AI spend to total revenue calculated for a subset of the 35 companies.
> 2VC value is an estimate of VC investment in companies primarily focused on AI. PE value is an estimate of PE investment in AI -related companies. M&A value is an estimate of AI deals
> done by corporations. “Other” refers to grants and seed fund investments. Includes only disclosed data available in databases , a nd assumes that all registered deals were completed
> within the year of transaction. Compound annual growth rate values rounded.
> 3M&A and PE deals expressed by volume; VC deals expressed by value.

Venture 

capital 

M&A 

8–12 

Other 

Private 

equity 

Investment in AI, 2016 1

$ billion 

AI share of total 

investment 

category, 2016 3

%

Compound annual 

growth rate 2

%

<1 

1–3

2–3

2010 –13 2013 –16 

55 85 

15 20 

35 40 

Investment by tech giants and other corporations 

6–9

2–3

18 –27 

Internal 

corporate 

investment 1 VC, PE, and 

other external 

funding 3

M&A 2National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

107 

Source: Press sea rch 

Partnerships 

These countries are also leveraging different combinations of public -private -academia to develop and 

promote AI: 

a) In the U.K., a public -private -academia partnership was established as "sector deals" to improve 

productivity. The expansion of tech parks through the tech nation program is also an example of 

public -private partnership. The government is also trying to develop regional R&D partnerships 

between universities, large corporations and investors in the sector, e.g., BT has partnered wi th 

15 universities across the U.K. on creating AI powered, next generation data infrastructure. 

b) Japan has instituted new programs to triple research -industry collaboration by 2025 (including 

co -locating industry employees with researchers). They have also signed collaboration pacts with 

the US and Israel for technology transfer and joint R&D projects. 

c) Japan is trying to foster solutioning of challenges faced by large corporation by connecting them 

with startup s, e.g., Japan Open Innovation Council, New Ene rgy and Industrial Technology 

Development Organi sa tion (NEDO) pitch, etc. to connect startup s with corporations. 

d) China has formed a "national team" with large private players including Baidu and Tencent to 

undertake fundamental and applied research across different AI topics, e.g., Baidu is working 

with the Chinese government to develop brain -inspired intelligent technology 

Meanwhile, recent developments in the digital ecosystem have triggered a discussion on implications for 

regulations on data protection and privacy. EU has released a comprehensive legal framework for data 

protection called General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). This framework details the rights of 

individuals (consent, data portability, etc.), obligations of businesses (define and sha re how they will use 

personal data, norms for data processing, data protection impact assessment, etc.) and plan of action in 

case of a data breach (data breach notifications, compensation to individuals, penalties, etc.) . As AI grows ▪ Developed Amazon  

> web services for
> cloud computing

▪ Customer services 

▪ Warehouse 

> management
> Make existing
> operations
> more efficient

▪ Customized search 

> results

▪ Customized ad 

> ranking

▪ Google cloud 

> platform

▪ Leverages Al to    

> improve operational
> efficiency and
> customer
> experience of e -
> commerce ecosystem
> Offer new
> services and
> products to
> existing
> customer

▪ Provides open 

> source Al platform
> Tensorflow

▪ Offers customized  

> ASIC for ML TPU

▪ Online translation 

▪ Graphic and voice 

> search

▪ Integrates Al into 

> cloud services
> offering

▪ Provides mobile 

> robotic based
> automated storage
> and retrieval
> systems

▪ Opens Al technology  

> platform Baidu Brain

▪ Offers Al solutions in  

> finance, healthcare ,
> and traffic &
> transportation
> industries

▪ Netflix like streaming  

> service iQiyi

▪ Launches Al data 

> apps construction
> platform

▪ Provides enterprise  

> level Al solutions in
> with Ali -cloud as
> foundation

▪ Tmall genie – voice 

> controlled smart
> home assistant
> Develop
> disruptive
> business
> models

▪ Virtual assistant: 

> Google Now

▪ Game Al system: 

> AlphaGO

▪ Self -driving car 

> system

▪ Smart home: Google 

> Home

▪ Virtual assistant 

– Alexa 

▪ Polly – life -like 

> speech

▪ Rekognition – image 

> analysis

▪ Lex – conversational 

> engine

▪ Customized search 

> results and ad
> ranking

▪ 020: order 

> prioritization and
> route planning

▪ DuerOS : Virtual 

> assistant

▪ Little fish – voice 

> controlled family
> robot

▪ Apollo – set of  

> artificial intelligence
> driven tools for self -
> driving vehicles

▪ Smart city AI  

> platform developed
> for Kuala Lumpur

▪ Smartmesh   

> connectivity
> solution supports
> many -to -many
> bluetooth mesh
> technology

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 108

rapidly across geogra phies and sectors, governments across the world are actively working on 

developing data pri vacy and security regulations. 

Furthermore, governments are playing an active role in developing AI ecosystems to capitali se on the 

social, economic benefits and es tablish leadership in the field of AI. 

a) Social benefits : Governments are focusing on sectors ranging from education to healthcare, 

agriculture to transport mobility with a view to significantly improve quality of life of its citi ze ns. 

b) Economic benefits : Governments have defined substantial economic aspirations through 

development and implementation of AI. While China aims to grow AI’s contribution to GDP to 26 

percent and the U.K. by 10 percent by 2030, Japan has estimated the economic impact of AI 

applic ation at JPY 1.1 trillion by 2045. 

c) Leadership in AI : Given the rapid pace at which AI technology is evolving, governments are 

setting themselves up for success with support from the private sector and academia. However, 

the models of engagement vary depend ing on starting points, challenges and appetite for public 

funding and regulation. 

If some countries decide to wait for a few years to establish an AI strategy and put in place the foundations 

for developing the AI ecosystem, it seems unlikely that they w ould be able to attain and match up to the 

current momentum in the rapidly changing socio -economic environment. Therefore, the need of the hour 

is to develop a policy framework that will help set up a vibrant AI ecosystem in India. 

The following table hig hlights funding commitments made by governments across the world to promote 

AI research and application: 

Country  Area  Funding 

Belgium   AI research in 

academia 

 Two funding agencies  – FWO (Flanders) and FNRS 

(Wallonia) .

 FNRS spent approximately EUR 1.8  million per year in 

the period 2011 -2017 and FWO appro ximately EUR 6.7 

million per year. 

 Between 2011 and 2017 around 67 out of 241 AI -related 

applications (representing 2.3% of all applications) 

submitted to FNRS were funded, and 175 out of the 832 

AI -rela ted applications sent to FWO were also accepted. 

China   AI startups   In China, governments play a deliberate and explicit role 

in fundi ng scientific research (giving USD800,000 to 

USD 1 million in subsidies to AI companies) .

Denmark   AI startups   The  Innovatio n Fund Denmark has provided EUR 20 

million as funding for big data in 2017 .

Germany   AI basic research 

 Applied AI 

research 

 With an  annual budget of more than EUR 3 billion, the 

German Research Foundation (DFG) is the main source 

of funding for basic  research in AI in Germany .

 In the past thirty years (1988 -2018), applied AI has been 

funded continuously by the Federal Ministry of 

Education and Research (Bundesministerium für Bildung 

und Forsch ung  - BMBF), for a total of EUR 215 million. 

 Current  annual  investment in AI is EUR 40 -50 million. 

Between 1988 and 2017, DF KI received EUR200 million 

from BMBF . There is additional funding allocated to 

universities and other research centres by the 

government. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 109

 BMBF and the Federal Ministry of the Economy and 

Energ y (Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie  -

BMWi) are currently funding a selection of Industry 4.0 

projects such as Mixed Reality Pro duction 4.0, for a total 

of EUR 550 million since 2013. 

 The program Smart Services World II aims to address 

areas whe re digitalisation could have an impact for the 

economy. It has  funding of EUR 50 million from BMWi 

(2017 -2021). 

Ireland   AI startups   The Irish government spends, through the Irish 

Economic Development Agency (IDA), Enterprise 

Ireland, and Scien ce Foundation  Ireland, over EUR 700 

million on R&D annually. Enterprise Ireland funds Irish 

companies and is the largest VC fund in Europe. 

Israel   AI ecosystem  –

partnerships 

 The Israeli government has several grant funding 

schemes for promoting collaboration and  knowledge 

transfer between academia and industry, such as 

Magnet and Magneton .

 The Israeli Science Foundation has a rich history of 

funding AI projects in academia that provide researchers 

with a high degree of freedom in their research 

compared to other c ountries. 

Netherlands   AI research  –

academia 

 The main funding body for academia in the Netherlands 

is the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research 

(NWO). Since 2002, NWO has funded 119 research 

projects containing the term ‘artificial  intelligence’ and 

142 research projects containing the term ‘machine 

learning’. In 2015, a programme on ‘Natural Artificial 

Intelligence’ was launched, which has funded five 

projects. 

Spain   AI in industry   Since 2016, EUR 170 million has been invested in the 

Industry 4.0 project Industria Conectada 4.0 under the 

National R&D and Innovation Plan. Industry 4.0 focuses 

on skills, cooperation, industrial adoption, and digital 

technologies (robotics, AI, cloud, cybersecurity, bi g

data). 

Sweden   AI research  –

academic 

 AI ecosystem  -

partnerships 

 The Research Institutes of Sweden is currently setting 

up an AI centre (RISE AI), with an initial turnover  of 

SEK50 million (approx. EUR 4.9 million) per year in R&D, 

over 4  startup s, more  than 50 experts and around 30 

active industrial collaborations (e.g. Nokia, Ericsson, 

ABB, and H&M). 

 Vinnova, Sweden's Innovation Agency, has fund ed 190 

AI -projects totaling SEK 398 million  (approx. EUR38.9 

million)  in the past 6 years. Appendix I II : Data Ecosystem 

# A key enabler 

The true value of AI will not be found in, say, an algorithm or a neural network itself. 

Today, the leading algorithms are available as software packages either commercially or open source. 

Storage infrastructure and huge computing resources has become commoditi se d and easily available 

from various vendors in the market. The challenge still remains with data – access to high quality , reliable 

data along with appropriate mark -ups still remains a challenge. 

Understanding key issues related to data thus become s crucial while evolving the national AI strategy. 

Access to vast quantities of data is vital for AI to be effective. Large platform s and technology 

companies who create monolith s of high volumes of d ata have a distinct advantage compared to smaller 

companies and startup s, thus leading to a very skewed market. 

Convergence of data is another challenge, with much data being either “dark” (unstructured, not readily 

usable) or disparate (hard to combine). Organisations need to be able to converge and make sense of 

data from sources such as Internet of Things (IoT) sensors and social networks. The greater the data 

density and variety, the greater are the chances of finding “unknown unknow ns” – relationships that were 

not known to exist or were not looked for at all. 

Data a nnotation is crucial, given the requirement of tagged or annotated data required for machine 

learning or AI . In most cases, data need s to be annotated manually or in semi -automated ways for the 

purpose of machine learning, even though sometime s annotated data can be generated automatically 

from the source. Technological advancements in data annotation systems are not at a level where manual 

annotation can be replaced. 

## Box  21 : ImageNet 

The ImageNet database has led to huge advancement in the field of image recognition. The ImageNet 

database was presented for the first time as a poster at the 2009 Conference on Computer Vision and 

Pattern Recognition (CVPR) in Florida by  researchers from the Computer Science department at 

Princeton University. The ImageNet project is a large visual database designed for use in visual object 

recognition software research. Over 14 millio n URLs of images have been hand  annotated by ImageNet 

to indicate what objec ts are pictured; in at least 1  million of the images, bounding boxes are also provided. 

Im ageNet contains over 20,000  ambiguous categories; a typical category, such as "balloon" or 

"strawberry", contains several hundred images. The dat abase of annot ations of third -party image URL s

is freely available directly from ImageNet; however, the actual images are not owned by ImageNet. 

The 2010s saw dramatic progress in image processing.  In  2011, a good ILSVRC classification error rate 

was 25%.  In 2012, a deep convolutional neural net achieved 16%; in the next couple of years, err or rates 

fell to a few percent. With  the 2012 breakthrough "combined pieces that were all there before", the 

dramatic quantitative improvement  marked the start of an ind ustry  wide AI boom. By 2015, researchers 

reported that software exceeded human ability at the narrow ILSVRC tasks. However, as one of the 

challenge's organisers, Olga Russakovsky, pointed out in 2015, the programs only have to identify National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 111

images as belonging  to one of a thousand categories; humans can recogni se  a larger number of 

categories, and also (unlike the programs) can judge the context of an image. 

Overcoming issues related to data a ccess 

a) Government data sharing : Government of India has large amounts of data lying in silos across 

ministries. The g overnment can launch a mission of making all these data available for public 

good after undertaking proper privacy checks. For example – climate data, non -strategic remo te 

sensing data, regional language speech (from All India Radio), soil health data etc. 

b) Corporate data s haring : Corporates based in India may be mandated to share their data for social 

good. For example, sharing transportation pattern of individuals / mas s transits, collected by 

service providers and aggregators, can help the city planners help in planning routes, predicting 

and managing traffic. 

c) Consent based data sharing: Lot of the data about individuals are personal in nature and hence 

cannot be shared by third party who have the access to these data – like financial institutions or 

hospitals. Upon proper and informed consent from the citizen s, these anonymised data may be 

shared for the purpose of artificial intelligence and data analytics. 

d)  Digiti se d a nd crowdsourced collection of data by government : Huge amounts of money and time 

is spend every few years to carry out the household consumption survey. A mechanism, as 

adopted by online social networks, to incentivise individuals to share details of their  consumption 

pattern  via an app can greatly reduce the cost of  manual surveys and lend itself to big data 

analysis and AI applicability. 

Often AI based transformation follows as a next step to digital transformation – in that case, the data for 

the purpos e of learning exists with the organi sa tion. For example, a financial institution would have 

access to large amounts of historic customer records to develop the AI system for predictive loan defaults. 

People or organi sa tions outside the data ecosystem migh t have limited access to this data. For example, 

a new company entering in the space of rural financing would need access to huge amounts of customer 

data along with information on the default rates to develop the risk based lending model. To bridge this 

access gap, some of these datasets are made available by the research communities as shown in the 

tables below. 

Datasets for Computer Vision and Image Processing                               

> Dataset Name Dataset Size Publisher Publisher Type Country
> MNIST 60,000 United States Census
> Bureau
> Institute and
> Bureau
> USA
> CIFAR 10 & CIFAR 100 60,000 Canadian Institute for
> Advance Research
> Research
> Institute
> Canada
> ImageNet 14,000,000 Princeton University University USA
> LSUN 10,000 Princeton University University USA
> Pascal Voc 5,00,000 Oxford University University UK
> SVHN 6,00,000 Stanford University University USA
> MS COCO 2,50,000 Google, CMU, etc. Research
> Consortium
> USA
> Visual Genome 108,000 Stanford University University

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 112

Labeled Faces In The Wild  13,000  University of  Massachusetts  University  USA 

Datasets for Natural Language Processing and Text Mining 

Dataset Name  Dataset Size  Organi sa tion  Org. Type  Country 

TREC  120K -3.6M  NIST Information 

Technology Laboratory 

Research  USA 

WikiText  100 million  Salesforce  Company  USA 

Question Pairs  4,00,000  Kaggle  Company  USA 

SQuAD:  1,00,000  Stanford  University  USA 

CMU Q/A Dataset:  Carnegie Mellon  University  University  USA 

Maluuba Datasets:  120K  Microsoft  Company  USA 

Billion Words:  1 Billion  Google  Company  USA 

Common Crawl:  1.81 billion  Common Crawl  Non -Profit 

Organisation 

USA 

bAbi:  Multiple  Facebook AI Research 

(FAIR) 

Company  USA 

Stanford Sentiment 

Treebank: 

107,785  Stanford  University  USA 

20 Newsgroups:  20,000  CMU & UCI  University  USA 

Reuters  21578  AT&T Labs  Research  USA 

IMDB  25,000  Amazon  Company  USA 

UCI’s Spambase  4601  UCI  University  USA 

It is clearly evident that universities and research laboratories in the USA in particular, have been the 

leader s in sharing these datasets , which has contributed significantly in developing a strong AI research 

base in the USA . The Government of India can also play a crucial role, working with the various academic 

institutions, in making annotated India specific dat a available for advancing AI research. National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 113

# Appendix I V: What Do the Markets Say? 

# Approaches to evaluating focus sector areas 

One way of evaluating which sectors to focus on is to follow the money i.e. which sectors have seen the 

most amount of VC funding in AI space. Venture Capital funding, in a sense, is a long -term view on a 

technology / solution, given that the median time to exit for most VC investments is more than 8 years. 

The AI ecosystem is essentially based on 5 pillars: 

a) policy makers, 

b) large companies, 

c) startups, 

d) universities and 

e) multi -stakeholder partnerships. 

Taking into account this perspective as well, sectors that are most pursued by VCs could be a good proxy 

for sectors to be focused on, for well -funded startups are capable of p ushing the technology frontiers and 

bringing ambitious solutions to fruition. 

AI remains the most active industry vertical in VC funding landscape, with an aggregate total investment 

of more than USD 31 billion globally across more than 3,600 disclosed deals in past 5 years 42 . Healthcare 

has been the hottest area o f AI startup investments, with USD 2.5 billion in VC investments in last 5 years, 

much of which has been fueled by medical imaging and diagnostics compa nies. Other active healthcare 

sub -segments include clinical trials & drug discovery and insights and risk analytics. The healthcare AI 

space has also been dominated by strong public partnerships in diagnostics: nVIDIA and GE, Google 

Deep Mind and NHS, AliH ealth and AstraZeneca. 

Another way to evaluate this could be to see where the large global tech companies (Google, Apple, 

Facebook, Amazon and Microsoft, popularly termed GAFAM , as well as Alibaba and its peers Baidu, 

Tencent and Xiaomi, popularly termed BATX in China) are most invested in. Among GAFAM, looking at 

the mentions of “Machine Learning” in respective earning transcripts since 2013, Google emerges as the 

company that has been highlighting its progress in AI / ML more than others. 

Tracking Googl e’s AI / ML initiatives, it appears that the Mountain View based company is heavily 

invested in Healthcare. Indeed, GV, formerly Google Ventures, the venture capital investment arm of 

Alphabet Inc., has tripled its investments in Healthcare deals in 2017 c ompared to 2013. Google’s 

approach to using AI to tackle diseases and lifestyle management is based on three pillar approach : 

a) Data generation: digiti sa tion and consolidation of data through wearables and medical imaging 

etc.  

> 42 CB Insights: “Artificial Intelligence Trends To Watch In 2018” and “Up And Up: Healthcare AI Startups See Record Deals”

National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence 

> 114

b) Disease detection 

c) Disease / li festyle management 

Google is currently heavily focused on eye diseases (diabetic retinopathy), diabetes (detection and 

management), heart disease (including hearth condition monitoring), Parkinson’s disease and multiple 

sclerosis. Google’s AI algorithm for diabetic retinopathy, trained on 128,000 images, was on -par w ith a 

panel of ophthalmologists . Other areas that Google may be exploring include Chronic Lower Respiratory 

Disease, several types of cancer, mental and behavioral health and aging. 

Google is al so invested in powering the healthcare data infrastructure, as evident in its USD625 million 

acquisition of Apigee, which is building healthcare APIs catering to the latest health records 

interoperability protocols. Similarly, Deep Mind is building a data infrastructure to enabling building of 

apps that can analy se different data elements. Furthermore, Google is also building health data streams 

that third parties could integrate in their research. Another one of Google’s interesting foray in healthcare 

AI is developing tools for doctors that are designed to augment their expertise.
