Title: Study Details | NCT06959277 | Balance4Mobility: Effects of Walkasins Use in Individuals With Peripheral Neuropathy and Balance Problems | ClinicalTrials.gov

URL Source: https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06959277

Markdown Content:
Study Details | NCT06959277 | Balance4Mobility: Effects of Walkasins Use in Individuals With Peripheral Neuropathy and Balance Problems | ClinicalTrials.gov

===============

Hide glossary
#### Glossary

Study record managers: refer to the Data Element Definitions if submitting registration or results information.

Search for terms

*   Accepts healthy volunteers A type of eligibility criteria that indicates whether people who do not have the condition/disease being studied can participate in that clinical study. 
*   Active comparator arm An arm type in which a group of participants receives an intervention/treatment considered to be effective (or active) by health care providers. 
*   Adverse event An unfavorable change in the health of a participant, including abnormal laboratory findings, that happens during a clinical study or within a certain amount of time after the study has ended. This change may or may not be caused by the intervention/treatment being studied. 
*   Age or age group

A type of eligibility criteria that indicates the age a person must be to participate in a clinical study. This may be indicated by a specific age or the following age groups:
The age groups are:

    *   Child (birth-17)
    *   Adult (18-64)
    *   Older Adult (65+)

*   All-cause mortality A measure of all deaths, due to any cause, that occur during a clinical study. 
*   Allocation A method used to assign participants to an arm of a clinical study. The types of allocation are randomized allocation and nonrandomized. 
*   Arm A group or subgroup of participants in a clinical trial that receives a specific intervention/treatment, or no intervention, according to the trial's protocol. 
*   Arm type A general description of the clinical trial arm. It identifies the role of the intervention that participants receive. Types of arms include experimental arm, active comparator arm, placebo comparator arm, sham comparator arm, and no intervention arm. 
*   Baseline characteristics Data collected at the beginning of a clinical study for all participants and for each arm or comparison group. These data include demographics, such as age, sex/gender, race and ethnicity, and study-specific measures (for example, systolic blood pressure, prior antidepressant treatment). 
*   Canceled submission Indicates that the study sponsor or investigator recalled a submission of study results before quality control (QC) review took place. If the submission was canceled on or after May 8, 2018, the date is shown. After submission of study results, a study record cannot be modified until QC review is completed, unless the submission is canceled. 
*   Certain agreements Information required by the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007. In general, this is a description of any agreement between the sponsor of a clinical study and the principal investigator (PI) that does not allow the PI to discuss the results of the study or publish the study results in a scientific or academic journal after the study is completed. 
*   Certification A sponsor or investigator may submit a certification to delay submission of results information if they are applying for FDA approval of a new drug or device, or new use of an already approved drug or device. A sponsor or investigator who submits a certification can delay results submission up to 2 years after the certification/extension first submitted date, unless certain events occur sooner. See Delay Results Type in the Results Data Element definitions for more information about this certification. 
*   Certification/extension first posted The date on which information about a certification to delay submission of results or an extension request was first available on ClinicalTrials.gov. ClinicalTrials.gov does not indicate whether the submission was a certification or extension request. There is typically a delay between the date the study sponsor or investigator submitted the certification or extension request and the first posted date. 
*   Certification/extension first submitted The date on which the study sponsor or investigator first submitted a certification or an extension request to delay submission of results. A sponsor or investigator who submits a certification can delay results submission up to 2 years after this date, unless certain events occur sooner. There is typically a delay between the date the certification or extension request was submitted and the date the information is first available on ClinicalTrials.gov (certification/extension first posted). 
*   Certification/extension first submitted that met QC criteria The date on which the study sponsor or investigator first submitted a certification or an extension request that is consistent with National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review criteria. The sponsor or investigator may need to revise and submit a certification or extension request one or more times before NLM's QC review criteria are met. It is the responsibility of the sponsor or investigator to ensure that the study record is consistent with the NLM QC review criteria. Meeting QC criteria for an extension request does not mean that the National Institutes of Health (NIH) has determined that the request demonstrates good cause. The process for review and granting of extension requests by the NIH is being developed. 
*   Clinical study A research study involving human volunteers (also called participants) that is intended to add to medical knowledge. There are two types of clinical studies: interventional studies (also called clinical trials) and observational studies. 
*   Clinical trial Another name for an interventional study. 
*   ClinicalTrials.gov identifier (NCT number)The unique identification code given to each clinical study upon registration at ClinicalTrials.gov. The format is "NCT" followed by an 8-digit number (for example, NCT00000419). 
*   Collaborator An organization other than the sponsor that provides support for a clinical study. This support may include activities related to funding, design, implementation, data analysis, or reporting. 
*   Condition/disease The disease, disorder, syndrome, illness, or injury that is being studied. On ClinicalTrials.gov, conditions may also include other health-related issues, such as lifespan, quality of life, and health risks. 
*   Contact The name and contact information for the person who can answer enrollment questions for a clinical study. Each location where the study is being conducted may also have a specific contact, who may be better able to answer those questions. 
*   Cross-over assignment A type of intervention model describing a clinical trial in which groups of participants receive two or more interventions in a specific order. For example, two-by-two cross-over assignment involves two groups of participants. One group receives drug A during the initial phase of the trial, followed by drug B during a later phase. The other group receives drug B during the initial phase, followed by drug A. So during the trial, participants "cross over" to the other drug. All participants receive drug A and drug B at some point during the trial but in a different order, depending on the group to which they are assigned. 
*   Data Monitoring Committee (DMC)A group of independent scientists who monitor the safety and scientific integrity of a clinical trial. The DMC can recommend to the sponsor that the trial be stopped if it is not effective, is harming participants, or is unlikely to serve its scientific purpose. Members are chosen based on the scientific skills and knowledge needed to monitor the particular trial. Also called a data safety and monitoring board, or DSMB. 
*   Early Phase 1 (formerly listed as Phase 0)A phase of research used to describe exploratory trials conducted before traditional phase 1 trials to investigate how or whether a drug affects the body. They involve very limited human exposure to the drug and have no therapeutic or diagnostic goals (for example, screening studies, microdose studies). 
*   Eligibility criteria The key requirements that people who want to participate in a clinical study must meet or the characteristics they must have. Eligibility criteria consist of both inclusion criteria (which are required for a person to participate in the study) and exclusion criteria (which prevent a person from participating). Types of eligibility criteria include whether a study  accepts healthy volunteers, has age or age group requirements, or is limited by sex. 
*   Enrollment The number of participants in a clinical study. The "estimated" enrollment is the target number of participants that the researchers need for the study. 
*   Exclusion criteria A type of eligibility criteria. These are reasons that a person is not allowed to participate in a clinical study. 
*   Expanded access A way for patients with serious diseases or conditions who cannot participate in a clinical trial to gain access to a medical product that has not been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Also called compassionate use. There are different expanded access types. 
For more information, see FDA Expanded Access: Information for Patients. 
*   Expanded access status

    *   **Available:**Expanded access is currently available for this investigational treatment, and patients who are not participants in the clinical study may be able to gain access to the drug, biologic, or medical device being studied.
    *   **No longer available:**Expanded access was available for this intervention previously but is not currently available and will not be available in the future.
    *   **Temporarily not available:**Expanded access is not currently available for this intervention but is expected to be available in the future.
    *   **Approved for marketing:** The intervention has been approved by the  U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use by the public.

*   Expanded access type

Describes the category of expanded access under U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulations. There are three types of expanded access: 
    *   **Individual Patients**: Allows a single patient, with a serious disease or condition who cannot participate in a clinical trial, access to a drug or biological product that has not been approved by the FDA. This category also includes access in an emergency situation.
    *   **Intermediate-size Population**: Allows more than one patient (but generally fewer patients than through a Treatment IND/Protocol) access to a drug or biological product that has not been approved by the FDA. This type of expanded access is used when multiple patients with the same disease or condition seek access to a specific drug or biological product that has not been approved by the FDA.
    *   **Treatment IND/Protocol**: Allows a large, widespread population access to a drug or biological product that has not been approved by the FDA. This type of expanded access can only be provided if the product is already being developed for marketing for the same use as the expanded access use.

*   Experimental arm An arm type in which a group of participants receives the intervention/treatment that is the focus of the clinical trial. 
*   Extension request In certain circumstances, a sponsor or investigator may request an extension to delay the standard results submission deadline (generally one year after the primary completion date). The request for an extension must demonstrate good cause (for example, the need to preserve the scientific integrity of an ongoing masked trial). All requests must be reviewed and granted by the National Institutes of Health. This process for review and granting of extension requests is being developed. See Delay Results Type in the Results Data Element definitions for more information. 
*   Facility name The name of the hospital or institution where a clinical study takes place. Note that not all study records include this information. To use this filter, you can enter some or all of a facility name, or type a few letters and select from the list that appears. 
*   Factorial assignment A type of intervention model describing a clinical trial in which groups of participants receive one of several combinations of interventions. For example, two-by-two factorial assignment involves four groups of participants. Each group receives one of the following pairs of interventions: (1) drug A and drug B, (2) drug A and a placebo, (3) a placebo and drug B, or (4) a placebo and a placebo. So during the trial, all possible combinations of the two drugs (A and B) and the placebos are given to different groups of participants. 
*   FDAAA 801 Violations

A FDAAA 801 Violation is shown on a study record when the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued a Notice of Noncompliance to the responsible party of an applicable clinical trial. A Notice of Noncompliance indicates that the FDA has determined the responsible party was not in compliance with the registration or results reporting requirements for the clinical trial under the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007, Section 801 (FDAAA 801).
The National Library of Medicine (NLM) is required by FDAAA 801 to add information to a study record about any FDAAA 801 Violation. This information is provided by the FDA. There are three categories of information that may be included:

    *   Violation: Shown when the FDA issues a Notice of Noncompliance and posts the Notice of Noncompliance on its designated webpage. There are three types of violations:
        *   Failure to submit required clinical trial information
        *   Submission of false or misleading clinical trial information
        *   Failure to submit primary and secondary outcomes

    *   Correction: Shown when the FDA confirms that the responsible party has updated the study record to correct the violation and posts the correction notice on its designated webpage. Because of the time for FDA review and processing, there may be a delay between the date when the study record was updated and the addition of correction information to the FDAAA 801 Violation information. 
    *   Penalty: Shown when the FDA imposes a penalty for the violation and posts the penalty notice on its designated webpage.

*   First posted The date on which the study record was first available on ClinicalTrials.gov after National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review has concluded. There is typically a delay of a few days between the date the study sponsor or investigator submitted the study record and the first posted date. 
*   First submitted The date on which the study sponsor or investigator first submitted a study record to ClinicalTrials.gov. There is typically a delay of a few days between the first submitted date and the record's availability on ClinicalTrials.gov (the first posted date). 
*   First submitted that met QC criteria The date on which the study sponsor or investigator first submits a study record that is consistent with National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review criteria. The sponsor or investigator may need to revise and submit a study record one or more times before NLM's QC review criteria are met. It is the responsibility of the sponsor or investigator to ensure that the study record is consistent with the NLM QC review criteria. 
*   Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007, Section 801 (FDAAA 801)U.S. Public Law 110-85, which was enacted on September 27, 2007. Section 801 of FDAAA amends Section 402 of the U.S. Public Health Service Act to expand ClinicalTrials.gov and create a clinical study results database. For more information on FDAAA 801, see the Clinical Trial Reporting Requirements page on this site. 
*   Funder type

Describes the organization that provides funding or support for a clinical study. This support may include activities related to funding, design, implementation, data analysis, or reporting. Organizations listed as sponsors and collaborators for a study are considered the funders of the study. ClinicalTrials.gov refers to four types of funders: 
    *   U.S. National Institutes of Health
    *   Other U.S. Federal agencies (for example, Food and Drug Administration, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs)
    *   Industry (for example: pharmaceutical and device companies)
    *   All others (including individuals, universities, and community-based organizations)

*   Gender-based eligibility A type of eligibility criteria that indicates whether eligibility to participate in a clinical study is based on a person's self-representation of gender identity. Gender identity refers to a person's own sense of gender, which may or may not be the same as their biological sex. 
*   Group/cohort A group or subgroup of participants in an observational study that is assessed for biomedical or health outcomes. 
*   Human subjects protection review board A group of people who review, approve, and monitor the clinical study's protocol. Their role is to protect the rights and welfare of people participating in a study (referred to as human research subjects), such as reviewing the informed consent form. The group typically includes people with varying backgrounds, including a community member, to make sure that research activities conducted by an organization are completely and adequately reviewed. Also called an institutional review board, or IRB, or an ethics committee.
For more information, see Who can join clinical research? on this site. 
*   Inclusion criteria A type of eligibility criteria. These are the reasons that a person is allowed to participate in a clinical study. 
*   Informed consent A process used by researchers to communicate to potential and enrolled participants the risks and potential benefits of participating in a clinical study. 
For more information, see Who can join clinical research? on this site. 
*   Informed consent form (ICF)The document used in the informed consent or process. 
*   Intervention model The general design of the strategy for assigning interventions to participants in a clinical study. Types of intervention models include: single group assignment, parallel assignment, cross-over assignment, and factorial assignment. 
*   Intervention/treatment A process or action that is the focus of a clinical study. Interventions include drugs, medical devices, procedures, vaccines, and other products that are either investigational or already available. Interventions can also include noninvasive approaches, such as education or modifying diet and exercise. 
*   Interventional study (clinical trial)A type of clinical study in which participants are assigned to groups that receive one or more intervention/treatment (or no intervention) so that researchers can evaluate the effects of the interventions on biomedical or health-related outcomes. The assignments are determined by the study's protocol. Participants may receive diagnostic, therapeutic, or other types of interventions. 
*   Investigator A researcher involved in a clinical study. Related terms include site principal investigator, site sub-investigator, study chair, study director, and study principal investigator. 
*   Last update posted The most recent date on which changes to a study record were made available on ClinicalTrials.gov. There may be a delay between when the changes were submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov by the study's sponsor or investigator (the last update submitted date) and the last update posted date. 
*   Last update submitted The most recent date on which the study sponsor or investigator submitted changes to a study record to ClinicalTrials.gov. There is typically a delay of a few days between the last update submitted date and when the date changes are posted on ClinicalTrials.gov (the last update posted date). 
*   Last update submitted that met QC criteria The most recent date on which the study sponsor or investigator submitted changes to a study record that are consistent with National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review criteria. It is the responsibility of the sponsor or investigator to ensure that the study record is consistent with the NLM QC review criteria. 
*   Last verified The most recent date on which the study sponsor or investigator confirmed the information about a clinical study on ClinicalTrials.gov as accurate and current. If a study with a recruitment status of recruiting; not yet recruiting; or active, not recruiting has not been confirmed within the past 2 years, the study's recruitment status is shown as unknown. 
*   Location A place where a research site for a clinical study can be found. Location information can be searched using a facility name, a city, state, zip code, or country. A location where a study is being conducted may also include contact information.  
*   Location countries Countries in which research facilities for a study are located. A country is listed only once, even if there is more than one facility in the country. The list includes all countries as of the last update submitted date; any country for which all facilities were removed from the study record are listed under removed location countries. 
*   Masking A clinical trial design strategy in which one or more parties involved in the trial, such as the investigator or participants, do not know which participants have been assigned which interventions. Types of masking include: open label, single blind masking, and double-blind masking. 
*   NCT number A unique identification code given to each clinical study record registered on ClinicalTrials.gov. The format is "NCT" followed by an 8-digit number (for example, NCT00000419). Also called the ClinicalTrials.gov identifier. 
*   No intervention arm An arm type in which a group of participants does not receive any intervention/treatment during the clinical trial. 
*   Observational study A type of clinical study in which participants are identified as belonging to study groups and are assessed for biomedical or health outcomes. Participants may receive diagnostic, therapeutic, or other types of interventions, but the investigator does not assign participants to a specific interventions/treatment.
A patient registry is a type of observational study. 
*   Observational study model The general design of the strategy for identifying and following up with participants during an observational study. Types of observational study models include cohort, case-control, case-only, case-cross-over, ecologic or community studies, family-based, and other. 
*   Other adverse event An adverse event that is not a serious adverse event, meaning that it does not result in death, is not life-threatening, does not require inpatient hospitalization or extend a current hospital stay, does not result in an ongoing or significant incapacity or interfere substantially with normal life functions, and does not cause a congenital anomaly or birth defect; it also does not put the participant in danger and does not require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the results listed above. 
*   Other study IDs Identifiers or ID numbers other than the NCT number that are assigned to a clinical study by the study's sponsor, funders, or others. These numbers may include unique identifiers from other trial registries and National Institutes of Health grant numbers. 
*   Other terms In the search feature, the Other terms field is used to narrow a search. For example, you may enter the name of a drug or the NCT number of a clinical study to limit the search to study records that contain these words. 
*   Outcome measure For clinical trials, a planned measurement described in the protocol that is used to determine the effect of an intervention/treatment on participants. For observational studies, a measurement or observation that is used to describe patterns of diseases or traits, or associations with exposures, risk factors, or treatment. Types of outcome measures include primary outcome measure and secondary outcome measure. 
*   Parallel assignment A type of intervention model describing a clinical trial in which two or more groups of participants receive different interventions. For example, a two-arm parallel assignment involves two groups of participants. One group receives drug A, and the other group receives drug B. So during the trial, participants in one group receive drug A "in parallel" to participants in the other group, who receive drug B. 
*   Participant flow A summary of the progress of participants through each stage of a clinical study, by study arm or group/cohort. This includes the number of participants who started, completed, and dropped out of the study. 
*   Patient registry A type of observational study that collects information about patients' medical conditions and/or treatments to better understand how a condition or treatment affects patients in the real world. 
*   Phase The stage of a clinical trial studying a drug or biological product, based on definitions developed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The phase is based on the study's objective, the number of participants, and other characteristics. There are five phases: Early Phase 1 (formerly listed as Phase 0), Phase 1, Phase 2, Phase 3, and Phase 4. Not Applicable is used to describe trials without FDA-defined phases, including trials of devices or behavioral interventions. 
*   Phase 1 A phase of research to describe clinical trials that focus on the safety of a drug. They are usually conducted with healthy volunteers, and the goal is to determine the drug's most frequent and serious adverse events and, often, how the drug is broken down and excreted by the body. These trials usually involve a small number of participants. 
*   Phase 2 A phase of research to describe clinical trials that gather preliminary data on whether a drug works in people who have a certain condition/disease (that is, the drug's effectiveness). For example, participants receiving the drug may be compared to similar participants receiving a different treatment, usually an inactive substance (called a placebo) or a different drug. Safety continues to be evaluated, and short-term adverse events are studied. 
*   Phase 3 A phase of research to describe clinical trials that gather more information about a drug's safety and effectiveness by studying different populations and different dosages and by using the drug in combination with other drugs. These studies typically involve more participants. 
*   Phase 4 A phase of research to describe clinical trials occurring after FDA has approved a drug for marketing. They include postmarket requirement and commitment studies that are required of or agreed to by the study sponsor. These trials gather additional information about a drug's safety, efficacy, or optimal use. 
*   Phase Not Applicable Describes trials without FDA-defined phases, including trials of devices or behavioral interventions. 
*   Placebo An inactive substance or treatment that looks the same as, and is given in the same way as, an active drug or intervention/treatment being studied. 
*   Placebo comparator arm An arm type in which a group of participants receives a placebo during a clinical trial. 
*   Primary completion date The date on which the last participant in a clinical study was examined or received an intervention to collect final data for the primary outcome measure. Whether the clinical study ended according to the protocol or was terminated does not affect this date. For clinical studies with more than one primary outcome measure with different completion dates, this term refers to the date on which data collection is completed for all the primary outcome measures. The "estimated" primary completion date is the date that the researchers think will be the primary completion date for the study.  
*   Primary outcome measure In a clinical study's protocol, the planned outcome measure that is the most important for evaluating the effect of an intervention/treatment. Most clinical studies have one primary outcome measure, but some have more than one. 
*   Primary purpose The main reason for the clinical trial. The types of primary purpose are: treatment, prevention, diagnostic, supportive care, screening, health services research, basic science, and other. 
*   Principal investigator (PI)The person who is responsible for the scientific and technical direction of the entire clinical study. 
*   Protocol The written description of a clinical study. It includes the study's objectives, design, and methods. It may also include relevant scientific background and statistical information. 
*   Quality control (QC) review National Library of Medicine (NLM) staff perform a limited review of submitted study records for apparent errors, deficiencies, or inconsistencies. NLM staff identify potential major and advisory issues and provide comments directly to the study sponsor or investigator. Major issues identified in QC review must be addressed or corrected (see First submitted that met QC criteria and Results first submitted that met QC criteria). Advisory issues are suggestions to help improve the clarity of the record. NLM staff do not verify the scientific validity or relevance of the submitted information. The study sponsor or investigator is responsible for ensuring that the studies follow all applicable laws and regulations. 
*   Randomized allocation A type of allocation strategy in which participants are assigned to the arms of a clinical trial by chance. 
*   Recruitment status

    *   **Not yet recruiting:** The study has not started recruiting participants.
    *   **Recruiting:** The study is currently recruiting participants.
    *   **Enrolling by invitation:** The study is selecting its participants from a population, or group of people, decided on by the researchers in advance. These studies are not open to everyone who meets the eligibility criteria but only to people in that particular population, who are specifically invited to participate.
    *   **Active, not recruiting:** The study is ongoing, and participants are receiving an intervention or being examined, but potential participants are not currently being recruited or enrolled.
    *   **Suspended:** The study has stopped early but may start again.
    *   **Terminated:** The study has stopped early and will not start again. Participants are no longer being examined or treated.
    *   **Completed:** The study has ended normally, and participants are no longer being examined or treated (that is, the last participant's last visit has occurred).
    *   **Withdrawn:** The study stopped early, before enrolling its first participant.
    *   **Unknown:** A study on ClinicalTrials.gov whose last known status was recruiting; not yet recruiting; or active, not recruiting but that has passed its completion date, and the status has not been last verified within the past 2 years.

*   Registration The process of submitting and updating summary information about a clinical study and its protocol, from its beginning to end, to a structured, public Web-based study registry that is accessible to the public, such as ClinicalTrials.gov. 
*   Removed location countries Countries that appeared under location countries but were removed from the study record by the sponsor or investigator. 
*   Reporting group A grouping of participants in a clinical study that is used for summarizing the data collected during the study. This grouping may be the same as or different from a study arm or group. 
*   Responsible party The person responsible for submitting information about a clinical study to ClinicalTrials.gov and updating that information. Usually the study sponsor or investigator. 
*   Results database A structured online system, such as the ClinicalTrials.gov results database, that provides the public with access to registration and summary results information for completed or terminated clinical studies. A study with results available on ClinicalTrials.gov is described as having the results "posted." 
**Note:** The ClinicalTrials.gov results database became available in September 2008. Older studies are unlikely to have results available in the database. 
*   Results delayed Indicates that the sponsor or investigator submitted a certification or extension request. 
*   Results first posted The date on which summary results information was first available on ClinicalTrials.gov after National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review has concluded. There is typically a delay between the date the study sponsor or investigator first submits summary results information (the results first submitted date) and the results first posted date. Some results information may be available at an earlier date if Results First Posted with QC Comments. 
*   Results first posted with QC comments The date on which summary results information was first available on ClinicalTrials.gov with quality control review comments from the National Library of Medicine (NLM) identifying major issues that must be addressed by the sponsor or investigator. As of January 1, 2020, initial results submissions for applicable clinical trials (ACTs) that do not meet quality control review criteria will be publicly posted on ClinicalTrials.gov with brief standardized major comments. Accordingly, the Results First Posted with QC Comments date may be earlier than the Results First Posted date for an ACT with summary results information that is not consistent with NLM quality control review criteria. 
*   Results first submitted The date on which the study sponsor or investigator first submits a study record with summary results information. There is typically a delay between the results first submitted date and when summary results information becomes available on ClinicalTrials.gov (the results first posted date). 
*   Results first submitted that met QC criteria The date on which the study sponsor or investigator first submits a study record with summary results information that is consistent with National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review criteria. The sponsor or investigator may need to revise and submit results information one or more times before NLM's QC review criteria are met. It is the responsibility of the sponsor or investigator to ensure that the study record is consistent with the NLM QC review criteria. 
*   Results returned after quality control review The date on which the National Library of Medicine provided quality control (QC) review comments to the study sponsor or investigator. The sponsor or investigator must address major issues identified in the review comments. If there is a date listed for results returned after quality control review, but there is not a subsequent date listed for results submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov, this means that the submission is pending changes by the sponsor or investigator. 
*   Results submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov Indicates that the study sponsor or investigator has submitted summary results information for a clinical study to ClinicalTrials.gov but the quality control (QC) review process has not concluded.
The results submitted date indicates when the study sponsor or investigator first submitted summary results information or submitted changes to summary results information. Submissions with changes are typically in response to QC review comments from the National Library of Medicine (NLM). If there is a date listed for results submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov, but there is not a subsequent date listed for results returned after quality control review, this means that the submission is pending review by NLM. 
*   Secondary outcome measure In a clinical study's protocol, a planned outcome measure that is not as important as the primary outcome measure for evaluating the effect of an intervention but is still of interest. Most clinical studies have more than one secondary outcome measure. 
*   Serious adverse event An adverse event that results in death, is life-threatening, requires inpatient hospitalization or extends a current hospital stay, results in an ongoing or significant incapacity or interferes substantially with normal life functions, or causes a congenital anomaly or birth defect. Medical events that do not result in death, are not life-threatening, or do not require hospitalization may be considered serious adverse events if they put the participant in danger or require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the results listed above. 
*   Sex A type of eligibility criteria that indicates the sex of people who may participate in a clinical study (all, female, male). Sex is a person's classification as female or male based on biological distinctions. Sex is distinct from gender-based eligibility. 
*   Sham comparator arm An arm type in which a group of participants receives a procedure or device that appears to be the same as the actual procedure or device being studied but does not contain active processes or components. 
*   Single group assignment A type of intervention model describing a clinical trial in which all participants receive the same intervention/treatment. 
*   Sort studies by

The Sort studies by option is used to change the order of studies listed on the Search Results page. You can sort by Relevance or Newest First: 
    *   Relevance: Studies that best match your search terms appear higher in the search results list. This is the default display for all searches.
    *   Newest First: Studies with the most recent First posted dates appear higher in the search results list.

*   Sponsor The organization or person who initiates the study and who has authority and control over the study. 
*   Statistical analysis plan (SAP)The written description of the statistical considerations and methods for analyzing the data collected in the clinical study. 
*   Status Indicates the current recruitment status or the expanded access status. 
*   Study completion date The date on which the last participant in a clinical study was examined or received an intervention/treatment to collect final data for the primary outcome measures, secondary outcome measures, and adverse events (that is, the last participant's last visit). The "estimated" study completion date is the date that the researchers think will be the study completion date. 
*   Study design The investigative methods and strategies used in the clinical study. 
*   Study documents Refers to the type of documents that the study sponsor or principal investigator may add to their study record. These include a study protocol, statistical analysis plan, and informed consent form. 
*   Study IDs Identifiers that are assigned to a clinical study by the study's sponsor, funders, or others. They include unique identifiers from other trial study registries and National Institutes of Health grant numbers. Note: ClinicalTrials.gov assigns a unique identification code to each clinical study registered on ClinicalTrials.gov. Also called the NCT number, the format is "NCT" followed by an 8-digit number (for example, NCT00000419). 
*   Study record An entry on ClinicalTrials.gov that contains a summary of a clinical study's protocol information, including the recruitment status; eligibility criteria; contact information; and, in some cases, summary results. Each study record is assigned a ClinicalTrials.gov identifier, or NCT number. 
*   Study registry A structured online system, such as ClinicalTrials.gov, that provides the public with access to summary information about ongoing and completed clinical studies. 
*   Study results A study record that includes the summary results posted in the ClinicalTrials.gov results database. Summary results information includes participant flow, baseline characteristics, outcome measures, and adverse events (including serious adverse events). 
*   Study start date The actual date on which the first participant was enrolled in a clinical study. The "estimated" study start date is the date that the researchers think will be the study start date. 
*   Study type Describes the nature of a clinical study. Study types include interventional studies (also called clinical trials), observational studies (including patient registries), and expanded access. 
*   Submitted date The date on which the study sponsor or investigator submitted a study record that is consistent with National Library of Medicine (NLM) quality control (QC) review criteria. 
*   Title The official title of a protocol used to identify a clinical study or a short title written in language intended for the lay public. 
*   Title acronym The acronym or initials used to identify a clinical study (not all studies have one). For example, the title acronym for the Women's Health Initiative is "WHI." 
*   Type of intervention A process or action that is the focus of a clinical study. Interventions include drugs, medical devices, procedures, vaccines, and other products that are either investigational or already available. Interventions can also include noninvasive approaches, such as education or modifying diet and exercise. 
*   U.S. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)An agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. AHRQ's mission is to produce evidence to make health care safer, higher quality, more accessible, equitable, and affordable, and to work within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and with other partners to make sure that the evidence is understood and used. 
*   U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)An agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The FDA is responsible for protecting the public health by making sure that human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products, medical devices, the Nation's food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, and products that give off radiation are safe, effective, and secure. 
*   Unknown A type of recruitment status. It identifies a study on ClinicalTrials.gov whose last known status was recruiting; not yet recruiting; or active, not recruiting but that has passed its completion date, and the status has not been verified within the past 2 years. Studies with an unknown status are considered closed studies. 

An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know

Here’s how you know

**Official websites use .gov**

A **.gov** website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.

**Secure .gov websites use HTTPS**

A **lock** ( ) or **https://** means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.

Skip to main page content

### Notice

Because of a lapse in government funding, the information on this website may not be up to date, transactions submitted via the website may not be processed, and the agency may not be able to respond to inquiries until appropriations are enacted. The NIH Clinical Center (the research hospital of NIH) is open. For more details about its operating status, please visit cc.nih.gov. Updates regarding government operating status and resumption of normal operations can be found at opm.gov.

 PRS Login 

 Menu 

*   Find Studies
    *   Expert Search
    *   How to Search
    *   How to Use Search Results
    *   How to Search for Studies with Results
    *   Constructing Complex Search Queries
    *   RSS Feeds

*   Study Basics
    *   Learn About Studies
    *   How to Read a Study Record
    *   How to Read Study Results
    *   Glossary
    *   Patient Resources

*   Submit Studies
    *   PRS Accounts
    *   PRS Help Resources

*   Data and API
    *   ClinicalTrials.gov API
    *   About the API
    *   How to Download Study Records
    *   Access Data in FHIR

*   Policy
    *   FAQs
    *   Clinical Trial Reporting Requirements
    *   FDAAA 801 and the Final Rule
    *   Protocol Registration Definitions
    *   Results Definitions
    *   Expanded Access Definitions

*   About
    *   News and Updates
    *   About ClinicalTrials.gov
    *   Trends and Charts
    *   Modernization
    *   Modernization Top Questions
    *   Selected Publications
    *   Release Notes
    *   Disclaimer
    *   Terms and Conditions
    *   Linking to This Site
    *   Accessibility

*   My Saved Studies (0)

1.   Home
2.   Search Results
3.   Study Record

The U.S. government does not review or approve the safety and science of all studies listed on this website.

Read our full  for details.

ClinicalTrials.gov is a website and online database of clinical research studies and information about their results. The National Library of Medicine (NLM) maintains the website. **The study sponsor or investigator submits information** about their study to ClinicalTrials.gov and **is responsible for the safety, science, and accuracy** of any study they list.

Before joining a study, talk to your health care professional about possible risks and benefits. To learn more about taking part in studies, read .

ClinicalTrials.gov ID 

Sponsor 

Information provided by 

Last Update Posted 

What would you like to download?
--------------------------------

File Format

Study Details Researcher View No Results Posted Record History

On this page

Study Overview

Contacts and Locations

Participation Criteria

Study Plan

Collaborators and Investigators

Publications

Study Record Dates

More Information

Study Overview
--------------

Contacts and Locations
----------------------

This section provides contact details for people who can answer questions about joining this study, and information on where this study is taking place.

To learn more, please see the .

Participation Criteria
----------------------

Researchers look for people who fit a certain description, called eligibility criteria. Some examples of these criteria are a person's general health condition or prior treatments.

 For general information about clinical research, read Learn About Studies(https://clinicaltrials.gov/study-basics/learn-about-studies).

Eligibility Criteria

Description

Inclusion Criteria:

*   Able to understand and provide informed consent for him or herself
*   Age 55 and older, male or female
*   Able to complete all functional outcome measures without the use of an assistive device
*   Clinical diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy prior to participating in the study as documented in the participant's medical record or by physician's note. Individuals with chemo-induced peripheral neuropathy must be at least one-year post-chemotherapy, indicating that their PN has become a chronic condition.
*   Self-reported gait and balance problems
*   Foot size that allows the Walkasins to function appropriately
*   Willing to use the Walkasins device as recommended

Exclusion Criteria:

*   Ability to stand on one leg for at least 30 seconds (If the person can stand for at least 30 seconds, he/she is excluded because his/her balance is likely not impaired enough to benefit from Walkasins.)
*   Self-reported acute thrombophlebitis, including deep vein thrombosis
*   Self-reported severe peripheral vascular disease
*   Untreated lymphedema
*   Untreated lesion of any kind, swelling, infection, inflamed area of skin or eruptions on the lower leg near product use
*   Self-reported, untreated fractures in the foot and ankle
*   Other neurological or musculoskeletal conditions that moderately or severely impact walking
*   Use of ankle-foot orthosis for ambulation that prevents donning of Walkasins
*   Weight of more than 300 pounds
*   Inability to perceive vibration from Walkasins Haptic Module

Ages Eligible for Study 

55 Years and older (Adult,Older Adult) 

Sexes Eligible for Study 

All

Accepts Healthy Volunteers 

No

Study Plan
----------

This section provides details of the study plan, including how the study is designed and what the study is measuring.

Expand all / Collapse all

 How is the study designed? 

Design Details

**Primary Purpose  :**Treatment

**Allocation  :**Randomized

**Interventional Model  :**Parallel Assignment

**Interventional Model Description:**Control group participants will receive Walkasins after six months of taking part in the trial.

**Masking  :**None (Open Label)

Arms and Interventions

| Participant Group/Arm | Intervention/Treatment |
| --- | --- |
| Participant Group/Arm | Experimental: Walkasins User Group Participants randomized to the user group will receive Walkasins, consisting of two parts for each leg: the Haptic Module and the Receptor Sole. They will use the device for one year (52 weeks). In addition, the user group participants will receive the fall prevention information provided to the control group. | Intervention/Treatment | Device: Walkasins * Walkasins® is an external, lower limb sensory prosthesis intended to replace part of the nerve function used for detection and signaling of foot pressure sensation during standing and walking activities. Walkasins consist of two parts for each leg: the Haptic Module and the Receptor Sole. The Haptic Module wraps around the lower leg of the user and contains electronics for reading Receptor Sole pressure signals, a microprocessor, and four vibrating motors that provide gentle tactile sensory cues to the front, back, medial, and lateral surfaces of the user's leg. These cues reflect real-time foot pressure information at a location above the ankle where skin sensation is still present. Other: Fall Prevention Training * Participants will watch "6 Steps to Prevent a Fall," a short (2 minute) educational video from the National Council on Aging, which describes simple steps to reduce fall risk. To improve their access to the education provided, participants will also receive three handouts, produced by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) STEADI initiative (Stopping Elderly Accidents, Deaths, and Injuries), to review after the study visit. The STEADI Initiative is a coordinated approach for healthcare providers to implement the American and British Geriatrics Societies' Clinical Practice Guideline for fall prevention (https://www.cdc.gov/steadi/index.html). |
| Participant Group/Arm | Other: Control Group Participants randomized to the control group will receive fall prevention information during the baseline visit. After six months, they will receive Walkasins for use during the final six months of the trial. | Intervention/Treatment | Other: Fall Prevention Training * Participants will watch "6 Steps to Prevent a Fall," a short (2 minute) educational video from the National Council on Aging, which describes simple steps to reduce fall risk. To improve their access to the education provided, participants will also receive three handouts, produced by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) STEADI initiative (Stopping Elderly Accidents, Deaths, and Injuries), to review after the study visit. The STEADI Initiative is a coordinated approach for healthcare providers to implement the American and British Geriatrics Societies' Clinical Practice Guideline for fall prevention (https://www.cdc.gov/steadi/index.html). |

 What is the study measuring? 

 Primary Outcome Measures 

| Outcome Measure | Measure Description | Time Frame |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Functional Gait Assessment (FGA) | The Functional Gait Assessment (FGA) is a 10-item scale that measures postural stability while individuals perform walking tasks that are scored from 0 to 3 (3 = normal, 2 = mild impairment, 1 = moderate impairment, 0 = severe impairment). Scores range from a minimum of 0 to a maximum of 30. Higher scores indicate better postural stability. | Baseline, Week 10, Week 26, Week 36 (Control Group), and Week 52 |
| Patient-Specific Functional Scale (PSFS) | The PSFS asks patients to define up to five specific tasks that they have difficulty with or are unable to perform because of their physical injury or disability. Some research studies adapt the PSFS by asking participants to list three tasks rather than five, which is the plan for this study. The patients then rate their difficulty in performing those tasks on a scale of 0 to 10 with 0 meaning "unable to perform activity" to 10 meaning "able to perform activity at the same level as before injury or problem." The ratings for the three activities are averaged. Higher scores indicate greater ability to perform the activity. | Baseline, Week 5, Week 10, Week 18, Week 26, Week 31, Week 36, Week 41, Week 46, and Week 52 |
| PROMIS® PROWalk | Eight items that have the most relevance for measuring change in individuals who have received Walkasins were selected from the 165 items comprising the PROMIS Item Bank v2.0 - Physical Function. Specifically, the selected items measure an individual's ability to perform various activities that involve upright mobility (balance, standing, and walking). Participants rate the eight items on a scale of 1 to 5; the raw scores are converted to T-scores for comparison to national norms. | Baseline, Week 5, Week 10, Week 18, Week 26, Week 31, Week 36, Week 41, Week 46, and Week 52 |

 Secondary Outcome Measures 

| Outcome Measure | Measure Description | Time Frame |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 10-Meter Walk Test | Gait speed will be measured through the 10-Meter Walk Test, timing only the middle 6 meters to allow for acceleration and deceleration. Participants will be instructed to walk at normal speed. Higher numbers indicate faster speeds (i.e., more meters per second). | Baseline, Week 10, Week 26, Week 36 (Control Group), and Week 52 |
| Four-Stage Balance Test | The 4-Stage Balance Test is part of the Centers for Disease Control's recommended test protocol for balance function. It includes four gradually more challenging postures the subject is exposed to: (1) Stand with feet side by side. (2) Stand with feet in semi-tandem stance. (3) Stand with feet in tandem stance. (4) Stand on one leg. Participants pass each level if they can hold the stance for 10 seconds and then move on to the next stance. If they cannot hold the stance, the test ends. Higher times indicate better balance than lower times. | Baseline, Week 10, Week 26, Week 36 (Control Group), and Week 52 |
| Modified Multidirectional Reach Test | The Multidirectional Reach Test is a quick screening tool for fall risk to indirectly measure the limits of stability. The participant outstretches his/her arm to shoulder height next to a yardstick mounted on the wall; then he/she reaches as far as possible in the instructed direction without taking a step. The test administrator records the start and end position of the index finger of the outstretched hand, and the difference represents the total reach for that direction. Higher differences indicate better stability. The Modified Multidirectional Reach Test used in this clinical trial will include only forward and backwards reaching that is completed and recorded with eyes closed. It will omit the left and right reaches. | Baseline, Week 10, Week 26, Week 36 (Control Group), Week 52 |
| Single Leg Stance Test | The Single Leg Stance Test (also called the unipedal stance test) "is a simple test for measuring static aspects of balance." It "is related to conditions such as peripheral neuropathy and intermittent claudication" and "is also associated with an increased risk for falls" (Spring et al., 2007) Participants stand unassisted on one leg with their hands on their hips. Timing begins when they lift one leg off the floor and ends when it touches the ground or the standing leg or an arm leaves the hips | Baseline, Week 26 |
| Timed Up and Go (TUG) and Timed Up and Go Cognitive/Dual Task (TUG-COG) | The Timed Up and Go Test is part of the Centers for Disease Control (CDC)-recommended STEADI test protocol for balance function. From a seated position in a standard armchair, the participant is asked to stand up from the chair, walk to a line on the floor 10 feet away at normal pace, turn, walk back to the chair at normal pace, and sit down again. The tester records the time taken from the command "Go" until the subject sits down again. Lower times indicate better/faster performance. The TUG-Cog is performed as described above; in addition, the participant is asked to count backwards by threes from a randomly selected number between 20 and 100. Lower times indicate better/faster performance. | Baseline, Week 10, Week 26, Week 36 (Control Group), Week 52 |
| Activities-specific Balance Confidence Scale 6 (ABC-6) | Powell and Myers developed the 16-item Activities-specific Balance Confidence (ABC) Scale to detect levels of balance confidence in older adults. Schepens et al. (2009) validated a 6-item version of the ABC, using the six most challenging activities from the 16-item scale. The six tasks are rated on a scale of 0 to 100; a score of 0 indicates no confidence and a score of 100 indicates complete confidence when performing the task. The overall score is calculated by adding the individual items then dividing by the total number of items (6). The higher the score, the greater the person's balance confidence; thus, higher scores indicate that subjects are more confident of their balance. | Baseline, Week 5, Week 10, Week 18, Week 26, Week 31, Week 36, Week 41, Week 46, and Week 52 |
| EuroQol HRQoL (EQ-5D-5L) | The EQ-5D-5L consists of five questions, one each on "mobility," "self-care," "usual activities," "pain / discomfort," and "anxiety / depression." Participants rate themselves according to statements reflecting five levels ranging from no problems with the activity or construct to inability to perform the activity or having an extreme amount of difficulty with the construct. | Baseline, Week 10, Week 26, Week 36, and Week 52 |
| PROMIS® Scale v2.0 - Pain Intensity 3a and Neuropathic Foot Pain Rating | The PROMIS Pain Intensity assessment measures "how much a person hurts" (https://www.healthmeasures.net/images/PROMIS/manuals/PROMIS_Pain_Intensity_Scoring_Manual.pdf). The three questions are not disease specific. Two items address pain experienced in the past seven days; the other, pain at present. In addition, we will ask participants to rate the neuropathic pain in their feet on scale of 0-10 (0 = No Pain, 10 = Worst Pain Imaginable). | Baseline, Week 10, Week 26, Week 36, Week 52 |
| Rapid Assessment of Physical Activity (RAPA) and Telephone Assessment of Physical Activity (TAPA) | The Rapid Assessment of Physical Activity (RAPA) is a measure of physical activity, designed for use with older adults. The researchers will administer the RAPA during in-person visits and the TAPA, a telephone-based assessment of physical activity based on the RAPA, during the Weeks 18 and 36 telephone visits. The assessments consist of seven questions on light, moderate, and vigorous physical (aerobic) activities to which the participants respond "yes" or "no," depending on whether or not the question is true of them. Scoring is based on the number of the item to which the participants report the highest positive response (e.g., if the participant answered "Yes" to question 4 and "No" to 5, 6, and 7, then "4" is the participant's score). Higher scores indicate more physical activity. The final two items address strength and flexibility and are scored separately. | Baseline, Week 10, Week 18, Week 26, Week 36, and Week 52 |
| Walkasins Experience Survey | At the follow-up visits, the study team will ask the participants assigned to the Walkasins user group specific questions about their experience with Walkasins. Control group participants will complete the survey at Weeks 36 and 52. | Baseline, Week 10, Week 26, Week 36 (Control Group), and Week 52 |

Other Outcome Measures 

| Outcome Measure | Measure Description | Time Frame |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Falls Monitoring | Participants will report details regarding falls they experience during their enrollment in the study. | Week 5, Week 10, Week 18, Week 26, Week 31, Week 36, Week 41, Week 46, and Week 52 |
| Monofilament Test | The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) identifies the monofilament test as the means of diagnosing loss of protective sensation (https://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/view/ncd.aspx?NCDId=171). To conduct the test, a clinician applies pressure with various sizes of monofilament to selected parts of the foot and asks the participant to indicate when he/she feels the filament. Including catch trials helps to ensure accurate test results. Per CMS, inability to feel a 10-gram monofilament on at least two of five test sites on either foot indicates loss of protective sensation (LOPS). | Baseline, Week 26, and Week 52 |
| Vibration Test | Vibration is one of several types of sensation encompassed within the somatosensory system, and it is often diminished in individuals with neuropathy. To examine vibration sense, a clinician applies a low-frequency (128 Hz) tuning fork to bony prominences and asks the participant (with closed eyes) to report when the vibration starts and stops. For this study, site personnel will employ the Rydel-Seiffer tuning fork, which provides a more quantitative assessment of vibratory sensation ranging from 2 to 8. | Baseline, Week 26, and Week 52 |

Collaborators and Investigators
-------------------------------

This is where you will find people and organizations involved with this study. 

Sponsor 

RxFunction Inc.

Investigators 

*   Study Director:Lars Oddsson, PhD,RxFunction Inc. 

Publications
------------

General

These publications are provided voluntarily by the person who enters information about the study and may be about anything related to the study.

*   Hsu CL, Manor B, Iloputaife I, Oddsson LIE, Lipsitz L. Six month lower-leg mechanical tactile sensory stimulation alters functional network connectivity associated with improved gait in older adults with peripheral neuropathy - A pilot study. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Nov 3;14:1027242. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.1027242. eCollection 2022.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36408098)
*   Koehler-McNicholas SR, Danzl L, Cataldo AY, Oddsson LIE. Neuromodulation to improve gait and balance function using a sensory neuroprosthesis in people who report insensate feet - A randomized control cross-over study. PLoS One. 2019 Apr 30;14(4):e0216212. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0216212. eCollection 2019.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31039180)
*   Oddsson LIE, Bisson T, Cohen HS, Iloputaife I, Jacobs L, Kung D, Lipsitz LA, Manor B, McCracken P, Rumsey Y, Wrisley DM, Koehler-McNicholas SR. Extended effects of a wearable sensory prosthesis on gait, balance function and falls after 26 weeks of use in persons with peripheral neuropathy and high fall risk-The walk2Wellness trial. Front Aging Neurosci. 2022 Sep 20;14:931048. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2022.931048. eCollection 2022.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36204554)
*   Oddsson LIE, Bisson T, Cohen HS, Jacobs L, Khoshnoodi M, Kung D, Lipsitz LA, Manor B, McCracken P, Rumsey Y, Wrisley DM, Koehler-McNicholas SR. The Effects of a Wearable Sensory Prosthesis on Gait and Balance Function After 10 Weeks of Use in Persons With Peripheral Neuropathy and High Fall Risk - The walk2Wellness Trial. Front Aging Neurosci. 2020 Nov 9;12:592751. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2020.592751. eCollection 2020.(https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33240077)

Study Record Dates
------------------

 These dates track the progress of study record and summary results submissions to ClinicalTrials.gov. Study records and reported results are reviewed by the National Library of Medicine (NLM) to make sure they meet specific quality control standards before being posted on the public website. 

More Information
----------------

Record History

About

About ClinicalTrials.gov

Release Notes

Site Map

Help

Give us feedback

Glossary

Customer Support

Legal

Disclaimer

Terms and Conditions

About

*   About ClinicalTrials.gov
*   Release Notes
*   Site Map

Help

*   Give us feedback
*   Glossary
*   Customer Support

Legal

*   Disclaimer
*   Terms and Conditions

 National Library of Medicine

 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 

ClinicalTrials.gov

An official website of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services(https://www.hhs.gov), National Institutes of Health(https://www.nih.gov), National Library of Medicine(https://www.nlm.nih.gov), and National Center for Biotechnology Information(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).

*   About HHS
*   About NIH
*   About NLM
*   About NCBI
*   Accessibility support
*   FOIA requests
*   No FEAR Act data
*   Office of the Inspector General
*   Privacy policy
*   HHS Vulnerability Disclosure

Looking for U.S. government information and services?

Visit USA.gov(https://www.usa.gov/)

Revision: v3.2.0

HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
