Title: 

URL Source: https://www.cpahkltd.com/UploadFiles/20140507095809438.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 07 May 2014 01:01:58 GMT

Markdown Content:
# Annual Development Report on China's Trademark Strategy 2013 

## TRADEMARK OFFICE/TRADEMARK REVIEW AND ADJUDICATION BOARD OF STATE ADMINISTRATION FOR INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA 

# China Industry & Commerce Press 001 

> Preface

# Preface 

2013 was a crucial year for comprehensively implementing the conclusions of the 18 th CPC National Congress and the second & third plenary session of the 18 th CPC Central Committee. Facing the new situation and task of thoroughly reforming and duty transformation, as well as the opportunities and challenges brought by the revised Trademark Law, Trademark staff in AICs at all levels followed the arrangement of SAIC and got new achievements by carrying out trademark strategy and taking innovation on trademark practice, theory and mechanism. 

——Trademark examination and review achieved great progress. In 2013, trademark applications increased to 1.8815 million, with a year-on-year growth of 14.15%, reaching a new record in the history and keeping the highest a mount of the world for consecutive 12 years. Under 

the pressure of trademark examination, Trademark Office and TRAB of SAIC faced the difficuties positively, and made great efforts on soloving problems. Trademark Office and TRAB of SAIC 

optimized the examination procedure, properly allocated examiners, implemented the mechanism 

of performance incentive, and carried out the “double-points” management. As a result, the Office 

examined 1.4246 million trademark applications, 16.09% more than last year. The examination period was maintained within 10 months, and opposition period was shortened to 12 months, which 

laid a firm foundation for performing the statutory time limit. 

—— Implementing trademark strategy with a shift to effective use and protection of trademark by law . In 2013, in light of the strategy of development driven by innovation raised up in the 18th CPC National Congress, based on the State Intellectual Property Strategy Outline ,SAIC turned the focus of trademark strategy implementation to effective use and legal protection, to playing roles of demonstration, innovation and services, to combing roles of enterprises’ entities, market and the government, to highlighting enterprises’ principle roles and market’s decisive functions, as well as to exercising fully the instructive roles of AIC authorities. Therefore, the trademark registration, utilization, protection and management got further improvement. First, let the Demonstration City (District) and Demonstration Enterprises play the leading roles in the 002 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

implementation of trademark strategy, promoting the advanced experiences. Second, innovate the working mechanism of trademark administrative guidance, improve the normalization and standardization of administrative guidance, offer different guidance to different enterprises, and encourage market participants establish and implement their own trademark strategies. Third, innovation of work made contributions to the development of economy and society. We helped 

enterprises get financing by trademark rights mortgage. In 2013, there were 818 applications for 

trademark rights mortgage recorded, 7438 trademarks pledged, and 40.18 billion Yuan involved, separately increasing by 19.2%, 41.8% and 87.2%. The project of trademark enriching farmers was thoroughly implemented, and the protection of GIs and trademarks for agricultural products was 

strengthened. By the end of 2013, the accumulated registered trademarks for agricultural products 

reached 1.4473 million. The accumulated registered and preliminarily approved GI marks reached 2190, among which 46 belonged to foreign owners. Supporting the enterprises to implement the 

strategy of “going-out” got great achievements. In 2013, domestic applicants filed 2273 Madrid 

applications (one mark for multiple classes), 8.2% increased compared with the year before, ranking 6 th in Madrid Union. 20275 territorial extensions were designated China, 0.8% increased and keeping Top 1 in Madrid Union for years. 

——Implementation of the crackdown on infringement and counterfeiting made progress. In 2013, AICs at all levels investigated and dealt with 83,100 cases about intellectual property infringements and counterfeiting, 1.121 billion Yuan involved, destroyed 1786 sites where counterfeit and shoddy goods were manufactured and marketed. 477 cases were transferred 

to judicial authorities, 0.28 billion Yuan involved. Meanwhile, AICs implemented the opinions on construction of trademark protection long term mechanism , pushed forward the construction of platform for sharing the trademark administrative enforcement information, and promoted the effective connection between trademark administrative enforcement and criminal justice. 

——Trademark legislative construction scored new achievements . With the Decision on the Amendments of Trademark Law approved in the 4 th meeting of the 12 th session NPC Standing Committee, the third amendment for Trademark Law was completed successfully. In order to publicize and carry out the revised Trademark Law, SAIC held a teleconferencing meeting and made an implementation notice. AICs at all levels strengthened the promotion of revised Trademark Law, conducted training programs, so as to improve the competence of administration 003 

> Preface

by law. Meanwhile, the revision of the related supporting regulations was accelerated, so as to 

ensure the successful implementation of the new law. 

——Trademark information construction was pushed forward steadily . First, the construction of IT system phase III made solid progresses. In order to meet the demands of the 

new trademark law, the examination programs were modified and tested. Preparation was made for 

the running of Phase III system. Second, technical supports were provided for on-line applications system. In 2013, on-line applications reached 1.1758 million, taking 62.49% of the total applications, 

with a year-on-year increase of 2.3%. Third, the program of improving the examination efficiency 

by information system was vigorously promoted. The 5-year blue print for trademark automation was planned. 

——Trademark public service reached new level . First, in order to improve the services and satisfy the applicants, SAIC optimized the application procedure, perfected service facilities. 

In 2013, 105 thousands applications were accepted in Trademark Registration Hall, increasing 

by 31.1%. Second, special telephones were prepared for improving the consultation quality. 69700 consultation telephones were answered, increasing by 16.9%. 2576 online public messages were responded, increasing by 45.9%. Third, the construction of China Trademark Website was 

strengthened. Scenario navigation system was officially launched. Quarterly statistics were released 

on the website. The web clicks reached 1.62 billion times in 2013. In addition, new progress was made in trademark agencies’ administration, international exchanges and team building, which provided a strong support to the continuous and healthy development of trademarks. In order to better and comprehensively display new achievements of trademark work and trademark strategy implementation, further publicized knowledge of trademark laws, and 

strengthen awareness of trademark in the whole society, under the instructions of Mr. Zhang Mao ( Minister of SAIC) and Mr. Liu Junchen ( Vice Minister of SAIC ), Trademark Office and Trademark Review and Adjudication Board compiled the Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy (2013) (hereinafter referred as Annual Development Report (2013)). The Annual Development Report (2013) consists of 13 chapters, starting with “Implementation of Trademark Strategy”. It systematically records the achievements in 2013 made by AIC system in terms of trademark application and registration, trademark administrative enforcement, 004 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

geographical indications and trademark for agricultural products, trademark review and adjudication, trademark legislation, trademark agencies, local trademark progress, international registration and oversea rights protection, international exchanges and cooperation, trademark 

publicity, trademark infrastructure and information construction and team building. Major and important events are pooled in the field of trademark and statistical analysis of various categories 

of trademark data also is conducted. As an important reference and comprehensive annual report, the report is authoritative, informative and practical. It aims to provide further understandings on trademarks for the society, to guide the trademark work, to promote enterprises’ abilities in trademark utilization and brand innovation, and to serve economic and social scientific development and innovative country construction. 

Great appreciation is extended to the SAIC General Affairs Office, all relevant departments 

and bureaus and directly affiliated instructions as well as AICs at different levels for their unreserved supports and contributions. Any suggestions and comments are welcome. 

## Trademark Office / Trademark Review and Adjudication Board 

March 25, 2014 CONTENTS 

001 

## Chapter 1 Implementation of Trademark Strategy  …………………………… 001 

1. Work harder to improve the effectiveness of implementation of trademark strategy  ………… 001 2. Serving the overall situation, making new contribution to implementing trademark strategy  …… 003 3. Giving overall consideration, supporting local government to implement trademark strategy through integrated measures  ……………………………………………………… 003 4. Improving enterprises’ trademark conscientiousness and their ability of use of trademark on the subject of key issues  ………………………………………………………………… 004 

## Chapter 2 Trademark application and Registration  …………………………… 005 

1. Information about Trademark Application and Registration  ……………………………… 005 2. Trademark application analysis  …………………………………………………………… 006 3. Adapting to new requirement, clarifying to new task, new achievement was achieved in trademark examination  …………………………………………………………………… 007 4. Strengthening the construction of the service window, the service quality of Trademark Registration Hall had been improved  ……………………………………………………… 010 

## Chapter 3 Trademark Administrative Enforcement  …………………………… 011 

1. Remarkable achievements have been made in the activities of crackdown on IPR infringement and counterfeiting  ………………………………………………………………………… 011 2. Progress had been made during the establishment of long-term mechanism of fighting against IPR infringement and counterfeiting  ……………………………………………………… 016 3. Data analysis relating to trademark rights violation cases treated by AICs at all levels  …… 018 

## Chapter 4 Geographical Indications and Trademarks for Agricultural Products  ……… 020 

1. Enhancing the registration of geographical indications and trademarks for agricultural products, promoting the construction of new socialist countryside  …………………………………… 020 2. Carrying out the investigation on the use of GIs Trademarks, providing scientific basis for enriching the farmers by trademarks  ……………………………………………………… 021 CONTENTS 

002 

3. Setting up the platform for promotion and presentation of GI marks, popularizing the law and knowledge of GIs  …………………………………………………………………………… 021 4. Pushing forward the GIs research and relative training, enhancing the level of guidance and utilizing of GIs and trademarks for agricultural products  ………………………………… 023 

## Chapter 5 Trademark Review and Adjudication  ……………………………… 025 

1. Taking efficiency as the key point, getting new achievement in case proceedings  ………… 025 2. To innovate actions, to perfect mechanism, and to maintain fair competition order in the field of trademark right verification  ……………………………………………………………… 028 3. Strengthening theoretical research and legal construction of review, carrying forward lawful review  ……………………………………………………………………………………… 030 4. Carrying out international publicity and communication actively, laying a good foundation for lifting review to an international level  ……………………………………………………… 031 

## Chapter 6 Trademark Legislation  ………………………………………………… 032 

1. Trademark Law amendment was accomplished successfully  ……………………………… 032 2. The amendment to Regulations for Trademark Law was conducted steadily  ……………… 034 3. Trademark Law promotions and trainings were strengthened constantly  …………………… 035 4. Response to administrative reconsiderations and litigations was continued to do well.  …… 036 

## Chapter 7 Trademark Agents  …………………………………………………… 037 

1. Basic information about trademark agencies  ……………………………………………… 037 2. The construction of the supervision system of trademark agency has been unceasingly enhanced  ………………………………………………………………………………… 038 3. Self-discipline of the trademark agent industry improved  ………………………………… 039 

## Chapter 8 Local Trademark Work  ……………………………………………… 041 

1.Pushing forward the deep and steady implementation of trademark strategy at a higher level  ……………………………………………………………………………………… 041 2. Adhering to serve development and striving to promote trademarks’ innovation and utilization  ………………………………………………………………………………… 044 3. Strengthening market supervision and practically protecting trademark rights  …………… 052 CONTENTS 

003 

4. Enhancing Promotions and Trainings to Provide Strong Protections to the Implementation of Trademark Strategy  ………………………………………………………………………… 055 

## Chapter 9 International Registration and Overseas Right Protection  ………… 059 

1. Further strengthening the work for trademark international registration, Madrid applications increasing steadily  ………………………………………………………………………… 059 2. Positively participating international cooperation, enhancing China’s voice in international affairs  ……………………………………………………………………………………… 059 3. Innovating service, supporting the Going Global strategy  ………………………………… 060 

## Chapter 10 International Exchanges and Cooperation  ………………………… 062 

1. Actively carrying on multilateral exchanges and cooperation  ……………………………… 062 2. Actively carrying on bilateral exchanges and cooperation  ………………………………… 063 3. Actively carrying on exchanges and cooperation with Hong Kong, Macau S.A.R. and Taiwan region  ……………………………………………………………………………………… 064 4. Further strengthening working relations with foreign embassies and intellectual property organizations in China  …………………………………………………………………… 065 

## Chapter 11 Trademark Publicity  ………………………………………………… 066 

1. Closely focused on new Trademark Law to conduct various legal promotions  ……………… 066 2. Actively Organizing 2013 National IPR Publicity Week  …………………………………… 068 3. Practically made online promotions and open administrative information  ………………… 069 4. Constantly strengthened the promotions on cracking down ip infringement and counterfeiting  ……… 070 

## Chapter 12 Trademark Infrastructural Construction and Information Construction  … 071 

1. The trademark archives management was more standardized and efficient  ………………… 071 2. Trademark information construction moved forward steadily  ……………………………… 072 

## Chapter 13 Trademark Team Building  ………………………………………… 074 

1. Trademark Office team building got new achievements  …………………………………… 074 2. Trademark Review and Adjudication Board team building displayed new images  ………… 079 3. AIC system’s team building achieved new result  ………………………………………… 080 004 

CONTENTS 

## Memorabilia 2013  ………………………………………………………………………083 Trademark Statistics ……………………………………………………………………100 

Statistics of Trademark Applications and Registrations in 2013  ……………………………… 100 

Statistics of Domestic Trademark Applications Filed and Registrations Approved in 2013 (Breakdown by Province/Autonomous Region/Municipality)  …………………………… 101 

Statistics of Foreign Trademark Applications Filed in 2013  ………………………………… 102 

Statistics of Foreign Trademark Registrations Approved in 2013  …………………………… 105 

Statistics of Trademark Applications and Registrations Sorted out According to Classes of Goods & services in 2013  ………………………………………………………………… 108 

Statistics of Trademark Applications and Trademark Registratrions In 1979-2013  ………… 110 

Statistics of Trademark Cases Reviewed and Adjudicated in 2013  …………………………… 112 

Statistics of General Trademark Offenses across the Country  ………………………………… 113 

Statistics of Trademark Infrigement and Counterfeiting Cases Across the Country (1)  ……… 114 

Statistics of Trademark Infrigement and Counterfeiting Cases Across the Country (2)  ……… 115 

Statistics of Trademark Offenses investigated by Provinces/Regions across the Country  …… 116 

Statistics of Domestic Trademark Applications Filed and Registrations Approved in 2013 ( breakdown by Province / Autonomous Region / Municipality)  ………………………… 118 001 

Implementation of Trademark Strategy Chapter 1 

# Chapter 1 Implementation of Trademark Strategy 

In 2013, in the wake of the important deployment to implement the strategy of innovation-driven development, which was put forward during the Eighteenth National Congress, SAIC implemented the Outline of National Intellectual Property Strategy, and continued to promote the implementation of trademark strategy, and made efforts to improve the ability of registering, using, protecting and managing trademark. SAIC had made great contribution to accelerate the change of the growth model. 

1. Work harder to improve the effectiveness of implementation of trademark strategy 

In 2013, the focus of implementation of trademark strategy transferred to promoting effective use of trademarks and enhancing protection for trademarks, as well as to pay attention to demonstration, creation and servings step by step. The ability of registering, using, protecting and managing trademark was further improved. (1) conscientiously summing up the experiences, putting stress on theoretical research,playing a leading role. On the basis of reviewing the experience and problems of the model cities (districts) and model enterprises in respect of trademark strategy implementation, thus initiating the fresh progress of trademark strategy by enhancing propagation, expanding the advanced experiences, typical model playing leading role, mutual boosting and making progress together. Special research was undertaken on the trademark development in different kinds. Theoretical research was undertaken on some key 

points, difficulties and hot problems such as “enterprise trademark management standard”, as well 

as some advanced experiences like brand instruction stations which were found during work. It was discussed about the positive role played by trademark strategy in the construction of innovation-oriented country and the economic and social development. (2) Enhancing guidance according to different classification, creating good environment and stimulated the enthusiasm of enterprises in innovating. To carry out innovations on the mechanism of trademark administrative guidance, the work became normalized and standardized by using the 

Suggestions Concerning Trademark Registration, the Guiding Information Concerning Brands Construction, the Suggestive Information Concerning Trademark Management and the Information 002 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Form Related to the Utilization of 

Trademarks, station of trademark 

strategy, “Red Shield” brands 

cultivating post, brand guidance 

station and other activities. By 

using the working mechanism such 

as Clothing and Household Textile Brand Building Consultations etc.,CTMO further intensified the 

guidance of trademark strategy i m p l e m e n t a t i o n a c c o r d i n g t o different classification, perfected the guidance of key enterprises on trademark protection and brand, encouraged and guided market entities to establish their own trademark strategy according to their 

own need. By setting up the incentive mechanism and stepping up the financial support, CTMO 

established special funds of implementing the trademark strategy, perfected the awarding policy and 

financial supporting measures relating to trademark strategy, helped enterprises to improve their own 

ability of brands cultivation. (3) Innovating working methods, enhancing the work, serving the development efficiently. 

Taking the service for development as the top priority, CTMO implemented relevant arrangements and instructions issued by State Council on supporting SMEs and private enterprises, draw their 

a t t e n t i on to their trademarks, helped them to register and use trademarks rightly a n d t o i n t e g r a t e technology, quality, m a n a g e m e n t a n d market advantages w i t h t r a d e m a r k . 

CTMO encouraged 

enterprises to improve their competition m o d e , t o r a i s e their ability to use t r a d e m a r k w h e n exploring market 

> ▲From November 11 to 22, 2013, Guangxi AIC delivered lecture tour about trademark helping enterprises and serving development. The activity was warmly welcomed by enterprisers. The enterprises representatives in Guilin presented pennants to Guangxi AIC

▲On Jun 18, 2013, a video conference on supporting micro enterprises 

and trademark strategy promoting economic development was held in Guizhou province. 003 

Implementation of Trademark Strategy Chapter 1 

and facing competition. So these enterprises can raise the added value of their brands and enhance 

their core competitiveness. Remarkable results had been acquired in helping enterprises financing through trademark rights pledge registration. CTMO had processed 818 applications for trademark 

rights pledge registration, including 7438 pledge trademarks, financing 40.18 billion yuan, which rose 19.2%,41.8% and 87.2% respectively. 

2. Serving the overall situation, making new contribution to implementing trademark strategy 

Trademark is an important part of intellectual property. As an important member of Inter-

Ministry Joint Conference for National Intellectual Property Strategy Implementation, SAIC fulfilled 

their duties and served the overall situation, actively implemented the principles and policies regarding intellectual property strategy, promoted fully implementation of intellectual property strategy. First, SAIC publicized and popularized important strategic arrangement about implementing intellectual property strategy and enforcing intellectual property protection which was put forward during the Eighteenth CPC National Congress and Third plenary Session of 18th CPC Central Committee. SAIC actively organized the “April 26” IP Publicity Week activities and so on. SAIC stepped up publicity efforts on the achievement of trademark strategy, and created good environment for trademark protection. Second, SAIC completed the policy system of intellectual property 

strategy implementation, enhanced the research to intellectual property theory, draught and refined 

political documents on intellectual property management. Third, SAIC enhanced the construction of 

intellectual property culture, issued the Opinions Related to Enhancing Construction of Intellectual 

Property Culture, researched and established supporting measures concerning implementing the 

Opinions Related to Enhancing Intellectual Property Protection in Emerging Industries of Strategic 

Importance and Guiding Opinions on the Cultivation and Development of Intellectual Property Services, etc. The implementation of industrial intellectual property strategy was promoted. Forth, SAIC did a self-exam of the implementation of the Outline of National Intellectual Property Strategy 

in five years and made a conclusion on the achievements, experiences and problems throughout the 

past implementation of trademark strategy. 

3. Giving overall consideration, supporting local government to implement trademark strategy through integrated measures 

In 2013, according to the demand of the Master Strategy for Regional Development and the Development Priority Zones Strategy, SAIC independently or jointly with other ministry released some polices supporting Yiwu, Central Plains Economic Zone and other cities or regions. Basing 

on the social and economic development features of certain areas, SAIC built up coordination mechanism of implementing trademark strategy, improved the intellectual property protection in certain area, optimized regional trademark resources, took implementation of trademark strategy as key point of regional development. The achievement of these polices proved that trademark 004 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

s t r a t e g y p l a y s g r e a t r o l e o f p r o m o t i n g e c o n o m i c a n d s o c i a l 

development. Minister 

a n d v i c e m i n i s t e r s o f SAIC, headed delegation to investigate in Inner 

Mongolia, Hunan, Henan, S h a n g h a i , Z h e j i a n g , 

Guangdong Shenzhen, a n d g a v e g u i d a n c e o n t h e i m p l e m e n t o f trademark strategy, and made important speeches. 

B e s i d e s i n v e s t i g a t i n g 

and attending activities 

in different areas with heads of SAIC, the heads of CTMO investigated in Henan, Beijing, Qinghai, 

and attended the activities of trademark strategy, and found out the situation of implementation of trademark strategy. 

4. Improving enterprises’ trademark conscientiousness and their ability of use 

of trademark on the subject of key issues 

Since the implement of trademark strategy, SAIC served the overall situation of economic 

and social development conscientiously, fulfilled the role the implementation of trademark strategy 

played in accelerating the change of the growth model and construction of innovation-oriented country. Insisting on serving the market entities with trademark strategy implementation, SAIC focused on the important role market entities played in implementing trademark strategy, to improve enterprises’ trademark conscientiousness through stepping up publicity efforts, improving service. The trademark application and valid registrations volume of domestic enterprises increased step by step. In 2013, there are 1232 trademark applications every 10,000 enterprises on average, which is 

1.6 times as the number in 2009. By 2013, there are 4737 valid registrations of domestic enterprises 

every 10,000 enterprises on average, which is 1.45 times as the number in 2009. The increase of average trademark applications and valid registrations showed that the market entities’ trademark conscientiousness and ability of using trademark improved a lot. The level of economic development quality and vitality was further guaranteed. 

> ▲On August 8, 2013, Mr. Liu Junchen, vice minister of SAIC, conducted investigation in Baiyinxile station of Inner Mongolia Xilin gol
> league AIC, and gave guidance regarding trademarks.

005 

Trademark Application and Registration Chapter 2 

# Chapter 2 Trademark application and Registration 

In 2013, the Trademark Office of the State Administration for Industry and Commerce (hereinafter referred to as "CTMO") faced the challenges, innovated in mechanism, strengthened the management, 

deeply explored the internal potentials, made new achievement on trademark examination. 

1. Information about Trademark Application and Registration 

In 2013, CTMO accepted 1,881,500 trademark applications, a year-on-year increase of 14.15%, a record high, ranking the first in the world for consecutive 12 years. The total trademark applications 

from 2009 to 2013 (which is 6.85 million) had exceeded the summation of 28 years' trademark applications (which is 6.39 million). The consecutively high growth rate of amount of trademark applications had been continued. In 2013, the electronic application through internet reached 1,175,8 00, 62.49% of the total applications, a year-on-year increase of 2.3%, thus it can be seen, electronic application through internet has been taken by more and more applicants and became the main w a y o f t r a d e m a r k 

a p p l i c a t i o n . B y 

Dec2013, there were trademark applications 13,241,300 in total, trademark registrations of 8,652,400, and valid registered trademarks of 7,237,900. I n 2 0 1 3 , 

C T M O a c c e p t e d 

34,667 applications  0100000 200000 300000 400000 500000 600000 700000 800000 900000 1000000 1100000 1200000 1300000 1400000 1500000 1600000               

> 1700000
> 1800000
> 1900000
> 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 170175 223177 270417 371936 452095 587925 664017 766319 707948 698119 830477 1072187 1416785 1648316 1881546

China's Trademark Applications from 1999 to 2013 006 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

filed for opposition, a decrease of 4.58%, which showed that the ratio of acceptance to preliminarily 

approved trademarks by interesfed party was highly improved; 119,324 for renewal, an increase of 

11.54%, 177,239 for modification of registered items, an increase of 16.46%, 113,364 for trademark 

assignments, an increase of 7.36%, 21,414 for annulment and cancellation, an increase of 28.74%, 

29,438 for recordal of trademark license contracts, a decrease of 4.31%, and 53,008 for Madrid trademark International Registration applications for territorial extension, an increase of 9.1%. In 2013, CTMO examined 

1,424,600 trademarks applications, an increase of 16.09%. The examining period was kept in 

10 months. CTMO approved 

9 9 6 , 7 2 4 a p p l i c a t i o n s f o r r e g i s t r a t i o n , p r e l i m i n a r i l y approved 936,750, an increase of 14.53%, rejected 262,185, an increase of 14.63%, partially rejected 225,744, an increase of 25.07%. The growth rate of partially rejected trademarks was higher than that of preliminarily approved and rejected trademarks.43,526 opposition cases were closed in this year, a decrease of 40.49% (the examination of opposition cases was getting harder, because of regaining the way of ruling through reasoning). The examining period of trademark opposition was kept in 12 months. 

In 2013, CTMO processed 181,991 applications for modifications, an increase of 20.86%,114,607 

assignments, an increase of 12.43%, 122,685 renewals, an increase of 22.02%, and 123,415 

annulments cancellations, an increase of 9.36%. CTMO processed 34,998 recordal of trademark license 

contracts, an increase of 29.89%, 582 recordal of special marks, an increase of 41.95%; examined 

42,743 Madrid territory extension applications, an increase of 2.41% and processed 27,611 applications 

for international registrations' modification, renewal, assignment, annulment, cancellation and correction, an increase of 41.54%. 

In 2013, CTMO approved and preliminarily approved 436 geographical indications as certification marks and collective marks applications, an increase of 16.89%. By the end of 2013, it had totally approved and preliminarily approved 2,190 geographical indications as certification marks and 

collective marks, and approved 1,447,300 trademarks of agricultural products. 

2. Trademark application analysis 

In terms of the goods and services designated for trademark application, Classes 25(216,446), 

> Domestic applications 1733361, accounting for 92.12% of total applications Foreign applications 148185, accounting for 7.88% of total applications
> Madrid applications for territorial
> extension 53008, accounting for 2.82% of total applications

007 

Trademark Application and Registration Chapter 2 

35(155,783 ), 9(114,976 ), 30(103,217 ) and 29(76,207 ) as defined in the International 

Classification of Goods and Services for the Purpose of the Registration of Trademarks were among the top ones with the largest number of applications. The five largest classes designated 

remain the same as the year before, which indicated that clothing, business service, apparatus and 

equipment, food are the main fields where the trademark are applied. 

In terms of the goods and services designated for trademark application by foreign applicants 

(including Madrid trademark applications for territorial extension), Classes 9(14,107 ), 35(10,882 ), 

25(9,905 ), 3(6,816 ), 5(6,488) as defined in the International Classification of Goods and Services 

for the Purpose of the Registration of Trademarks were among the top ones with the largest number 

of applications. The statistics indicated that apparatus and equipment , business service, clothing, 

cosmetics and washing matter, pharmaceuticals were the main fields where the foreign trademark are 

applied. 

The top five provinces (municipalities) with the largest number of domestic applications were the same as last year, which were Guangdong(318,789 ), Zhejiang(178,978), Beijing(133,510), Jiangsu(110,097), Shanghai(106,374), altogether amounting 48.91% of the total domestic 

applications, same as last year. Provinces with over 40,000 applications also included Fujian, 

Shandong, Hong Kong, Sichuan, Henan, Chongqing, Hebei, Anhui, Hunan and Shanxi, 4 provinces 

more than last year. The top five provinces (municipalities) with the largest year-on-year increase were 

Shanxi(increase 39.82%), Xizang(increase 37.08%), Hong Kong(increase 28%), Anhui(increase 27.57%), Hebei(increase 23.99%). The applications of 12 western provinces totaled 257,861, a year-

on-year increase of 13.18%. The top five provinces (municipalities) with the largest number of applications for 

international registrations were Guangdong(503), Zhejiang(409), Shandong(233), Jiangsu(199) 

and Fujian(159). The top ten countries or regions with the largest number of foreign trademark applications 

(including Madrid trademark applications for territorial extension) were the USA(30875 pieces), Japan(16,604), Germany(10,765), European Union(10,252), France(9,629), the United Kingdom(8627), Republic of Korea(8,331), Italy(6,655), Swiss(5,485) and Australia(3,541). 

Trademark applications from the above ten countries or regions accounted for 74.75% of the total foreign applications in China. 

3. Adapting to new requirement, clarifying to new task, new achievement was 

achieved in trademark examination 

Trademark office of SAIC took all kinds of measures simultaneously, significantly encouraged 

the staff by perfecting mechanism and enforcing management. The examination period was kept in 10 months successfully, which laid the foundation of keeping the period in the limitation required by law 008 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

in future. (1) Analyzing the situation objectively, actively dealing with the challenge. In 2013, trademark examination faced the pressure and challenge never met before. First, the trademark applications increased significantly. In 2010, Trademark Office achieved the goal of solving backlogs in 3 years perfectly. The trademark examination period was shorten into 1 year, with the condition that the trademark application were over 1 million, reached 1.072 million. In the recent 3 years, as the economy developing and the social’s trademark awareness improving, the trademark application grew quickly and reached over 2 million. The contradiction between the rapid increase of trademark application and shortage of trademark examination staff became more and more outstanding. Second, trademark examination difficulties continuously increased. The trademark application continuously increased quickly, leading to the big growth of data in basic trademark comparison database. The 

difficulty of examination and search grew as well. The work of examining 1 trademark was as difficult 

as examining 2.2 trademarks in 2008. To meet the requirement of new trademark law that allowed the 

multiple-class applications, CTMO had fulfilled all-classes examination. In addition to International Classification of Good and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks changing year by 

year, the difficulty for the examiner judging the similar relationship of goods and services and the examination standard grew in the same time. Third, the new trademark law brought new requirement to the examination time limits. The new trademark law that passed on August 30,2013, gave a clear 

rule to the examination period, namely the preliminary examination period for CTMO is 9 months; the publication period for preliminarily approved application is 3 months; the time limits for CTMO 

to make a ruling after investigating and verifying the opposition application is 12 months.(If there are some special need for delaying, after approved by the administrative authority for industry and commerce under the State Council the period can be extended for 6 months.) Further, it also set the time limits for trademark declaration of invalidation and examining cancellation. Since 2008, the examiners had been always working overload. There are over 450 trademarks examined by a examiner every month on average, which is 3 time as the work done by one examiner in developed country. Under the pressure of unceasingly enlarged trademark applications numbers and continuously increased 

trademark examination difficulties, it would be a hard task and grim challenge for CTMO to further 

shorten the examination period to 9 months as required by law. (2) Perfecting the working mechanism, excavating the potential. Facing the serious situation, 

under the leadership of the Leading Party Group of SAIC, CTMO continuously raised the working efficiency by improving working mechanism, excavating the potential. First, according to the requirement of new Trademark Law, CTMO examined the whole working procedure of all works of CTMO, wrote the Working Procedure of Trademark Examination, nailed down the time limit of all procedure, optimized and combined them. Second, CTMO enhanced the training and management of assist trademark examiners. CTMO adopted integrated train in all kinds of forms such as providing courses, field visiting, communicating in symposium, summarizing and so on. 009 

Trademark Application and Registration Chapter 2 

CTMO mad e t h e Pl a n f o r C T M O to Adopt Incentive Mechanism to 

Assist Trademark Examiners, which 

significantly encouraged them to work 

with enthusiasm and gave the system insurance to meet the time limits for examination ordained by new 

trademark law. Third, CTMO properly 

a l l o c a t e d o f f i c e r s , e n r i c h e d t h e trademark examiners. Since November 

15 2013, CTMO transfer officers from 

opposition divisions who had less pressure on time limits to trademark examination divisions to reduce the pressure of trademark examination, and got great achievement. The trademark examination in November and December got a year-on-year increase of 21.08% and 55.28% respectively. 

(3) Enforcing the interior management, raising the working efficiency. By strengthen the interior management, CTMO gave full play to the initiatives of all the staff and assist trademark examiners, 

carried forward the spirit of hard work and perseveringly, successfully completed the task of trademark examination. First, double-nodes management was introduced into the trademark examination management, namely target task node management and latest examination period node management. The target task node management is to make it clear the aim of task quantity of trademark examination and task trademark examination period by the end of 2013 and by the end of April 2014. The latest examination period node management is to set the monthly examination progress, and makes sure 

that the aim task could be finished every month. Second, CTMO introduced special report system 

of trademark examination, according to which the quantity of trademark application , trademark examination, unexamined trademark application and trademark examination period progress would be reported monthly, to keep the examination progress. Third, the trademark examination quality 

management was strengthened. In the trademark examination, CTMO continued to attach equal 

importance to quality and quantity, actively perfected the supervision system of trademark examination, accelerated the development of trademark examination quality checking system, explored the way to set up long-acting mechanism of trademark examination quality supervision, fasten the trademark examination progress. Forth, the information construction was accelerated, which gave technical 

support to the improvement of examination efficiency. CTMO actively promoted the construction 

of third generation of automatic trademark examination system and information reform project of trademark examination and reviewing. The intelligent level in trademark examination system was improved. 

> ▲From April 15 to 28, the training course for new
> employed assist trademark examiners was held by CTMO in
> the guesthouse of SAIC.

010 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

4. Strengthening the construction of the service window, the service quality of Trademark Registration Hall had been improved 

Taking the opportunity of promoting the CPC's Mass Line Study and Practice Campaign, CTMO 

had been improving the training and management level and establishing the sense of purpose and service for staff members working in trademark service window under the requirements of "for the 

people, pragmatic and free from corruption" to improve the service quality of Trademark Registration Hall, which aim at masses satisfaction chiefly. In 2013, Trademark Registration Hall had accepted 105 thousands direct trademark applications, 31.1% increased than last year. CTMO Zhongguancun Office 

had accepted 51 thousands direct trademark applications, 86.4% increased than last year. (1) Improving management practices and enhancing the management ability. In accordance 

with the Window Service Regulation for Industrial and Commercial Administration Institution 

and The Action Plan of Special Campaign to resolve the issue of "Four difficulty" for the Window Service Department of Industrial and Commercial Administration Institution released by SAIC, 

CTMO classified window service criteria and formulated specific working regulation, service standards and assessment provisions. Through formulating Window Service Regulation for CTMO Zhongguancun Office, the working performance of Zhongguancun office had been further improved, 

which consolidated and improved the good image of the window of SAIC to support local economy development. (2) Optimizing service processes and improving service facilities. Making Registration Hall Service Quality Evaluation System to play great role in strengthening supervision, staff members of window position significantly enhanced their service awareness, attitude and quality. CTMO was constantly improving service settings in Trademark Registration Hall, for example, replaced waiting 

seats for applicants, so as to provide a safe and comfortable environment for applicants. 

(3) Responding to what public concerned and resolving significant issues. To resolve significant issues raised by masses such as agent attracting customer irregularly in the Registration Hall, CTMO 

coordinated related departments actively to govern comprehensively. Under the new situation of trial implementation of new business license for self-employed individuals which no longer record 

information about business scope in few districts, CTMO studied and adjusted the application criteria 

in time to ensure that applicants could submit their applications smoothly. 011 

Trademark Administrative Enforcement Chapter 3 

# Chapter 3 Trademark Administrative Enforcement 

In 2013, AICs at all levels conscientiously implemented the State Council’s arrangements on the 

enhancement of the protection of intellectual property, combined the combat against IPR infringement 

and counterfeiting with the functional transformation of government, the better execution of AICs’ 

responsibilities and the further improvement of the efficiency of the administrative enforcement, fully fulfilled the legal responsibilities and strengthened the trademark-related administrative enforcement. 

They placed great emphasis on the protection of well-known trademarks, foreign-related trademarks, trademarks for agricultural products and geographical indications, actively explored the long-term supervision mechanism for the suppression of trademark infringement and counterfeiting, gradually improved the administrative protection mechanism of trademarks and made positive contributions to the sound and rapid economic and social development. 

1. Remarkable achievements have been made in the activities of crackdown on IPR infringement and counterfeiting 

AICs at all levels made great efforts to promote the crackdown on IPR infringement and 

counterfeiting, investigating a large number of infringement and counterfeiting cases. In 2013, 83,100 cases have been investigated and treated, with a total amount of 1.121 billion yuan involved; 1786 sites where counterfeit and shoddy goods were produced and marketed were destroyed and 477 cases were 

transferred to judicial organizations, with a total amount of RMB 280 million yuan involved. 

(1) Kept the momentum of rigorously cracking down on IPR infringement and counterfeiting and handled a batch of important violation cases. 

By continuously placing emphasis on the protection of well-known trademarks, foreign-related 

trademarks, trademarks for geographical indications, AICs at all levels rigorously suppressed illegal acts violating trademark exclusive rights and handled a batch of important violation cases. The SAIC organized relative local AICs to execute investigations on commonly-mentioned and serious trademark 

infringement of “Gannan navel orange”, “China Gold”, “PARADIS” and “BMW”. The AIC of Pingdingshan of Henan Province treated a case of counterfeit CISCO computer network systems and equipment, with a total value of more than 800,000 yuan. The AIC of Jiangyin of Wuxi checked five 012 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

business premises which were suspect of being used to sell fake products, seized 1399 counterfeit products with international famous 

trademarks such as “LV”, “ G U C C I ” , “ C H A N E L ” a n d “ H E R M E S ” . T h e A I C o f M u d a n j i a n g o f H e i l o n g j i a n g P r o v i n c e 

treated a case violating the trademark rights of Swiss 

watches “Merveille”, with a 

total value of 1.57 million. AICs at all levels paid more attention to the communication and cooperation between administrative enforcement and criminal justice. They positively cooperated with public security services and launched joint activities to keep 

the momentum of rigorously cracking down on IPR in infringement and counterfeiting. The AIC of Haidian of Beijing, jointly with local public security service, seized 1050 counterfeit clothes, bags 

and shoes violating the exclusive rights of international well-known trademarks such as “GUCCI”, 

“ROLEX”, “LV”, “HERMES”, with a total amount of more than 10 million yuan. Six suspects have been transferred to public security service. The AIC of Chaoyang of Beijing, jointly with local public 

security service, destroyed a large site for selling counterfeits with 18 storerooms for the stockage and sell of counterfeit products violating exclusive rights of international well-known trademarks such as 

“LV”, “CHANEL”, “HERMES”, “GUCCI”, “PRADA” and “DIOR”. The total amount involved was more than 9.3 million and more than 20 suspects were seized. The AIC of Qingyuan of Guangdong 

Province, jointly with local public security service, handled a case of counterfeit explosion-proof 

and heat-insulating membranes for vehicles violating the exclusive rights of trademarks “3M” and “Ray Ban”, confiscating 160 counterfeit heat-insulating membranes for vehicles, with a total amount of nearly 2 million yuan. The AIC of Jilin Province, cooperated with the provincial public security 

service, checked several sites which were suspect of manufacturing and selling hotpot seasoning 

violating the registered trademark “Haiqiwang” in Changchun and Songyuan. 4 illegal sites were destroyed, 525 boxes of counterfeit products were confiscated and the total amount involved reached 1.5 million yuan. The Market Supervision Administration of Shenzhen, jointly with local public  

> ▲The AIC of Shanghai executed in depth the special campaign of
> cracking down on IPR infringement and counterfeiting. Attaching great
> importance on trademarks such as well-known trademarks, foreign-related trademarks and geographical indications, as well as on products such as articles of daily use, food and domestic appliances, it enhanced the fight against illegal acts violating intellectual property and manufacturing and selling counterfeit and shoddy goods.

013 

Trademark Administrative Enforcement Chapter 3 

security service, succeeded to destroy a site of manufacturing and selling counterfeit mobile phones, confiscating 25 boxes of counterfeit goods, temporarily seized 1000 suspected counterfeit “ S u m s u n g ” m o b i l e p h o n e s , and 100 suspected counterfeit 

“XIAOMI MI” mobile phone, with 

a value of more than 1 million yuan. 1 person was seized at the scene and 1 person was arrested on criminal charge. 

( 2 ) E m p h a s i z i n g o n k e y p o i n t s , t h e S p e c i a l Campaign made significant achievements. 

(a)The acts of bad-faith registrations were effectively suppressed. In order to maintain a fair and orderly market competition environment as well as a health order of trademark registration, 

the Trademark Office and the TRAB of SAIC built a special green channel for suspected bad-faith 

registration cases, leading a rigorous examination on the cases concerning illegal possession of unregistered trademarks of others, misuse of the reputation of registered trademarks of others, illegal possession of public resources in bad faith and frequent bad-faith registration of trademarks of others. Until now, more than 20,000 trademarks were refused or cancelled for the above reasons; the acts of bad-faith registration were effectively suppressed. (b)The acts of taking illegal advantage of famous brands were severely suppressed. From April 2013, SAIC arranged and launched a special campaign of crackdown on acts taking illegal advantage of famous brands, focusing on necessities of life such as domestic appliances, articles of daily use, food and articles for construction and decoration, as well as on agriculture-related products such as agricultural chemicals, chemical fertilizer and seeds. According to preliminary statistics, 29,600 cases were handled during this special campaign, with a total value involved of 744 million yuan and a total 

fine of 274 million yuan. Meanwhile, local AICs also treated a number of important cases to give 

a strong deterrent to law breakers. AICs of Sichuan Province severely treated the cases reported by 

CCTV, concerning the illegal acts violating some famous trademarks such as “Luzhou Laojiao” and 

“Wangzai”. AICs of Guangdong Province treated some cases concerning the online sale of counterfeit accessories for automobiles violating the trademark “NISSAN”, which made positive progress in handling cases of trademark infringement via internet.  

> ▲On October 16, 2013, the Office of Crackdown on Counterfeiting Activities of the AIC of Shenyang Province organized a collective destroy of counterfeit and shoddy products in the
> “Laohuchong Rubbish Dump”.

014 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

(c)The regulation on online transaction of products was comprehensively enhanced. According 

to the Notification of Severely Punish the Acts of Selling on line Products and Services Whose Sale is Explicitly Forbidden by the Government and the Notification of Launching a Special Campaign Against Websites of Illegal Market Subjects issued by SAIC, AICs at all levels strengthened daily supervision 

of online business, improved the safeguard of internet security from the origin, and further enhanced the regulation of the online market, in order to clean out illegal online market subjects, to repress illegal acts of selling counterfeit products via internet and to purify the online market environment. According to preliminary statistics, local AICs asked administrations in charge of telecommunications to shut down more than 100 websites owned by illegal market subjects, inspected more than 13000 websites, asked more than 2000 websites to rectify existing problems, investigated and handled over 300 online 

infringement cases, with a total fine of more than 2 million yuan. 

(d)The activities of “Protecting the Agriculture and the Peasants by AICs” were well executed. According to the Working Plan of Activities of Protecting the Agriculture and the Peasants by AICs in 2013 issued by SAIC, AICs at all levels severely cracked down on illegal acts of manufacturing and selling counterfeit and shoddy agricultural materials, in order to ensure the harvest and the supply 

of agriculture products. AICs of Heilongjiang Province launched a special campaign of protecting the exclusive rights of the registered trademark of compound fertilizer “Beifeng”, confiscated more than 160 tons of infringing fertilizers. The AIC of Bozhou of Xinjiang Autonomous Region, jointly 

with local public security service, destroyed two sites of processing, distributing, packing and selling counterfeit seeds, with nearly 40 tons of seeds and an amount of 1.76 million yuan involved. Two suspects were arrested on criminal charge. (e)The supervision of products quality in important market areas was emphasized. According to 

the Notification of Further 

Enhancing the Supervision 

and the Consumer Rights Protection in Key Areas 

and the Notification of 

Launching Product Quality Supervision in the Markets 

in 2013 issued by SAIC, AICs at all levels launched quality supervision and s p e c i a l c a m p a i g n s o n e l e c t r o n i c a p p l i a n c es, c l o t h e s a n d s h o e s , materials for construction and decoration, vehicles ▲ Auyuan AIC of Jiangxi Province conducted aspecial check of fruit 

> businesses for better protecton of Gannan orange of GI trademark.

015 

Trademark Administrative Enforcement Chapter 3 

and articles for children, severely cracked down on illegal acts of manufacturing and selling counterfeit and shabby products. During the special campaign on the quality of articles for children, AICs at all levels investigated and handled 722 cases concerning selling counterfeit and shoddy articles for children, with a total amount of 3.134million yuan involved. 

(3) Step up publicity efforts, and proactively create a sound atmosphere. 

SAIC constantly strengthened the communication with main news media such as the People’s 

Daily, China News Agency and CCTV, and main internet media such as people.cn, xinhua.net, sina. com, sohu.com and qq.com, in order to publicize the achievements of crackdown on IPR infringements 

and counterfeiting. Until now, the special website “Activities of crackdown on infringement of intellectual property rights a n d o n m a n u f a c t u r i n g and marketing counterfeit a n d s h o d d y g o o d s l e d by AICs at all levels” published 204 news about related activities led by S A I C a n d A I C s a t a l l levels. The website was visited 974,873 times by the public and the mobile application of the website has been downloaded more than 150,000 times. The coverage of information was effectively expanded 

and the influence of anti-infringement activities was increased. Local AICs vigorously publicized the achievements of the activities against IPR infringement 

and counterfeiting by accepting interviews via internet, organizing propagation and providing reports through news media. A vice director general of AIC of Anhui Province participated in an on line program of the website of the provincial government, accepted a special interview concerning the 

implementation of the trademark strategy, the crackdown on the IPR infringement and the role of serving and helping the enterprises to become stronger. He developed an in-depth communication with 

the presenter and on-line audience. During the World Intellectual Property Day on April 26, the AIC of Guangdong Province organized 481 activities, including on-the-spot consultations and collective 

destructions, and issued 17,617 public service advertisements. The AICs of Hubei Province took advantage of TV stations and radio stations to publish more than 600 activity notifications, made use 

of electronic screens of over 1500 telecommunication companies, banks and supermarkets to display 

> ▲Qitaihe AIC of Heilongjiang Province conducted a special check on sports garments, to fight against counterfeits and false advertisements.

016 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

propagating information, and printed and distributed initial proposals. Their propagation was creative and effective. The AIC of the Ningxia Autonomous region published a set of exams on the New Legal Daily to organize a knowledge contest of the Trademark Law. The AICs of Shanghai and Sichuan released some typical infringement cases of the year 2012 during the World Intellectual Property Day on April 26 and achieved good results. 

2. Progress had been made during the establishment of long-term mechanism 

of fighting against IPR infringement and counterfeiting 

(1) The legal system against IPR infringement and counterfeiting was continuously improved. First of all, the revision of the Trademark Law and the Consumer Rights Protection Law had been accomplished and the new laws will enter into force respectively on May 1st and March 15, 2014. Secondly, the revision of the Regulations for the Implementation of the Trademark Law went forward smoothly. Meanwhile, in order to ensure the implementation of the revised Trademark Law and Consumer Rights Protection Law, the revision and drafting of relative regulations of SAIC have been 

launched. Thirdly, with the coming into force of the newly revised Trademark Law and Consumer 

Rights Protection Law, some training was organized to improve the better understanding of laws among officials. 

(2) The mechanism of cooperation between administrative enforcement and criminal justice has been improved. According to the Opinions concerning the Cooperation between Administrative 

Enforcement of AICs and Criminal Justice issued jointly by SAIC, the Ministry of Public security 

and the Supreme People's Procuratorate, local AICs strengthened the administrative enforcement 

and severely fulfilled their responsibilities. The AIC of Sichuan Province issued the Guidance on the 

Transfer of Suspected Criminal Cases, further improved the transfer of suspected criminal cases by 

establishing information communication system, consultation system and supervision system. A Bureau of crackdown on IPR infringement and counterfeiting was established in Yiwu of Zhejiang Province, 

making full use of administrative enforcement resources and organizing local AIC, public security service, court, procuratorate and administration of quality supervision to jointly launch a special 

campaign against IPR infringement and counterfeiting. They exchanged information and organized case 

discussions at irregular intervals, improved the seamless communication system between administrative enforcement and criminal justice, and realized the connection between the Consumer Complaint Center 12315 and the Precaution Center of Economic Cases in order to realize the information sharing. 

(3) The disclosure of information concerning IPR infringement and counterfeiting cases according 

to the law went on smoothly . In line with the Opinion of Disclosure of Information concerning IPR 

Infringement and Counterfeiting Cases according to the Law issued by the State Council, SAIC 

worked efficiently to launch a research on the Implementation Measures of Disclosure of Information concerning IPR Infringement and Counterfeiting Cases according to the Law by AICs, and conducted 

the feasibility study. 017 

Trademark Administrative Enforcement Chapter 3 

(4) The establishment of IPR infringement cases information platform ran smoothly. The establishment of the information platform concerning trademark-related administrative enforcement ran smoothly. At present, the supporting platform of basic hardware and software has been established; the development of software for the statistics of administrative cases, for the assistance and the supervision of administrative cases and for the analysis of administrative cases has been accomplished; the norms 

for the statistical indicators of administrative cases have been defined; the interface for the information 

sharing between administrative enforcement and criminal justice has been prepared. 

Local AICs promote the information construction concerning crack down on IPR infringement 

and counterfeiting. The AIC of Shanghai upgraded the Trademark Supervision System, updated basic 

trademark data, and connected this database with those of the Enterprise Registration System, Cases Management System and Comprehensive supervision system of AIC stations. Meanwhile, in order to further improve information sharing mechanism between trademark holders, a Database of Relative Contacts for the Identification of True and False Trademarks and Products was established and more 

than 1300 contact information of foreign-related trademarks and well-known (famous) trademarks of Shanghai was collected. This database facilitated the clue discovery, the evidence collection, the 

identification of trademarks and products and the perpetuation of evidence during the investigation of 

trademark-related cases. 

(5) The early warning mechanism and emergency treatment mechanism of IPR infringement and 

counterfeiting cases were gradually established. Considering that the IPR infringements are becoming 

more complex, more large scale and more organized, the Trademark Office drafted the Emergency Plan for Important Trademark-related Cases according to the Opinion concerning the Establishment of 

Long-term Mechanism for Trademark Protection of SAIC. 

Local AICs also positively explored new working methods during the treatment of trademark-

related cases. The AIC of Zhejiang Province issued the Early Warning and Emergency Treatment Plan 

for the Trademark-related Supervision, in order to improve the capacity of treating important and urgent trademark-related cases, prevent and decrease the risk and harm of urgent trademark right infringement cases, and protect legal rights and interests of trademark holders. This plan defined the working principles, responsibilities, emergent preparedness, supervision and treatments. The AIC of Sichuan Province made efforts to improve consumer security alert system and emergency treatment system. In light of 12315 statistics analysis, daily supervision, quality supervision and consumer satisfaction surveys, Sichuan AICS arranged administrative conversations and gave admonition to enterprises being 

frequently complained by consumers. Meanwhile, they displayed necessary information and distributed 

consumption warnings when it concerns important and hotspot consumption-related issues, in order to guide the consumption and emphasize pre intervention. As to important and urgent risks which was or potentially was harmful to consumer security, they established effective urgency treatment mechanism, initiating the tracking, accepting the case in time, enhancing inter-department cooperation, accelerating the treatment and keeping consistent voice to the public, in order to strengthen the crackdown on 018 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

IPR infringement and counterfeiting. AICs of Shanghai, in respecting the working principle of “focusing on important regions and defining infringement risks”, collected information on supervision 

and enforcement, inspected main shopping streets (centers), clothes and small commodity markets (shopping mall), sale (exposition) places and professional markets for food, agriculture products and 

construction materials where exist IPR infringement risks. They evaluated and defined key zones for 

supervision, issued and implemented important supervision measures, staggered inspections, changed regularly responsible zones and promoted dynamic inspection. With all efforts made, they succeeded to 

significantly improve the efficiency of administrative enforcement. 

3. Data analysis relating to trademark rights violation cases treated by AICs at 

all levels 

In 2013, AICs at all levels investigated and dealt with 56,867 various trademark-related cases, of which 6,896 cases were general violation cases and 49,971 cases were trademark infringement and counterfeiting cases, including 11,735 foreign-related cases. In the various violation cases, totally 6.53 million illegal trademark labels were seized and eliminated and 362 suspected criminal cases and 347 suspects were transferred to judicial organizations. The top ten provinces and municipalities with the largest number of cases investigated and 

handled were: Zhejiang with 6,142, Guangdong with 5,965, Anhui with 4,930, Fujian with 4,146, Shanghai with 2,990, Jiangsu with 2,725, Hubei with 2,267, Shandong with 2,251, Liaoning with 1,118, and Beijing with 1,024. The above mentioned cases added up to 33,558, accounting for 67% of all 

trademark violation cases. 

Judging from the illegal use of registered trademarks, 510 cases were about “selling shoddy 

products with inferior quality to cheat consumers”, accounting for 59% of all cases related to registered trademark utilization and management cases; 259 cases were about “unauthorized alternation to registered trademark”, accounting for 30%. Among all cases in relation to illegal utilizations of unregistered trademarks, the cases of“unregistered trademarks were falsely represented as registered trademarks” still occupied a large portion, totaling 3956 cases, accounting for 88% of utilization and management of unregistered trademarks. As to the cases of trademark infringements, the cases of “selling products that infringe upon the exclusive rights of registered trademarks” were still the main form with the total number of 31,819 accounting for 75.4% of trademark infringements cases. There were 6068 cases of “using a trademark similar to the registered one on identical products, or using the same or similar trademarks on similar products without authorization from the registrant of that trademark”, accounting for 14.4%. 1668 cases concerned “knowingly providing warehousing, transportation, mailing and hidden facilities for activities violating exclusive rights of registered trademarks”, accounting for 4%. 1311 cases were involving “using a mark identical with or similar to the registered trademark of others as the name or 019 

Trademark Administrative Enforcement Chapter 3 

decoration of identical or similar products to mislead the public”, accounting for 3%. As to the cases of trademark counterfeiting, the number of cases investigated and handled was 7786. Among them, the cases of “using a trademark identical to a registered trademark on identical products without the authorization from the registered trademark holders” and “knowingly selling products bearing counterfeited registered trademarks” were the main forms, with the number of 3492 and 3478 respectively, accounting for 44.8% and 44.7% of all the cases. 

In 2013, 11,735 foreign-related trademark violation cases were investigated and treated. Judging 

from the case proportions, foreign-related trademark infringement and counterfeiting cases remained the dominant position. Among all the cases, 11,636 were foreign-related trademark infringement and counterfeiting cases, accounting for 99.2% of the total number, and 99 were general violation cases. In 2013, there were 14,770 cases of complaint concerning trademark violations, accounting for 26% of the total number of trademark violation cases. 020 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

# Chapter 4 Geographical Indications and Trademarks for Agricultural Products 

In 2013, AICs around the country followed the requirement of carrying out the project of enriching farmers by trademarks and strengthening the protection of geographical indications and trademarks for agricultural products, which was set out in CPC Central Document No. 1 of 2013, 

Several Opinions on Accelerated Development of Modern Agriculture and Further Improving the Vitality of Rural Development. AICs improved the protection of geographical indications and 

trademarks for agricultural products, accelerated the transformation of agricultural development mode and served the construction of new socialist countryside. The working mechanism of enriching the farmers by GIs and trademark for agricultural products has become the momentum for rural economic development and increased the farmers’ income. 

1. Enhancing the registration of geographical indications and trademarks for agricultural products, promoting the construction of new socialist countryside 

In 2013, CTMO kept improving the working mechanism and strengthening the 

standardization of examination on geographical indications and trademarks for agricultural products, therefore improving the efficiency and quality of examination. The yearly registered 

and preliminarily approved certification marks and collective marks for geographical indications 

reached 436, and the total number added up to 2190 by the end of the year, increasing by 24.9% compared with 2012 (1754), and 6.3 times compared with 2007 (301), among which the top 6 

provinces were separately: Shandong 340, Fujian 202, Chongqing 173, Zhejiang 171, Hubei 133 

and Sichuan 119. Foreign GIs registered and preliminarily approved in China reached 46. The amount of registered trademarks for agricultural products reached 1.4473 million by the end of 2013. When Geographical Indications are registered as trademarks and used on high quality and special agricultural products, their intangible value will be transferred to the products, forming tangible added value and realizing the appreciation of agricultural products, so as to increase income for farmers and promote the construction of new socialist countryside. According to the recent investigation, the prices of agricultural products with registered collective marks or 021 

Geographical Indications and Trademarks for Agricultural Products Chapter 4 

certification marks for GIs are 20% to 90% higher than the similar products. The added value increases by 105% on average after registration and the highest even reaches 6 times. The income from agricultural products with Geographical Indications for farmers comprises 41% of their total income, increased by 90% compared with the time before registration and the highest reaches 10 times. 

2. Carrying out the investigation on the use of GIs Trademarks, providing scientific basis for enriching the farmers by trademarks 

In 2013, CTMO sent staff to take investigation on the utilization of GI marks in Fujian, Yunnan and Henan Provinces. The investigation involved the licensing, employees, scale of production, economic benefit, infringement & protection, international registration and development difficulties on the GI marks of Yidu Chinese Lute, Nanri Abalone, Minhou Olive, Jianshui Pomegranate, Xishuang Banna Camellia Chicken, Lijiang Tobacco Leaves, Xinzheng Jujube, Bian Embroidery, Linzhou D o n g y a o M i l l e t a n d s o o n . 

Solutions to the problems raised in the investigation were provided in the end. I n t h e p r o g r a m , n a m e d 

CPPCC Members’ Investigation 

on GIs in Shandong Province, 

initiated by Magazine China 

Political Consultation, supported by SAIC, undertook by Shandong A I C a n d C h i n a E c o n o m i c Information Network, 6 CPPCC m e m b e r s t o o k i n v e s t i g a t i o n on the effects of GIs, such as 

Zhangqiu Green Onion, Zibo C e r a m i c s , J i a o z h o u C h i n e s e 

Cabbage, for adjustment of agricultural industrial structure, enrichment of farmers, acceleration for the construction of socialist new countryside, and as well as on the promotion and protection of 

registered GI marks. They highly appreciated the achievement obtained by Shandong in the fields 

of GIs’ cultivation, development and protection, providing further suggestions on the development of agricultural trademarks. 

3. Setting up the platform for promotion and presentation of GI marks, popularizing the law and knowledge of GIs 

CTMO continued to cooperate with media, such as the channel of China Countryside 

> ▲ The group of CPPCC Members’ Investigation on GIs in Shandong Province took an on-the-spot investigation on “Jiaozhou Chinese Cabbage” Certification Mark on August 1, 2013.

022 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Voice of CNR, Journal of Contemporary China, China News Service, Journal of Administration on Industry and Commerce, China Industry and Commerce News, China Consumers Journal, Brilliance Magazine, on the promotion of GIs and their protection. At the same time, it publicized 

GIs and their effects for enriching farmers at different social sectors, raising GIs users’ awareness 

of intellectual property protection. Besides, CTMO built the platform for GIs registrants and users, 

which increased the geographical indication production efficiency, made good presentation of China geographical indication products, and spread GIs’ culture widely. During the 17th Investment & Trade Forum for Cooperation between East & West China, 

SAIC and Shaanxi Provincial Government co-sponsored the workshop of GI Marks Promoting Industrial Development. More than 300 delegates from local GIs enterprises, AIC and trademark 

agencies took part in the workshop. With the subject of raising consciousness, tapping potential, utilizing fully and improving development, the workshop aimed at constructing a platform for communication, taking the successful example for guiding the GIs of the West becoming more and more popular, and pushing GIs becoming the great impetus for the West. 

Under the support of CTMO, China Trademark Association held the International Well-known Marks and GIs Exposition in Dalian, during the fifth International Trademark and Brand 

Festival. GI products from all over the country were presented in the GI products pavilion and the exposition enhanced their popularity, added value and market competitiveness. 

> ▲On April 5, 2013, SAIC and Shaanxi Provincial Government co-sponsored the GI Marks
> Promoting Industrial Development Workshop during the 17th Investment & Trade Forum for
> Cooperation between East & West China. Mr. Fu Shuangjian, Vice Minister of SAIC, took part in the
> workshop.

023 

Geographical Indications and Trademarks for Agricultural Products Chapter 4 

The talk show “returning from investigation” held by China Economic Information Network, 

made a special program for GIs with the support of CTMO. The CPPCC members taking part in the Investigation on GIs in Shandong Province and the officers from authorities in charge of GIs, 

shared their feelings and the status of GIs registration and protection with readers. The fifth National Trademark Competition and Essay Contest for middle school students, 

held by China Trademark Association and Middle School Student Paper, sported by CTMO, came 

to a successful conclusion in 2013. With the support from education authorities, schools and students all over the country, the organizing committee received more than 240,000 answer sheets 

and essays from 24 provinces. The program, first held in 2009, had a successful history of five 

sessions, with millions of students involved and hundreds of students awarded. Through materials collection, investigation and interview, the students in the program had a better understanding of trademark and GIs, which helped strengthen their legal consciousness. 

The 3rd National GI Marks Photography Competition was held last year. With the theme of GIs products, all the works reflected the special industries development, the structural adjustment 

of regional economy, farmers’ income increasing after the trademark registration for GIs. 

4. Pushing forward the GIs research and relative training, enhancing the level of guidance and utilizing of GIs and trademarks for agricultural products 

In light of the specificity of GIs’ registration and protection, CTMO assigned staff to make lectures in Yunnan, Guangdong, Fujian, Hubei and Jiangsu, providing trainings on GI legal system, trademark cultivation and registration procedure for local government officials, AIC staff 

members, trademark a g e n t s , G I m a r k s o w n e r s a n d u s e r s , Intellectual Property Officials from OAP1. I n t h e l e c t u r e s , 

C T M O s t a f f a l s o 

provided experience o n h o w t o u s e G I s t o d e v e l o p s p e c i a l agricultural industry and enrich farmers, as well as gave specific i n s t r u c t i o n f o r G I m a r k s a p p l i c a t i o n and registration. The 

> ▲ Experience Communication Meeting on Trademarks for Geographical Indication was held by Hunan AIC on July, 2013.

024 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

lectures helped the local governments and AICs realize that GIs and trademarks for agriculture could promote the development of agricultural development, the adjustment of agricultural structure, and enrichment of farmers. 

In accordance with the 2013 Senior Training Program on the Knowledge Updating Project for Professional and Technical Personnel approved by the Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security, CTMO conducted the senior workshop on intellectual property theory together with the 

Department of Personnel and Administrative School of AIC. The workshop aimed at strengthening the training for AICs, judges, trademark agents, lawyers and legal staff, and improving their knowledge and practice about GIs. The participants discussed on the GIs’ protection mode, the 

relationship between intangible cultural heritage and GIs, the difficulties on GIs management and 

protection. 47 personal essays and 5 group essays have been presented. 025 

Chapter 5 Trademark Review and Adjudication 

# Chapter 5 Trademark Review and Adjudication 

In 2013, under the leadership of the Leading Party of SAIC, as well as Vice Minister Liu Junchen, the Trademark Review and Adjudication Board (TRAB) thoroughly studied and implemented the spirit of the 18th National Congress of the CPC, and the first, second and third 

plenary meetings of 18th CPC Central Committee, conscientiously implemented the deployment of National Symposium of Director General of Administration for Industry and Commerce, further pioneered work ideas, renewed the concept, deeply explored the potentialities, tried the best to solve the backlogs of trademark review, actively serve the creation and development, continually 

enhanced team building, solidly implemented the mass line of educational practice, finished all 

kinds of task well. 

1. Taking efficiency as the key point, getting new achievement in case proceedings 

In 2013, seriously followed the deployment and requirement of the Leading Party 

Group of SAIC, TRAB insisted on improving the efficiency and quality of trademark review 

and adjudication through the innovation of mechanisms, strived to short the review period, actively participated in administrative proceedings, performed the functions of administrative reconsideration. All works improved notably. 

(1) Putting stress on solving backlogs to keep the review period in 18 months 

In order to shorten the review period of cases, and solve the problem of backlog of cases, which was concerned by the whole society and attached attention by enterprises, the leading Party group of SAIC explicitly requested that the review period must be controlled within 18 months. 

Trademark Review and Adjudication Board implemented the requirements of the leading Party 

group of SAIC earnestly, regarded the problem of backlog of cases as review priority, closely integrated with the practical activities of fulfilling the education of mass line, and solved the problem of backlog of cases as prominent problem reported by the masses. According to statistics, in order to ensure the review period of 18 months, all review 

cases applied before the end of June of 2012 have to be completed by the end of 2013, the 026 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

total amount of cases have to be completed throughout the whole year is 137,400, which is 3.9 times of the annual average amount during solving the problem of backlog of cases, equivalent to 2.6 times of the highest yearly volume in 2012. In the face of rough assignment, 

all Party members and cadres of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board actively tried 

to find a solution, pooled the wisdom and efforts of everyone, and took a series of measures to further improve the efficiency of case reviewing. First, set clear objectives and narrow 

down responsibility. Trademark Review and Adjudication Board checks, decomposed the task 

load requiring to be settled before the end of 2013 comprehensively, assigned responsibility to department to specify reviewing target tasks of each department in each month, and fully mobilized working enthusiasm of each department. Specific task should be arranged by each department according to the ability of respective personnel. Second, effectuate performance based rewards and punishment mechanism to motivate people to work more and well. Third, standardize legal documents for judgment and simplify document type. Further refine and summarize case judgment essentials required by different types of cases, make judgment document reference template unifiedly according to the different types of cases, and different applicable provisions to standardize the content of the judgment and ensure “not missing essentials, and having reference for judgment”. Fourth, constantly advance simplification and innovation of the business process. Adopt the way of batch processing in case acceptance and reviewing with the help of the means of information technology to increase efficiency of case acceptance and reviewing. Fifth, continuously strengthen the construction of trademark review and adjudication business system, enrich inquiry function, add typical case retrieval, refine litigation process management, and enhance application services. Sixth, further deepen 

the communication with relevant courts in Beijing, simplify judicial proceedings which can be 

simplified or merged to effectively save time of examiners appear in court to participate in the litigation and improve the efficiency of litigation. Seventh, strengthen quality management, 

further improve the system of spot-check and supervision of the committee leadership. Verify case reviewing situation by team members by adopting online and spot-check through taking files based 

on assignment of responsibility. Eighth, carry out statistical analysis timely to grasp case handling progress comprehensively. Carry out statistical analysis to workload completed by each examiner in each department in every month and report relevant information in report form to the leadership of the administration. Ninth, check cases backlogged for many years completely to guarantee reviewing time limit fundamentally. Establish a special working group for case liquidation and supervision, list and verify all cases which cannot be heard temporarily because of undetermined rights of reference mark, vigorously promoting to solve backlogged cases completely. Tenth, bring the model role of leadership teams and Party members and cadres at all levels to full play, actively mobilize party members, the young and positive factors of all aspects to motivate all to exploit potentialities further, improve efficiency, and provide 027 

Chapter 5 Trademark Review and Adjudication 

effective guarantee to solve the backlog problem. Under the solidarity, diligence, overtime and all-out hard working of all cadres of Trademark 

Review and Adjudication Board, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board settled 144,000 

review cases in 2013 with a year-on-year growth of 174.61%, equivalent to the sum of workload in the past four years, four times of annual workload during backlog period in three years, hitting a new record. There are 108,000 rejected cases with a year-on-year growth of 153.17%; and 36,000 complex cases with a year-on-year growth of 271% In 2013, the total workload is quadrupled, but the review period shortened to 17 months, a historic new leap in case has been achieved. 

The SAIC leadership fully recognized the outstanding achievements that Trademark Review and Adjudication Board had made in the case. On the report about the case that Trademark Review and Adjudication Board had undertaken, Minister Zhang Mao commented “I’m grateful for the considerable efforts that the comrades from Trademark Review and Adjudication Board have devoted. We should publicize the work they have done and encourage people to follow their example.” Vice Minister Liu Yuting commented “the work is hard, but the result is 

remarkable. I hope you can continue to exert yourself according to the requirements made by 

Minister Zhang Mao on the videophone conference, and implement the new Trademark Law.” and “Congratulations, and continue to make efforts.” Vice Minister Ma Zhengqi commented “It’s 

great to speed up the process of review, and to be in the service of enterprises. Please organize the publication of the achievement. ” The achievements of trademark review were published on China Industry & Commerce 

News as the headline. On the day of its publication, 11 media, including GOV.cn, Sohu.com, 

China Intellectual Property News, China Daily.com.cn, reported or reprinted the news under the title of “State Administration for Industry and Commerce Settled over 140,000 Cases about 

Trademark Review in 2013”. 

The rapid ascension of case efficiency and substantial contraction of the review period are highly praised by the holders of the trademark at home and abroad, relevant international 

organizations and associations also call or mail to congratulate and affirm the performance. 

(2) Unceasingly strengthening the window construction so that the public service is more 

efficient and convenient 

With “serving the masses and providing people with convenience” as the goal, Trademark 

Review and Adjudication Board further improved window service measures, compiles and prints Guide for Trademark Review and Adjudication Business Service, Trademark Review and Adjudication Application Form, Notes for Trademark Review and Adjudication Application 

timely. At the same time, add hotline, set up a specialized consulting post, and formulate 

consulting and question-answering system. In 2013, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board received 82,600 cases newly applied for review and adjudication; answered more than 028 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

150 consulting phones averagely per day with a year-on-year growth of more than four times, and received more than 200 people for face-to-face counseling, replies more than 180 letters for written consulting, and transmitted more than 600 consulting businesses other than trademark review and adjudication. 

(3) Rate of administrative litigation reduced, rate of lawsuit winning further improved 

To reduce rate of administrative lawsuit losing, increase rate of lawsuit winning, Trademark 

Review and Adjudication Board discussed on trademark right verification business with Beijing 

First Intermediate People's Court in 2013 for the situation that the existing judicial precedent 

is not the same with that of Beijing First Intermediate People's Court. Trademark Review and Adjudication Board and Beijing First Intermediate People's Court made a deep analysis legally and 

politically, and reach a consensus on reviewing standards and the evidence evaluation principles of cases with larger divergences, vigorously promoting the responding rate and quality of trademark review and adjudication cases. In 2013, lower rate of litigation and higher rate of lawsuit winning were still maintained when the number of cases settled reaches 2.4 times of that in the same period in 2012. There were 

1760 first instance litigation cases in 2013 with the rate of litigation of 1.22%, reducing by 3.48% 

compared with that in 2012 (4.7%). 2004 first-instance judgment cases, 1158 second-instance judgment cases and 43 retrial judgment cases were received. The overall lawsuit winning rate has been improved compared with that in the same period in 2012. 

(4) Administrative reconsideration work has been completed efficiently, effectively promoting “promote harmony and govern for the people” 

249 administrative reconsideration application forms were received from January to 

November 2013, three times of the applications in last year. 241 cases are settled, increasing 

277% than 2012. In the reconsideration, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board made case 

reviewing rules strict, perfects systems and procedures, and at the same time, actively innovated 

way of thinking, use coordination, mediation and other ways to settle cases flexibly, unblocked 

channels of communication and coordination, perfected cohesive mechanism of reconsideration, letters and visits and other work, effectively protecting the legitimate rights and interests of the parties involved, and promoting “promote harmony and govern for the people”. 

2. To innovate actions, to perfect mechanism, and to maintain fair competition order in the field of trademark right verification 

First, reform well-known trademark recognition mechanism, and promote normalization of 

well-known trademark recognition and protection. Recognition of well-known trademarks has 

changed the research methods of centralized submission and discussion in batch. Effectuation of “discuss at the time of application” not only ensure orderly advance of well-known trademark recognition and protection, but also ensure the unity of reviewing standards of related cases. In 029 

Chapter 5 Trademark Review and Adjudication 

2 0 1 3 , t h e r e a r e 3 3 0 w e l l -known trademarks determined i n r e v i e w c a s e s , a n d r e -determined 147 well-known t r a d e m a r k s d e t e r m i n e d previously, such as “LOUIS 

V U I T TO N ” , “ P O R S C H E " , “MARLBORO”, etc. Cross-

category protection was carried out timely. Second, intensify force of research visit before reviewing to reach the unity o f t h e l e g a l e ff e c t , s o c i a l effect and the review results. To send persons to carry out deep investigation and study on trademark dispute cases 

involving in geographic identification and agricultural products in Guizhou, Jiangsu, Hubei and 

other places, and give a ruling fairly in accordance with the law on the basis of the facts obtained 

on site, which was highly affirmed by the parties involved and related local governments. Third, reinforce to fight against unfair competition in the field of trademark to maintain honesty market competition environment actively. More than ten thousand trademark dispute cases involving in 

abusive registration were heard in 2013, which gave a powerful blow to all kinds of behaviors 

of abusive registration, fully recognized by the society from all walks of life. “PRTV” trademark dispute case and “JINZHU” trademark dispute case are rated as “National Major Case of Intellectual Property Right Protection” and “Most Influential National Top Ten Trademark Event”. 

Fourth, actively promotes healthy development of trademark agency industry. Organize dozens of 

agencies throughout the country to held “Trademark Review and Adjudication Case Acceptance and Reviewing Business Symposium”, formulate Measures on Standardizing Submiting Trademark Review and Adjudication Application Materials by Trademark Agency (Trial) and Guidance on Submiting Trademark Review and Adjudication Application Materials and 

Evidence by Trademark Agency (Trial), effectively regulating the behavior of the agencies. Fifth, adhere to the principle of national treatment, protect the interests of trademark of foreign parties involved equally, effectively safeguarding the good image that we protect 

intellectual property, highly praised by relevant state and relevant foreign enterprises. Korean Intellectual Property Office addressed a letter to thank Trademark Review and Adjudication Board for the matter that Trademark Review and Adjudication Board protects KBS official certification 

> ▲ On February 28, 2013, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board organized “Trademark Review and Adjudication Case Acceptance and Reviewing Business Symposium”, Huang Jiahua, deputy director of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board
> chaired the meeting, dozens of trademark agencies all over the country participated in the symposium.

030 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

mark of South Korea according to the law. 

3. Strengthening theoretical research and legal construction of review, carrying forward lawful review 

First, revision on relevant content of Trademark law has been finished. Study time limit, 

system value of well-known trademarks, qualification restriction of opposition subject, protection 

of exclusive right to use trademark under network environment, and other problems which were highlighted primarily by related representatives and form written reply to effectively promote 

law revision. Second, Opinions on Work Specification of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board Reviewing Cases Involving in Well-known Trademark Recognition Cases has been 

revised, effectively promoting the standardization and institutionalization of well-known trademark recognition. Third, revise trademark review and adjudication rules and trademark reviewing standards seriously, complete revision of trademark review and adjudication part of 

Regulations for the Implementation of the Law of Trademarks and revision task of Trademark Review and Adjudication Rules. Related supporting preparation for the implementation of the 

Law of Trademarks has also been completed. Types of 17 kinds of incoming dispatches and types of 33 kinds of outgoing dispatches have been revised. Fourth, continuously deepen theoretical investigation on trademark review and adjudication, and expand service areas. Authorized by 

Chinese Propaganda Department, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board has completed 

investigation and research on central special subject “cultural brand protection” through a lot of researches. The subject report was examined and approved by the research group of Chinese 

Propaganda Department, and submitted to Comrade Liu Yunshan in the form of report. Research 

group of Chinese Propaganda Department addresses a letter to the administration to express its 

thanks for the important contributions made by Trademark Review and Adjudication Board for 

the subject research. Fifth, training for trademark review and adjudication expert training class under industry and commerce systems throughout the country has been successfully completed, strengthening quality of professional knowledge of trademark cadres. The training class was 

the first training activity held for industrial and commercial systems at all levels of the country. Representatives of local industry and commerce departments participated in the training think 

that the training class was of high standards, accurate positioning, and strong pertinence. The 

teaching contents were rich, teaching ways were flexible and innovate. The training was of strong 

pertinence, guidance and partialness. Public review and adjudication demonstration held during training has received good interaction and teaching effect, and reached the requirements of “held to show the level and effect” raised by the administration. Sixth, enrich means of publicity and education continuously, carried out law and review and adjudication knowledge publicity on trademark review and adjudication extensively. Further strengthen the cooperation with related media, and actively cooperate with China Industry & Commerce News, open up “major case 031 

Chapter 5 Trademark Review and Adjudication 

interpretation” column, provide analysis of professional papers a n d t y p i c a l c a s e s t i m e l y, expanding the trademark review and adjudication knowledge publicity platform, effectively promote the level of improving b r a n d p r o t e c t i o n a w a r e n e s s and business integrity of all kinds of market subjects. Two pieces of works selected and 

delivered by Trademark Review and Adjudication Board have 

won the special prize and the third prize of the fifth national industry and commerce administration outstanding theses contest respectively. 

4. Carrying out international publicity and communication actively, laying a good foundation for lifting review to an international level 

Trademark Review and Adjudication Board has received delegations from the European Union, Japan, Britain, France, Thailand, and other countries and regions for more than 20 times in 

2013. It has arranged vast cadres to take an active part in intellectual property seminar organized 

by the European Union, Japan, Taiwan and other countries and regions for 6 times. According to the arrangement of foreign affairs, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board has sent 8 persons to Japan, the European Union, South Korea, Taiwan and other countries and regions to investigate successively. Through reception, attending seminars, and investigation, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board has powerfully publicized the trademark review and adjudication work of our 

country, which has laid a theoretical and practical foundation to promote the trademark review and adjudication work to reach the international advanced level. 

> ▲ Trademark Review and Adjudication Board held national
> industry and commerce administration system trademark review and adjudication expert training class in the administrative institute of the
> administration from May 13 to May 23, 2013.

032 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

# Chapter 6 Trademark Legislation 

The year 2013 witnessed a breakthrough in China’s Trademark legal construction. Trademark 

Office of SAIC actively coordinated with the National People’s Congress, promoted a successful 

accomplishment in Trademark Law’s third amendment, and solidly carried out the amendments 

to Regulations for the Trademark Law and other rules, which constantly improved the social 

awareness on trademarks, created a good environment for trademark protections, and provided strong legal protections for the implementation of trademark strategy. 

1. Trademark Law amendment was accomplished successfully 

(1) Important background to Trademark Law’s amendment 

Current Trademark Law was adopted on August 23, 1982, and implemented on March 

1, 1983. In 1993, to fit the development of China’s market economy and to protect trademark 

exclusive rights, Trademark Law was amended for the first time. It was amended for the second 

time in 2001 to meet the requirement of joining in WTO and to perform obligations regulated in 

TRIPs. 

The over thirty years’ implementation of Trademark law played an important role in the protection to trademark exclusive rights, the maintenance of a fair honest and competitive market order, and the promotion to China’s social and economic development. Since the implementation, China’s trademark registration, utilization, protection and administration level has improved 

obviously; and the trademark work has developed significantly. China has already turned to be a trademark big country. However since the development of socialistic market economy, trademark 

applications increased sharply, which was hardly fitted by current law mainly in five aspects. Trademark registration procedure was complicated, malicious trademark registrations were relatively in common, unfair competitions in trademarks still were serious, infringements were not effectively controlled and trademark rights protections needed to be strengthened. To suit the new situation and task, to better serve economic and social development, the amendment and improvement to current Trademark Law turned to be a primary importance in China’s trademark works. 

(2) Basic information on Trademark Law amendment 033 

Chapter 6 Trademark Legislation 

In 2003, the SAIC was entrusted by the State Council of China to conduct the third amendment of the Trademark Law. In the following six years, SAIC conducted thorough research and studies at grass-root level, widely collected social opinions and conscientiously listened to suggestions from relevant experts and scholars, and then finalized the Draft of Amendment of Trademark Law, which was submitted to the State Council for examination on November 18, 

2009. On October 31, 2012, this Draft was discussed and approved by the Executive Meeting 

of the State Council and submitted for the examination of the Standing Committee of National People’s Congress on November 11, 2012. The Amendment was adopted at the fourth Session of the Standing Committee of the Twelfth National People’s Congress on August 30, 2013. It is put 

into implementation on May 1, 2014, which would be an important milestone in the history of 

China’s Trademark Law development. 

(3) The main changes in the new Trademark Law 

The Amendment of Trademark Law, on the premise of keeping in line with International Treaties to which China has already acceded, focuses on domestic reality. It borrows and absorbs advanced experiences and mature procedures from major countries in the world. It also improves trademark legal system to solve major issues occurred during practices. 1. Adjusting trademark examination mechanism to facilitate applicants’ registrations in a quicker and more convenient way. It abolishes the visibility standard under current Trademark Law, and provides the sound – there is a relatively mature procedure in sound mark’s application and examination internationally - can be registered as a trademark. It, following international practice, accepts electronic application through internet and multi-class applications. It provides a mechanism of “Examination Opinion Letter” and stipulates that during examination procedure, 

the Trademark Office could request explanation and revision of the applications from applicants. It also restructures the opposition procedure, which simplifies rights verifications and restricts the 

opponent, therefore to solve the problems of the current trademark opposition procedure, such as overly broad identities of opponents and opposition grounds, excessively complex procedure of trademark registrations, to shorten the time of registration and to control bad-faith oppositions. 

2. Regulating unfair competitions during trademark registrations, utilizations and agency 

behaviors to safeguard fair and competitive market order. The new law adopts the principle of 

“Honesty and Credibility” and clearly defines and prohibits malicious trademark applications, 

which provides legal basis for cracking down malicious behaviors and protecting fair and competitive market order. It provides “where a party uses another party’s well known trademark or registered trademark as its own company name, misleads the public and constitutes unfair competition, Anti-Unfair Competition Law shall apply”. It strengthens the instructions and protections to trademark utilizations to promote effective use of trademarks and to improve their utilizations. It also strengthens the supervisions to trademark agencies to increase their obligations, to reinforce the ways of administration to them for the health development of trademark agency 034 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

market 3. Clarifying well-known trademarks protection system and instructing well-known trademarks to return to original legislative intent. Well-known trademark is not an honor, but a legal concept. Well-known trademarks determination is a special protection to the enlarged scope of protection, which is a general practice internationally and plays an effective role in regulating 

“free riding” behaviors. However, some enterprises in reality deliberately misinterpret it as an 

honor to promote, which is an unfair competition and disturbs market order. The new Trademark Law insists in well-known trademark determinations, in the meanwhile prohibits producer or business operator to use the words “well-known trademark” on goods or the packaging or containers for such goods, or in advertising, exhibitions, or other commercial activities. It will benefit the enterprises in cultivation of independent trademarks on the premises of respecting market rules to really strengthen their market competitiveness. 4. Enhancing the protection on trademark exclusive rights to protect legal interest of trademark owners. It adds new trademark infringement, stipulates the legal circumstances for heavier punishment on trademark infringements and defines for AICs’ law enforcement which incudes the standard of penalty according to different amounts of sales revenues for illegal operations. It adds the stipulation 

on punitive damages, increases the amount of statutory damages from “RMB 500,000” to “RMB 3 

million” to increase the illegal cost. It also reduces the burden of proof on trademark owners, which 

effectively solves the trouble of low damages in difficulty to prove. 

2. The amendment to Regulations for Trademark Law was conducted steadily 

(1) The progress of amendment to Regulations for Trademark Law 

SAIC paid great attentions to Regulations’ amendment. Early in March 2012, Trademark Office set up a Regulations amendment group and comprehensively started the amendment. Trademark Office jointly with Trademark Review and Adjudication Board, established a special 

team to study 11 major issues including division of applications, sound mark, trademark agency supervision and trademark exclusive rights protection. On the basis of the Amendment of Trademark Law and experiences summarized from implementation of current trademark laws 

and regulations, Trademark Office and Trademark Review and Adjudication Board, after a full investigation and discussion, drafted Regulations for Trademark Law (the request for comment draft). Trademark Office and Law Department of SAIC, through forums and written inquires asked 

for opinions from AIC system, 13 ministries including the Supreme People’s Court, the Supreme 

People’s Procuratorate, Ministry of Public Security, Ministry of Commerce and State Intellectual Property Office, agencies, enterprises, exports and scholars. On December 30, SAIC submitted the draft revision to the Regulations for Trademark Law to the State Council for examination. 

(2) Ideas of amendment to Regulations for Trademark Law 

The main ideas of amendment are taking Trademark Law amendment as the upper law basis, 035 

Chapter 6 Trademark Legislation 

focusing on domestic realities, to borrow and absorb advanced experiences and practices from 

major countries in the world; targeting main issues occurred in reality, to further refine, modify 

and improve relevant conditions, standards and procedures in trademark work. In the meantime, 

to echo the layout of Trademark Law amendment and to keep the stableness of Regulations’ layout, the revised Regulations still took the layout of amendment. The major changes were in 

two aspects. One is to implement Trademark Law Amendment, to refine articles of Trademark 

Law through Regulations and to make it operational and executional. It might benefit the public 

to operate kinds of trademark transactions more quick and convenient. It might also benefit 

Trademark Office, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board and local AICs to well perform the duties. The other is to revise current Regulations which maladapted realities. It transferred new ideas, good practices and good experiences accumulated by Trademark Office, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board and local AICs into legal outcomes by means of the Regulations in order 

to well serve the social and economic development. 

3. Trademark Law promotions and trainings were strengthened constantly 

S A I C , t a k i n g t h e o p p o r t u n i t y o f t h e a d o p t i o n o f T r a d e m a r k L a w A m e n d m e n t , organized a series o f p r o m o t i o n s a n d t r a i n i n g s . O n September 17, it held a video and telephone mobilization meeting t o i m p l e m e n t t h e new Trademark Law, 

where Xin Chunying, 

deputy director of 

NPC’s Law Committee interpreted the new Law, and Zhang Mao, minister of SAIC attended and 

made an important speech. From December 21 to 22, SAIC in its Shenzhen Administration School held an AIC system Trademark Law training, where leaders and directors in charge of trademark work from AICs and market supervision authorities in each province, autonomous region, municipality directly under the central government, city with independent budgetary status, and sub-provincial city attended. 

AIC at all levels have also actively developed specific trainings. Through the trainings, AIC staff 

> ▲ On September 17, 2013, SAIC held an AIC system video and telephone meeting to implement the new Trademark Law in Beijing and made deployment there.

036 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

laid a solid theoretical foundation, discussed sensitive and thorny issues, strengthened u n d e r s t a n d i n g s a n d i m p r o v e d p r a c t i c a l ability to the new Law. The new Trademark Law was implemented comprehensively and thoroughly. 

4 . R e s p o n s e 

to administrati v e reconsiderations and litigations was continued to do well. 

In 2013, Trademark Office actively took measures to speed up trademark examinations and to 

improve their qualities. As the application base increased, trademark administrative reconsideration and litigation cases h a v e a l so increased constantly. Trademark Office seriously enforced law and responded to the reconsideration and litigation cases. There were 259 reconsideration cases, 30 litigations 

involving first instance, 

second instance and retrial handled for the whole year. The main types of those cases were: unacceptance of 

opposition, unacceptance of trademark application, renewal and modification, and refusal of transfer. 

> ▲ From December 21 to 22, 2013, SAIC held an AIC system Trademark Law training in Administration School in Shenzhen
> ▲ On November 6, 2013, Zibo AIC of Shandong province organized a new Trademark Law training.

Chapter 7 

037 

Trademark Agents 

# Chapter 7 Trademark Agents 

In 2012, China’s trademark agency industry opened a new page. The Managing Measures on Law-firm’s Access to Trademark Agency Service came into force, which means that the law-firm came into trademark agency industry officially. The number of trademark agencies registered at AIC increased 

to a new record. The pass of new Trademark Law built a good legal foundation for the administration for trademark agency. The improvement of industry self-discipline and their business ability played an important role in pushing ahead China’s trademark industry. 

1. Basic information about trademark agencies 

Until December 31, 2013, there were 18,772 trademark agencies in China, among which 8222 were law-firms and 1831 were trademark agencies newly established in 2013 registered at AIC (a record high). The number of trademark agencies experienced a ten-year fast increase since 2003. 

                              

Number of trademark agencies since 2002 038 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

trademark agencies registered at AIC（10550） 

law-firms （8222）               

> By the end of 2013, there were 18772 trademark agencies in China
> Number of annually increased trademark agencies since 2003
> 694 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 745 675 568 523 555 730 1041 1369 1672 1331

2. The construction of the supervision system of trademark agency has been unceasingly enhanced 

(1) The Managing Measures on Law-firm’s Access to Trademark Agency Service was put 

in force. 

On January 1, 2013, The Managing Measures on Law-firm’s Access to Trademark Agency Service came into force. There are 7864 law-firms in the first batch of recorded by CTMO. The enforcement 

of these managing measures means the law-firms and their lawyers stepped into trademark agency 

industry, which have significant meanings on perfecting the intellectual property agency system, and 

pushing ahead the trademark agency industry developing canonically and healthily. 

(2) New trademark law enhanced the supervision of trademark agency. Chapter 7 

039 

Trademark Agents 

Article 19, Article 20and Article 68of the Trademark Law stated the right and obligation of 

trademark agency, clarified the legal obligations which trademark agency should take if they commit 

illegal actions, set up the measurement of stop accepting files from trademark agency that commit crime, enhanced self-discipline of trademark agency industry organizations, and suggested to build credit file for trademark agencies. The new trademark law enhanced the supervision of trademark agency as well as trademark market. With clear rules and powerful measures, the new trademark law offered protection for the right and benefit of applicant, safeguarded the order of trademark agency 

market. To implement the regulations to enhance the supervision in the new trademark, Regulations for the Implementation of the Trademark Law of the People’s Republic of China will have independent chapter about trademark agency. The preparation for The Managing Measures on Credit Information of Trademark Agency already began as well as the Working Regulation for Rejecting Trademark Agency 

Service had already been started. 

(3) Trying hard to set up trademark agency supervision mechanism 

In January 2013, SAIC approved the application from Guangdong AIC to transfer the duty of 

recording submission of trademark agency to Guangdong Trademark Association. The digitalized management system developed by Guangdong Trademark Association would record all the setup, 

change and close application of trademark agency since May. This pilot is an explore and taste 

for trademark agency association to get first-hand information of trademark agency, as well as for beginning the credit management of trademark agency and improving industry self-discipline in the future. 

3. Self-discipline of the trademark agent industry improved 

(1) Made active efforts to build a trademark agency credit system, enhancing self-discipline of the whole industry. 

In January 2013, the Branch for trademark agents of China Trademark Association (CTA) passed the Punishment Rules of the Branch for trademark agents of China Trademark Association the Rules of the Discipline Committee of the Branch for trademark agents of China Trademark Association, which would come into force on January 25th 2013. In November, CTA drafted the amendment of Constitution of the Branch for trademark agents of China Trademark Association according to the 

new Trademark Law, as well as the amendment of the two documents mentioned before. The Second 

Member Congress of the Branch for trademark agents approved these amendments. The Notice about Tax Policy of trial of replacing business tax with a value-added tax (VAT) in transportation and services 

businesses (Taxation [2013]37) which involved the taxation of trademark agency got attention of many 

members of Branch of Trademark Agency. The Branch of Trademark Agency reflected the situation and wrote to State administration of Taxation of Xicheng District named with the Suggestion about 

solving the problem that Trademark Agency Pay the Trademark Fee on behalf of the Applicant paying 

the value-added tax (VAT). According to Civil Procedure Law of the People’s Republic of China, 040 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

CTA wrote recommendation to the people’s court of all levels for its members participating in lawsuit nearly 80 times. 

(2) Held the Round Table Conference of Chinese and Foreign Trademark Agencies. 

In June 2013, the Round Table Conference of Chinese and Foreign Trademark Agencies was held by the Branch for trademark agents of China Trademark Association (CTA) during the China Trademark Festival in Dalian. Representatives of Chinese and Foreign trademark agencies jointly 

discussed the issues of self-discipline and industrial development during the conference. 

(3) Strengthened trademark agent training. 

In November 2013, the Branch for trademark agents of China Trademark Association held 2 

training course on trademark lawsuit practices and Trademark Law revision, to help the trainees to adapt themselves to the new character and new trend of trademark cases in new period, to acquaint themselves with latest news about the Trademark Law revision, and to improve the lawyers, trademark 

agents, AIC officials and other relevant stuff in professional quality and business level, as well as their 

ability to handle complicated trademark case. 

(4) Strengthened international exchange and cooperation of the trademark agent industry. 

In May 2013, China Trademark Association organized some members to go to United State of 

American to attend the 135th Annual meeting of The International Trademark Association (INTA), and 

communicated with INTA and other related organizations. In June, The China Trademark Association held a symposium with the Japan Patent Attorneys Association during the China Trademark Annual Meeting. In October, China Trademark Association sent representative to Geneva to attend the 30 th SCT meeting of WIPO. Chapter 8 

041 

Local Trademark Work 

# Chapter 8 Local Trademark Work 

In 2013, AICs at all levels seriously implement the spirit of CPC’s 18th National Congress, took the objective of serving “Five in One” construction, insisted in exploration and innovation, deepened efficiency building and fulfilled their duties by solid works, which further promoted trademark strategy implementation and actively contributed for economic and social development. 

1.  Pushing forward the deep and steady implementation of trademark strategy at a higher level 

AICs at all levels seriously summarized experiences gathered recent years from trademark strategy implementation, enhanced the awareness of serving economic and social development by trademark works, practically borrowed and promoted good experiences and methods, comprehensively strengthened organizational leadership, engaged all parties and took effective measures to further implement trademark strategy. 

Beijing Municipal Government introduced Opinions on Further Implementing Trademark Strategy and Promoting Capital’s Brand Economy, focusing on breeding Beijing Brands. Its governments at all levels strengthened a strong fiscal support to the strategy by establishing special funds, improving 

awards and allowances. Tianjin held a special meeting to summarize the city’s achievements in implementing trademark strategy, to deploy new trademark missions for the next stage, and to promote trademark development 

in scientific and technological enterprises. 

Shanxi Province held a video working conference, focusing on implementing trademark strategy and revitalizing local economy by brands, which encouraged and promoted market participants to innovate trademarks, to actively develop self-owned brands and to promote local economic transformation. 

The Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region AIC signed a trademark and brand strategy 

cooperation agreement with Guangdong AIC. They reached consensus in trademark and brand strategy’s implementation, trademark enforcement and protection, trademark information exchange, trademark policy’s research and cooperation, and the establishment of a trademark 042 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

a n d b r a n d s t r a t e g y j o i n t conference. 

Jilin province, on the basis 

of the outlines of the national economic and social development 

plan for the 12th five years in Jilin 

and the industrial development plans, drafted the implementing 

p r o g r a m o f p r o m o t i n g J i l i n ’s 

trademarks and brands (2013-2017) (for examination and approval), which blueprinted trademark and brand development in the next five years. 

Heilongjiang accomplished 

the plan of AIC in serving and supporting industrial park’s (large project) enterprises to implement trademark strategy. The AICs outreached to the enterprises on the list, and collectively, comprehensively and thoroughly provide supports for their trademark strategy’s implementation. 

H a r b i n A I C h e l d a

forum to deeply promote the implementation of trademark 

strategy. Representatives from 

31 enterprises made in-depth exchanges and resonations i n d e e p e n i n g t r a d e m a r k strategy’s implementation, breeding brands, cracking down counterfeiting and safeguarding rights. 

J i a n g s u P r o v i n c i a l 

Government issued Indicator 

System of Basic Modernization in Southern Jiangsu, which included the indicator of proportion of 

added value created by independent trademarks enterprises in GDP, and clearly demanded to quicken the brand building. Its local municipal governments respectively held trademark strategy promotional meetings, rewarded advanced counties/districts, groups, and individuals, elected model villages and 

enterprises in trademark strategy implementation, and introduced or revised fiscal subsidies to newly 

registered marks and loan aids to trademark pledges. Some villages established trademark strategy 

> ▲ On May 25, 2013, at the opening and signing ceremony of the first Inner Mongolia and Guangdong Science and Technology Cooperation Week, Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region AIC and
> Guangdong AIC jointly signed a trademark and brand strategy cooperation agreement.
> ▲ On March 28, 2013, Harbin AIC held a forum themed as “deep
> promoting the implementation of trademark strategy”.

Chapter 8 

043 

Local Trademark Work 

implementation operation organizations, introduced strategy implementation policies and Brands 

Instruction Stations. All the measures further optimized the policy environment to implement trademark strategy. 

Zhejiang AIC focused on the “three famous” project to foster famous enterprises, products and experts, and the requirement to implement IP strategy, standard strategy and brand strategy, finished and reported the Outline of Countermeasures to Implement Trademark Strategy in Zhejiang, and Opinions of Zhejiang Government on Implementing Trademark Strategy and Promoting Innovative 

Province Construction, jointly boosted the implementation of trademark strategy with other authorities and provided policy supports to trademark fostering, registration, utilization and protection. 

Fujian Government introduced Several Measures on Promoting Trademark Works, which released 

detail measures in fostering independent trademarks, promoting trademark qualities and values, propelling and pushing trademark works internationalizations, strengthening trademark exclusive rights protections, and enhancing policies and funds aids and protections. In its inner cities, AICs seriously implemented stimulus measures for trademark strategy, promoted the governments and relevant authorities to include trademark strategy into local and industrial development overall plan and deployment, therefore to carry out the strategy in a higher level. Shandong held a trademark awarding ceremony and trademark strategy implementation forum to promote and deploy the work for the strategy’s implementation. Its cities’ governments held trademark work meetings, implement special fund for the strategy, adjusted and optimized trademark work checks 

and evaluations. They also elected model units good at utilizing Geographical Indication Marks, 

released list of model counties (cities and districts), enterprises and industrial parks who did well in trademark strategy implementations, summarized and promoted their model experiences to constantly optimize the environment for the strategy. 

Henan government treated 

trademark strategy implementations as important decision makings, released Opinions on Implementing Trademark Strategy, and held a video and telephone conference 

for the implementation. Quick 

actions were conducted and detailed policies and measures were issued all over the province, which achieved good effect. 

H u b e i G o v e r n m e n t 

released Several Opinions on Promoting the Trademark Strong 

> ▲ On November 21, 2013, the Mobilization on Promoting the Trademark Strong Province Building was held in Hubei Province.

044 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Province Building, held relevant mobilization, notified result of well-known marks determinations and 

Geographical Indications registrations in 2012, mobilized and deployed the trademark strong province building tasks, and promoted the updates of AIC’s trademark strategy into brand strategy, AIC’s sole job into government work. Guizhou released Promoting Plan for Trademark Strategy Implementation in 2013, issued 

Guizhou AIC’s Opinions (Trial) on Solving Several Questions in Guizhou Famous Marks and Trade Names, Administrative Measures on Guizhou Famous Marks, Guizhou AIC’s Work Measures in 

Promoting the development of Guizhou’s liquor industry, drafted Instructions (Trial) on Pledge Loans 

of Trademark Rights in Guizhou, which provided strong legal and policy support for trademark 

strategy’s implementation. Yunnan AIC continued to include trademark strategy implementations as one of yearly key work evaluation indicator, which evaluated the three level’s trademark cultivation and registration, the instruction and application of Geographical Indication marks, and the objective and task of “double attacks”, therefore ensured the accomplishment of yearly trademark strategy work. 

Xizang released and carried out The People’s Government of Tibet Autonomous Region’s Opinions on Accelerating the Implementation of Trademark Strategy, timely finished the application 

of national trademark strategy model regions and model enterprises, which led the strategy develop further. Shaanxi, followed the requirements of the Outline of National Economic and Social Development 

Plan for the 12th five years in Shaanxi, and Shaanxi Intellectual Property Strategy Outline (2008-2020), 

planned provincial trademark strategy work (2014-2020), which focused on trademark’s development in the next few years, proactively raised objectives, key projects and main measures. 

Ningxia AIC finished the compilation of its local 2012 trademark development report, actively 

attended activities which happened during the five year’s implementation of intellectual property strategy to evaluate the overall conditions, to summarize experiences, and to locate problems. It 

compiled data from 2008 to 2012 reflecting the achievement in trademark strategy implementation, and 

provided references of innovative mind, improved method and productive effect. 

2. Adhering to serve development and striving to promote trademarks’ 

innovation and utilization 

AICs at all levels constantly kept in mind the obligations of serving development. They strengthened the administrative instruction and trademark cultivation to promote effective utilization of trademarks, which comprehensively promote local economic and social development. 

(1) Strengthening trademark instruction and cultivation 

Beijing, followed the requirement of “promoting transformation of industrial structure and 

growth pattern toward a development of high-end industry”, conducted well-known trademarks and famous trademarks recommendations and determinations, fostered local enterprises having advantages, Chapter 8 

045 

Local Trademark Work 

traditions and competitive potentials, and reached achievement in strengthening trademark management and added value enhancement within enterprises. Tianjin AIC focused technology based enterprises’ trademark applications and included them into its yearly trademark administration evaluation to enhance services and instructions. It suggested and 

finished the task at the beginning of the year “to have trademark applications for 80% giant enterprises 

and 30% generals”. For match the release and implementation of new Trademark Law, it compiled Enterprises’ Trademark Practical Guide and dispatched freely to well known and famous trademark enterprises and trademark association members. 

Hebei, focused on the characteristics of industrial structures and the requirement of industrial 

revitalization, provided policy support to agriculture products trademarks, high-tech products 

trademarks, collective marks, certification marks and Geographical Indications during their application 

of famous marks. Shanxi AIC closely focused the implementation of trademark strategy to revitalize the province by trademarks. It went into enterprises, farmers and industrial parks, to practically solve problems met in trademark registration, utilization, protection and management, and to help over 1000 enterprises formulate their trademark strategy plans. 

Inner Mongolia AIC continued the promotion of “four documents and one card” working mode, 

to provide instructions for enterprises dominating local characteristic industry, having low trademarks but strong desires for registrations, and instructed them to register, utilize trademarks and to foster well-known or famous trademarks to develop and expand themselves on trademark strategy. 

Jilin AICs, through investigation, generally established enterprises operation and trademark 

utilization archives, comprehensively carried out trademark administrative instruction working mode of 

“three documents and five entries”, instructed and coordinated a record high of 111 million trademark 

pledge loans for enterprises. 

Heilongjiang Province paid many attentions to the cultivation of agriculture products marks 

especially Geographical Indication marks, which made the volume of registered marks and Geographical Indications a sharp increase. It also attached high attentions to trademark support for agricultural industrialized leading enterprises manufacturing green food, organic food, non-pollution food, or doing intensive product processing, and for advantageous characteristic and strategic industries. 

Harbin AIC established a trademark utilization mode focusing on traditional advantageous 

industry and strategic emerging industry to open green channel for their capital raising. It insisted in developing trademarks by the top leader, supervising and inspecting trademark works, visiting main enterprises to provide onsite service for supporting trademark development. Shanghai actively developed the census of trademarks in culture and creative industry and the research of ancient trademark “Shanghai”'s development. It visited a series of main trademark enterprises and industrial parks to provide instructions. It also strengthened the support to export 046 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

enterprises by organizing special trainings, and compiled an analysis on Shanghai’s trademarks to provide evidence for overall trademark works. 

Zhejiang AIC took the support to the building of “Brand Instruction Station” and 

other public service platforms as a priority to hold promotion meetings, and to raise detailed requirements. It organized the inspections to brand bases and instruction stations, constantly explored their deep integrations, and promoted their functions, which boosted the implementation of local trademark strategy and the development of economy. 

Hangzhou AIC combined with the 

twelfth five years plan on trademark strategy implementation, conducted a project investigating trademark strategy implementations’ contribution on economic development. It organized three workshops with 54 famous mark enterprises. Through investigation, it had a further understanding on trademark ’s r ole an d f un ction in economic society, and better solid the 

confidence on trademark strategy. 

Ningbo AIC, considering the situation that the star leveled brands instruction stations established last year were sole in villages, timely set up multiple types o f stations in brand bases, trade associations, and star leveled them, which well promoted the trademark and brand work. Anhui strengthened the building of professional trademark and brand bases, conducted the determinations and visits to them orderly. It paid many attentions to the creation of trademark and brand bases groups which covered the whole province and had unique characteristics. 

Xiamen enhanced the cultivation of Taiwan-related marks. It actively provided services and 

instructed their registrations and utilizations. It also enlarged the scope of famous marks determinations, which applied by Taiwan enterprises, from only goods marks to both of goods marks and services marks. 

Jiangxi AICs solidly conducted their services for multiple enterprises to foster trademarks. They ▲ Hangzhou DERLOOK brand instruction station. 

> ▲ On June 16, 2013, Hangzhou organized workshop
> to discuss trademark strategy implementations’ contribution on economic development.

Chapter 8 

047 

Local Trademark Work 

strengthened the cooperation and coordination with villages, subdistricts, industrial parks or business departments in order to actively and smoothly establish brands instruction stations. They enhanced the administrative instructions to activities of “several trademark registrations instructed by one AIC station” and “three documents and one card” for intensifying the basic trademark construction abilities. They also attached great importance to the visits and instructions to main enterprises for their well-known and famous marks applications and for their brand buildings. Shandong steadily promoted the trademark infrastructure buildings in its grass roots. It established a trademark statistical and report system, assigned full-time trademark administers in local trademark authorities and their grass-root units to actively promote the establishment of brand instruction stations and improve trademark archive’s management. Wuhan investigated and analyzed its city’s trademark development in every season to support top policy makings and brand economic developments. It promoted the working mode of “supporting hundred of marks by hundred of unit leaders”, which effectively instructed eligible enterprises to get protections in multiple channels and manners, and showed a breakthrough to well-known trademarks in application, coverage, distribution, cultivation and reservation. 

Hunan AIC released Opinions on the Trial Establishment of Trademark and Brand Instruction Centers in National Level Industrial Parks, and began the experiments of Trademark and Brand 

Instruction Centers. They instructed enterprises having a brand advantage, trademark strategy model counties (cities or districts) and model enterprises to strengthen the development of trademarks. Through a constant cultivation towards trademarks, there was a increase in the quantity of famous marks. Guangdong deeply promoted the trial building of local international brands and achieved good effect. Chenghai trial site of Shantou city accelerated local economy by the registration and promotion of “Cheng 

Hai Wan Ju”(Chenghai Toy) trademark. 

Other regions also actively speeded up the building and development of brands for a positive interaction between local international brands and enterprises’ brands, therefore to promote the industrial transformation. 

Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region took the objective of helping 

thousand of enterprises with the 

> ▲ Guangxi AIC jointly with China Brand Management Research Center, held tour lectures themed as “Enrich
> Enterprises by Trademarks and Serve Development”.
> The picture shows one lecture held in Nanning High-tech Development Zone to help enterprises with trademark
> development.

048 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

trademarks’ growing and stronger, investigated deeply into grass roots and invited experts there to solve 

difficulties. It held tour lectures to conduct the activity of “Trademark Revitalizing Guangxi”, which 

effectively promoted enterprises’ quick development. 

Guangxi AIC jointly with China Brand Management Research Center, held tour lectures themed 

as “Enrich Enterprises by Trademarks and Serve Development”. The picture shows one lecture held in 

Nanning High-tech Development Zone to help enterprises with trademark development. Hainan AIC conducted trademark resources investigations deeply into enterprises, factories and 

mines, national farms and countryside. It actively instructed and promoted market entities to register and use trademarks in business. It realized trademark registration for one AIC grass root unit from one to multiple. In 2013, the applications increased 33% compared with the previous year. Sichuan actively promoted trademark strategy into industrial parks. It issued Notice on Promoting Trademark Strategy into Industrial Parks, set up trademark strategy instruction stations (units) within its local parks to promote the brand building there, which showed a good effect. 

Xizang AIC helped to coordinate the application of well known marks, Geographical Indication 

marks and famous marks through onsite services and instructions, which made trademark registration volume increased steadily. 

Xinjiang AIC released its local 2012 trademark development report, a reference for the 

government, enterprises and the public. It strengthened trademark daily consultations, conducted 

Xinjiang related trademark monitors to change the remedy into precaution. It also paid great attentions 

to trademark administrative instruction mode of “four documents, two accounts and one cards” to enlarge its instruction coverage. It actively explored trademark administration long term effect mechanism to promote its work normalization and systemization. 

(2) Enhancing the project of “Using trademark to enrich farmers” 

Hebei AIC strengthened the guidance on agriculture products operators’ trademark registrations, 

and instructed them to enhance brand reputation and competitiveness through quality improvements and trademark promotions. It also instructed relevant associations on Geographical Indication marks’ application. The cultivation of agriculture products marks and Geographical Indication marks turned out a great achievement. 

Liaoning AIC issued the Proposed Standard for Geographical Indication Marks’ Utilizations to 

strengthen its administration and to promote its local economic development. Agriculture related branches of Shenyang AIC, actively helped farmers, relevant enterprises and associations to apply trademarks. Its working mode “enterprises (cooperation organizations) + farmers + trademarks” was a practice of using trademarks to enrich farmers. The sharp increase of Geographical 

Indication marks and Certification marks promoted farmers’ incomes, agricultural added values, and 

rural areas’ sustainable development. Dalian widely deployed the investigations to Geographical Indication marks’ utilizations and protections, and summarized into a targeted report, which once read by local government and trademark Chapter 8 

049 

Local Trademark Work 

holders, was a useful reference for Geographical Indication marks’ registration and utilization. 

Henan AIC closely coordinated with local government, relevant associations, and agriculture 

related enterprises to choose some local featured agriculture products to give special instructions and supports. The Geographical Indication numbers increased 28% compared with last year, a record increase. 

Hubei AIC comprehensively promoted its project to have at least one Geographical Indication 

for each county, and continued to promote industrialized working mode of “enterprises (associations) + Geographical Indications + farmers”. There were 39 new Geographical Indications applications, ranking first among the six provinces in middle China. Geographical Indications promoted the enrichment of farmers and the achievement of agriculture development. Agriculture related branches of Wuhan AIC provided onsite services to support trademark development of farmers’ professional cooperation organization. It promoted “five helps” to help in 

searching, designing, applying, using trademarks and in other fields. It also invited trademark agencies 

to provide live consultations and operations, which gained many appraises. 

Hainan continued the model county project of “using trademark to enrich farmers”. It promoted the models’ demonstrations and influences to cultivate a series of agriculture products marks, which 

increased such products’ qualities and added values and changed agriculture into a pillar industry in promoting local featured economic development. Chongqing AIC deployed the investigations on Geographical Indication resources to explore the eligible ones for registrations. It practically made the Geographical Indication marks’ recommendation and application to instruct the Geographical Indication w o r k f r o m q u a n t i t y t o 

quality and benefit. It deeply 

conducted the docking of Geographical Indication products with supermarkets to reduce circulation links and cost, which showed a constant increase in the management and utilization. AICs at all levels in Yunnan Province, actively cultivated, coordinated and explored Geographical Indication resources and got a great achievement. There were 18 Geographical Indications marks being registered or getting preliminary approval in 2013, a great promotion for plateau’s featured agriculture products’ brand building. Shaanxi AIC constantly deepened its work of “one mark registration for one grass root unit”. 

> ▲ Chongqing AIC successfully held a fair to dock “Feng Jie Qi
> Cheng” with markets.

050 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

It organized and helped local societies, associations and enterprises in Geographical Indication Certification marks’ application and in fostering independent brand. There were 2967 agriculture related marks registered in 2013, over 20 marks registered as Geographical Indications. Its work of “using trademarks to enrich farmers” got fruitful achievement. Gansu AIC went deep into rural areas to promote model cases of using Geographical Indications to enrich farmers and to instruct farmers to increase their trademark awareness. It also instructed farmer’s professional cooperation organizations to explore valuable products for registration to improve market competitiveness. 

Qinghai government released Implementation Strategy to Further Promote Agriculture and Animal Products Marks and Geographical Indication Marks Strategy. AICs at all levels attached great 

importance on the characteristic and green products to instruct relevant industry applying well known and famous marks. They conducted onsite operations and instructions, coordinated local government to establish special department and deployed multiple measures to promote Geographical Indication marks. 

Xinjiang emphasized “to continue promoting agriculture product market and to implement 

trademark strategy” as the main task to improve its agriculture products market in 2013, and listed in 

its government work report. Xinjiang AIC conducted investigations and researches to the development of Geographical Indication marks and agriculture products marks, and formed and released Xinjiang Geographical Indication Resources Database. It instructed the grass root units and villages to jointly 

develop brand instruction stations and 193 stations were established. It also paid many attentions to the building of Geographical Indication marks and agriculture products marks. 

(3) Enlarging Trademark Value’s Application Channel 

Jiangsu AIC paid attentions to trademark rights pledge loans. It conducted pledge loans 

investigations, drafted agreements to support famous enterprises and organized communication and signing activities for banks and enterprises. A breakthrough of 6 billion yuan of trademark pledge loans in the whole province showed the deployment of brand effect and the increase of trademark value. 

Hangzhou AIC continued the cooperation and coordination with banks, enterprises and experts. 

Through measures of investigation, plat construction, administrative instruction, and credit building, it promoted well known and famous mark enterprises to trademark rights pledge loans. It actively implemented Chun’an experience in the whole city to fully exercise trademark’s intangible functions 

and to solve financing difficulties. 

Anhui insisted in and improved “five services” mechanism to trademark rights pledge loans, which assigned relevant work into counties (cities or districts). The work promoted the balanced development of loans to meet enterprises’ necessities and to serve real economic development. 

Jinan AIC jointly with Bank of Communication and trademark evaluation department to establish the city’s first financing channel using trademark rights pledge. The headquarter of Bank of Communication offered a loan of 15 million yuan using trademark “Zhong Gong” as a collateral to Chapter 8 

051 

Local Trademark Work 

Jinan Heavy Machinery Joint-Stock Co., LTD, a breakthrough of zero in Jinan’s trademark pledge 

history. Shenzhen promoted a risk allocation mechanism to reinsurance the intellectual property pledge 

financing. On the basis of Several Measures to Promote Intellectual Property Pledge Financing, Shenzhen Reinsurance Center re-guaranteed the city’s Intellectual Property pledges, where reinsurance 

center, financing guarantee departments and commercial banks bore the loan risk according to the ratio of 5:4:1. The reinsurance center has also assigned risk remedies accounting for 2% of the total reinsurance value. 

Sichuan AIC upon a wide collection of public opinions, jointly with Sichuan Banking Regulatory Bureau, issued Guidance on Trademark Exclusive Rights Pledge Loans in Sichuan Province (Chuan 

AIC No [2013] 41), to instruct enterprises effectively using their marks, to promote them extending 

their trademark pledge financing channels, and to increase trademark added values. Chengdu built a platform for enterprise’ financing, which supported and instructed well known 

and famous mark enterprises to extend channels including intellectual property evaluated in terms of shares, pledge loans, mark transfer, etc., to promote the expansion of manufactures and the innovation of technologies. In 2013, nearly 600 million yuan pledge loans were offered to 38 enterprises. 

Xi’an AIC organized the discussion of Opinions on Trademark Pledge Loans, sent enterprises letters on pledge loans to serve them in financing and development, which proved a good effect. 

(4) Encouraging trademark’s application and utilization outside China 

Dalian AIC, to support and encourage enterprises’ independent innovation and international brand building, released Notice of Instructions on Dalian export-oriented enterprises’ trademark international registrations and protections, to actively instruct them well use aids to promote trademark international registrations. 

Fujian government played the instructive and supportive role of policies to set up aids for Madrid 

international registrations from 5 thousand to 100 thousand yuan, which stimulated the enthusiasm and initiative of enterprises to register international marks and encouraged them to implement international application strategy. 

Xiamen held EU IP lectures 

and invited full time lawyer to introduce EU’s trademark system and protections. It helped to link enterprises and trademark agencies, a n d e n c o u r a g e d a g e n c i e s t o  

> ▲On September 10, 2013, EU Intellectual Property Protection
> Workshop was held in Xiamen.

052 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

tailor Madrid international registration plans for enterprises, which promoted the overseas trademark 

registration. 

Qingdao held a joint meeting with World Intellectual Property Organization to invest Madrid International Registration’s protections and its role in promoting economic development. Hunan AIC conducted a special investigation on export-oriented enterprises’ international 

trademark registrations. It invited local AICs and enterprises to join tailored trainings and included the 

achievement of Madrid international registration as one of AICs’ evaluation indicators to effectively 

improve the awareness and standard of trademark registration. 

Shenzhen seriously implemented Rules on Shenzhen IP Special Funds Management, provided aids from 2000yuan to 1000yuan for each register to overseas registration from Madrid system, OHIM, OAPI and individual registration. It also aided agencies successfully helping client’s oversea 

registration a fund of 500 yuan for each register. All measures successfully stimulated the overseas strategy. 

3. Strengthening market supervision and practically protecting trademark rights 

AICs at all levels focused on the protection of trademark exclusive rights, strengthened administrative enforcement, combined daily supervision and special campaign, enhanced international cooperation and regional coordination, and continued the work of cracking down Intellectual Property infringement and counterfeiting, which effectively protected the interests of trademark holders and consumers and safeguarded the fair and competitive market order. 

(1). Strengthening trademark supervision and enforcement 

Shenyang AIC attached great importance to the supervision to trademark printing enterprises in 

its daily supervision. It urged them to establish and improve “five mechanisms” in relating to trademark 

printings and three documents including the operation, the circulation and the destruction, and made records. It tried trademark authorized operating system, which extend trademark supervision and lowered the occurrence and complaints of trademark infringement. Changchun deployed a special campaign on administrative instruction and supervision toward trademark printing enterprises. It on the basis of localization and grid management, inspected and recorded those enterprises and dealt with their illegal behaviors. 

Harbin focused on well-known and famous trademarks protection, seriously cracked down 

infringement and counterfeits to protect enterprises’ interests. It, on the basis of standardizing agencies’ operations, released relevant self discipline and honest rules, signed commitments with agencies to standardize the market order. Ningbo timely conducted special supervisions to trademark printing enterprises and inspected their operations. It checked the validity of licenses, procedures and contents of printings, seriously investigated printing infringing and counterfeiting signs, punishing illegal printings and sales of above Chapter 8 

053 

Local Trademark Work 

signs therefore to stop from origin of trademark infringement and counterfeiting. 

AICs in Jiangxi took a clear functional assignment during cracking down infringement and 

counterfeiting. The provincial AIC strengthened the supervision and instruction to “double cracking downs”, oversaw the major cases, and instructed the real problem shootings. Local AICs, led by governments, cooperated with departments of public security, people’s procuratorate, people’s court, quality inspection, and the customs, continued to maintain the pressure to intellectual property infringement and counterfeits. 

Qingdao AIC promoted the government to release Work Plan on 2014 Qingdao International Horticultural Exposition IP Protection and Franchising Products Market Standardization. It began 

the supervision to the protection of Expo’s symbols and investigation to infringements, to protect the legitimate interest of the symbols’ holder. It focused on the cracking down on infringement of famous marks, and organized enforcement to strengthen the protection. It visited the city’s major trademark agencies to organize meetings and to instruct them honest and lawful operation to standardize agencies’ market order. Wuhan took special campaign on major areas, regions and products. It combined the 

comprehensive supervision with festivals’ consumption hot spots, the special campaign with March 15 

and April 26 promotions, the management with quality inspections. It focused on household appliances, daily necessities, food, decors, and agriculture related goods, to strengthen the investigation on free riding, especially the major cases, which turned a good effect. Guangzhou conducted two major special campaigns - “double cracking downs” and to combat “free riding”. It focused on “food, civil life, high risk, and hazard” areas to organize special campaign to leatherware, household appliance, construction material. It handled with the most cases in the province, and publicized 10 typical cases involving “free riding” in 2013 and successfully accomplished the trademark enforcement in Canton Fair. Through the strict attacks to trademark infringement and counterfeit, it achieved good social effect and consolidated trademark protections. Chengdu promoted historical cultural and public resources to register. Through a thorough 

selected list of historical cultural brands registrations, it compiled a Research Report on Chengdu Historical Cultural and Public Brand Protection and Development Plan, and initiated the trademark 

registration and protection to relevant resources. Guizhou, considering recent malicious application of tourist sceneries or famous cultural brands, conducted an investigation to major historical, cultural, tourist resources and intangible cultural heritages to promote the development of cultural industry and the protection of cultural brand. Ningxia focused on public most concerned food and household appliances to strengthen products quality supervision in circulations. It attached great importance to well known and famous marks, foreign related marks, Geographical Indication marks to investigate a series of major cases which specially 

concerned by public and infringed in internet. Many illegal unfair competition cases involving “free 

riding” were handled, and agriculture related illegal behaviors were punished. Through administration, 054 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

the infringement in major areas, regions and products was shrinked sharply, the trademark exclusive rights were protected effectively. 

AICs at all levels in Xinjiang, 

paid great attentions to the “double cracking downs” in order to promote independent innovation, economic transformation, social integrity, and national or regional image. It closely focused on major problems injuring people’s interest and affecting development driven by innovation. It continued the special campaign, and included it into 2013 evaluation indicator of performance assessment. 

(2) Innovating and Improving Trademark Supervision Long Term Effect Mechanism 

Shanxi AIC issued Work Plan on Cracking Down IP Infringement and Counterfeiting in 2013 and its evaluation details, and improved working mechanism for “double cracking downs”, which was an institutional guarantee to control trademark infringements. 

Jilin AIC instructed 16 national or provincial level integrity markets to excise Authorized 

Trademark Operations, which constrained market owners and operators to respect other’s trademark rights and to boycott illegal goods. Shanghai AIC strengthened the investigation on major cases and improved its case investigation procedures. It closely coordinated with the people’s court, people’s procuratorate and public security department to set up a joint meeting mechanism and to strengthen the punishment on trademark illegal cases. It randomly selected concluded cases to check and regulate law enforcement. It promoted the establishment of trademark supervision comprehensive evaluation system to take scientific manners 

to evaluate works and to improve efficiency. It also improved its trademark supervision information 

system to share data with other systems. Nanjing actively promoted the authorized trademark operations into shopping malls and held live meeting to explore the use of administrative instructions as an innovation in supervisions to exercise its duty. 

Fujian released Fujian AIC Protecting Trademark Rights Warning and Emergency Response 

Plan, basically set up major cases’ warning and emergency response mechanism. It also issued Fujian 

Trademark Printing Management Rules, to strengthen administration to trademark printings, and instructed local relevant enterprises to set up and to improve five mechanisms in relating to the printing 

to regulate the whole procedures.  

> ▲Leaders from Ningxia AIC investigated one trademark printing enterprise.

Chapter 8 

055 

Local Trademark Work 

In order to create a characteristic Internet goods trading supervision mechanism, Xiamen 

conducted administrations in five ways. It relied on internet and set up internet goods trading supervision information support system, relied on people and set up supervision work frame, relied on laws and regulations and set up special campaign oriented working mode, relied on brands and cultivated a series of local internet brands and relied on promotions and set up a good public opinion environment. 

Shandong took the principle of gradual influence and promotion to promote trademark checking 

and recording system and trademark authorized operating system to exercise its duty of supervision on trademarks in circulations. It basically formed a comprehensive trademark supervision mechanism combining AIC administration, social supervision and enterprise self discipline together. 

Guangdong AIC signed an MOU on Sharing Information on Cracking Down Infringement and 

Counterfeiting with the public security authority, by assigning liaison officers to provide a quick 

search in each authority. It also improved trademark coordination with Hong Kong, and carried out the notification, co investigation and communication mechanism to trademark cases with Hong Kong 

customs. Sichuan actively drafted Opinions on Establishment of Enforcement Coordination between Sichuan AIC and Sichuan Public Security Authority, and Sichuan AIC Enforcement and Investigation 

Professional Consultation Mechanism (drafted for approval) to further improve trademark 

administration and supervision. 

4. Enhancing Promotions and Trainings to Provide Strong Protections to the Implementation of Trademark Strategy 

AICs at all levels attached great importance on the fundamental work in the implementation of trademark strategy, including the promotions, educations and trainings. They constantly, comprehensively and widely promoted trademark work and knowledge, strongly developed the trainings to AIC staffs, agencies and market entities, which was a reliable public opinion support and power protection for trademark strategy implementation. 

(1) Effectively Promoted Trademarks 

Dalian, on the occasion of “Trademark Festival”, chose many ways to publicize new trademark knowledge including a special column of “Calling upon trademark power and Promoting boom and 

development” in paper and TV medias, the video of “Dalian’s implementation of trademark strategy” 

and online discussion at “China Dalian” government web portal, which turned to be a good effect. 

Heilongjiang closely focused on the subject of “Implementing Trademark Strategy and Serving Scientific Development”, made good use of “March 15” Consumers’ Day and “April 26” World IP 

Day to conduct trademark strategy promotions. It went deeply into enterprises, communities and public areas to publicize trademark knowledge, helped local government in organizing large trademark 056 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

activities to instruct consumers’ awareness of respecting and protecting brands. 

Hangzhou used official website and mass medias to promote trademark strategy and knowledge 

and to exhibit brands. It invited professors for lectures of trademark management, registration, protection and relevant policies. It trained trademark printing enterprises the knowledge of new 

Trademark Law. It visited major fostered enterprises and SME to introduce trademark registration and utilization. It conducted an investigation on “Trademark Strategy’s Contributions to Hangzhou’s 

Economic Development” to enhance understandings to the status and function of trademarks in economy and society. Though all manners of promotion, the public especially market entities’ trademark awareness were improved in multi ways. Shaanxi AIC seriously conducted trademark laws and regulations promotion. During “IP protection promotion week”, it played the advantages of medias to communicate IP knowledge in physical media, promotional material, outdoor consultation, and etc. It fully exercised the role of 

“Trademark Knowledge Teaching Team” to provide trainings to enterprises in trademark knowledge 

and laws. It also held trainings on new Trademark Law to do the education and promotion work. All things were done to create an advocating intellectual property social environment. 

Gansu took the opportunity of March 15 and April 26, developed various promotions, and conducted “Magnificent Gansu” logo registrations and recommendations. Through promotions, good 

social effect was received. 

Qinghai drafted and released 2012-2013 Trademark Development Report, and successfully jointly organized the Magnificent Qinghai, Characteristic Brands – Qinghai brands products Zhengzhou Road Show. It also edited brand promotion special articles in main newspapers, coordinated local TV broadcasting trademark shows of local enterprises, organized new Trademark Law promotion, and establish Qinghai 

Tr a d e m a r k w e b s i t e t o foster a sound environment o f c u l t i v a t i n g a n d respecting trademarks. 

X i n j i a n g , o n t h e 

o c c a s i o n o f N a t i o n a l I P P r o m o t i o n We e k a n d D e c e m b e r 4 L a w Promotion Day, conducted live consultations with medias. It also widely p r o m o t e d t r a d e m a r k knowledge and the new l a w, d i s p a t c h e d o v e r ▲ During April 26 IP Promotion Week, Karamay AIC conducted IP 

> activities in communities.

Chapter 8 

057 

Local Trademark Work 

800,000 promotional materials, accepted 6000 consultations and complaints, over 50 forums, lectures, trainings, contests to enhance social awareness to trademarks. 

(2) Strengthening the Education and Training 

Jiangsu held eight times “brand manager” trainings and trained a series of person talented in brand 

building. It also organized the second term competition to cultivate excellent trademark professional person for local AICs. Nanjing AIC strengthened the team building and conducted trainings to person working with trademarks, advertisements and contracts. It promoted local data management and the new Trademark Law trainings for AICs all over Nanjing. It also organized law lectures, video and telephone meetings, workshops, trainings and contests to solid foundations and to make a breakthrough. 

Jinan AIC and its branches took ways of video and special reports to educate its staff and relevant people from enterprises in relating to trademark works, which effectively improved the efficiency in 

trademark strategy implementation and in local enforcement. Wuhan AIC strengthened supervision on trademark agencies, periodically organized meetings 

to star level the agencies. On May 

15, 2013, it organized a trademark training to over 80 peoples from the cities agencies and lawyers recorded in SAIC. The training provided a systematical introduction of trademark application and registration basic knowledge of ethics in trademark services, which effectively improved the qualities and abilities of people involving in trademarks. Shenzhen assigned special fund of 3 million yuan every year for intellectual property trainings in order to help enterprises in cultivating useful staff. It promoted qualification evaluation work to stimulate the human resource development of trademark talented people all over the city. It also jointly organized IP school of Shenzhen University to cultivate trademark talented people and to gradually improve trademark relevant people cultivation mechanism. Guangxi AIC organized local trademark and advertisement supervision training to explain new Trademark Law, to analyze trademark infringement cases and enforcement, which effectively improved staffs’ enforcement level. Yunnan held trademark trainings in the province. Its local AICs also conducted kinds of educations. There were 4100 staffs in and out AIC system accepted trainings in 2013. Through 

> ▲ On May 15, 2013, Wuhan held a trademark training to
> agencies.

058 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

c o m p r e h e n s i v e t r a i n i n g s a n d educations, the trademark staffs’ political qualities were improved and their abilities to implement trademark strategy were enhanced. G a n s u A I C t a r g e t e d a t t h e deficiency of trainings of trademark laws and regulations to local branches and enterprises. It organized video trainings and lectures, made full use of famous marks’ renewals and determinations to conduct face to face, point to point, and thing to thing instructions to trademark staffs in and out the system. The actions explored a new way of trademark trainings and improved their purpose and function.  

> ▲On August 22, 2013, Yunnan held a trademark training within the province.

Chapter 9 

059 

International Registration and Overseas Right Protection 

# Chapter 9 International Registration and Overseas Right Protection 

In 2013, CTMO continued the examination on international registrations under Madrid System, carrying out the promotion and training on International Registration of Marks under Madrid System, and strengthening the support for international registration by domestic 

applicants. 

1. Further strengthening the work for trademark international registration, Madrid applications increasing steadily 

Madrid applications from China grew to a new record in 2013, reached 2273 (several 

classes and countries designated in one application), with a year-on-year growth of 8.2%, 

ranking the sixth in the Madrid Union, and the total applications added up to 17, 229. There were 20, 275 Madrid applications (one application with several classes) designating China 

in 2013, with the total applications adding up to 196, 092, ranking the first continually in the 

union. The Office examined foreign Madrid applications designating China on 41,736 classes 

of goods or services, completed 9076 modification applications, 6064 renewal requests, 7499 cancellations, 3574 transmissions, 671 limitations and 727 corrections. The office also made 180 decisions on oppositions and sent out 265 notifications of provisional refusals based on opposition. 

2. Positively participating international cooperation, enhancing China’s voice in international affairs 

SAIC played an active part in Madrid System reform and development, and dispatched representative to attend Madrid Union Assembly and Working Group on the Legal Development of the Madrid System for the International Registration of Marks, enhancing voice of China in the Union. CTMO cooperated with International Bureau of WIPO to carry 

out the development of acceptable goods/services database. The Office sent staff members to give lectures in Intellectual Property Protection Workshop for the Delegation from French-speaking African Countries. 060 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

3. Innovating service, supporting the Going Global strategy 

(1) Strengthening promotion and training, improving the awareness of trademark international registration.In 2013, Trademark Office of SAIC dispatched staff members to provinces, such 

as Jiangsu, Hunan, Zhejiang, Yunnan, Hubei, Liaoning and Guangdong, for the promotion and training on international registration of marks. Meanwhile, the Office cooperated with International Bureau of WIPO to promote Madrid System. (2) Improving registration guide, providing better services for Madrid applicants. CTMO timely updated the information of International Registration on China Trademark Website, providing FAQs and Fee Calculation Standards for the applicant’s convenience. 

(3) Strengthening rights safeguarding, helping enterprises protect their trademark rights abroad. 

In 2013, CTMO strengthened cooperation and communication with counterparts of other countries, 

as well as helped and supported Chinese enterprises to protect their rights overseas by providing 

effective suggestions. The case of bad faith registration of trademark “Baidu” in European Union has made great progress. CTMO helped Baidu Corporation submit evidence to the OHIM and the Benelux Court and safeguard their own rights through legal procedure. Recently, OHIM has decided to cancel the trademark “Baidu” registered by European Baidu Corporation in bad faith. If European Baidu 

> ▲ Hunan AIC held training course on International Registration of Marks under Madrid System on
> April, 2013.

Chapter 9 

061 

International Registration and Overseas Right Protection 

Corporation do not appeal in the due time, Baidu Corporation will win the case. After being aware of “Hengshun” trademake’s bad faith filing in Peru in July, 2013, CTMO helped Jiangsu Hengshun Vinegar Industry Co., Ltd. research and analyze the relative 

International agreements and Peru’s trademark law, prepare and file opposition application to 

Peru Intellectual Property Office on time. Director General Xu Ruibiao of CTMO sent a letter 

to his counterpart of Peru Intellectual Property Office, expressing his concern on this case. Now the case is still on the procedure. 062 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

# Chapter 10 International Exchanges and Cooperation 

In 2013, SAIC positively carried out a series of multilateral and bilateral exchanges and 

cooperation in the trademark field, playing a very important role in establishing China’s positive image in IPR protection, new progress was made in this respect. 

1. Actively carrying on multilateral exchanges and cooperation 

(1) Exchanges and cooperation with WIPO 

In 2013, SAIC strengthened the exchanges and cooperation with WIPO. On November 8, Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC met the visiting Francis Gurry the Director General of WIPO. Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC and Wang Binying, Deputy Director General of WIPO joined the meeting. Zhang Mao expressed that SAIC would like to jointly work with WIPO to consolidate current 

cooperation fruits, and to further expand cooperation in larger areas to mutually promote trademark development. 

Trademark Office of SAIC actively assigned staffs to join the 51st and 52nd WIPO Assemblies, 

the 30th meeting of the Standing Committee on the Law of Trademarks, Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications (SCT) of WIPO, the 23rd Session of Nice Union Assembly, the 

11th Working Group Meeting 

on the Legal Development 

of the Madrid System for the International Registration of 

Trademarks, World Symposium on Geographical Indications, 

R e g i o n a l S y m p o s i u m o n N i c e , Vi e n n a a n d L o c a r n o 

Classifications, WIPO and INTA’s Trademark Law and Examination Workshop and IP 

▲ On November 8, Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC met WIPO DG 

Francis Gurry. Chapter 10 

063 

International Exchange and Cooperation 

enforcement trainings. 

On August 6, Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office under SAIC met the visiting Director of Operations Service Madrid Registry of WIPO, Mrs. Asta Valdimarsdottir. Both sides exchanged the Madrid operation programs and internal procedures. 

(2) TM5 Meeting 

From December 2 to 6, 2013, Mrs Li Yali, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office, as the official member, joined the 2013 TM5 Annual Meeting in South Korea. She, on behalf of the Office, 

introduced the progress from last year’s meeting and discussed the progress of mutual cooperation projects and the following works. 

(3) Exchanges and Cooperation with APEC 

In 2013, CTMO dispatched representatives to attend the 36th Meeting of Intellectual Property 

Experts Group. The representatives seriously researched and arranged proposals and proactively protect national interests. 

(4) Activities in OECD 

SAIC representative participated the IP and Competition Law Symposium organized by OECD/ 

Korea Policy Center and WIPO . 

2. Actively carrying on bilateral exchanges and cooperation 

(1) Exchanges and Cooperation with US 

On September 9, 2013, 

Zhang Mao Minister of SAIC 

met the visiting Acting Director 

of USPTO, Ms. Teresa Stanek R e a . B o t h s i d e s t a l k e d o n 

Tr a d e m a r k L a w r e v i s i o n , malicious trademark registration, and bilateral cooperation. In April 2013, Trademark 

Office of SAIC organized staffs 

to US for Sino-US IP workgroup director general level meeting. In September, US delegation 

of IP work group under JCCT visited Trademark Office. Wu Qun exchanged ideas on trademarks with USPTO Senior Consultant Ms. Elaine Wu. In December, Xia Qing, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office joined China’s IP Oversea Exchanges and the Sino-US IP workgroup meeting where she discussed the progress of Regulations for 

the Implementation of the Trademark Law, malicious registration and other both concerned issues. 

> ▲ On September 9, 2013, Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC met the visiting Acting Director of USPTO, Ms. Teresa Stanek Rea.

064 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Trademark Office continued to strengthen the exchanges and cooperation with US Embassy in 

China, AmCham China, US Semiconductor Industry Association and other organizations to catch the newest progress of the US part, and to promote China’s Trademark progress and to make deep 

discussions on the revisions and implementations of Trademark Law and its Regulations. Relevant Staff from Trademark Office also met personnel from InterContinental and Deckers Outdoor Corporation to 

discuss relevant trademark cases. 

(2) Exchanges and Cooperation with EU 

In 2013, Trademark Office dispatched staffs to 12nd, and 13th Sino-EU IPR Working Group Meetings, the 8th round Sino-EU Agreement on Cooperation and Protection of Geographical Indications. It officially started the IPKEY plan with the European counterpart and negotiated and formulated plans on specific cooperation under the framework. 

(3) Exchanges and Cooperation with United Kingdom 

In 2013, bilateral cooperation between China and United Kingdom has been continually strengthened. Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC met the visiting Chief Executive of Intellectual Property Office of UK, Mr. John Alty and discussed on trademark progress and cooperation in 2014. Wu Qun, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office under SAIC and Li Zhijun, Deputy Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board under SAIC, met with visiting Deputy Director General in charge of trade policies in Department for Business Innovation and Skills, Mr Michael Williams. Both 

sides exchanged ideas on relevant trademark cases and Trademark Law revision. 

(4) Exchanges and Cooperation with other countries and organizations 

Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC and Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC met the Danish Minister for Business and Growth. Liu Junchen also met the visiting Chairman of Russian Federal Service for Intellectual Property Mr. B Simonov. Li Yali, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office under SAIC met Director General of Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual Property Mr. Felix Addor. Yan Shi, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office under SAIC met Israel Patent Office Director (Deputy Director General level) Mr Asa Kling. In 2013, SAIC also held the second IP training seminar for ARIPO and the third seminar for 

OAPI to deliver trainings and to promote China’s trademark system. It also selected representatives to 

South Korea for implementing IP cooperation Agreement. Business Corporations and Associations including Pernod Ricard, Lacoste, SEPHORA, Comité Champagne and Zegna also paid visits to Trademark Office and Trademark Review and Adjudication Board to discuss relevant trademark cases. 

3. Actively carrying on exchanges and cooperation with Hong Kong, Macau S.A.R. and Taiwan region 

In 2013, Trademark Office assigned examiners twice to Macau for IP symposium with the Hong Kong and Macau counterpart on the topic of mainland trademark examination standard and Chapter 10 

065 

International Exchange and Cooperation 

trademark rights protection strategy. It also assigned representatives under the request of Chinese Commercial and Industrial Coordination Society to Taiwan region to promote Trademark Law for 

Taiwan enterprises. It held a workshop with experts from Taiwan Intellectual Property Office to 

coordinate trademark cases under the framework of “the Agreement for Cross-strait Cooperation in Intellectual Property Protection”. It also sent staff to attend CEPA implementation senior 

meeting on December 18, 2013 in Shanghai and to discuss with the Hong Kong counterpart on 

relevant issues in relating to the implementation of the latest sign of the tenth supplementary agreement of CEPA. 

4. Further strengthening working relations with foreign embassies and intellectual property organizations in China 

SAIC further strengthened the communication with trademark authorities in relevant international organizations, countries, and regions, the embassies or intellectual property organizations, to get to know their latest progresses, to promote China’s trademark achievements, and to make deep 

discussions on the revision and implementation of Trademark Law and its Regulations, which played 

a great important role in strengthening external promotions and creating good images for China’s IP protections. 066 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

# Chapter 11 Trademark Publicity 

In 2013, AICs at all levels took the opportunity of the adoption of new Trademark Law, trademark administrative protection and trademark strategy implementation, made good use of traditional media including radio, television, paper and magazine and new media such as internet to promote trademarks, thereby effectively improving public awareness to trademarks and their legal consciousness to trademark laws, creating a favorable environment to value, utilize and protect trademarks. 

1. Closely focused on new Trademark Law to conduct various legal promotions 

On August 30, 2013, Decision on the Revision of the “Trademark Law of the People’s Republic 

of China” was adopted at the 4th Session of the Standing Committee of the Twelfth National People’s Congress, which successfully concluded the ten years’ trademark law the third time revision work. The new Trademark Law makes great adjustments in trademark registration and administration system to facilitate trademark applicants, to safeguard a fair and competitive market order, and to strengthen trademark rights protections. It opens a new chapter in China’s trademark legal construction. It also makes a higher requirement for AICs in trademark administrations. To comprehensively strengthen public awareness to trademark laws and regulations, to improve market entities’ trademark utilizations and protections, to enhance AIC staffs and trademark agents understandings on new Law, the whole AIC system closely focused on the major changes of the Law to conduct various and informative promotions. The first is to strengthen organizational leadership to solidly and orderly promote the Law. 

SAIC set up a Trademark Law implementation work leading group, which was headed by its Vice Minister Liu Junchen. It formulated work plans to maintain the emphasis and effectiveness of the 

implementation. On September 17, 2013, SAIC held its system’s video and telephone meeting to 

implement the new Law, where Xin Chunying, Deputy Chairman of NPC’s Law Committee interpreted the new Law, and Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC attended and made an important speech and to make 

full deployment. On September 18, SAIC issued Notices on implementing the new Trademark Law to further clarify work requirements. 

The second is to innovate promotions for a better effect. Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC wrote a 

signed article in People’s Daily with the theme of “Studying and Implementing new Trademark Law to Chapter 11 

067 

Trademark Publicity 

Serve Economic and Social Development”. 

Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark 

Office under SAIC accepted an group 

interview by medias including the Xinhua News Agency, Guang Ming Daily, and China National Radio. SAIC also actively coordinated with CCTV in major CCTV 

news to report the adoption and major changes of the new Law. It also gave 

specific promotions in periodicals including 

China Industry and Commerce News, 

Biweekly of Administration for Industry 

and Commerce, and China Industry and 

Commerce Administration Research, and 

in websites including SAIC and Trademark 

Office web portals. 

T h e t h i r d i s t o c o n t r o l t h e implementations at various levels to foster a legal environment. AICs at all levels, focused on the requirements in SAIC’s deployment, seriously implemented the 

spirit of Minister Zhang Mao’s speech. 

They started in succession the promotion and training on the new Trademark Law and gained a good social effect. AICs 

in Inner Mongolia, Shandong, Yunnan, Qinghai released relevant work opinions 

or work plans to comprehensively deploy the education and implementation. AICs in 

Shanxi, Liaoning, Jilin, Zhejiang, Fujian, Hubei, Guangdong, Guangxi, Guizhou, Shaanxi, Qinghai and Xinjiang conducted 

targeted Trademark Law promotions and trainings in ways of trainings, forums, promotional materials, paper documents and knowledge quizzes, to improve the work level of trademark enforcement and  

> ▲From November 24 to 30, 2013, Shenyang held the Trademark Law promotion week. The picture shows
> the promotional slogan on Dongyu Plaza of Maluwan Heping District of the city. ▲ On November 29, 2013, Shenzhen Market Supervision Administration Bureau (Intellectual Property
> Office) organized an implementing meeting for new Trademark Law.
> ▲ On December 4, 2013, Xiamen AIC took the opportunity of National Legal Knowledge Publicity Day
> to promote new Trademark Law to citizens.

068 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

service standard of agencies. 

2. Actively Organizing 2013 National IPR Publicity Week 

In 2013, SAIC as one member of the Publicity Week organizing committee, in accordance with the arrangement, on the subject of “Implementing IP Strategy and Supporting Innovation Driven Development” and on the implementation of the Outline of the National Intellectual Property Strategy, during the publicity week showed the characteristics of AIC authorities, and displayed remarkable achievements in trademark strategy implementation. With combined efforts of the whole system, various activities were accomplished successfully. (1) Actively took part in publicity activities arranged by the organizing committee. The opening 

ceremony of 2013 IPR Publicity Week was held in the internet. SAIC, followed the requirements of the 

organizing committee, made full uses of the characteristics of quick broadcasting, large information carrying, and mass audience acceptance of new medias including the internet to actively join and 

promote all activities. On April 25, Fu Shuangjian, Vice Minister of SAIC attened the news conference 

held by News Office of the State Council to introduce China’s IP development and to answer journalists’ questions on how AIC system to implement trademark strategy and the major work of trademarks in the next stage. 

(2) Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy (2012) Chinese/English 

version was continued to release. SAIC vigorously organized the compilation and released publicly, 

and presented the Annual Report to relevant ministries, governments above municipal level, AICs above prefecture level. The Annual Report made extensive introductions of AICs’ remarkable 

accomplishments to promote trademark strategy implementation, further educated trademark laws and relevant knowledge and enhanced social’s trademark awareness. 

(3) Variously AIC featured 

publicity activities were organized. In April, 2013, SAIC organized a n e x h i b i t i o n t o s h o w a n d celebrate the achievements of the i m p l e m e n t a t i o n o f Tr a d e m a r k Law for thirty years in Trademark 

Building and its web portal. The 

exhibition was concentrated on important accomplishments made during the Law’s implementation. AICs at all levels also fully made 

use of IPR Publicity Week and ▲Chongqing AIC Dianjiang branch deeply conducted the activity in April 26 IPR Publicity Week to send promotional materials for local people. Chapter 11 

069 

Trademark Publicity 

combined with local work characteristics to conduct various activities. AICs in 

Jiangsu, Guangdong, Chongqing and 

Guizhou released local trademark annual report to publicly and fully reflect local situations in trademark work and brand building. Shanxi AIC, on the occasion of the week, exposed a batch of trademark infringing cases which were reported by over twenty medias including People. 

cn, Huanqiu.com and Shanxi Daily. Jilin 

AIC organized local trademark and brand forum to invite representatives from ten enterprises to exchange ideas on implementing trademark strategy. Fujian AIC conducted activity 

themed by “Cherishing trademark value and Protecting IP rights” on the occasion of IPR Publicity week. Hubei AIC made topic promotions in Hubei Daily including “Promoting Trademark Strategy Implementation to serve the Building of “Five Hubei”” and “Blowing the Horn of Hubei’s Brand Building”. Wuhan AIC conducted in its system “Five Ones” promotion. Shenzhen made fully use of the platform and technical advantage of internet to promote intellectual property and opened official Weibo 

“Shenzhen Intellectual Property”. Yunnan AIC conducted essay collections on the topics of “Trademark 

Strategy Promotes Industrial Development” and “Accompanied by Marks”. Qinghai AIC released its implementing plan on “Using Trademark to Enhance Value and Taking Brand to Drive Development” 

trademark promotion month to instruct local AICs organizing major trademark promotions in 

agricultural and pastoral areas, enterprises and schools. From April 26 to 29, 2013, Qinghai organized the Magnificent Qinghai, Characteristic Brands – Qinghai brands products Zhengzhou Road Show to 

strengthen the trademark promotions and to get public recognitions. 

3. Practically made online promotions and open administrative information 

(1) Strengthening the construction of intangible window – China Trademark Website, and fully playing its promotional advantages . The first is to improve the website after multiple revisions. “China Trademark Registration Scenario Navigation System” was launched to facilitate the public in a more 

convenient way. The second is to open special column in China Trademark Website to promote the 

Party’s Mass Line Study and Practice action, which timely reflected the latest news of the action and 

provided study and exchange areas for trademark staffs and public in joining the action. The last is to timely update and maintain the content of China Trademark Website. There were 263 trademark information released by the website. The site had 1.62 billion clicks this year and turned to be an important bridge to connect public with trademark works. 

> ▲From April 26 to 29, 2013, Qinghai organized the Magnificent Qinghai, Characteristic Brands – Qinghai brands products Zhengzhou Road Show.

070 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

(2) Constantly improved the consulting service qualities and practically opened administration. 

Trademark Office in 2013 dealt with 2576 public messages, 45.9% increase compared with the previous 

year. The consultations in relating to trademark registration, reviews and relevant services accounted to 42.06% of all the handled messages. It answered 69700 trademark consultation telephones, a 17% increasement. It operated 385 trademark inquiries after their applications. It also handled 53 cases involving open government administrative information. 

4. Constantly strengthened the promotions on cracking down ip infringement and counterfeiting 

In 2013, SAIC strengthened its promotions on cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting. 

It enhanced the communication and coordination with central medias including People’s Daily, Xinhua News Agency, and CCTV, and major web medias including People.cn, Xinhuanet.com, Sina.com. cn, Sohu.com and QQ.com, and organized 10 meetings including various news conferences, news briefings, and situation notifications. It also organized several special news conferences, on the occasion of celebrating the five years’ implementation of Anti-Monopoly Law, the twenty years’ implementation of Anti-Unfair Competition Law, the revision of Trademark Law and Law on Protection of the Rights 

and Interests of Consumers, and the opportunity of combating bribery in business, false advertising and pyramid selling. Those conferences had achieved good social effects. AICs at all levels using various means including online interview, promotion and media report to strongly promote the achievement in cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting. Anhui AIC’s main leaders went into studio of local government website, accepted interviews on the topic of “Deeply implementing trademark strategy, Combating IP infringement and Serving enterprises to be bigger 

and stronger”, and interacted with cyber friends. Guangzhou AIC on the occasion of “April 26 IPR 

Publicity Week”, organized 481 live consultations and centralized destructions. It also released 17617 

pieces of public service advertisement. Hubei AIC publicized more than 600 news in relating to special 

campaign through televisions and radios. It made good use of electronic screens in more than 1500 enterprises including telecoms, banks and supermarkets to conduct promotions. It also printed and 

sent written proposals and leaflets to promote the protection in order to have an effect of using multi 

channels and from multiple aspects. Ningxia AIC held a trademark contest in Legality. Shanghai AIC 

and Sichuan AIC, on the occasion of “April 26 IPR Publicity Week”, held respectively a typical case 

presentation meeting in relating to trademark infringements and counterfeiting, and got good social effects. Chapter 12 

071 

Trademark Infrastructural Construction and Information Construction 

# Chapter 12 Trademark Infrastructural Construction and Information Construction 

The year 2013 witnessed the continuous overall promotion of trademark infrastructural construction and information construction. The new look of trademark archives management and the increasing informationization of trademark registration management and public services laid a 

solid foundation for further elevating efficiencies in trademark registration, utilization, protection and 

administration. 

1. The trademark archives management was more standardized and efficient 

(1) The institutionalization of trademark archives management was strengthened. First, Trademark 

▲On April 2, SAIC Minister Zhang Mao inspected the trademark archives storehouse. 072 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Files and Documents Retention Schedule, filed by the State Archives Administration, was released and put into effect on May 1, 2013. Second, steady progress was made in the amendment of the Provisional Measures on Trademark Archives Management by active research, argumentation and listening to a 

variety of viewpoints. Third, daily patrol system of the trademark archives storehouse was strictly 

carried out, and the Working Plan on Security Management of Trademark Archives during Flood 

Season was formulated to ensure the security of trademark archives. (2) The standardization of trademark archives management improved. 7.06 million trademark 

archives had been baled in sacks instead of shelves due to tight storage space until Trademark Building 

c a m e i n t o u s e . 5 . 1 7 m i l l i o n trademark archives were filed and shelved in 2013 to increase the standardization of trademark 

archives management. Meanwhile, 

400,000 backlog of unarchived documents were sorted, arranged 

and filed. 

(3) The trademark archives service improved. According to the Notice on Strictly Implementing 

the Provisions by MOF and NDRC 

of Abolishing Charges on the Use of Archives issued by SAAC, since August 1, 2013, there has been no charge on archives printing and copying, reducing the costs 

and improving the efficiency of archives inquiries. Throughout the year, 1240 archives inquiries were 

received, 29,800 copies of archives were printed, 8631 certificates of trademark registration were issued, and 2485 archives were reviewed internally. 

2. Trademark information construction moved forward steadily 

(1) The automation system Phase III for trademark registration and administration was actively promoted. Trademark Office continued the modification and test of trademark business software in accordance with the new Trademark Law, launched two rounds of networked test, and prepared in earnest for the operation of Phase 3. 

(2) The Information Construction Project to Improve the Efficiency of Trademark Examination, Review and Adjudication made solid progress. To improve the efficiency of trademark examination, 

review and adjudication, a five-year developing blueprint of trademark automation was planned to explore the feasibility of intelligent examination in similar graphics retrieval and ordering. Five 

requirements documents have been drafted, including Requirements of Planning, Designing and 

> ▲ On May 31, Deputy Inspector Xia Qing of CTMO guided the filing of trademark archives.

Chapter 12 

073 

Trademark Infrastructural Construction and Information Construction 

Programming, Requirements of Building Intelligent Examination and Retrieval System, Requirements of Standardizing the Classification of Goods, Requirements of Building Quality Management and Control System for Trademark Examination, Review and Adjudication, and Requirements of Electronic Library for Trademark Examination, Review and Adjudication. (3) Maintenance of trademark automation system performed well. Trouble-free operation of the computer system was ensured all day to provide effective technical support for trademark examination. The offsite backup system construction of trademark data, hardware expansion of the online application system, host upgrade of trademark examination system and attack protection of the China Trademark Website have all been completed. (4) Effective technical support was provided to improve the online service system. Website data was synchronized with the internal examination system weekly to provide more timely and accurate information for trademark applicants and the public. 12,500 technical consultation on online application 

were answered. 634 new applications for digital certificates from trademark agencies were processed, as well as 2643 modifications and renewals. So far, 8,641 trademark agencies have access to trademark 

application through the online application system. 074 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 Chapter 13 Trademark Team Building 

In 2013, under the great concerns and correct leaderships of SAIC leading party group, Trademark 

Office, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board intensively carried out activities throughout the Party to 

study and practice its mass line, and comprehensively enhanced the group building, work style building and clean government building. At the mean time, they focused on the improvement of abilities of performance, further strengthened the instructions of team building of trademark staffs in AIC system to provide a solid organizational support and personal guarantee for implementing the development of trademark work. 

1. Trademark Office team building got new achievements 

(1) Remarkable results have been achieved in solid promoting the party’s mass line study and practice. 

The first is to integrate the study and education into the whole procedures. The party committee of Trademark Office set examples in study and attending group instruction report, and had four times centralized studies and discussions emphasis on the Party’s Constitution, the report of 18th CPC National Congress, the decision of the Third Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee, series of important 

speeches from General Secretary Xi Jinping, and special documents and study materials used in mass 

line study and practice. Leader of party committee lead off a topic speech in one study meeting, and then other leading members spoke one by one to exchange study experiences and to strengthen understandings. Party branches of Trademark Office Party Committee were also paid great attentions to the study upon requirements to exchange ideas, to confirm faith and belief, to consolidate aims and to strengthen mass viewpoint. They combined positive examples and warning educations together, organized and attended AIC 

model report, watched special education documentaries reflecting local AIC staffs’ advanced performances, the Story of Zhou Enlai and 20 Years Memory on Party and State Perish of Soviet Union, timely delivered 

unlawful acts against the wind to each party member, and instructed members to look for gaps in contrast of model staffs and for problems compared with negative examples. Trademark Party Committee also organized an essay collection topic with “Chinese Dream, AIC Love, Gone with Trademarks” to instruct party members to transfer study fruits into real practices based on post and diligent for people. 

The second is to widely collect public opinions. Leaders of Trademark Office insisted in open activities, and combined invitation in the office and going out to visit together, through paper opinions or lectures to Chapter 13 

075 

Trademark Team Building 

collect suggestions and opinions from SAIC inner departments, Trademark Office inner directors, enterprises, trade associations, trademark agencies, retired staffs and cadre representatives of Trademark Office. They accompanied SAIC ministers to collect opinions and suggestions 

locally in Hebei and Tianjin AICs. 

Through contact point established 

in Miyun AIC, the Trademark 

Office directly listened to opinions and suggestions from staffs and regulatory objects in grass roots; through collection and reorganization of proposals from NPC and CPPCC, public messages from internet, telephone consultations to trademark works and other channels, it collected 206 pieces of original opinions and suggestions. After the summarization and analysis, 46 suggestions involving 7 aspects including trademark registration, trademark exclusive rights protection, trademark strategy implementation promotion, trademark information building, trademark public service, team building and life services were collected. 

The third is to target at “Four undesirable work styles” to probe deeply in problems. Trademark Office 

seriously analyzed public opinions and suggestions, focused on “Four styles” to independently probe and to 

mutually help. Leaders of Trademark Office held several meetings to research and find 11 major problems in 

“Four Working Styles”: 3 in formalism, 4 in bureaucracy, 2 in hedonism and 2 in extravagance. The fourth is to widely conduct heart to heart talks. Upon SAIC’s requirements, main leader of 

Trademark Office has conducted straightforward talks with other leading members, with director and staff 

representatives. Other leading members have also talked sincerely with each other, and with directors. They talked not only achievements but also problems. They made self-criticism to exchange ideas and accept suggestions. Except for the talks, leaders of Trademark Office have also held two preparatory meetings for democratic meetings, where they exchanged problems to be criticized and made comprehensive communication for consensus. 

The fifth is to seriously compile contrasting checking materials. It followed a strict standard, went into acute investigation and deep analysis to firmly rectify problems. Main leader of Trademark Office drafted 

the leading members’ contrasting checking materials and held special meetings many times with members to discuss and revise the materials. Leading members personally wrote their materials and revised upon suggestions and opinions. Under the leaderships of SAIC ministers and the supervision group, the leading 

> ▲ On August 6, 2013, Lv Zhihua and Yan Shi, both deputy
> secretary of Trademark Office Party Committee and deputy director
> general of Trademark Office, and Ouyang Shaohua, full time deputy secretary of Trademark Office Party Committee went to contact point in Miyun branch of Beijing AIC to conduct research in mass line study
> and practice.

076 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

members of Trademark Office modified and improved their materials many times to accurately and fully probe all problems, to deeply analyze reasons, and to make the rectification measures clear and practical. 

The sixth is to seriously conduct criticism and self criticism and to hold the democratic meetings in 

a high quality. Leading members of Trademark Office closely targeted at the theme and relied on reality to 

deeply probe major problems in “Four undesirable work styles” and to explore the reason. They conducted 

criticism and self criticism in the spirit of Rectification Movement. There were 58 opinions concerning self 

criticism and 41 for mutual criticism, among which 16 criticisms for the main leader. The criticism and self criticism communicated ideas and enhanced unity. Focused on the existing problems, leading members 

brainstormed for practical rectifications. Trademark Office Party Committee held a special briefing after the democratic meeting to introduce information for all staffs. Party branches of Trademark Office also held 

regular activities of organizations delicately, where the Office leaders attended in the identity of a party member and also commented. 

The seventh is to vigorously promote effectiveness of rectifications. Trademark Office seriously planed its rectifications, and detailed them to clarify the problems, rectification objectives, rectification measures 

and responsibilities and made public commitment. Leading members also seriously planned each one’s 

plan and implemented personal and responsible divisions’ rectifications. Under SAIC’s unified deployment and requirement, it probed and rectified simultaneously, and emphasized on major problems in “Four work 

styles”, “service window” constructions and public concerns. It established and improved relevant working 

> ▲ On November 29, 2013, Party Committee of Trademark Office held a democratic meeting briefing which notified the basic information of democratic meeting to all staffs.

Chapter 13 

077 

Trademark Team Building 

mechanism and regulations and coordinated SAIC in mechanism planning to strengthen the executive ability, and to practically solve major problems. It used mechanism building to consolidate style construction fruit, promoted the close contact with the mass and the improvement of work styles into long term effects. Some initial achievements have been made in optimizing window service, solving trademark examination backlog and controlling excessive documents and meetings. 

(2) The spirit of “Eight Rules” of CPC Central Committee has been implemented to practically improve work styles. 

The first is to practically improve investigation and research. In the study and practice activity, 

Trademark Office insisted in open activities. Leaders personally went into the grass root for investigation, widely listened to public opinions, and rectified major problems reflected by the mass simultaneously. They 

voluntarily took simple journey when local investigation to refuse reception and invitation over the standard and the native products in order to burden local people. The second is to strengthen trademark service window building to optimize services and improve public service level. Upon the unified requirement of SAIC, Trademark Office focused on trademark 

application realities, targeted at Trademark Office Registration Hall, Zhongguancun Office, strengthened the 

training and management to trademark service people. It took the criteria of public satisfaction to consolidate the mass concept, strengthen service awareness, optimize service procedure, upgrade infrastructure and 

improve service quality to create a good window image of the Office. 

The third is to practically improve meeting styles. Upon SAIC’s requirement, Trademark Office seriously arranged the plan of meetings and activities. It cancelled all inadequate meetings including Trademark Strategy Implementation Evaluation and Appraisal meeting, Trademark Strategy Implementation 

Live meeting, Trademark Pledge meeting, and Geographical Indications Research meeting. The meeting of 

whole AIC system implementing new Trademark Law was also held in video and telephone. It strengthened meeting plan management and seriously researched and coordinated the planning of 2014 meetings to strictly control the quantity and the size. The fourth is to simplify documents. It reduced paper documents and made all brief reports in electronic way. Some documents such as Notice of SAIC on Well Implementing the New Trademark Law were dispatched to the whole system via intranet. 

The fifth is to strictly enforce diligent and thrifty. Trademark Office seriously regulated and reduced 

duty consumption and three public consumptions to control unnecessary human consumption. It strictly 

managed vehicles to prohibit private use of government vehicles. It strictly used office space according to regulations. Current building area of the office is below the standard for 634 m2. It also actively conducted 

special campaign on extravagance and waste. It educated the staffs to voluntarily keep a simple and diligent style in daily work and life and to accept public supervision voluntarily. The supervision group of General 

Office of CPC central committee and General Office of State Council provided a positive recognition when 

on site investigation. (3) Party Construction responsibility system was vigorously implemented. The construction of 078 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Trademark Office Party Committee was further strengthened. 

The first is to implement the spirit of the report of 18th CPC National Congress, the decision of the 

Second and the Third Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee, and series of important speeches 

from General Secretary Xi Jinping. It actively organized cadre above director level to participate in SAIC’s 

centralized trainings and instructional reports, 7 directors to attend Party school study, and supported party branches jointly with functional units to study and construct together. It also organized Party Construction contest to study and understand party history. The second is to strengthen political disciplines to enhance overall awareness and global consciousness. Leaders led the implementation of CPC central committee’s policy and deployment, and required all party members to keep the same with those policy and deployment in mind, politically and in action to resolutely protect the authority. The third is to practically develop and manage party members. It developed 7 new members and held the admission oath. 3 probationary party members became full members in the last year. 

The fourth is to insist in the party’s leadership to the Youth League. Trademark Office Youth League general branch successful finished the general election. It held experience sharing forum, selected 29 young 

people to join in SAIC youth backbone training and grass root investigation. It was selected as one of eight contact points by the China Youth League Central Committee, the only one in law enforcement department. The fifth is to enhance cultural and harmonious government building. Trademark Office strongly supported its staffs for exercise and other interests. It also actively organized to join in SAIC broadcast gymnastic, table tennis and walking contest. 

(4) The requirements to the construction of the Party conduct and of an honest and clean government were comprehensively implemented and the construction was achieved new fruits constantly. 

The first is to constantly strengthen the clean and honest construction of Trademark Office leading members. The members set examples to seriously obey rules on honest and clean governance and to voluntarily accept public supervisions. They also insisted in principles to manage the construction of the Party conduct and of an honest and clean government and the anticorruption. The second is to strengthen anticorruption and honest and clean governance education and trademark 

relevant cultural construction. Trademark Office practically implemented code of ethics for CPC cadres and SAIC’s rules on preventing interest conflict. It organized origin honest and clean cultural works collection to 

collect 28 works including aphorisms, paintings and calligraphies, photos and poems. 

The third is to systematically summarize Trademark Office’s experiences in the construction of the Party conduct and of an honest and clean government, and to formulate Rules of Trademark Office Cadres’ Honest and Clean Behaviors. 

The fourth is to continue the exploration and promotion of electronic supervision on the occasion of the construction of trademark registration and management automation system (Phase III) to safeguard honest 

behaviors of cadres and clean governance of the office, and to prohibit illegal behaviors. Chapter 13 

079 

Trademark Team Building 

2. Trademark Review and Adjudication Board team building displayed new 

images 

(1) Focused on the improvement of political, professional and style qualities, to actively promoted team building. 

The first is to deeply conduct the Party’s mass line study and practice, to seriously implement 

“Eight Rules” of CPC Central Committee, which practically solved the major problems existing in “Four undesirable work styles”. The Board also made rectification plan to strengthen mechanism construction, to 

regulate window service and to promote the change of work styles. The second is to focus on team’s cohesive power and combat effectiveness to strictly promote the 

Party’s organizational construction. It timely set up Trademark Review and Adjudication Board party 

committee, and 4 affiliated branches. It also strengthened leading members building to enhance party construction power. The third is to target at theoretical building to promote a learning party organization building. It seriously implemented the spirit of CPC’s 18th National Congress to constantly improve political, professional and style qualities. The leading members set examples to study and exchange their feelings to the study of the spirit of CPC’s 18th National Congress. All cadres 

of the Board also studied the spirit 

and exchanged their understandings. 

The Board also established a 

special column to promote the 

study. It conducted situation educations such as confidentiality and security to enhance cadres’ ideological 

understanding and responsible consciousness. The fourth is to focus on serving development to promote service oriented Party organization 

building. The Board vigorously visited and investigated enterprises to help them in solving difficulties, which exercised the tenets and got public recognitions. It strengthened regular information notifications and 

operation connections with local AICs and lubricated the channel of public suggestions. In the meantime, it innovated service measures, and established cooperation framework with Guizhou government in trademark 

verification and protection to strengthen the help and support to underdeveloped areas in Western China, 

which got local high concerns and was reported in series by several medias. The framework agreement’s 

> ▲ On November 15, 2013, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board held a meeting with all cadres to deliver and study the spirit of the
> Third Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee.

080 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

signing was broadcasted on that very day in Guizhou news. 

The fifth is to strengthen the Party committee building and the worker, youth and women organization 

building to constantly innovate activity carriers and to enrich activity contents which strongly promoted 

works of the Board. In order to encourage the staffs to well accomplish the heavy work and to relieve their work pressures, the Board held an interest game competition and invited all staffs to join. Gao Xiuying, 

secretary of the Committee of Direct-affiliated Departments of SAIC attended the game and gave a live instruction. She highly appraised the game for its high engagement, its objective of exercise and activating 

team environment, and its result of enhancing cohesions and combat powers. Liu Yuting, Vice Minister of 

SAIC also gave a full recognition to the game and commented that “The game was well developed by the 

Board, which activated the life of department works, and enhanced team cohesions. It should be introduced 

to other departments and to instructed them on the premise of diligent and thrifty to conduct other similar activities.” 

In 2013, there were 3 youths awarded “excellent League Cadre” or “excellent League Member” by SAIC. The Youth League Branch of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board was awarded as “Advanced Grass Root League Organization” in 2012 by SAIC. The young staffs of the Board actively attended 

Capital’s intellectual property promotion, training, and visiting. All the events got public appraisal and showed a good look of the youth. 

(2) Further identifying the system risks to solidly promote the construction of the Party conduct and of an honest and clean government 

The first is to further innovate study manners to enrich the honest and clean governance education. The Board used information manner to strengthen the instruction and education to its cadres and alerted them to be honest in performing their duties, and to dedicate to their jobs and to make selfless contributions. 

The second is to constantly enhance supervision and constraint. Through the improvement of a risk precaution mechanism of regulating procedures, identifying risks, sunshine exercising, and advocating both honest and ability, to practically promote development by diligence, and to protect safety by integrity. The third is to constantly enhance staff’s responsible awareness to strictly define standard of duty performance. It used system building to safeguard the effective implementation of the construction of Party and Governance. It also reminded in time the examiner the review time limits to safeguard the practical case handling. 

The fourth is to refine the obligations and responsibilities. On the occasion of defining workload of each examiner, the Board clarified the duties on tagging administrative case responses and implementing ruling results to improve efficiency. 

3. AIC system’s team building achieved new result 

For the past year, Trademark authorities of AIC system followed the overall deployment of SAIC on strengthening professional team building to enhance the leading members’ construction, and to comprehensively improve the team’s quality. They further strengthen the professional and complex Chapter 13 

081 

Trademark Team Building 

trademark management professional building, deeply promoted the Party’s mass line study and practice, tried to create a high and professional trademark supervision and law enforcement team which was excellent in politics, operations, and styles, thus to further promote trademark service level. 

(1) AIC system’s new Trademark Law video and telephone implementation meeting was held to unify understandings. 

In September 2013, AIC system’s new Trademark Law video and telephone implementation 

meeting was held in Beijing. Zhang Mao, Party Secretary of SAIC Party members and Minister of 

SAIC was present in the meeting and delivered an important speech there. The meeting required the system to fully understand the significance of implementing new Trademark Law in SAIC obligation transformation and in serving innovative country construction. It required to strengthen the understanding to the main changes in the Law, and to take the opportunity of the Law’s implementation to solid work and to comprehensively improve the level in trademark registration, utilization, protection and management, and to make contributions in serving innovative country construction and in completion of a moderately prosperous society. Staffs from the whole AIC system seriously studied 

and fully understood the spirit of Zhang Mao’s speech after the meeting and vowed to practically unify 

the thinking and actions in line with the spirit to constantly strengthen the responsibility and sense of urgency and to actively develop the study, promotion, training and implementation of new Trademark Law and to establish a good foundation for its successful implementation. 

(2) Education and training were both strengthened to constantly improve the staff’s qualities. 

In 2013, SAIC held an Intellectual Property Advanced Theoretical Research Senior Training Class 

and an AIC system new Trademark Law Training. Local AICs also conducted various educations to comprehensively promote trademark professional team building and to improve the staff’s qualities. Forums, 

lectures were held in Beijing, Jilin, Shanghai, Fujian, Hainan, Hubei, Tibet, Gansu, Ningxia, Harbin, Jinan, Nanjing, Wuhan, and Xi’an to publicize trademark regulations and the new Law in order to create a social 

environment for trademark development and to improve trademark management staff’s qualities and abilities. Trainings on well known and famous trademarks’ protection, international registrations, trademark 

pledges, Geographical Indication registrations were organized in Hebei, Inner Mongolia, Heilongjiang, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Henan, Guizhou, Shaanxi, Qinghai, Xinjiang, Changchun, Qingdao, Guangzhou and 

Chengdu to increase the comprehensive abilities of enterprises in innovating, implementing, protecting 

and managing trademarks. Jiangsu AIC held a Trademark Strategy Service Specialist competition to 

foster professional persons for AIC system in trademark administration. Shandong organized trademark supervision training course to over 200 trademark backbones with China Intellectual Property Society. 

Hunan AIC held a Provincial Geographical Indication Marks Experiences and Training meeting to have its 

local AICs and 67 mark owners to join the meeting. Ningbo AIC organized over 500 people from more than 130 trademark instruction stations to have round tour trainings. Shenzhen took general trainings, professional title appraisals, IP management advanced professional staff cultivations in colleges to steadily improve the 082 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

city’s trademark professional personnel training system. 

(3) The party’s mass line study and practice was conducted actively to practically change work styles. 

Local AICs took the opportunity of the Party’s mass line study and practice to solidly establish the tenets and the mass concept, to further change work styles in serving enterprises and people with enthusiasm, which got good achievements. Trademark exclusive rights pledges were actively promoted 

in Liaoning, Anhui, Sichuan, Shenyang and Dalian to better fit the requirement of enterprises in funding. 

Tianjin organized experts to take half a year to compile Enterprise Trademark Practical Guide and send freely to well known and famous trademark enterprises and trademark association members. Shandong AIC seriously investigated 8907 enterprises and farmers, and helped them in over 6000 trademark questions and 1000 enterprises with trademark strategy implementation plans. Guangdong AIC actively supported industrial (professional) associations’ and intermediaries’ development and discovered the cooperation trial 

with them. Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region AIC took the activity of “Using Trademarks to revitalize 

Guangxi”. 5655 personnel were dispatched to help 1041 enterprises. Yunnan AIC focused on team building and released “Ten Prohibits for Yunnan AIC Trademark Supervision Staffs” to further strict the discipline. 

Chongqing went deeply in SME trademark administrative instructions and helped them with 3786 trademark registrations, which accumulated to 6699. Hangzhou AIC took the platform of “Entering enterprises and Serving Grass root” and “Connecting Enterprises and Helping them in difficulties” to visit and support the mainly cultivated enterprises and SMEs. Xiamen AIC voluntarily contact local well known trademark 

enterprises in paper documents to instruct them regularly using their marks. Memorabilia 2013 

083 

# Memorabilia 2013 

On January 14, liaison meeting of member ministries of national cracking down IP infringement 

and counterfeiting leading group was held in Ministry of Commerce. Yan Shi, Deputy Director General 

of Trademark Office, Deputy Director of General Affairs Office under SAIC’s cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting leading group attended the meeting. 

From January 15 to 19, Fu Shuangjian, Vice Minister of SAIC led a team to Qinghai and Sichuan 

to visit and comfort local staffs and to investigate “Double Festivals” market. Yan Shi, Deputy Director 

General of Trademark Office accompanied the investigation. On January 18, the fifth plenary meeting of national cracking down IP infringement and 

counterfeiting leading group was held in Beijing, which researched and deployed the work of cracking 

down IP infringement and counterfeiting and also the work of promoting the use of genuine software 

in the first season of 2013. Gan Lin, Vice Minister of SAIC, accompanied by Chen Wentong, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office, was present at the meeting. On January 29, the fifth meeting of SAIC’s cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting 

leading group was organized. Fu Shuangjian, Vice Minister of SAIC, leader of SAIC’s cracking down 

IP infringement and counterfeiting leading group hosted the meeting. The meeting summarized works of double cracking downs in 2012 and made researches and deployments for the first season’s work in 2013. 

Xu Ruibiao, Director General of 

Tr a d e m a r k O f f i c e , D i r e c t o r o f General Affairs Office under SAIC’s cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting leading group made a work report there. On February 5, Huang Jiahua, 

Deputy Director General of Trademark 

Review and Adjudication Board met with visiting delegates from Japan 

▲ On February 5, Huang Jiahua, Deputy Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board met with visiting delegates from Japan Bridgestone Corporation. 084 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Bridgestone Corporation. The Japanese delegates thanked the Board for the work of IP protections and presented it a pennant inscribed with “impartially enforcing laws, pragmatic and efficient”. 

On February 27, the performance evaluation work coordinating meeting of the General Affairs Office of national cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting leading group was held in 

Ministry of Commerce. It conducted mobilizations and trainings to the evaluation work. Yan Shi, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office, Deputy Director of General Affairs Office under SAIC’s 

cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting leading group attended the meeting. On February 28 , Trademark Review and Adjudication Board held trademark review cases acceptance workshop. Huang Jiahua, Deputy Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board hosted the workshop. Dozens of trademark agencies all over the country attended the workshop. The Board, focusing on formality requirements of sending proof documents during trademark review cases, collected opinions from representatives of those agencies on its drafted Measures on Regulating Trademark Agencies in Sending Trademark Review Application Materials (Trial) and Guide on Sending Trademark Review Materials and Proofs for Trademark Agencies (Trial). The two drafted regulations got a unanimous approval during the workshop and were implemented since March 1, 2013. From March 4 to 8, the sixth performance evaluation team of the General Affairs Office of national cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting leading group made an onsite investigation 

to Shanghai municipality and Jiangsu province. The team was led by Yan Shi, Deputy Director General 

of Trademark Office, Deputy Director of General Affairs Office under SAIC’s cracking down IP 

infringement and counterfeiting leading group. Relevant ministries such as the People’s Bank of China 

and China Food and Drug Administration assigned representatives to join the evaluation. 

On March 5, Li Yali, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office, met with visiting Deputy 

Director General of Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual Property Mr. Felix Addor. On March 6 , to implement the spirit of education practice themed as “to serve people in pragmatic and 

honest way”, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board, for its work 

realities, organized some staffs to Tianjin to conduct investigation and to promote trademark knowledge to the citizens there. 

O n M a r c h 2 1 , t h e n e w s conference on Promotional Plan on National IP Strategy Implementation in 2013 was held in SIPO. Chen Wentong, Deputy Director General of 

> ▲ On March 5, Li Yali, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office, met with visiting Deputy Director General of Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual Property Mr. Felix Addor.

Memorabilia 2013 

085 

Trademark Office joined the conference and answered questions on trademark strategy implementations. 

On March 27, Fu Shuangjian, Vice Minister of SAIC met with visiting Alan C. Drewsen, INTA Executive Director. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office joined the meeting. 

On April 2 , Zhang Mao, Secretary of SAIC Party Committee and Minister of SAIC visited the Trademark Building and listened to work reports from Xu Ruibiao Director General of Trademark Office and He Xunban Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board. Li Yali, Lv Zhihua, Yan Shi, Chen Wentong, 

Deputy Director Generals of Trademark 

Office, Ouyang Shaohua, Fulltime Deputy 

Secretary of Trademark Office Party 

Committee, Wu Qun, Xia Qing, Deputy Inspectors of Trademark Office, Huang Jiahua, Chen Zhuo, Li Zhijun, Deputy Director Generals of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board and Ren Gang, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board joined the work report. 

On April 3 , Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC met with visiting Deputy Director General of WIPO Wang Binying. Fu Shuangjian Vice Minister of 

SAIC joined the meeting. On April 4, the 17th Investment and Trade Forum for Cooperation between East and West 

China was held in Xi’an of Shaanxi Province. On 

the next day, a symposium using Geographical I n d i c a t i o n m a r k s t o p r o m o t e i n d u s t r i a l development, organized by SAIC and Shaanxi 

Provincial Government was held in Xi’an. Fu Shuangjian Vice Minister of SAIC joined the forum and the symposium. Lv Zhihua, Deputy ▲ On April 2, Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC visited the Trademark Building. 

> ▲ On April 3, Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC met with visiting Deputy Director General of WIPO Wang Binying. ▲ Lv Zhihua, Deputy Director General of
> Trademark Office presented a lecture for the new examiner assistants.

086 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Director General of Trademark Office joined the 

symposium. From 15 to 17 of April, the China Trademark A s s o c i a t i o n D e l e g a t i o n h e a d e d b y F u 

Shuangjian, Vice Minister of SAIC went to 

Taiwan to participate the 2013 Cross Strait 

Trademark Symposium. Xu Ruibiao, Director 

General of Trademark Office accompanied to join the symposium. From 15 to 28 of April, Trademark Office held training courses for new recruited examiner assistants. The training was conducted in the form of lectures, visitings, exchanges and examinations. On April 22, Yan Shi, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office met with visiting Israel Patent Office Director Asa Kling in Trademark Building. Both sides exchanged opinions 

on trademark registration, protection and well known trademark determination. In the morning of April 23, Huang Jiahua, Deputy Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board met with visiting delegation from InterContinental Hotels Group headed by its Vice Global Executive Calolyn Dinberg. MsCalolyn Dinberg on behalf 

of the InterContinental thanked the 

Board and presented a pennant for its 

work in trademark protections. On April 25, Fu Shuangjian, 

vice Minister of SAIC attended the 

news conference relating to China’s IP Development in 2012, which was held by News Office of the State Council. Yan Shi, Deputy Director General of 

Trademark Office joined the conference. 

On April 26, the signing ceremony for the Cooperation Agreement between  

> ▲On April 22, Yan Shi, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office met with visiting Israel Patent
> Office Director Asa Kling in Trademark Building.
> ▲ On April 25, Fu Shuangjian, vice Minister of SAIC attended the news conference held by News Office of the State Council. ▲ On April 26, Xu Ruibiao Director General of Trademark Office was present at the signing ceremony for the Cooperation
> Agreement between SAIC and Nanjing City to protect 2014 Summer Youth Olympic Games Intellectual Properties.

Memorabilia 2013 

087 

SAIC and Nanjing City to protect 2014 Summer Youth Olympic Games Intellectual Properties was 

held in Nanjing of Jiangsu Province. Xu Ruibiao Director General of Trademark Office was present at 

the ceremony. On April 28, the first plenary meeting of national cracking down IP infringement and 

counterfeiting leading group was held in Beijing. The work on cracking down IP infringement and 

counterfeiting and also the work on promoting the use of genuine software were reported in the meeting. During the meeting, relevant documents were discussed and reviewed and works were 

researched and deployed. Wang Yang, Vice Premier and Chief Leader of the Leading Group host the meeting. Liu Yuting, Vice Minister of SAIC, and Yan Shi, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office joined the meeting. 

On April 28, “PRTV” case handled by Trademark Review and Adjudication Board was selected to be one of “Major Cases in National IP Protections”. On May 3, Economic Law Department under NPC’s Law Committee held a meeting to introduce the new requirement in legislations of this NPC and the revisions on Trademark Law (drafted version). Wang Chaoying, Director General of Economic Law Department under NPC’s Law Committee host the 

meeting. Zhang Hui, Director General of Department of Policies and Laws under SAIC, Zhu Jianqiao, Deputy Director General of Department of Policies and Laws under SAIC, Wu Qun, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office and Ren Gang, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board 

joined the meeting. 

From 13 to 23 of May, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board organized a Trademark Review Cases Expert Training Course in SAIC School of Administration in Shenzhen. Deputy Director 

Generals in charge of trademark works from AICs at provincial level and trademark operating experts from AICs above city level joined the course. 

On May 21, Ren Gang, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board met 

with visiting Executive of Château 

Lafite Rothschild, Christophe Salin. Mr 

Christophe Salin introduced the history and development of the brand “Lafite”. 

Ren Gang introduced the situations 

and problems of China’s Trademark 

protection. Both sides also made a further 

discussion on malicious trademark registration and Geographical Indication determinations. 

On May 23, a workshop on Trademark 

Law revision was organized in Beijing. Lang Sheng, Vice Chariman of NPC’s 

> ▲ On May21, Ren Gang, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board met with visiting Executive of Château Lafite Rothschild, Christophe Salin.

088 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Law Committee hosted the 

meeting. Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC was present 

at the w o r k s h o p . D e p u t y 

Director General Zhu Jianqiao 

of Legal Affairs Office of SAIC, Deputy Inspector Wu 

Qun of Trademark Office and Deptuy Inspector Ren Gang of TRAB attended the 

workshop. 

On May 29, Vice Minister Liu Junchen of SAIC paid a visit to the Trademark Building, and listened to work reports delivered by Director General Xu Ruibiao of Trademark Office and Director General He Xunban of TRAB. Li Yali, Lv Zhihua, Yan Shi, Chen Wentong, Deputy Director Generals of Trademark Office, Wu Qun, Xia Qing, Deputy Inspectors of Trademark Office, Huang Jiahua, Chen Zhuo, Li Zhijun, Deputy Director Generals of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board, and Ren Gang, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board joined the visit. On June 4, Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC met with chairman and CEO of Schneider Electric, Jean-Pascal Tricoire. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office accompanied the meeting. On June 5, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC met Pajchima Tanasanti, Director General of the Department of Intellectual Property of Thailand. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office 

accompanied the meeting. 

On June 7, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC met Wang Binying, Deputy Director General of WIPO. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office accompanied the meeting. On June 8, the work meeting of national cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting was 

held in Beijing, which delivered the spirit of the first plenary meeting of national cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting leading group, notified the work of double cracking downs for the past 

half year, exchanged local experiences and deployed assignments. Chen Wentong, Deputy Director 

General of Trademark Office joined the meeting. On June 9, Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC met Wang Binying, Deputy Director General of WIPO. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office accompanied the meeting. From 13 to 16 of June, “The fifth China International Trademark Festival” was held in Dalian of Liaoning Province. Qi Xuchun, Vice President of CPPCC, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC, Wang Binying, Deputy Director General of WIPO, Li Wancai, Governor of Dalian City were present at the opening ceremony. He Xunban, Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board, Li 

> ▲ On May 29, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC visited Trademark Building.

Memorabilia 2013 

089 

Yali, Lv Zhihua, Yan Shi, Deputy Director Generals of Trademark Office, Wu Qun, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office, Chen Zhuo, Deputy Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board 

were also present the ceremony and joined relevant activities in the festival. 

On June 15, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC went to DHI-DCW and Baiyun Branch of Xigang AIC of Dalian for investigations. Yan Shi, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office 

accompanied the investigations. 

From 17 to 21 of June, Wu Qun, Deputy Inspector 

of Trademark Office went to 

Shenzhen and Zhongshan to 

participate in a tour workshop 

on Effectively Using Madrid International Registration 

System held by WIPO. 

On June 18, Ma Zhengqi a n d L i u J u n c h e n , V i c e Ministers of SAIC held a topic 

meeting to discuss how to improve trademark examination and review efficiencies by using information technology. 

> ▲ From 13 to 16 of June, “The fifth China International Trademark Festival” was held in Dalian of
> Liaoning Province.
> ▲ On June 15, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC went to DHI-DCW and Baiyun Branch of Xigang AIC of Dalian for investigations.

090 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office, Li Yali, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office joined the meeting. On June 27, the third Session of the Standing Committee of the Twelfth National People’s 

Congress discussed the Trademark Law Amendment (drafted version) in groups in Great Hall of the People. Lv Zhihua, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office and Wu Qun, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office joined the meeting. On July 11, Wu Qun, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office met with visiting Deputy Director General in charge of trade policies in Department for Business Innovation and Skills, Mr. Michael Williams. Both sides exchanged ideas on “GLEN” trademark case, Trademark Law revision, well 

known trademark determinations, the application of copy rights as prior rights in opposition cases, trademark distinctiveness, trademark transfer procedure and other issues. 

On July 17, Trademark Office’s 

mobilization meeting on the Party’s Mass 

Line Study and Practice was held in 

Trademark Building. Xu Ruibiao, Secretary 

of Trademark Office Party Committee, 

Director General of Trademark Office, and 

leader of the leading group of Trademark 

Office for Mass Line Study and Practice 

hosted the meeting, and made deployment and mobilization on deeply implementing 

SAIC’s meeting spirits on the Party’s Mass Line Study and Practice, and on Trademark Office’s practices. Ouyang Shaohua, Full time Deputy Secretary of Trademark Office Party Committee read the implementing work plan. Li Yali, Lv Zhihua, Yanshi, Deputy Secretaries of Trademark Office Party 

Committee and Deputy Director Generals of Trademark Office, Chen Wentong, Party 

Member of Trademark Office Party Committee 

and Deputy Director General of Trademark 

Office, Wu Qun, Party Member of Trademark Office Party Committee and Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office, Xia Qing, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office were present at 

the meeting. All Party members of Trademark 

Office joined the meeting. On July 17, Wu Qun, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office met in Trademark Building the visiting Vice President of American 

> ▲ On July 17, Trademark Office held a mobilization meeting on the Party’s Mass Line Study and Practice.
> ▲ On July 17, Wu Qun, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office met in Trademark Building the visiting Vice President of American Chamber of Commerce in China, Mr. Patrick Wang and introduced
> the revisions on Trademark Law.

Memorabilia 2013 

091 

Chamber of Commerce 

in China, Mr. Patrick Wang. He introduced the 

revisions on Trademark 

Law. Mr. Wang presented American Business in 

China 2013 White Paper and introduced relevant situations. 

On July 23, Zhang M a o , M i n i s t e r o f 

SAIC met with visiting committee member of European Commission 

Directorate-General for Agriculture and Rural Development Mr. Dacian Ciolos. Both sides exchanged 

ideas on Geographical Indication protections and jointly cracking down counterfeited wine and alcohol 

trade behaviors. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office joined the meeting. On July 24, followed SAIC’s deployment of conducting “Chinese Dream, AIC Love” discussions 

and the arrangement of the Party’s Mass Line Study and Practice, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board organized a “Chinese Dream, Trademark Dream” speech contest. 10 contestants joined the activity. Leading members of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board, Secretary of the Youth League of SAIC direct-affiliated departments, staffs of the Board watched the whole contest. From July 31 to August 2, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC led a team to investigate in Hebei 

and Tianjin on how to solidly conduct the 

Party’s Mass Line Study and Practice. 

During the investigation, he widely listened to opinions and suggestions of 

local AICs and enterprises. Zhang Hui, 

Director General of the Department of 

Policies and Laws under SAIC and Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office joined the investigation. 

On August 5, Trademark Office 

meeting on the Party’s Mass Line Study 

and Practice was held in Trademark 

Building to collect suggestions and 

opinions on the leading members, work 

> ▲ On July 23, Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC met with visiting committee
> member of European Commission Directorate-General for Agriculture and
> Rural Development Mr Dacian Ciolos.
> ▲ On August 1, the delegation led by Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC conducted investigation meeting in Anxin
> AIC.

092 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

style buildings and trademark work. Xu Ruibiao, Secretary of Trademark Office Party Committee, Director General of Trademark Office, and leader of the leading group of Trademark Office for Mass Line Study and Practice hosted the meeting. Lv Zhihua, Yanshi, Deputy Secretaries of Trademark 

Office Party Committee and Deputy Director Generals of Trademark Office, Chen Wentong, Party 

Member of Trademark Office Party Committee and Deputy Director General of Trademark Office, Ouyang Shaohua, Full time Deputy Secretary of Trademark Office Party Committee, Wu Qun, Party Member of Trademark Office Party Committee and Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office, Xia Qing, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office were present at the meeting. Retired staff representatives including former Director General of Trademark Office, Li Jianchang, representatives of the Party 

members of Trademark, non Party members and the worker, youth and women representatives also attended the meeting. On August 6, Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office met with visiting Director of Operations Service Madrid Registry of WIPO, Mrs. Asta Valdimarsdottir, and the coordinator of Madrid team Pei Xiaoling. Wu Qun, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office joined the visiting. 

On August 6, Lv Zhihua, Yan Shi, Deputy Secretaries of Trademark Office Party Committee and Deputy Director Generals of Trademark Office, and Ouyang Shaohua, Full time Deputy Secretary of Trademark Office Party Committee, went to Miyun AIC of Beijing contact point to conduct the Party’s Mass Line Study and Practice. They directly listened to local suggestions and opinions. 

On August 13, Lv Zhihua, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office met the Counsellor (Economic) of Embassy of the Republic of Singapore Mr. Tan Lui Ha1. She listened to the introduction of registration of the trademark “BUSINESS CHINA, SINGAPORE”. 

On August 14, Chen Wentong, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office met with visiting vice president of Honeywell in Asia and Pacific region Mr. Sun Dan. He introduced the procedure of 

well known trademark determination in opposition case. From 23 to 26 of August, Trademark Office organized the Office meeting to research and to 

discuss the revision of Regulations for Trademark Law. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office hosted the meeting. Li Yali, Lv Zhihua, Chen Wentong, Deputy Director Generals of Trademark Office was present at the meeting. Directors of the Office inner divisions also attended the meeting. 

On August 23, a Special Session of national cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting 

leading group was held in Beijing to research and deploy the double cracking downs all over the country. Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC was present at the meeting. Chen Wentong, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office attended the meeting. 

On August 27, Trademark Office accepted CCTV interview on Trademark Law Amendment. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office introduced the significance of the revision and the major changes. Lv Zhihua, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office explained trademark 

examination and review time limits, the enhancement on trademark rights protection. Legal Affairs 

Division of Trademark Office introduced the opening character of the revision. 

On August 29, Trademark Office accepted a group interview by People’s Daily, Legal Daily, Memorabilia 2013 

093 

Economic Daily and other medias. 

Xu Ruibiao, Director General 

of Trademark Office introduced the background, significance and major changes of the new Law and answered questions. On September 4, Wu Qun, 

Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office met with visiting Chairman 

and President of SEPHORA Mr. Chris de Lapuente. Both sides exchanged ideas on “SEPHORA” 

trademark registration. On September 4, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC met with visiting Chairman of Russian Federal Service for Intellectual Property Mr. B Simonov. Both sides introduced the latest progress and exchanged opinions on further promoting and enhancing the cooperation between China and Russia in the area of Intellectual Property Protection. Both sides made further discussions on the implementation of the MOU on the cooperation between SAIC and Russian Federal Service for Intellectual Property jointly signed on May 19, 2010. Li Yali, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office and Li Zhijun, Deputy Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board joined the meeting. 

On September 4, the General 

Branch of Trademark Office Youth 

League organized an experience sharing workshop. Ouyang Shaohua, Full time Deputy Secretary of Trademark Office Party Committee sincerely talked with the young staffs to share his experiences and to review his endeavors, in order to promote the young to be excellent in the post. On September 5, the plenary meeting of SAIC’s cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting 

leading group was held. Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC, leader of SAIC’s cracking down IP 

infringement and counterfeiting leading group hosted the meeting and made a speech there. Yan 

Shi, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office, Deputy Director of General Affairs Office under ▲ On August 29, Trademark Office accepted a group interview by People’s Daily, Legal Daily, Economic Daily and other medias. 

> ▲ On September 4, the General Branch of Trademark Office
> Youth League organized an experience sharing workshop. Ouyang
> Shaohua, Full time Deputy Secretary of Trademark Office Party
> Committee sincerely talked with the young staffs.

094 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

S A I C ’s c r a c k i n g d o w n I P i n f r i n g e m e n t a n d counterfeiting leading group attended the meeting. O n S e p t e m b e r 6 , 

Zhang Mao, Minister of 

SAIC met with visiting 

D a n i s h M i n i s t e r f o r Business and Growth, Mr. H.E. Henrik Sass Larsen. Zhang Mao introduced the 

basic information on China’s Trademark registration, trademark law amendment and trademark enforcement. 

Both sides also exchanged bilateral cooperation and Danish enterprises’ trademark protections in China. Li Yali, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office, Chen Zhuo, Deputy Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board joined the meeting. 

On September 9, Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC met with visiting Acting Director of USPTO, Ms. Teresa Stanek Rea. Both sides talked on China’s Trademark Law revision, malicious trademark registration, antimonopoly, trade secret and bilateral cooperation. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office, and He Xunban, Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board 

joined the meeting. On September 11, Wu Qun, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office met with visiting US delegation of Intellectual Property Work Group under China-US Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade, headed by Ms. Elaine Wu. Both sides exchanged opinions on bilateral cooperation in China’s Trademark Law revision, drafting Trademark Law Regulation, trademark malicious registration, 

Geographical Indication protection and etc. On September 17, SAIC held in Beijing its system video and telephone meeting to implement new Trademark Law and made overall deployment on the study and implementation. Xin Chunying, Vice Chairwoman of NPC’s Law Committee was invited to explain the Law. Zhang Mao, Secretary of SAIC Party Committee and Minister of SAIC was present at the meeting and made an important speech. Liu Yuting, Deputy Secretary of SAIC Party Committee and Vice Minister of SAIC hosted the meeting. Ma Zhengqi, Vice Minister of SAIC, He Xin, Discipline Leader of SAIC, and Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC also attended the meeting. 

From 9 to 11 of October, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC went to Ningxia to investigate the trademark strategy implementations. Zhang Hui, Director General of the Department of Policies and  

> ▲On September 6, Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC, jointly with H.E. Henrik Sass Larsen, Danish Minister for Business and Growth, signed an MOU between SAIC and Danish Ministry for Business and Growth.

Memorabilia 2013 

095 

Laws under SAIC, and Yan Shi, Deputy Director General of 

Trademark Office accompanied 

the investigation. O n O c t o b e r 1 0 , L i 

Z h i j u n , D e p u t y D i r e c t o r General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board met 

w i t h v i s i t i n g D i r e c t o r o f International Policy Department 

under UK Intellectual Property Office Neil Feinson, and senior 

IP officer from Economy and Trade Policy Department of 

British Embassy Tom Duke. The British part provided high appraisals for the Board’s work in IP protections. Both 

sides also conducted further discussion and exchange in the specific implementation of the new Trademark Law, the determination proof of well known trademarks. O n O c t o b e r 1 2 , International Cooperation Department under SAIC led the meeting with EU Delegations 

i n C h i n a . B o t h s i d e s 

communicated the 2013-2014 biennial cooperation plan project list under the framework of the third 

phase of Sino-EU IP Cooperation (IP Key). Representative from Legal Affairs Division of Trademark Office joined the meeting. 

On October 15, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC met with visiting Vice President of Lacoste Holding Group, the Devanlay Group and the Maus Freres Group, Mr. Patrice Oudre. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office, and Chen Zhuo, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office 

joined the visit. On October 15, representatives from EU delegations in China, Italian Embassy and Zegna visited   

> ▲From 9 to 11 of October, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC
> went to Ningxia to investigate the trademark strategy implementations.
> ▲ On October 10, Li Zhijun, Deputy Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board met with visiting Director of International Policy Department under UK Intellectual Property Office Neil Feinson.

096 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Trademark Review and Adjudication Board for “Zegna” trademark case. Chen Zhuo, Deputy Director General of the Board joined the visit. 

On October 16, the liaison meeting of member ministries of national cracking down IP 

infringement and counterfeiting leading group was organized in Ministry of Commerce. The meeting 

discussed major work assignments for the fourth season of the year and annual evaluation method. 

Chai Haitao, Deputy Director General of the General Affairs Department of national cracking down 

IP infringement and counterfeiting leading group hosted the meeting. Liaison persons of all member 

ministries were present at the meeting. Yan Shi, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office, Deputy 

Director of General Affairs Office under SAIC’s cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting leading group attended the meeting. On October 23, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC listened to report on trademark examinations and relevant protection mechanisms in Trademark Building. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office, Li Yali, Lv Zhihua, Yanshi, Chen Wentong, Deputy Director Generals of Trademark Office, Ouyang Shaohua, Full time Deputy Secretary of Trademark Office Party Committee, Wu Qun, Xia Qing, Deputy Inspectors of Trademark Office joined the meeting. 

From 23 to 24, October, the eight round negotiation on Sino-EU Geographical Indication 

Agreement was organized in Beijing. Representatives from Legal Affairs Division and Geographical Indication Division of Trademark Office joined the negotiation. 

On October 30, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC met the delegations from Legal Affairs Commission of European Parliament led by Vice Chairman Raffaele BALDASSARRE. Both sides exchanged ideas on Trademark Law revision, government procurement (bid), SME and European investment. He Xunban, Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board, Wu Qun, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office joined the meeting. 

On October 30, a project workshop on China’s Geographical Indication protection and its 

law enforcement system was organized by China International Association for Urban and Rural Development affiliated by Development Research Center of the State Council. Geographical Indication Division of Trademark Office assigned staff to attend the workshop and provide opinion on the interim 

research report. On November 8, Zhang Mao, Minister of SAIC met with visiting Director General of WIPO, Francis Gurry. Zhang Mao expressed to work with WIPO to consolidate current cooperation and to 

further enlarge cooperation in wider areas, and to mutually promote trademark development. On November 8, Sino-US IP workgroup director general level meeting was held in Ministry of Commerce. Both sides exchanged ideas on Geographical Indications, and malicious registrations. Xia Qing, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office joined the meeting. 

From 13 to 15 of November, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC investigated trademark legal work and trademark strategy implementation in Henan. Zhang Hui, Director General of the Department of Policies and Laws under SAIC and Yan Shi, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office joined Memorabilia 2013 

097 

the investigation. On November 13, the plenary meeting of national cracking d o w n I P i n f r i n g e m e n t a n d counterfeiting leading group was held in General Office of State Coucncil. Wang Yang, 

Vice Premier and Chief Leader 

of the Leading Group hosted 

the meeting. Sun Hongzhi, Vice Minister of SAIC, and Chen 

We n t o n g , D e p u t y D i r e c t o r General of Trademark Office joined the meeting. On November 15, Trademark 

Review and Adjudication Board organized a democratic life meeting briefing. Zhang Deqiang, from the 

third supervision team of SAIC was present at the meeting and gave instructions. All party members 

of the Board joined the meeting. In that afternoon, the Board held another meeting to deliver the spirit of the Third Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee. He Xunban, Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board hosted the meeting and made a deep mobilization and 

deployment on implementing the spirit. From 19 to 20 of November, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC went to Zhejiang for trademark investigation and law work. It visited Shaoxing Qing Fang Cheng brand instruction station, Keqiao 

b r a n c h o f S h a o x i n g 

A I C a n d K u a i j i s h a n 

wine Enterprise to hear relevant work reports. On November 22, 

He Xunb a n , D i r e c t o r 

General of Trademark 

Review and Adjudication Board and Huang Jiahua, 

Deputy Director General 

of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board 

went to Guizhou to sign a cooperation agreement, 

> ▲ From 13 to 15 of November, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of
> SAIC investigated trademark legal work and trademark strategy
> implementation in Henan.
> ▲ From 19 to 20 of November, Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC went to Zhejiang for trademark investigation and law work.

098 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

on behalf of the Board, with the promotion authority of Guizhou Party Committee, which functioned to 

strengthen the help and support to undeveloped area in Western China. On November 28, Trademark Office organized a democratic life meeting. Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC was present at the meeting and made an important speech. Xu Ruibiao, Secretary of Trademark Office Party Committee, Director General of Trademark Office, and leader of the leading group of Trademark Office for Mass Line Study and Practice hosted the meeting, and made the personal 

and leading members’ comparison checking. Other leading members also made personal comparison 

checking and conducted criticism and self criticism. Xu Aiting, leader of the second supervision team from SAIC was present at the meeting and made comments. Relevant person from the supervision team 

and Personnel Department also attended the meeting. On the next day, the democratic life meeting 

briefing was held in Trademark Office. 

From November 28 to October 2, IP advanced theoretical research senior workshop was held in 

SAIC School of Administration in Shenzhen. Trademark Office led the workshop’s organization. Xia Qing, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office was present at the opening ceremony and made a speech. 

From 2 to 6 of December, TM5 Annual Meeting was held in Seoul of Korea. As an official member, Trademark Office assigned a delegation led by Li Yali, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office to attend the meeting. 

From 3 to 7 of December, 2013 Sino-US IP work group meeting and IP oversea exchanges were 

organized in Washington of US. Xia Qing, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office was present at the 

meeting. On December 5 , Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC met with visiting Chief Executive of Intellectual Property Office of UK, Mr. John Alty and discussed on trademark progress and 2014 annual cooperation. Wu Qun, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office, Huang Jiahua, Deputy Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board accompanied the visit. 

On December 11, national law enforcement and judicial procedure connecting work promotional meeting 

and training was held in Zhengzhou of Henan province. Yanshi, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office 

attended the meeting. O n D e c e m b e r 1 2 , S A I C ’s cracking down IP infringement and counterfeiting leading group meeting 

was held. Liu Junchen, Vice Minister 

of SAIC and Leader of SAIC’s cracking down IP infringement  

> ▲Chen Wentong, Deputy Director General of Trademark Office made a lecture in AIC system’s training on new Trademark Law.

Memorabilia 2013 

099 

and counterfeiting leading group hosted the meeting and made a speech. Yan Shi, Deputy Director 

General of Trademark Office, Deputy Director of General Affairs Office of SAIC’s cracking down IP 

infringement and counterfeiting leading group attended the meeting and reported the work on double cracking downs in the past three seasons. On December 20 , Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC went to Shenzhen Market Supervision Administration Bureau and Tencent for investigation. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office accompanied the investigation. 

From 21 to 22 of December, AIC system’s training on new Trademark Law was organized in 

SAIC School of Administration in Shenzhen. Liu Junchen, Vice Minister of SAIC was present at the opening ceremony and made a speech. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office, Yan Shi, Chen Wentong, Deputy Director Generals of Trademark Office, Wu Qun, Deputy Inspector of Trademark Office, Li Zhijun, Deputy Director General of Trademark Review and Adjudication Board made lectures during the training. Responsible staffs in charge of Trademark from AICs at provincial 

level participated in the training. On December 23, SAIC work meeting on establishing and improving trademark examination and 

review long term effect mechanism was organized in SAIC. Liu Yuting, Vice Minister of SAIC hosted the meeting. Liu Junchen was present at the meeting. Relevant staffs from General Affairs Office, the Department of Policies and Laws, Personnel Department, Trademark Review and Adjudication Board and Tongda Trademark Service Center attended the meeting. Xu Ruibiao, Director General of Trademark Office also attended the meeting. 100 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Domestic International Madrid Total 

Applications Filed for 

Registration 1733361 95177 53008 1881546 

Applications Filed for Renewal 99786 13528 6010 119324 Applications for Opposition 20901 13382 384 34667 

Modification Applications 147645 26765 2829 177239 Assignment Applications 97657 13658 2049 113364 Annulment Applications 6508 2278 21414 Cancellation Applications 12628 

Applications for Recordal of 

License Contracts 29438 29438 

Registrations Approved 909541 59496 27687 996724 Trademark Applications Preliminarily Approved 908878 27872 936750 Trademark Applications 

Refused 251498 10687 262185 Trademark Applications 

Partly Refused 221560 4184 225744 

Trademark Registration Modified 172914 9077 181991 

Trademark Registration 

Assigned 111038 3569 114607 

Trademark Registration Renewed 116621 6064 122685 

Trademark Registration 

Annulled 110186 7502 123415 

Trademark Registration 

Cancelled 5727 

Recordal of License Contracts Handled 34998 34998 

Re-issuance of Registration Certificates 10680 10680 

## Statistics of Trademark Applications and Registrations in 2013 

# Trademark Statistics Trademark Statistics 

101 

P/M/R Applications Registrations Valid Registrations 

Beijing 133510 68688 467259 Tianjin 22127 13194 77143 

Hebei 43826 21084 166136 Shanxi 16753 6731 52742 

Inner Mongolia 13146 6899 56746 Liaoning 30440 16881 134082 

Jilin 14977 7330 62575 

Heilongjiang 19079 9719 84157 Shanghai 106374 57354 364528 

Jiangsu 110097 60069 459132 

Zhejiang 178978 105825 864161 Anhui 42981 19523 123834 Fujian 96134 52367 369736 

Jiangxi 26862 13064 88125 Shandong 92765 47202 343623 

Henan 57591 29410 184866 

Hubei 37031 18190 132396 

Hunan 41362 21453 139205 Guangdong 318789 162264 1126595 Guangxi 16652 8430 57656 

Hainan 7470 4022 28554 Sichuan 63649 31125 219938 Guizhou 19814 9655 41448 Yunnan 28051 15637 87927 Tibet 1316 531 3667 Shaanxi 40169 21209 104745 Gansu 6293 2991 23887 

Qinghai 2963 1717 10429 Ningxia 3689 2401 13411 

Xinjiang 16368 8767 57024 Chongqing 45751 25034 114889 

Hongkong 67889 29907 175097 

Macao 621 321 2778 Taiwan 9844 10547 104095 Total 1733361 909541 6342586 

## Statistics of Domestic Trademark Applications Filed and Registrations Approved in 2013 (Breakdown by Province/Autonomous Region/Municipality) 

Note: Applications and registrations refer to statistics from Dec 16, 2012 to Dec 15, 2013, others refer to accumulative data by Dec 15, 2013. 102 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Country/Region Foreign Madrid Total 

Algeria 39 5 44 Afghanistan 17 0 17 Argentina 185 0 185 United Arab Emirates 389 0 389 Oman 3 0 3Azerbaijan 52 48 100 Egypt 57 10 67 Ethiopia 11 0 11 Ireland 343 46 389 Estonia 11 29 40 Andorra 4 0 4Angola 16 0 16 Anguilla 304 0 304 

Antigua and Barbuda 1 0 1Austria 372 635 1007 Australia 2303 1238 3541 

Barbados 29 0 29 Papua New Guinea 6 0 6

Bahamas 159 0 159 Pakistan 62 0 62 Paraguay 2 0 2Palestine 3 0 3

Bahrain 9 0 9Panama 110 0 110 

Brazil 492 0 492 

Belarus 0 61 61 

Bermuda 126 0 126 

## Statistics of Foreign Trademark Applications Filed in 2013 

Country/Region Foreign Madrid Total 

Bulgaria 26 178 204 

Belize 17 0 17 

Republic of Benin 2 0 2

Benelux 0 2394 2394 

Belgium 318 0 318 Iceland 17 70 87 

Puerto Rico 6 0 6Poland 148 267 415 

Bosnia -Herzegovina 0 10 10 

Bolivia 9 0 9

Belize 30 0 30 

Burkina Faso 1 0 1Democratic People's 

Republic of Korea 2 1 3Denmark 895 583 1478 Germany 4275 6490 10765 Togo 3 0 3Dominican 

Republic 8 0 8

Russia 503 1474 1977 Ecuador 16 0 16 France 4402 5227 9629 Philippines 112 37 149 Fiji 2 0 2Finland 348 229 577 

Democratic Republic 

of the Congo 8 0 8Columbia 123 3 126 

Costa Rica 5 0 5103 

Trademark Statistics 

（Cont'd） 

Country/Region Foreign Madrid Total 

Georgia 7 15 22 Cuba 4 1 5Guyana 2 0 2

Kazakstan 14 37 51 

Republic of Korea 7700 631 8331 Netherlands 1213 0 1213 Netherlands Antilles 102 0 102 

Montenegro 0 1 1

Kyrgyzstan 3 7 10 Canada 1806 0 1806 Ghana 4 0 4Cambodia 5 0 5

Czech Republic 83 214 297 

Zimbabwe 5 0 5Cameroon 4 0 4

Qatar 69 0 69 Cayman Islands 2341 0 2341 

Kuwait 36 0 36 Croatia 1 52 53 

Kenya 14 11 25 Cook Islands 16 0 16 

Kuraso 3 6 9Latvia 3 28 31 Lebanon 62 0 62 Lithuania 4 32 36 Libya 12 0 12 Liechtenstein 154 86 240 Luxembourg 307 0 307 

Romania 18 81 99 

Country/Region Foreign Madrid Total 

Madagascar 2 3 5

Isle of Man 175 0 175 

Malta 97 0 97 

Malaysia 944 0 944 

Mali 1 0 1

Macedonia 0 8 8

Marshall 60 0 60 

Mauritius 59 0 59 

Mauritania 3 0 3USA 25773 5102 30875 

Virgin Islands of the 

United States 10 0 10 

Mongolia 0 5 5

Bangladesh 11 0 11 Peru 21 0 21 

Myanmar 37 0 37 

Republic of Moldova 0 25 25 

Morocco 20 27 47 

Monaco 39 175 214 

Mexico 325 11 336 Namibia 5 0 5South Africa 318 0 318 Nicaragua 4 0 4Nepal 2 0 2Nigeria 28 0 28 Norway 103 373 476 EU 0 10252 10252 Portugal 173 187 360 104 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Country/Region Foreign Madrid Total 

Japan 13200 3404 16604 Sweden 777 227 1004 Switzerland 1696 3789 5485 Serbia 0 24 24 Sierra Leone 2 0 2Senegal 4 0 4Cyprus 85 74 159 Seychelles 344 0 344 Saudi Arabia 97 0 97 Federation of Saint 

Kitts and Nevis 5 0 5

San Marino 8 30 38 Sri Lanka 31 0 31 Slovakia 63 158 221 Slovenia 11 63 74 Thailand 1173 0 1173 Tanzania 18 0 18 The Turks and Caicos Islands 1 0 1Tunisia 7 0 7Turkey 239 886 1125 

Vanuatu 3 0 3Guatemala 31 0 31 

Venezuela 36 0 36 

Brunei 81 0 81 Uganda 2 0 2Ukraine 65 308 373 Uruguay 17 0 17 

Republic of 

Uzbekistan 9 1 10 Spain 1261 670 1931 

Country/Region Foreign Madrid Total 

Western Samoa 144 0 144 Greece 153 76 229 Singapore 1965 312 2277 

New Zealand 964 186 1150 

Hungary 28 61 89 Syria 59 0 59 

Jamaica 2 0 2Armenia 6 17 23 

The Republic of 

Yemen 23 0 23 Iraq 53 0 53 Iran 98 39 137 Israel 270 129 399 Italy 2690 3965 6655 India 702 0 702 Indonesia 113 0 113 

United Kingdom 6503 2124 8627 Channel Islands 38 0 38 

British Guernsey 6 0 6

The British Virgin 

Islands 3069 0 3069 

British West 

Indies 60 0 60 

Jordan 35 0 35 

Vietnam 87 60 147 

Zambia 1 0 1

Bailiwick of Jersey  23 0 23 Gibraltar 1 0 1Chile 235 0 235 Total 95177 53008 148185 105 

Trademark Statistics 

Country/Region Foreign Madrid Total 

Algeria 21 0 21 Afghanistan 6 0 6Argentina 110 0 110 United Arab Emirates 204 1 205 Oman 7 1 8Azerbaijan 25 0 25 Egypt 75 7 82 Ireland 213 106 319 Estonia 3 13 16 Andorra 4 12 16 Angola 29 0 29 Anguilla 65 0 65 Austria 224 507 731 Australia 1165 454 1619 

Barbados 37 0 37 Papua New Guinea 1 0 1

Bahamas 53 1 54 Pakistan 50 0 50 Paraguay 11 0 11 Palestine 1 0 1

Bahrain 2 0 2Panama 42 7 49 

Brazil 314 0 314 

Belarus 4 37 41 

Bermuda 137 0 137 

Bulgaria 25 53 78 

Belize 11 0 11 

Republic of Benin 1 0 1

Belgium 166 478 644 

## Statistics of Foreign Trademark Registrations Approved in 2013 

Country/Region Foreign Madrid Total 

Iceland 27 5 32 

Puerto Rico 0 0 0Poland 24 225 249 

Bolivia 0 0 0

Belize 34 4 38 

Burkina Faso 1 0 1Democratic Peoples 

Republic of Korea 3 1 4Denmark 529 459 988 Germany 2332 5339 7671 Togo 1 0 1

Dominican Republic 7 0 7

Russia 236 1030 1266 Ecuador 7 0 7France 2082 3236 5318 Philippines 72 1 73 Fiji 1 0 1Finland 146 284 430 

Democratic Republic 

of the Congo 0 0 0Columbia 77 0 77 

Costa Rica 4 0 4Georgia 4 3 7Cuba 4 0 4

Kazakstan 12 11 23 

Republic of Korea 3815 246 4061 Netherlands 570 862 1432 Netherlands Antilles 32 0 32 

Kyrgyzstan 3 0 3106 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Country/Region Foreign Madrid Total 

Guinea 5 0 5Canada 871 12 883 Ghana 0 0 0Cambodia 0 0 0

Czech Republic 30 127 157 

Zimbabwe 1 0 1Cameroon 2 0 2

Qatar 15 0 15 Cayman Islands 1076 17 1093 Ivory Coast 4 0 4

Kuwait 5 0 5Croatia 4 28 32 

Kenya 4 1 5Cook Islands 10 0 10 

Kuraso 2 0 2Latvia 8 13 21 Laos 1 0 1Lebanon 40 1 41 Lithuania 4 14 18 Libya 3 0 3Liechtenstein 31 58 89 Luxembourg 158 284 442 

Romania 33 16 49 

Madagascar 0 0 0

Isle of Man 57 0 57 

Malta 10 56 66 

Malaysia 529 3 532 

Mali 3 0 3

Country/Region Foreign Madrid Total 

The Republic of Macedonia 0 5 5

Marshall 60 0 60 

Mauritius 26 0 26 

Mauritania 0 0 0USA 15881 2273 18154 

Virgin Islands of the 

United States 1 0 1

Mongolia 0 1 1

Bangladesh 5 0 5Peru 33 0 33 

Myanmar 10 1 11 

Republic of Moldova 1 16 17 

Morocco 4 26 30 

Monaco 46 52 98 

Mozambique 0 7 7

Mexico 239 2 241 Namibia 0 0 0South Africa 233 0 233 Nepal 3 0 3Nigeria 17 0 17 Norway 42 136 178 Portugal 114 122 236 

Japan 14266 1828 16094 Sweden 373 495 868 Switzerland 1015 2714 3729 El Salvador 1 0 1Serbia and 

Montenegro 1 14 15 Sierra Leone 1 0 1107 

Trademark Statistics 

（Cont'd） 

Country/Region Foreign Madrid Total 

Senegal 1 0 1Cyprus 90 487 577 Seychelles 138 8 146 Saudi Arabia 56 0 56 Federation of Saint 

Kitts and Nevis 1 0 1

San Marino 6 8 14 

Saint Vincent  1 0 1Sri Lanka 12 0 12 Slovakia 1 35 36 Slovenia 8 34 42 Thailand 251 10 261 Tanzania 1 0 1The Turks and Caicos Islands 4 0 4Trinidad and Tobago 1 0 1Tunisia 13 0 13 Turkey 117 206 323 Turkmenistan 1 0 1

Vanuatu 0 0 0Guatemala 4 0 4

Venezuela 38 0 38 

Brunei 28 0 28 Uganda 3 0 3Ukraine 28 105 133 Uruguay 15 6 21 

Republic of 

Uzbekistan 2 1 3Spain 869 563 1432 Western Samoa 89 0 89 

Country/Region Foreign Madrid Total 

Greece 64 46 110 Singapore 1096 135 1231 

New Zealand 563 18 581 

Hungary 8 52 60 Syria 13 0 13 

Jamaica 3 0 3Armenia 4 12 16 

The Republic of 

Yemen 10 0 10 Iraq 50 0 50 Iran 66 22 88 Israel 107 86 193 Italy 1630 2463 4093 India 355 7 362 Indonesia 44 0 44 

United Kingdom 3263 1536 4799 Channel Islands 10 0 10 

British Guernsey 7 0 7

The British Virgin Islands 1752 80 1832 

British West Indies 113 0 113 

Jordan 20 0 20 

Vietnam 90 56 146 

Bailiwick of Jersey  9 5 14 Gibraltar 2 1 3Chile 132 0 132 Total 59496 27687 87183 108 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013         

> Class Applications Registrations Domestic International Madrid Total Domestic International Madrid Total

1 26358 1772 1131 29261 16679 1343 730 18752 2 12966 593 364 13923 7600 436 205 8241 3 52881 4754 2062 59697 25745 3052 1051 29848 4 10317 727 371 11415 6141 496 244 6881 5 55222 4457 2031 61710 27340 2740 1187 31267 6 32447 1571 1029 35047 18906 1037 555 20498 7 47793 3172 1963 52928 28952 1978 1057 31987 8 11225 1027 615 12867 7161 661 322 8144 9 100869 8891 5216 114976 54092 5205 2501 61798 10 18571 1988 1295 21854 9477 1202 723 11402 11 66283 2923 1527 70733 36713 1557 772 39042 12 30826 2418 1146 34390 15644 1259 563 17466 13 2607 159 74 2840 1973 112 49 2134 14 31604 1824 1272 34700 14923 1307 714 16944 15 4482 290 139 4911 2741 263 83 3087 16 30441 2826 1678 34945 19444 1983 875 22302 17 14178 957 691 15826 9127 674 445 10246 18 40243 3352 1968 45563 23734 2250 994 26978 19 31792 762 636 33190 18542 599 385 19526 20 43609 1592 1054 46255 23513 1148 593 25254 21 32563 2125 999 35687 18763 1406 534 20703 22 5815 424 216 6455 3790 301 139 4230 

## Statistics of Trademark Applications and Registrations Sorted out According to Classes of Goods & services in 2013 Trademark Statistics 

109 

（Cont'd）         

> Class Applications Registrations Domestic International Madrid Total Domestic International Madrid Total

23 4446 232 119 4797 3295 191 78 3564 24 26657 1309 873 28839 16739 1046 474 18259 25 206541 6649 3256 216446 101646 4351 1362 107359 26 8298 579 258 9135 5822 424 156 6402 27 9209 430 275 9914 5199 381 213 5793 28 23684 2152 1095 26931 14045 1644 628 16317 29 72703 2541 963 76207 38061 1518 475 40054 30 98498 3444 1275 103217 50090 2025 600 52715 31 50454 785 435 51674 26766 555 247 27568 32 35280 1897 928 38105 15332 1083 441 16856 33 54464 3647 1412 59523 25781 2001 796 28578 34 4878 393 251 5522 2835 233 150 3218 35 144901 7350 3532 155783 62693 3263 1021 66977 36 26439 1314 749 28502 12957 885 473 14315 37 24614 1303 1168 27085 14490 807 731 16028 38 14574 954 954 16482 7417 699 593 8709 39 20368 1028 630 22026 11418 605 417 12440 40 13732 675 613 15020 8618 495 378 9491 41 45762 3355 2097 51214 23011 2127 1069 26207 42 45005 2891 2925 50821 24377 1881 1676 27934 43 66620 2086 659 69365 29994 1236 311 31541 44 23488 996 577 25061 12488 650 377 13515 45 9654 563 487 10704 5467 387 300 6154 Total 1733361 95177 53008 1881546 909541 59496 27687 996724 110 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Applications Registrations Approved Year Domestic International Madrid Total Domestic International Madrid Total 

1979 27459 5130 32589 1980 26177 15348 1297 16645 1981 23004 15707 2049 17756 1982 17000 1565 18565 12385 4672 17057 1983 19120 1687 20807 4293 2278 6571 1984 26487 3077 29564 13252 1518 14770 1985 43445 5798 49243 19584 2084 21668 1986 45031 5939 50970 26993 5126 32119 1987 40014 4055 44069 27687 4454 32141 1988 41683 5866 47549 25448 3604 29052 1989 43202 5209 48411 31810 4625 36435 1990 50853 4371 2048 57272 25966 4036 1269 31271 1991 59124 5885 2595 67604 34501 3523 2306 40330 1992 79837 8367 2591 90795 42710 4198 1180 48088 1993 107758 21014 3551 132323 42668 3999 2059 48726 1994 117186 20238 5193 142617 47482 7803 3016 58301 1995 144610 21442 6094 172146 59895 12591 19380 91866 

## Statistics of Trademark Applications and Trademark Registratrions In 1979-2013 Trademark Statistics 

111 

（Cont'd） 

Applications Registrations Approved Year Domestic International Madrid Total Domestic International Madrid Total 

1996 122057 22615 7132 151804 101178 15843 11407 128428 1997 118577 21676 8502 148755 188047 24958 10033 223038 1998 129394 18252 10037 157683 80095 14137 13478 107710 1999 140620 18883 11212 170715 96139 13896 12366 122401 2000 181717 24623 16837 223177 129441 16327 12807 158575 2001 229775 23234 17408 270417 167563 19017 16259 202839 2002 321034 37221 13681 371936 169904 23364 19265 212533 2003 405620 33912 12563 452095 206070 21188 15253 242511 2004 527591 44938 15396 587925 225394 25069 16156 266619 2005 593382 52166 18469 664017 218731 23792 16009 258532 2006 669276 56840 40203 766319 228814 25254 21573 275641 2007 604952 59714 43282 707948 215161 19159 29158 263478 2008 590525 60704 46890 698119 342498 31870 29101 403469 2009 741763 51966 36748 830477 737228 68471 31944 837643 2010 973460 67838 30889 1072187 1211428 108510 29299 1349237 2011 1273827 95831 47127 1416785 926330 66074 30294 1022698 2012 1502540 97190 48586 1648316 919951 58656 26290 1004897 2013 1733361 95177 53008 1881546 909541 59496 27687 996724 Total 11694821 997293 500042 13241337 7546701 708068 397589 8652358 112 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

Item Cases by Category Number of Cases(Piece) 

Applications Accepted 

Review of Rejection of Trademark 

Applications 58491 

Review of Trademark Oppositions 17846 

Disputes over Registered 

Trademarks 4121 

Review of cancellation of 

regisrered Trademarks 2156 Total 82614 Adjudication 

Review of Rejection of Trademark 

Applications 108301 

Review of Trademark Oppositions 30232 

Disputes over Registered 

Trademarks 5042 

Review of cancellation of 

regisrered Trademarks 607 Total 144182 Administrative Litigation First Instanse 1760 Second Instanse 881 

Retrial 57 Total 2698 

Administrative Recinsideration 

Applications accepted 265 Closed Cases 241 

## Statistics of Trademark Cases Reviewed and Adjudicated in 2013 Trademark Statistics 

113 

> Statistics of General Trademark Offenses across the Country
> Item Total Number of Cases Among: Number of foreign-related cases  Total Value (10,000 yuan) Total Fines (10,000 yuan) Number of Cases Handled  Trademark reproduction seized and removed (pieces) Faulty articles destroyed (pieces) Total  Complaint Case  Total  Complaint Case  Subtotal  Complaint Case Fine between 100,000 and 1 million yuan Fine over 1 million yuan
> Total  6896  1114  99  29  16371  5101  3772  858  116  1 256705  70785 Administration on the use of registered trademarks Altering the registered trademark without approval  259  71  1 371  * 60  18  * * * *Altering the name, address or other registered matters without approval 35  11  109  * 14  6 * * * *Assigning a registered trademark without approval  57  4 151  * 37  3 * * * *Producing shoddy goods to deceive consumers  510  171  7 443  392  220  67  11  * *Administration on the use of unregistered trademarks Passing unregistered trademarks off as registered trademark 3956  626  53  15  12555  3309  2162  547  77  1 * *Producing shoddy goods to deceive consumers  405  24  428  259  134  8 6 * *
> Violating Article 6 of
> Trademark Law  109  6 125  111  63  5 1 * *
> Violating Article 10 of
> Trademark Law  22  2 164  11  3 1 * *
> Violating Article 40(2) of Trademark Law  227  40  20  7 300  * 128  42  * * 2161  2
> Violating Article 13 of Trademark Law  232  48  310  * 170  38  * * 30672  2805
> Violating the Regulation on Trademark Printing  1030  105  18  7 1250  921  741  117  20  216584  66198 Illegal use of Geographical Indications  14  1 3 6 7 1 210  1610 Illegal use of Geographical Indications special signs  25  2 2 24  7059  65 Illegal use of Special Signs  15  5 161  92  9 5 1 19  105

114 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

> Statistics of Trademark Infrigement and Counterfeiting Cases Across the Country (1)
> Item Total Number of Cases Among: Number of foreign-related cases  Total Value (10,000 yuan) Total Fines (10,000 yuan) Subtotal  Complain Case Number of Cases Handled (pieces 、10,000 yuan)  Internet-related cases Total  Complaint Case  Total  Complaint Case punishment Fine between 100,000 and 1 million yuan Fine over 1 million yuan Number of Cases Total Value
> Total  49971  13656  11636  4434  65230  46406  38438  12179  1195  20  647  1716 Couterfeiting trademark Subtotal  7786  2438  2211  827  12731  7731  5871  2076  92  6 119  342 Using an indentical trademark on the same goods without the consent of the proprietor  3492  1150  1141  431  6598  4179  2549  972  61  28  213 Selling, couterfeiting or making, without authorization, lables of a registered trademark of others 816  250  135  32  1542  765  630  233  7 1 4Selling goods that bear couterfeited registered trademark knowingly  3478  1038  935  364  4590  2788  2692  871  24  6 90  126 Trademark infringement Subtotal  42185  11218  9425  3607  52499  38675  32567  10103  1103  14  528  1373 Using a similar trademark on the same goods, or an identical or similar trademark on similar goods without authorization 6068  1460  1866  496  11291  8987  4603  1285  242  4 41  87 Selling goods that infringe the exclusive right to a registered trademark  31819  8515  7150  2978  32203  25045  24173  7647  775  9 474  944 Using identical or similar marks to a registered trademark of others,on the same or similar goods, as the name or decoration of the goods,misleading the public 1311  295  167  42  4201  1806  1025  255  48  1 3 5Facilitating the infringement behaviors by providing storage,transportation,postal service and concealment intentionally 1668  598  141  69  2572  1617  1651  598  22  1Changing other's registered trademark without authorization,and selling goods bearing a replaced trademark 109  27  7 4 597  183  106  27  2 3 311 Causing other damages to the exclusive right to a registered trademark of others  300  97  27  6 738  355  183  76  8 1 2Infringing the exclusive right of Geographical Indications  81  19  35  32  70  19 Infringing the exclusive right of Olympic Signs  38  5 2 163  103  31  5 1Infringing the right of well-kmown trademark  791  202  65  12  699  546  725  191  5 5 26

Trademark Statistics 

115 

> Statistics of Trademark Infrigement and Counterfeiting Cases Across the Country (2)
> Item Number of Infringing Articles destructed (pieces) Number of Infringing Trademark Lables Seized and Removed (pieces) Number of tools Specially Used to Manufacture the Infringing Goods and Couterfeit Labels of registered Trademarks Destructed (pieces) Cases Transferred to Judical Organs Number of Cases  Among: Number of Foreign-related Cases Total  Number of Complaint Number of Persons transferred  Total  Number of Complaint Number of Persons transferred
> Total  13724110  6274103  8566  * * * * * *Couterfeiting trademark Subtotal  4961460  1947457  346  362  146  347  177  69  176 Using an indentical trademark on the same goods without the consent of the proprietor  4141095  951992  165  131  72  111  65  38  48 Selling, couterfeiting or making, without authorization, lables of a registered trademark of others  199553  817707  50  25  6 18  5 1 5Selling goods that bear couterfeited registered trademark knowingly  620812  177758  131  206  68  218  107  30  123 Trademark infringement Subtotal  8762650  4326646  8220  * * * * * *Using a similar trademark on the same goods, or an identical or similar trademark on similar goods without authorization 4940904  1931001  5935  * * * * * *Selling goods that infringe the exclusive right to a registered trademark  3478540  1466873  1871  * * * * * *Using identical or similar marks to a registered trademark of others,on the same or similar goods, as the name or decoration of the goods,misleading the public 120141  248641  347  * * * * * *Facilitating the infringement behaviors by providing storage,transportation,postal service and concealment intentionally 25984  218627  50  * * * * * *Changing other's registered trademark without authorization,and selling goods bearing a replaced trademark 2323  222784  0 * * * * * *Causing other damages to the exclusive right to a registered trademark of others  41376  197447  14  * * * * * *Infringing the exclusive right of Geographical Indications  1825  30290  * * * * * *Infringing the exclusive right of Olympic Signs  2465  97  1Infringing the right of well-kmown trademark  149092  10886  2 * * * * * *

116 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

## Statistics of Trademark Offenses investigated by 

## Provinces/Regions across the Country 

Unit: Piece、Ten thousand Yuan 

Item General offenses Infringement and counterfeiting Total Number of Cases Among: Number of foreign-related cases Total Value Total Fines Total Number of Cases Among: Number of foreign-related cases Total Value Total Fines 

Total 6896 99 16370.83 5101.47 49971 11636 65230.04 46406.10 

Beijing 6 1 199.64 36.42 1024 477 2054.16 1014.51 Tianjin 33 30.00 23.16 344 48 828.47 567.07 

Hebei 257 5 170.89 142.02 927 111 591.39 731.43 Shanxi 212 131.28 61.28 1021 46 679.18 353.11 Inner 

Mongolia 65 55.74 44.91 205 2 264.95 187.51 Liaoning 168 422.78 135.31 1118 157 2467.52 834.40 

Jilin 39 29.11 36.81 427 52 841.78 476.13 

Heilongjian 27 15.13 16.48 315 42 415.47 210.40 Shanghai 58 1845.56 171.19 2990 2039 2805.27 1555.71 

Jiangsu 127 10 2755.89 240.63 2725 230 7227.91 4355.47 

Zhejiang 488 2 1557.70 600.07 6142 3135 11934.36 10247.90 Anhui 601 3 210.21 204.14 4930 439 1587.67 1512.09 Fujian 332 15 174.46 123.36 4146 928 2981.43 2278.09 Trademark Statistics 

117 

Item General offenses Infringement and counterfeiting Total Number of Cases Among: Number of foreign-related cases Total Value Total Fines Total Number of Cases Among: Number of foreign-related cases Total Value Total Fines 

Jiangxi 130 125.87 88.48 590 10 1410.27 479.79 Shandong 555 1113.21 383.20 2251 90 1875.28 1593.46 

Henan 644 2 853.19 329.88 4994 109 2200.85 1561.32 

Hubei 669 1484.10 559.70 2267 68 7157.59 3972.07 

Hunan 319 254.04 349.86 1022 20 2759.41 1506.82 Guangdong 427 42 947.11 417.22 5965 3067 8326.64 7530.09 Guangxi 107 143.96 35.42 779 57 439.90 260.59 

Hainan 178 6 106.97 129.63 434 49 391.18 417.65 Chongqing 34 3 147.20 251.48 289 77 889.72 944.04 Sichuan 219 2277.82 245.54 964 126 1561.03 1427.84 Guizhou 83 174.25 30.13 450 3 344.55 194.23 Yunnan 321 292.25 194.76 889 26 1247.92 642.25 Tibet 29 2 17.37 9.19 59 28.86 60.15 Shaanxi 310 7 356.72 74.10 851 120 263.29 345.06 Gansu 142 85.50 66.47 636 41 501.98 378.24 

Qinghai 22 0.69 1.25 284 1 105.99 121.11 Ningxia 34 6.03 7.39 244 12 100.42 117.66 

Xinjiang 260 1 386.16 91.99 689 54 945.60 529.91 

（Cont'd） 118 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013 

## Statistics of Domestic Trademark Applications Filed and Registrations Approved in 2013 ( breakdown by Province / Autonomous Region / Municipality) 

Note: Applications and Registrations refer to Trademark statistics from Jan 1st to Dec 31st, 2013; others 

refer to accumulative data by Dec 31st, 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Beijing

Beijing City 133510 68688 467259 8 1184 Dongcheng District 8885 4667 36923 0 76 

Xicheng District 10868 5014 47884 0 171 Chaoyang District 33604 18048 104410 0 309 Fengtai District 9893 5439 32080 1 44 Shijingshan District 5506 2134 9574 0 13 

Haidian District 33139 17298 119557 0 320 

Mentougou District 1396 589 4966 2 11 Fangshan District 2614 1699 9400 1 8Tongzhou District 6617 3254 18349 0 29 Shunyi District 2784 1325 11541 0 47 Changping District 4785 2112 14988 0 37 Daxing District 4381 2601 22129 1 51 

Huairou District 2084 1007 6667 1 22 Pinggu District 2240 1021 5517 1 13 

Miyun County 1256 668 4899 1 3Yanqing County 348 283 2091 0 4Tianjin Tianjin City 22127 13194 77143 12 228 

Heping District 602 387 3561 0 4

Hedong District 621 435 3567 0 5

Hexi District 859 555 4247 0 15 Nankai District 1394 736 6167 0 6

Hebei District 617 233 2384 0 4

Hongqiao District 432 315 2380 0 6Dongli District 1221 1074 5684 0 13 

Xiqing District 1848 1013 5491 1 12 

Jinnan District 796 504 3755 1 5

Beichen District 1573 1354 6735 0 15 Wuqing District 1711 962 6343 0 15 Trademark Statistics 

119 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Tianjin

Baodi District 547 294 2115 6 5

Ji County 271 126 1011 0 0Ninghe County 582 286 1240 1 4

Jinghai County 889 702 3848 0 7

Hi-tech Zone 333 173 1772 0 0

Development Zone 587 739 3142 0 0

Binhai New Area 5654 2617 7168 3 10 

> Hebei Province

Hebei Province 43826 21084 166136 30 232 Shijiazhuang City Shijiazhuang City 12003 5676 44149 6 57 Chang'an District 1100 454 2633 - 0

Qiaodong District 1298 484 2527 - 1

Qiaoxi District 824 429 2406 - 2

Xinhua District 1087 403 2603 - 2Yuhua District 1120 485 2912 - 0

Jingxing Mine Area 9 5 31 - 0

Xinji City 641 282 2348 - 10 Gaocheng City 499 249 1851 - 2

Jinzhou City 1038 617 5033 - 1

Xinle City 418 168 1637 - 1Luquan City 178 109 864 - 0

Jingxing County 67 86 347 - 0

Zhengding County 515 273 1950 - 4Luancheng County 232 119 1135 - 1

Xingtang County 113 65 428 - 0Lingshou County 91 38 308 - 0Gaoyi County 69 33 319 - 1Shenze County 155 54 482 - 0

Zanhuang County 84 46 278 - 1Wuji County 344 136 942 - 0Pingshan County 133 95 574 - 1Yuanshi County 152 47 387 - 1

Zhao County 206 131 845 - 1120 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013   

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hebei Province
> Shijiazhuang City

Development Zone 3 5 302 - 0

> Zhangjiakou City

Zhangjiakou City 765 355 3794 1 4

Qiaoxi District 40 18 276 - 0

Qiaodong District 47 29 363 - 0

Xuanhua District 96 31 718 - 2

Xiahuayuan District 3 0 22 - 0

Xuanhua County 23 23 180 - 0

Zhangbei County 32 17 153 - 0

Kangbao County 20 15 70 - 0Guyuan County 29 18 66 - 0Shangyi County 36 8 67 - 0Wei County 44 15 182 - 0Yangyuan County 33 13 140 - 0

Huai'an County 9 2 47 - 0Wanquan County 33 11 152 - 0

Huailai County 86 79 590 - 2

Zhulu County 38 41 399 - 0Chicheng County 13 4 53 - 0Chongli County 111 3 60 - 0

Hi-tech Zone 63 12 73 - 0Chabei District 2 5 29 - 0Saibei District 1 1 4 - 0Chengde City Chengde City 1084 500 3904 4 5Shuangqiao District 203 58 520 - 0Shuangluan District 29 33 154 - 0

Yingshou Yingzi Mine Area 18 11 55 - 0Chengde County 40 19 335 - 0

Xinglong County 68 40 388 - 0Pingquan County 173 75 631 - 0Luanping County 41 25 138 - 0Longhua County 142 74 379 - 0

Fengning Man Autonomous Coutny 77 55 258 - 0Trademark Statistics 

121 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hebei Province
> Chengde City

Kuancheng Man Autonomous Coutny 110 20 234 - 1

Weichang Man and Mongolia 

Autonomous Coutny 128 60 318 - 0

> Qinhuangdao City

Qinhuangdao City 1459 990 7332 0 11 

Haigang District 594 375 2179 - 3Shanhaiguan District 46 115 705 - 1

Beidaihe District 68 16 272 - 0Changli County 191 195 1506 - 1Funing County 123 101 632 - 1Lulong County 76 50 408 - 0

Qinglong Man Autonomous Coutny 40 16 161 - 0

Development Zone 2 11 318 - 0Tangshan City Tangshan City 2663 1577 12412 2 28 Lubei District 396 175 1752 - 2Lunan District 219 172 1021 - 0Guye District 36 21 279 - 0

Kaiping District 74 64 440 - 2Fengrun District 282 133 1334 - 0Fengnan District 107 89 697 - 1

Zunhua City 229 74 882 - 3

Qian'an City 150 91 708 - 0Luan County 148 121 567 - 0Luannan County 178 115 863 - 8Laoting County 122 35 402 - 1

Qianxi County 90 37 351 - 3Yutian County 381 166 1324 - 1

Caofeidian Industrial Zone 39 17 77 - 0

Nanpu Development Zone 6 4 67 - 1

Hangu Management District 10 0 25 - 0

Hi-tech Zone 67 53 338 - 0

Haigang Development Area 30 8 40 - 0

Lutai Development Zone 50 17 125 - 0Langfang City Langfang City 3593 1811 15020 1 9122 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hebei Province
> Langfang City

Guangyang District 359 206 1264 - 0Anci District 131 117 738 - 2

Bazhou City 676 325 2504 - 2Sanhe City 364 170 1429 - 1Gu'an County 305 71 817 - 0Yongqing County 114 68 425 - 0xianghe County 457 118 943 - 0Dacheng County 276 162 1484 - 0Wen'an County 497 279 2181 - 0

Dachang Hui Autonomous Coutny 67 72 411 - 0

Development Zone 76 75 652 - 0

> Baoding City

Baoding City 9034 4294 30662 4 63 

Xinshi District 305 131 1018 - 0

Beishi District 477 118 643 - 0Nanshi District 200 80 563 - 0Dingzhou City 348 122 1056 - 1

Zhuozhou City 249 94 1017 - 2Anguo City 524 113 666 - 0Gaobeidian City 1415 687 4569 - 4

Mancheng Coutny 229 158 1232 - 0

Qingyuan Coutny 324 232 1501 - 0Yi Coutny 257 124 578 - 1

Xushui Coutny 452 259 2066 - 9Laiyuan Coutny 47 61 203 - 0Dingxing Coutny 178 83 673 - 2Shunping Coutny 65 27 178 - 0Tang Coutny 200 106 722 - 0Wangdu Coutny 132 52 330 - 0Laishui Coutny 77 54 282 - 2Gaoyang Coutny 691 373 2594 - 2Anxin Coutny 460 302 1764 - 3

Xiong Coutny 299 167 1143 - 1Trademark Statistics 

123 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hebei Province Baoding City

Rongcheng Coutny 287 116 1067 - 0

Quyang Coutny 125 41 264 - 0Fuping Coutny 72 9 88 - 0

Boye Coutny 83 48 462 - 0Li Coutny 557 282 1402 - 2Cangzhou City Cangzhou City 3869 2123 16729 4 13 Yunhe District 210 193 805 - 0

Xinhua District 99 68 564 - 1

Botou City 285 128 1125 - 3

Renqiu City 836 350 2846 - 2

Huanghua City 135 121 984 - 0

Hejian City 668 365 2561 - 0Cang Coutny 279 182 1432 - 1

Qing Coutny 226 91 1549 - 1Dongguang Coutny 90 61 472 - 0

Haixing Coutny 27 18 157 - 0Yanshan Coutny 95 94 490 - 0Suning Coutny 339 129 875 - 0Nanpi Coutny 99 63 412 - 3Wuqiao Coutny 54 27 187 - 0

Xian Coutny 245 109 957 - 0

Mengcun Hui Autonomous Coutny 88 43 400 - 0

> Hengshui City

Hengshui City 2102 813 7339 0 17 Taocheng District 203 96 634 - 0

Jizhou City 253 134 903 - 1Shenzhou City 134 55 671 - 5

Zaoqiang County 276 85 731 - 1Wuyi County 107 47 444 - 0Wuqiang County 75 42 379 - 1

Raoyang County 93 39 475 - 0Anping County 239 75 684 - 3Gucheng County 275 80 689 - 1124 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hebei Province

Hengshui 

City 

Jing County 166 52 683 - 0Fucheng County 56 36 255 - 0

> Xingtai City

Xingtai City 4557 2067 16856 7 15 

Qiaodong District 281 72 621 - 0

Qiaoxi District 214 69 717 - 1Nangong City 364 124 878 - 0Shahe City 145 109 683 - 0

Xingtai County 118 50 413 - 0Lincheng County 63 33 343 - 1Neiqiu County 37 21 82 - 0

Baixiang County 53 20 115 - 0Longyao County 310 94 1522 - 0

Ren County 302 96 931 - 1Nanhe County 173 74 683 - 2Ningjin County 546 283 2728 - 4

Julu County 181 121 618 - 1

Xinhe County 59 27 241 - 1Guangzong County 156 41 407 - 0Pingxiang County 353 120 1524 - 2Wei County 184 85 670 - 0

Qinghe County 743 464 2296 - 0Linxi County 164 78 483 - 0

> Handan City

Handan City 2996 1310 11145 1 10 Congtai District 199 101 775 - 0

Hanshan District 204 90 746 - 0Fuxing District 61 35 283 - 0

Fengfeng Mine Area 74 28 300 - 0Wu'an City 131 51 628 - 1

Handan City 90 48 350 - 0Linzhang County 137 50 314 - 0Cheng'an County 65 37 240 - 0Daming County 249 78 774 - 1Trademark Statistics 

125 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hebei Province Handan City

She County 46 22 212 - 0Ci County 138 51 522 - 0Feixiang County 126 25 162 - 0Yongnian County 357 184 1672 - 1

Qiu County 94 44 361 - 0

Jize County 160 58 357 - 0Guangping County 79 30 255 - 1Guantao County 164 45 479 - 0Wei County 265 95 709 - 0

Quzhou County 239 133 733 - 3Shanxi Province Shanxi Province 16753 6731 52742 34 42 Taiyuan City Taiyuan City 5711 2354 17438 3 14 

Xinghualing District 590 264 2213 - 2

Xiaodian District 1532 620 2603 - 0Yingze District 1295 411 2393 - 1

Jiancaoping District 305 98 732 - 0Wanbailin District 630 224 1095 - 0

Jinyuan District 172 77 573 - 0Gujiao City 70 22 152 - 0

Qingxu County 217 86 960 - 4Yangqu County 90 74 264 - 0Loufan County 27 13 107 - 0Datong City Datong City 688 484 3478 3 2City Area 123 72 407 - 0

Mine Area 165 16 150 - 0Nanjiao District 58 34 178 - 0

Xinrong District 15 8 44 - 0Yanggao County 53 20 140 - 0Tianzhen County 19 10 86 - 0Guangling County 33 14 145 - 1Lingqiu County 13 9 135 - 0

Hunyuan County 36 26 132 - 0126 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shanxi Province Datong City

Zuoyun County 13 11 56 - 0Datong County 15 10 75 - 0Shuozhou City Shuozhou City 479 358 1362 4 0Shuocheng District 87 107 275 - 0Pinglu District 87 58 170 - 0Shanyin County 38 15 136 - 0Ying County 67 23 167 - 0Youyu County 45 32 125 - 0

Huairen County 113 101 313 - 0Yangquan City Yangquan City 365 131 1273 1 2City Area 155 21 148 - 0

Mine Area 26 11 99 - 0Suburb 35 21 178 - 0Pingding County 54 48 275 - 0Yu County 65 16 221 - 1Changzhi City Changzhi City 1187 374 3679 1 1City Area 68 16 171 - 0Suburb 42 24 193 - 1Lucheng City 17 11 289 - 0Changzhi County 119 19 306 - 0

Xiangyuan County 97 45 432 - 0Tunliu County 52 23 238 - 0Pingshun County 131 41 141 - 0Licheng County 9 4 59 - 0

Huguan County 39 5 217 - 0

Zhangzi County 45 37 169 - 0Wuxiang County 44 13 121 - 0

Qin County 67 52 249 - 0

Qinyuan County 48 9 150 - 0

Hi-tech Zone 9 1 21 - 0

> Jin
> cheng City

Jincheng City 1056 384 2878 0 0City Area 227 33 371 - 0Trademark Statistics 

127 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shanxi Province
> Jin cheng City

Gaoping City 134 54 456 - 0

Zezhou County 127 57 301 - 0

Qinshui County 48 33 177 - 0Yangcheng County 302 103 746 - 0Lingchuan County 55 18 218 - 0

> Xinzhou City

Xinzhou City 523 205 1949 0 2

Xinfu District 141 42 253 - 0Yuanping City 48 27 195 - 0Dingxiang County 53 21 274 - 2Wutai County 67 17 177 - 0Dai County 22 5 115 - 0Fanzhi County 28 24 125 - 0Ningwu County 26 11 120 - 0

Jingle County 21 3 33 - 0Shenchi County 15 3 88 - 0Wuzhai County 8 0 47 - 0

Kelan County 16 2 52 - 0

Hequ County 12 22 91 - 0

Baode County 26 4 34 - 0Pianguan County 9 1 51 - 0

> Jinzhong City

Jinzhong City 1590 566 4734 9 10 Yuci District 482 141 1080 - 0

Jiexiu City 160 47 327 - 0Yushe County 14 8 109 - 0

Zuoquan County 52 14 62 - 0

Heshun County 107 4 106 - 0

Xiyang County 32 13 234 - 0Shouyang County 54 15 207 - 0Taigu County 123 63 829 - 3

Qi County 63 31 418 - 3Pingyao County 266 131 832 - 3Lingshi County 158 75 265 - 0128 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shanxi Province Linfen City

Linfen City 1032 393 4016 2 1Yaodu District 363 69 519 - 0

Houma City 90 61 480 - 0

Huozhou City 28 14 120 - 0

Quwo County 40 15 153 - 0Yicheng County 67 35 159 - 0

Xiangfen County 136 22 286 - 0

Hongdong County 94 59 501 - 1Gu County 21 8 73 - 0Anze County 8 5 116 - 0Fushan County 10 4 84 - 0

Ji County 21 26 156 - 0

Xiangning County 20 11 193 - 0Pu County 10 6 100 - 0Daning County 6 2 26 - 0Yonghe County 12 6 29 - 0

Xi County 17 13 70 - 0Fenxi County 16 5 49 - 0Yuncheng City Yuncheng City 2032 860 7762 8 5Yanhu District 445 187 1052 - 0Yongji City 104 75 554 - 1

Hejin City 98 21 365 - 0

Ruicheng County 177 52 441 - 1Linyi County 192 59 712 - 3Wanrong County 79 53 358 - 0

Xinjiang County 93 71 417 - 0

Jishan County 136 38 359 - 0Wenxi County 98 45 569 - 0

Xia County 94 33 237 - 0

Jiang County 145 91 602 - 0Pinglu County 16 21 175 - 0Yuanqu County 114 11 137 - 0Trademark Statistics 

129 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shanxi Province Lüliang City

Luliang City 2067 731 4699 1 5Lishi District 101 35 333 - 0

Xiaoyi City 205 61 432 - 0Fenyang City 760 291 1752 - 4Wenshui County 151 71 578 - 0

Zhongyang County 52 10 77 - 0

Xing County 27 14 74 - 0Lin County 226 74 252 - 0Fangshan County 33 21 204 - 0Liulin County 123 53 163 - 0Lan County 174 23 256 - 0

Jiaokou County 45 17 85 - 0

Jiaocheng County 147 63 369 - 1Shilou County 24 4 56 - 0

> Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region

Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region 13146 6899 56746 24 66 

> Hohhot City

Hohhot City 3323 2148 17261 6 17 

Xincheng District 649 359 3028 - 1

Hui Area 356 159 1604 - 0Yuquan District 238 146 1435 - 0Saihan District 784 328 1781 - 0Tuoketuo County 85 17 288 - 0Wuchuan County 62 36 207 - 0

Helin Geer County 313 328 2140 - 2

Qingshuihe County 47 12 131 - 0

Tumote Left Banner 133 54 446 - 0

Hohht Technical Economic Development 

Area 29 0 11 - 0

> Baotou City

Baotou City 1946 852 8193 1 17 

Kundulun District 107 36 597 - 3Donghe District 183 97 1048 - 2

Qingshan District 572 234 2013 - 4Shiguai District 12 5 47 - 0

Baiyun Ebo Mine Area 1 0 2 - 0130 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region Baotou City

Jiuyuan District 108 43 653 - 0Guyang County 41 16 194 - 0

Tumote Right Banner 119 81 417 - 0

Darhan Muminggan United Banner 46 27 124 - 0

Baotou Rare-earth Hi-tech Industrial Development Zone 33 2 292 - 0Wuhai City Wuhai City 233 169 999 0 0

Haibowan District 151 90 416 - 0

Hainan District 14 25 105 - 0Wuda District 65 45 400 - 0Chifeng City Chifeng City 1565 798 5020 2 5

Hongshan District 344 182 1299 - 0Yuanbaoshan District 153 155 773 - 3Songshan District 220 70 475 - 0Ningcheng County 207 59 574 - 1Linxi County 46 53 156 - 0

Alukeerqin Banner 56 31 126 - 0

Bairin Left Banner 50 31 202 - 0

Bairin Right Banner 50 16 103 - 0

Keshiketeng Banner 71 26 192 - 0

Ongniud Banner 156 68 313 - 0

Harqin Banner 69 27 186 - 0

Aohan Banner 90 33 311 - 0Tongliao city Tongliao city 918 355 3081 2 0

Horqin District 356 101 699 - 0

Huolinguole City 24 4 130 - 0

Kailu County 51 39 189 - 0

Kulun Banner 59 11 94 - 0

Naiman Banner 81 27 264 - 0

Zhalute Banner 24 32 158 - 0

Horqin Left Center Banner 57 24 181 - 0

Horqin Left Back Banner 43 21 202 - 0

Tongliao Developmentment Zone 0 1 1 - 0Trademark Statistics 

131 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region Hulum Buir City

Hulum Buir City 1148 473 3040 1 9

Hailar City 206 78 700 - 4

Manzhouli City 125 39 405 - 2

Zhalantun City 118 40 386 - 0Yakeshi City 211 35 347 - 1Genhe City 88 59 240 - 1Erguna City 13 11 102 - 0

Arong Banner 52 71 245 - 0

Xinbarhu Right Banner 10 4 18 - 0

Xinbarhu Left Banner 14 3 19 - 0

Chenbarhu Banner 16 3 51 - 0

Elunchun Banner 49 29 165 - 0

Ewenke Autonomous Banner 30 23 76 - 0

Molidawa Dawor Autonomous Banner 63 32 111 - 1Erdos City Erdos City 1549 1013 11170 0 14 Dongsheng District 722 490 7200 - 12 

Dalate Banner 181 145 1189 - 1

Zhunger Banner 82 95 566 - 0

Etuoke Front Banner 25 24 116 - 0

Etuoke Banner 72 27 323 - 0

Hangjin Banner 52 30 198 - 0

Wushen Banner 108 23 240 - 0

Yijinhuoluo Banner 23 7 210 - 0Ulanqab City Ulanqab City 664 319 2138 3 0

Jining District 125 101 563 - 0Fengzhen City 31 11 104 - 0

Zhuozi County 24 14 133 - 0

Huade County 25 4 91 - 0Shangdu County 125 18 210 - 0

Xinghe County 31 9 141 - 0Liangcheng County 36 20 132 - 0

Chahar Right Front Banner 29 16 94 - 0132 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region
> Ulanqab City

Chahar Right Center Banner 24 8 72 - 0

Chahar Right Back Banner 24 24 123 - 0

Siziwang Banner 79 21 129 - 0

> Bayannur City

Bayannur City 862 384 3204 3 2Linhe District 275 144 1556 - 0Wuyuan County 162 54 414 - 1Dengkou County 61 26 145 - 0

Wulate Front Banner 121 52 310 - 0

Wulate Center Banner 59 14 87 - 0

Wulate Back Banner 28 9 64 - 0

Hangjin Back Banner 101 69 499 - 1

> Xing'an League

Xing'an League 501 204 1178 0 0Ulanhot City 149 85 609 - 0Arshan City 54 19 116 - 0Tuquan County 89 20 97 - 0

Horqin Right Front Banner 87 38 163 - 0

Horqin Right Center Banner 59 20 71 - 0

Zhalaite Banner 56 23 123 - 0

> Xilinguole League

Xilinguole League 523 312 1656 4 2

Xilinhot City 181 61 507 - 0Erlianhot City 36 10 88 - 1Duolun County 42 80 133 - 0

Abaga Banner 17 5 39 - 0

Sunite Left Banner 12 5 17 - 0

Sunite Right Banner 25 10 88 - 0

East Wuzhumuqin Banner 28 26 107 - 0

West Wuzhumuqin Banner 40 9 65 - 0

Taipusi Banner 58 23 178 - 0

Xianghuang Banner 8 9 48 - 0

Zhengxiangbai Banner 15 16 112 - 0

Zhenglan Banner 39 26 143 - 0

Wulagai Eco-Development Zone 6 2 30 - 0Trademark Statistics 

133 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Inner Mongolia Autonomous  Region Xilin
> guole League

Heichengzi Demonstration Zone 4 0 4 - 0Alashan League Alashan League 166 82 374 2 0

Alashan Left Banner 120 55 262 - 0

Alashan Right Banner 20 11 31 - 0

Ejina Banner 6 8 21 - 0Liaoning Province Liaoning Province 30440 16881 134082 81 367 Shenyang City Shenyang City 12458 6155 49393 5 79 Shenhe District 2119 1150 8493 - 13 

Heping District 1611 973 7657 - 3Dadong District 1069 483 4142 - 9

Huanggu District 1047 494 4442 - 3Tiexi District 1573 713 4760 - 6Sujiatun District 391 191 2011 - 0Dongling District 618 344 3900 - 7

Shenbei Xin District 644 213 1792 - 1Yuhong District 1016 441 4023 - 2

Xinmin City 533 233 1439 - 0Liaozhong County 399 159 1226 - 0

Kangping County 100 54 316 - 0Faku County 355 114 690 - 2Chaoyang City Chaoyang City 550 249 2108 0 5Shuangta District 127 37 392 - 0Longcheng District 93 38 268 - 2

Beipiao District 61 30 285 - 0Lingyuan District 85 37 280 - 1Chaoyang County 37 23 126 - 0

Jianping County 83 36 368 - 0

Harqin Left Mongol Autonomous County 46 29 156 - 2Fuxin City Fuxin City 417 250 2002 0 5

Xihe District 60 27 337 - 0

Haizhou District 53 39 419 - 0

Xinqiu District 5 20 110 - 2134 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Liaoning Province Fuxin City

Taiping District 51 32 184 - 2

Qinghemen District 7 7 44 - 0

Zhangwu County 91 63 340 - 0

Fuxin Mongol Autonomous County 107 41 327 - 0Tieling City Tieling City 865 456 3629 12 1Yinzhou District 120 53 757 - 0

Qinghe District 26 16 274 - 1Diaobingshan City 55 26 251 - 0

Kaiyuan City 187 83 634 - 0Tieling County 105 98 518 - 0

Xifeng County 119 62 422 - 0Changtu County 177 93 555 - 0Fushun City Fushun City 992 488 4046 2 13 Shuncheng District 398 139 1163 - 1

Xinfu District 103 62 596 - 2Dongzhou District 68 42 250 - 2Wanghua District 86 57 649 - 0Fushun County 75 34 316 - 0

Xinbin Man Autonomous County 83 55 388 - 0

Qingyuan Man Autonomous County 83 46 363 - 0

> Benxi City

Benxi City 426 248 2088 13 1Pingshan District 62 60 349 - 1

Xihu District 50 20 201 - 0

Mingshan District 68 30 493 - 0Nanfen District 12 2 51 - 0

Benxi Man Autonomous County 92 22 199 - 0

Huanren Man Autonomous County 113 43 574 - 0Liaoyang City Liaoyang City 1544 635 4679 0 4

Baita District 206 80 812 - 0Wensheng District 111 43 338 - 0

Hongwei District 45 24 335 - 2Gongchangling District 28 8 97 - 0Trademark Statistics 

135 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Liaoning Province Liaoyang City

Taizihe District 72 51 282 - 0Dengta City 695 295 1648 - 0Liaoyang County 322 133 995 - 1Anshan City Anshan City 1778 1087 9274 3 21 Tiedong District 291 175 1415 - 12 Tiexi District 107 54 1036 - 0Lishan District 110 33 547 - 0

Qianshan District 205 215 1034 - 0

Haicheng City 815 456 4179 - 7Taian County 119 65 362 - 0

Xiuyan Man Autonomous County 109 76 430 - 0Dandong City Dandong City 1083 527 4644 8 8

Zhenxing District 386 113 1406 - 3Yuanbao District 96 55 541 - 1

Zhen'an District 69 37 349 - 0Fengcheng City 161 91 502 - 0Donggang City 148 138 877 - 4

Kuandian Man Autonomous County 82 41 420 - 0Dalian City Dalian City 7102 4827 35494 11 201 

Xigang District 709 621 3752 - 1

Zhongshan District 1230 605 6496 - 11 Shahekou District 1150 674 4722 - 6Ganjingzi District 1537 1048 6017 - 131 Lvshunkou District 139 97 994 - 1

Jinzhou District 306 207 2017 - 0Wafangdian City 322 129 1393 - 3Pulandian City 217 99 1385 - 13 

Zhuanghe City 227 86 1009 - 1Changhai County 163 425 1408 - 0Yingkou City Yingkou City 1242 665 4908 5 6

Zhanqian District 233 134 1218 - 0

Xishi District 123 68 476 - 2136 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Liaoning Province Yingkou City

Bayuquan District 184 74 515 - 0Laobian District 51 42 284 - 1Dashiqiao City 301 183 1281 - 2Gaizhou City 178 95 737 - 0Panjin City Panjin City 681 446 3263 3 1

Xinglongtai District 213 137 1219 - 0Shuangtaizi District 124 40 406 - 0Dawa County 164 105 745 - 0Panshan County 119 99 544 - 0

> Jinzhou City

Jinzhou City 711 744 4090 0 9Taihe District 146 425 912 - 1Guta District 65 27 527 - 0Linghe District 92 69 663 - 0Linghai City 85 46 421 - 2

Beizhen City 115 55 545 - 0

Heishan County 106 59 401 - 1Yi County 48 22 173 - 2

> Huludao City

Huludao City 754 311 2954 18 13 Longgang District 59 49 536 - 1Lianshan District 94 43 500 - 0Nanpiao District 16 5 43 - 0

Xingcheng City 394 103 952 - 6Suizhong County 83 62 485 - 1

Jianchang County 67 25 170 - 0

> Jilin Province

Jilin Province 14977 7330 62575 40 69 Changchun City Changchun City 6553 3323 27913 5 33 Nanguan District 990 380 2795 - 2Chaoyang District 936 466 3786 - 2

Kuancheng District 627 358 2648 - 9Erdao District 535 208 1431 - 1Luyuan District 549 285 2290 - 3Shuangyang District 206 101 778 - 0Trademark Statistics 

137 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Jilin Province
> Changchun City

Dehui City 259 124 906 - 1

Jiutai City 227 126 826 - 0Yushu City 285 106 1060 - 0Nong'an County 360 156 1016 - 0

> Baicheng City

Baicheng City 461 209 1739 5 1Taobei District 88 28 233 - 0Da'an City 86 33 220 - 1Taonan District 87 50 439 - 0

Zhenlai County 55 29 219 - 0Tongyu County 77 26 208 - 0Songyuan City Songyuan City 704 339 2174 8 0Ningjiang District 164 69 495 - 0Fuyu County 229 110 521 - 0Changling County 92 46 297 - 0

Qian'an County 32 16 133 - 0

Qian Gorlos Mongol Autonomous County 108 67 462 - 0

> Jilin City

Jilin City 2216 1118 10036 2 10 Chuanying District 315 157 1571 - 4Longtan District 232 116 925 - 1Changyi District 364 177 1311 - 0Fengman District 153 135 677 - 0Panshi City 148 76 627 - 0

Jiaohe City 249 68 719 - 0

Huadian City 172 67 789 - 0

Shulan Vity 152 82 569 - 0Yongji County 155 80 611 - 1Siping City Siping City 1101 465 3742 1 8Tiexi District 190 36 515 - 2Tiedong District 116 73 454 - 1Shuangliao City 72 45 247 - 0Gongzhuling City 263 156 1159 - 0Lishu County 114 60 470 - 0138 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Jilin Province

Siping City Yitong Man Autonomous County 102 37 336 - 0Liaoyuan City Liaoyuan City 501 265 2147 1 2Longshan District 103 34 514 - 0

Xi'an District 51 70 510 - 0Dongfeng County 122 53 412 - 0Dongliao County 99 43 225 - 1Tonghua City Tonghua City 1316 629 6595 10 8Dongchang District 102 35 346 - 0Erdaojiang District 27 16 169 - 0

Meihekou City 343 136 1628 - 2

Ji'an City 139 92 510 - 0Tonghua County 96 49 534 - 2

Huinan County 188 70 778 - 0Liuhe County 187 65 866 - 0

> Baishan City

Baishan City 727 367 2749 3 1

Hunjiang District 88 45 451 - 0

Jiangyuan District 56 29 205 - 0Linjiang City 105 46 404 - 0Fusong County 276 124 912 - 1

Jingyu County 109 95 332 - 0

Changbai Korean Autonomous County 30 14 109 - 0

> Yanbian Korean Autonomous
> Prefecture

Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture 1384 721 5836 4 6Yanji City 510 344 2681 - 3Tumen City 56 50 282 - 0Dunhua City 230 94 979 - 0

Hunchun City 137 57 496 - 2Longjing City 77 38 395 - 1

Helong City 75 17 293 - 0Wangqing County 63 32 217 - 0Antu County 197 84 444 - 0

> Heilongjiang
> Province

Heilongjiang Province 19079 9719 84157 36 145 

Harbin City Harbin City 9999 4927 43807 5 68 Trademark Statistics 

139 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Heilongjiang Province Harbin City

Songbei District 262 168 708 - 0Daoli District 1370 701 5894 - 9Nangang District 2185 1192 12597 - 15 Daowai District 1329 616 5976 - 6

Xiangfang District 1048 435 4801 - 16 Pingfang District 97 178 1013 - 2

Hulan District 187 155 869 - 3Acheng District 353 118 1042 - 0Shuangcheng City 337 148 1447 - 2Shangzhi City 282 81 961 - 0Wuchang City 1201 303 1945 - 3Yilan County 67 27 335 - 0Fangzheng County 59 22 300 - 0

Bin County 151 142 605 - 1

Bayan County 143 73 354 - 0

Mulan County 73 32 241 - 0Tonghe County 56 27 196 - 0Yanshou County 90 51 446 - 0

> Qiqihar City

Qiqihar City 1474 795 6540 7 10 

Jianhua District 231 90 742 - 0Longsha District 161 128 1137 - 2Tiefeng District 82 75 689 - 2Ang'angxi District 36 14 144 - 0Fulaerji District 93 23 361 - 2Nianzishan District 19 4 71 - 2

Meilisi Daur District 49 14 121 - 0Nehe City 159 80 528 - 0Longjiang County 100 64 308 - 0Yian County 82 35 310 - 1Tailai County 55 19 190 - 0Gannan County 79 34 313 - 0Fuyu County 115 75 319 - 0140 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Heilongjiang Province Qiqihar
> City

Keshan County 78 46 322 - 0

Kedong County 38 38 527 - 0

Baiquan County 96 45 240 - 0

> Heihe City

Heihe City 634 291 1690 2 2Aihui District 67 40 186 - 0

Beian City 164 96 385 - 0Wudalianchi City 240 71 446 - 0Nenjiang County 103 66 320 - 0

Xunke County 26 6 79 - 0Sunwu County 19 5 59 - 0Daqing City Daqing City 1524 741 5685 4 9Saertu City 249 145 1055 - 0Longfeng District 191 85 556 - 0

Ranghulu District 193 68 1140 - 1Datong District 29 41 194 - 0

Honggang District 39 22 197 - 0

Zhaozhou County 81 26 216 - 1

Zhaoyuan County 93 61 332 - 1Lindian County 51 35 389 - 1

Duerbote Mongol Autonomous County 101 54 343 - 0

Development Zone 4 19 141 - 0Yichun City Yichun City 438 242 2217 0 3Yichun District 38 48 461 - 0Nancha District 47 27 158 - 0Youhao District 27 30 180 - 0

Xilin District 7 4 44 - 0Cuiluan District 11 5 122 - 0

Xinqing District 10 3 41 - 0

Meixi District 24 3 72 - 0

Jinshantun District 6 4 45 - 0Wuying District 20 12 96 - 1Wumahe District 28 3 45 - 0Trademark Statistics 

141 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Heilongjiang Province
> Yichun City

Tangwanghe District 12 2 31 - 0Dailing District 16 5 32 - 0Wuyiling District 1 2 13 - 0

Hongxing District 7 2 16 - 0Shangganling District 19 4 62 - 0Tieli City 151 73 584 - 2

Jiayin County 13 12 85 - 0

> Hegang City

Hegang City 294 181 1526 1 2

Xiangyang District 21 9 114 - 0

Xingshan District 0 2 36 - 0Gongnong District 72 53 414 - 1Nanshan District 26 20 119 - 0

Xing'an District 13 5 81 - 0Dongshan District 40 16 120 - 1Luobei County 78 44 316 - 0Suibin County 39 27 201 - 0

> Jiamusi City

Jiamusi City 802 446 4644 2 6

Qianjin District 81 38 638 - 1

Xiangyang District 94 65 481 - 3Dongfeng District 50 29 476 - 0Suburb 109 76 914 - 0Tongjiang City 56 20 168 - 1Fujin City 115 59 549 - 0

Huanan City 94 43 273 - 0

Huachuan City 74 31 410 - 0Tangyuan City 49 34 300 - 0Fuyuan City 20 7 104 - 0Shuangyashan City Shuangyashan City 395 174 1808 1 0

Jianshan District 46 36 346 - 0Lingdong District 10 5 39 - 0Sifangtai District 12 6 68 - 0

Baoshan District 7 6 46 - 0142 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Heilongjiang Province
> Shuangyashan City

Jixian County 55 22 287 - 0Youyi County 57 25 203 - 0

Baoqing County 125 50 503 - 0

Raohe County 78 26 283 - 0

> Qitaihe City

Qitaihe City 179 72 733 0 1Taoshan District 52 14 200 - 0

Xinxing District 46 20 197 - 1

Qiezihe District 22 15 80 - 0

Boli County 54 21 235 - 0

> Jixi City

Jixi City 490 234 2504 1 7

Jiguan District 102 48 694 - 5

Hengshan District 19 12 128 - 0Didao District 9 13 69 - 0Lishu District 6 2 62 - 0Chengzihe District 22 7 82 - 0

Mashan District 8 3 35 - 1

Hulin City 116 69 693 - 0

Mishan City 119 53 493 - 0

Jidong County 52 26 228 - 0

> Mudanjiang City

Mudanjiang City 1134 835 6752 3 26 Dong'an District 116 104 799 - 2Aimin District 90 58 666 - 0Yangming District 97 102 589 - 0

Xi'an District 154 118 965 - 0

Muling City 66 36 313 - 1Suifenhe City 169 101 713 - 17 

Hailin City 133 113 804 - 0Ning'an City 125 122 814 - 0Dongning County 85 49 318 - 5Linkou County 65 28 271 - 0Suihua City Suihua City 1314 726 5350 5 11 

Beilin District 252 121 659 - 2Trademark Statistics 

143 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Heilongjiang Province
> Suihua City

Anda City 133 87 517 - 0

Zhaodong City 248 120 849 - 0

Hailun City 180 107 676 - 9Wangkui County 89 61 286 - 0Lanxi County 91 55 434 - 0

Qinggang County 64 17 181 - 0

Qing'an County 96 38 530 - 0

Mingshui County 89 32 184 - 0Suiling County 56 62 359 - 0Daxing'anling Area Daxing'anling Area 258 99 1046 5 0

Huma County 12 16 69 - 0Tahe County 34 5 136 - 0

Mohe County 84 29 201 - 0

Jiageda Banner 100 39 525 - 0Songling District 12 3 30 - 0

Xinlin District 10 3 43 - 0

Huzhong District 5 4 24 - 0Shanghai Shanghai City 106374 57354 364528 13 932 

Huangpu District 3099 1545 10855 - 21 

Xuhui District 4451 2558 9823 - 17 Changning District 2785 1636 9849 - 17 

Jing'an District 1520 858 6339 - 2Putuo District 3261 1783 11106 - 15 

Zhabei District 2783 1450 5549 - 7

Hongkou District 2201 1374 5392 - 5Yangpu District 3752 1714 9910 - 15 

Minhang District 9301 5078 29003 - 66 

Baoshan District 4179 2166 10725 - 14 

Jiading District 12501 6171 33070 4 67 Pudong New Area 17721 9951 66835 1 191 

Jinshan District 12967 6124 25678 - 31 Songjiang District 7585 4595 27407 1 68 144 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shanghai

Qingpu District 6016 3389 22901 - 52 Fengxian District 7916 4204 21963 1 50 Chongming County 2297 1231 5345 6 7

> Jiangsu Province

Jiangsu Province 110097 60069 459132 117 1420 Nanjing City Nanjing City 18547 10503 69306 4 235 

Xuanwu District 1700 1122 6628 - 7

Baixia District 1913 1277 7863 - 15 

Qinhuai District 1217 411 2906 - 7

Jianye District 1410 771 4836 - 20 Gulou District 2073 1224 7786 - 27 

Xiaguan District 516 315 2857 - 4Pukou District 1004 425 3083 - 2Liuhe District 810 421 2621 - 4

Qixia District 1031 477 2651 - 0Yuhuatai District 872 407 2624 - 6

Jiangning District 2735 1269 8132 - 14 Lishui County 557 317 1798 - 7Gaochun County 495 362 2356 - 2

> Xuzhou City

Xuzhou City 4255 2418 16992 3 18 Yunlong District 105 68 275 - 0Gulou District 71 34 189 - 0

Jiawang District 144 108 537 - 0

Quanshan District 246 98 373 - 0Pizhou City 578 308 1819 - 0

Xinyi City 340 209 1431 - 0Tongshan District 453 240 1761 - 4Suining County 359 175 1177 - 0Pei County 386 152 1244 - 0Feng County 614 338 2070 - 0Lianyungang City Lianyungang City 2640 1248 10575 8 11 

Xinpu District 796 262 2557 - 0Lianyun District 93 74 528 - 0Trademark Statistics 

145 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Jiangsu Province
> Lianyungang City

Haizhou District 88 40 406 - 0Ganyu County 458 208 1346 - 1Guanyun County 284 129 975 - 1Donghai County 356 268 2205 - 1Guannan County 227 129 1006 - 0Suqian City Suqian City 2868 1266 7895 2 24 Sucheng District 310 156 1013 - 0Suyu District 306 184 827 - 0Shuyang County 1188 454 2042 - 1Siyang County 217 153 1222 - 6Sihong County 359 194 1553 - 5

> Huaian City

Huaian City 4456 1579 10529 46 20 

Qinghe District 225 66 465 - 0

Qingpu District 190 98 474 - 1Chuzhou District 270 235 1265 - 2

Huaiyin District 883 191 1546 - 3

Jinhu County 425 160 1209 - 5

Xuyi County 713 160 1365 - 3

Hongze County 350 179 923 - 1Lianshui County 473 188 1376 - 2Yancheng City Yancheng City 4923 2518 18194 12 47 Tinghu District 413 190 1108 - 1Yandu District 463 328 1639 - 5Dongtai City 651 256 2275 - 6Dafeng City 617 238 2250 - 5Sheyang County 473 355 2244 - 6Funing County 407 216 1536 - 1

Binhai County 269 185 898 - 1

Xiangshui County 280 170 797 - 3

Jianhu County 628 249 1623 - 10 Yang zhou City Yangzhou City 6932 4742 31976 2 65 Weiyang District 174 106 939 - 0146 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Jiangsu Province
> Yangzhou City

Guangling District 715 184 963 - 1

Hanjiang District 593 475 4109 - 2Yizheng City 602 488 2540 - 2

Jiangdu City 1042 674 5974 - 15 Gaoyou City 986 715 3473 - 5

Baoying County 904 604 3702 - 13 Taizhou City Taizhou City 3964 1921 17470 9 66 

Hailing District 402 160 1032 - 0Gaogang District 283 123 740 - 0

Jingjiang City 726 479 4193 - 20 Taixing City 567 223 3087 - 6

Jiangyan City 686 270 2332 - 9

Xinghua Ctiy 793 357 3120 - 7Nantong City Nantong City 8835 5760 39327 8 154 Chongchuan District 488 191 841 - 1Gangzha District 171 83 902 - 0

Haimen City 1271 819 6229 - 11 

Qidong City 819 516 5259 - 31 Tongzhou District 1257 1100 6735 - 28 

Rugao City 819 803 4391 - 19 

Rudong County 936 513 3655 - 14 

Haian County 1133 464 3554 - 17 

> Zhenjiang City

Zhenjiang City 4270 2021 16736 3 54 

Jingkou District 106 37 191 - 0

Runzhou District 57 31 171 - 0Dantu District 357 139 1251 - 3Yangzhong City 401 148 1876 - 7Danyang City 1971 905 7561 - 23 

Jurong City 553 234 1440 - 0Changzhou City Changzhou City 7786 4733 39874 7 139 

Xinbei District 1728 1103 7343 - 23 

Zhonglou District 855 427 2761 - 1Trademark Statistics 

147 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Jiangsu Province
> Changzhou City

Tianning District 694 422 2627 - 2

Qishuyan District 115 62 592 - 2Wujin District 2776 1640 15368 - 52 

Jintan City 543 368 2642 - 0Liyang City 660 439 3252 - 9Wuxi City Wuxi City 12407 7795 71228 7 239 Chong'an District 179 75 501 - 0Nanchang District 417 251 1111 - 3

Beitang District 354 257 1641 - 0

Binhu District 903 552 2776 - 6

Huishan District 823 514 3350 - 7

Xishan District 1374 929 9104 - 18 

Jiangyin City 3545 2494 23086 - 82 Yixing City 1618 1064 10153 - 50 Wuxi New District 1084 582 3850 - 1Suzhou City Suzhou City 27627 13758 109512 6 348 Gusu District 709 519 2502 - 2

Huqiu District 109 59 524 - 0Wuzhong District 2403 963 7133 - 23 

Xiangcheng District 1563 745 5649 - 15 Wujiang City 1991 1218 7630 - 23 

Kunshan City 3998 1940 13467 - 51 Taicang City 1197 598 6060 - 14 Changshu City 4911 2723 25068 - 61 

Zhangjiagang City 2611 1690 18210 - 44 New District 85 27 854 - 0

> Zhejiang Province

Zhejiang Province 178978 105825 864161 171 4186 

> Hangzhou City

Hangzhou City 40035 23094 168955 18 522 Gongshu District 3514 2256 12444 - 17 Shangcheng District 2345 1279 9860 - 25 

Xiacheng District 3143 1982 13388 - 18 148 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Zhejiang Province Hangzhou City

Jianggan District 3469 1911 12740 - 34 

Xihu District 6419 3599 24037 - 24 

Binjiang District 3498 2138 11125 - 21 Yuhang District 3661 2015 15403 - 60 

Xiaoshan District 4636 2674 21546 - 83 Lin'an City 864 687 4768 - 17 Fuyang City 1348 720 5641 - 23 

Jiande City 451 308 2695 - 12 Tonglu County 636 342 2506 - 5Chun'an County 533 262 1841 - 11 

> Huzhou City

Huzhou City 4438 2808 24400 6 142 Wuxing District 343 198 875 - 0Nanxun District 655 389 2831 - 1Changxing County 708 463 5638 - 19 Deqing County 751 346 4087 - 24 Anji County 1012 669 4433 - 52 

> Jiaxing City

Jiaxing City 13356 9235 56113 9 178 Nanhu District 822 588 3550 - 9

Xiuzhou District 1562 1136 6774 - 5Pinghu City 1012 850 3768 - 28 

Haining City 3023 1739 13058 - 25 Tongxiang City 3191 2023 11692 - 26 

Jiashan County 636 499 3470 - 26 

Haiyan County 1604 991 6578 - 23 

> Zhoushan City

Zhoushan City 612 348 4359 17 19 Dinghai District 208 118 1779 - 6Putuo District 138 90 1158 - 3Daishan County 86 45 372 - 2Shengsi County 9 1 91 - 1Ningbo City Ningbo City 21126 12436 107760 26 961 

Haishu District 1695 1090 7846 - 19 

Jiangdong District 1300 968 5831 - 26 Trademark Statistics 

149 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Zhejiang Province
> Ningbo City

Jiangbei District 727 493 3847 - 30 

Beilun District 1470 643 5525 - 59 

Zhenhai District 1178 480 3548 - 36 Yinzhou District 4227 2606 16419 - 122 Cixi City 3794 2169 25136 - 217 Yuyao City 2195 1397 13845 - 179 Fenghua City 881 531 5486 - 51 Ninghai County 1038 548 5496 - 38 

Xiangshan County 457 218 2461 - 33 Shaoxing City Shaoxing City 11540 7460 59791 13 218 Yuecheng District 740 386 3188 - 6

Zhuji City 3758 2821 23273 - 66 Shangyu City 1185 733 6004 - 42 Shengzhou City 1365 774 6756 - 13 Shaoxing County 2022 1372 11096 - 18 

Xinchang County 902 573 3756 - 23 

Jinghu New District 19 17 62 - 0

> Quzhou City

Quzhou City 3105 1442 12257 10 54 

Kecheng District 332 192 1152 - 1

Qujiang District 436 229 1475 - 6

Jiangshan City 771 389 4007 - 11 Changshan County 355 145 1006 - 0

Kaihua County 339 126 1125 - 3Longyou County 448 202 1913 - 19 

> Jinhua City

Jinhua City 30179 18088 122493 17 431 Wucheng District 857 465 3013 - 5

Jindong District 868 369 2814 - 10 Lanxi City 841 439 3962 - 16 Yongkang City 5602 3365 23966 - 70 Yiwu City 13839 8657 55221 - 147 Dongyang City 3035 1845 13054 - 33 Wuyi County 1375 760 5938 - 44 150 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Zhejiang Province Jinhua
> City

Pujiang County 1506 1043 7153 - 62 Pan'an County 580 337 1373 - 5Taizhou City Taizhou City 17140 10091 99909 24 714 

Jiaojiang District 2099 1161 12414 - 61 

Huangyan District 2179 1102 12877 - 56 Luqiao District 2399 1594 17902 - 111 Linhai City 1839 1101 9112 - 49 Wenling City 4122 2396 22236 - 162 Sanmen County 525 332 2336 - 22 Tiantai County 853 576 5044 - 29 

Xianju County 489 340 3201 - 29 Yuhuan County 1958 1099 11784 - 121 Wenzhou City Wenzhou City 32178 18903 191027 9 884 Lucheng District 2480 1417 15605 - 46 Longwan District 2127 1357 14017 - 51 Ouhai District 2872 1780 18399 - 74 

Ruian City 6333 3443 33776 - 153 Yueqing City 5257 3238 32742 - 127 Yongjia County 3302 1872 20228 - 73 Wencheng County 682 422 2696 - 9Pingyang County 2494 1348 11215 - 22 Taishun County 401 201 1236 - 3Dongtou County 146 79 906 - 5Cangnan County 2999 1558 11383 - 21 Lishui City Lishui City 4489 2461 18918 21 63 Liandu District 507 202 1070 - 1Longquan City 585 350 2469 - 4

Jinyun County 1161 500 3486 - 11 

Qingtian County 601 315 2719 - 8Yunhe County 171 98 745 - 2Suichang County 207 247 1123 - 6Songyang County 164 99 760 - 7Trademark Statistics 

151 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Zhejiang
> Province Lishui City

Qingyuan County 626 238 1513 - 1

Jingning She Autonomous County 129 82 500 - 3Anhui Province Anhui Province 42981 19523 123834 57 338 

> Hefei City

Hefei City 11887 5566 34455 3 153 Shushan District 1433 464 2688 - 17 Luyang District 1097 531 2435 - 4Yaohai District 1355 438 2097 - 0

Baohe District 1424 580 2506 - 3Changfeng County 366 147 893 - 0Feidong County 437 231 1348 - 1Feixi County 525 278 1677 - 1

Economic Development Zone 742 358 2610 - 0Lujiang County 610 255 1753 - 0Suzhou City Suzhou City 1626 846 4199 3 4Yongqiao District 285 110 398 - 0Dangshan County 265 136 651 - 1

Xiao County 230 92 595 - 0Lingbi County 218 135 648 - 0Si County 289 141 486 - 1

> Huaibei City

Huaibei City 705 298 2421 0 1

Xiangshan District 145 92 552 - 1Duji District 32 15 121 - 0Lieshan District 69 21 174 - 0Suixi County 155 83 645 - 0Fuyang City Fuyang City 3520 1546 8553 2 9Yingzhou District 472 220 937 - 0Yingdong District 193 97 544 - 0Yingquan District 267 179 676 - 0

Jieshou City 403 166 1024 - 1Linquan County 344 180 1071 - 2Taihe County 514 172 1413 - 2Funan County 542 263 1155 - 1152 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Anhui Province Fu yang City

Yingshang County 255 128 676 - 0

> Bozhou City

Haozhou City 2920 1194 8201 0 10 

Qiaocheng District 910 403 2383 - 0Guoyang County 468 188 1914 - 1

Mengcheng County 419 177 917 - 0Lixin County 521 246 1032 - 1

> Bengbu City

Bengbu City 1465 575 4991 1 7

Bengshan District 83 41 177 - 0Longzihu District 62 26 126 - 0Yuhui District 83 32 133 - 0

Huaishang District 94 32 144 - 0

Huaiyuan County 341 133 1001 - 0Guzhen County 115 68 443 - 0Wuhe County 167 58 611 - 0

> Huainan City

Huainan City 825 351 2376 1 2Tianjia'an District 214 83 493 - 0Datong District 45 18 140 - 0

Xiajiaji District 62 26 203 - 0

Bagongshan District 28 35 120 - 1Panji District 121 48 178 - 0Fengtai County 177 85 492 - 0Chuzhou City Chuzhou City 2411 1046 8295 4 9Langya District 93 46 552 - 0Nanqiao District 48 21 185 - 0

Mingguang City 190 115 641 - 0Tianchang City 563 313 2380 - 5Lai'an County 305 136 875 - 0

Quanjiao County 170 82 565 - 0Dingyuan County 532 88 712 - 0Fengyang County 298 129 1231 - 0

> Ma an
> shan City

Maanshan City 1924 1011 5870 2 23 

Huashan District 199 126 517 - 0Trademark Statistics 

153 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Anhui Province
> Ma an shan City

Yushan District 194 109 524 - 1

Jinjiazhuang District 206 156 1036 - 0Dangtu County 56 0 12 - 5

Hanshan County 315 226 739 - 0

He County 735 282 2386 - 0Wuhu City Wuhu City 3619 1717 10340 4 44 

Jinghu District 335 134 932 - 1Yijiang District 253 66 348 - 0Sanshan District 267 125 522 - 6

Jiujiang District 190 59 492 - 3Wuhu County 435 213 946 - 0Fanchang County 282 216 1070 - 2Nanling County 625 154 830 - 2

Development Zone 4 12 92 - 0Wuwei County 474 288 2111 - 0Tongling City Tongling City 736 257 1554 2 9Tongguanshan District 72 36 237 - 0Shizishan District 54 22 123 - 0Suburb 29 21 90 - 0Tongling County 199 64 470 - 0Anqing City Anqing City 3779 2165 11735 5 16 Daguang District 93 33 260 - 0Yingjiang District 125 43 290 - 0Yixiu District 118 33 314 - 0Tongcheng City 583 379 2423 - 5

Huaining County 389 232 1672 - 1

Zongyang County 312 200 955 - 0

Qianshan County 569 455 1351 - 0Taihu County 338 178 945 - 1Susong County 411 218 877 - 0Wangjiang County 158 97 516 - 0Yuexi County 346 160 794 - 5

> Huang
> shan City

Huangshan City 1099 586 3841 4 8154 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Anhui Province
> Huangshan City

Dunxi District 264 123 836 - 2

Huangshan District 151 121 634 - 1

Huizhou District 75 39 387 - 2She County 184 69 629 - 2

Xiuning County 167 71 551 - 0Yi County 39 16 192 - 0

Qimen County 140 60 353 - 0Liuan City Liuan City 2935 1253 7276 19 12 

Jin'an District 187 95 508 - 0Yu'an District 274 139 578 - 0Shou County 357 115 713 - 3

Huoqiu County 412 210 1196 - 1Shucheng County 480 207 1374 - 1

Jinzhai County 418 110 657 - 0

Huoshan County 283 149 713 - 4Chizhou City Chizhou City 1861 577 3616 4 11 Guichi District 303 132 898 - 3Dongzhi County 266 127 746 - 1Shitai County 220 57 451 - 2

Qingyang County 172 89 712 - 2

> Xuancheng City

Xuancheng City 1545 692 4954 2 12 

Xuanzhou District 258 90 757 - 1Ninguo City 388 128 995 - 2Langxi County 132 68 456 - 1Guangde County 171 145 961 - 2

Jing County 262 125 717 - 2

Jingde County 103 44 281 - 1

Jixi County 98 48 429 - 1Chao hu City  Chaohu City 1252 556 3125 - 8Fujian Province Fujian Province 96134 52367 369736 202 1325 Fuzhou City Fuzhou City 16123 8977 62940 14 197 Gulou District 4075 2357 14172 - 40 Trademark Statistics 

155 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Fujian Province Fuzhou City

Taijiang District 2081 1303 7122 - 11 Cangshan District 2585 1160 7308 - 28 

Mawei District 343 218 1531 - 3

Jin'an District 1799 922 6567 - 8Fuqing City 1353 671 6056 - 23 Changle City 606 413 3260 - 6

Minhou County 750 468 3131 - 17 Lianjiang County 562 352 2542 - 1Luoyuan County 98 81 526 - 0

Minqing County 400 222 1318 - 5Yongtai County 263 149 794 - 0Pingtan County 304 175 995 - 0Nanping City Nanping City 3906 2135 12956 20 29 Yanping District 418 120 963 - 1Shaowu City 187 102 830 - 6Wuyishan City 1533 892 4555 - 4

Jian'ou City 313 315 1458 - 3

Jianyang City 296 127 908 - 2Shunchang County 115 72 619 - 1Pucheng County 248 108 733 - 2Guangze County 55 49 384 - 0Songxi County 195 77 507 - 1

Zhenghe County 308 144 654 - 1Sanming City Sanming City 2540 1309 7476 13 26 

Meilie District 192 108 838 - 3Sanyuan District 367 122 802 - 1Yong'an City 315 221 1285 - 4

Mingxi County 176 101 380 - 4

Qingliu County 124 47 234 - 2Ninghua County 222 201 630 - 2Datian County 178 104 521 - 0Youxi County 277 141 838 - 3156 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Fujian Province Sanming City

Sha County 260 85 682 - 2

Jiangle County 59 45 317 - 0Taining County 195 44 303 - 0

Jianning County 124 78 439 - 3Putian City Putian City 6726 3174 18545 5 31 Chengxiang District 1444 704 4313 - 5

Hanjiang District 979 386 2943 - 2Licheng District 1847 793 4622 - 5

Xiuyu District 1008 400 2318 - 10 

Xianyou County 1271 828 3748 - 2

> Quanzhou City

Quanzhou City 33243 18494 151494 16 629 Fengze District 3282 1829 10326 - 37 Licheng District 1809 836 7528 - 31 Luojiang District 696 345 3202 - 12 

Quangang District 683 341 1445 - 2Shishi City 4671 2390 23019 - 101 

Jinjiang City 9472 5240 53006 - 233 Nan'an City 5596 3230 24005 - 66 

Huian County 1703 1004 7333 - 45 Anxi County 2858 1781 10926 - 12 Yongchun County 519 322 1895 - 1Dehua County 1018 411 1888 - 7

Jinmen County 3 0 11 - 0

> Xiamen City

Xiamen City 20061 11754 71211 2 310 Siming District 8853 4692 27735 - 40 

Haicang District 1057 535 4212 - 23 

Huli District 5117 3033 15593 - 45 

Jimei District 1149 891 5681 - 36 Tong'an District 1505 1068 5906 - 19 

Xiang'an District 947 550 2783 - 3

> Zhang
> zhou City

Zhangzhou City 5561 3440 23075 72 62 

Xiangcheng District 1114 767 4665 - 6Trademark Statistics 

157 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Fujian Province
> Zhang zhou City

Longwen District 377 254 1272 - 1Longhai City 996 559 4494 - 5Yunxiao County 184 99 759 - 0

Zhangpu County 697 338 1872 - 2

Zhaoan County 251 107 650 - 3Changtai County 355 204 1178 - 4Dongshan County 80 41 363 - 1Nanjing County 358 167 1524 - 1Pinghe County 444 271 1467 - 1

Huaan County 163 167 660 - 1Longyan City Longyan City 3542 1242 10946 16 15 

Xinluo District 913 308 3576 - 1

Zhangping City 194 104 761 - 1Changting County 405 243 1370 - 4Yongding County 325 119 1185 - 2Shanghang County 972 147 1085 - 3Wuping County 295 100 813 - 0Liancheng County 263 140 838 - 1Ningde City Ningde City 4635 2396 13753 47 26 

Jiaocheng District 552 232 906 - 2Fuan City 1142 741 4417 - 16 Fuding City 931 432 2775 - 4Shouning County 191 94 569 - 1

Xiapu County 261 162 1086 - 0

Zherong County 198 100 685 - 1Pingnan County 208 78 419 - 0Gutian County 683 241 1502 - 0

Zhouning County 120 69 604 - 0

> Jiangxi  Province

Jiangxi Province 26862 13064 88125 40 96 Nanchang City Nanchang City 6956 3106 23721 0 26 Donghu District 620 225 1686 - 0

Xihu District 1013 420 2558 - 1158 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Jiangxi Province
> Nanchang City

Qingyunpu District 359 150 1093 - 1Wanli District 185 88 403 - 0

Qingshanhu District 641 245 1782 - 0Nanchang County 731 257 1980 - 0

Xinjian County 342 189 1212 - 0Anyi County 311 158 756 - 0

Jinxian County 472 322 1970 - 1

National Hi-tech Industrial Development Zone 393 142 1424 - 0

> Jiujiang City

Jiujiang City 2910 1549 8508 4 7

Xunyang District 117 83 603 - 1Lushan District 323 99 734 - 0

Ruichang City 149 81 363 - 0

Jiujiang County 98 60 377 - 0Wuning County 334 95 567 - 0

Xiushui County 556 231 1109 - 0Yongxiu County 234 127 760 - 0De'an County 104 39 283 - 0

Xingzi County 185 132 494 - 0Duchang County 273 280 935 - 2

Hukou County 112 44 266 - 1Pengze County 189 110 786 - 1Gongqing Cheng City 86 53 463 - 0

> Jingdezheng City

Jingdezheng City 929 521 2857 6 5Changjiang District 64 21 92 - 0

Zhushan District 180 87 432 - 0Leping City 185 85 523 - 0Fuliang County 119 101 444 - 1Yingtan City Yingtan City 656 351 2594 0 3Yuehu District 109 49 517 - 3Guixi City 200 117 716 - 0Yujiang County 213 98 616 - 0

Xinyu City Xinyu City 463 241 1608 1 3Trademark Statistics 

159 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Jiangxi Province Xinyu
> City

Yushui District 136 68 412 - 0Fenyi County 107 35 346 - 0Pingxiang City Pingxiang City 800 382 2842 1 1Anyuan District 139 63 568 - 0

Xiangdong District 79 34 297 - 0Lianhua County 156 92 550 - 0Shangli County 158 79 412 - 1Luxi County 124 50 393 - 0Ganzhou City Ganzhou City 4533 2480 13924 9 9

Zhanggong District 510 307 1554 - 2

Ruijin City 338 138 892 - 2Nankang City 920 559 2374 - 0Gan County 241 125 775 - 2

Xinfeng County 215 105 613 - 0Dayu County 77 51 412 - 0Shangyou County 149 63 376 - 0Chongyi County 104 30 267 - 0Anyuan County 84 59 277 - 0Longnan County 103 37 278 - 0Dingnan County 67 24 164 - 0

Quannan County 65 30 212 - 0Ningdu County 371 230 979 - 0Yudu County 412 212 1165 - 2

Xingguo County 288 160 932 - 0

Huichang County 118 54 261 - 0

Xunwu County 58 34 213 - 0Shicheng County 127 54 318 - 0Shangrao City Shangrao City 3040 1582 9565 5 8

Xinzhou District 373 214 960 - 0Dexing City 190 85 546 - 0Shangrao County 295 162 1040 - 0Guangfeng County 323 172 1205 - 0160 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Jiangxi Province
> Shangrao City

Yushan County 226 132 919 - 0

Qianshan County 129 51 490 - 0

Hengfeng County 113 45 252 - 0Yiyang County 173 77 453 - 0Yugan County 244 75 439 - 0Poyang County 448 193 1085 - 0Wannian County 155 69 431 - 0Wuyuan County 213 125 869 - 0Fuzhou City Fuzhou City 1508 881 5125 4 4Linchuan District 315 190 1205 - 2Nancheng County 165 83 382 - 0Lichuan County 108 57 355 - 0Nanfeng County 96 143 514 - 1Chongren County 69 46 270 - 0Le'an County 107 49 261 - 0Yihuang County 76 54 259 - 0

Jinxi County 134 74 369 - 0

Zixi County 76 21 198 - 0Dongxiang County 152 77 589 - 0Guangchang County 75 32 185 - 0Yichun City Yichun City 2739 1103 10441 3 19 Yuanzhou District 243 93 716 - 0Fengcheng City 448 155 1061 - 0

Zhangshu City 807 262 3338 - 2Fengxin County 78 55 613 - 4Gaoan City 404 153 1505 - 2Wanzai County 150 61 565 - 2Shanggao County 162 90 614 - 3Yifeng County 158 84 668 - 3

Jing'an County 91 50 334 - 0Tonggu County 59 15 218 - 1

Ji'an City Ji'an City 2393 1142 7503 7 11 Trademark Statistics 

161 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Jiangxi Province Ji'an City

Jizhou District 168 86 511 - 0

Qingyuan District 150 56 272 - 2

Jinggangshan City 259 127 852 - 2

Ji'an County 104 44 349 - 0

Jishui County 125 68 488 - 2

Xiajiang County 147 65 247 - 0

Xin'gan County 224 139 927 - 0Yongfeng County 501 245 1485 - 1Taihe County 183 76 657 - 1Suichuan County 182 65 468 - 0Wan'an County 59 40 243 - 0Anfu County 136 57 393 - 1Yongxin County 157 71 433 - 0Shandong Province Shandong Province 92765 47202 343623 340 873 

> Jinan City

Jinan City 14969 7122 48413 29 98 Shizhong District 1438 598 4477 - 4Lixia District 2323 1149 8238 - 7

Huaiyin District 1261 567 3337 - 6Tianqiao District 2254 993 5284 - 2Licheng District 2543 1135 7035 - 7Changqing District 613 156 1394 - 2

Zhangqiu City 696 364 2603 - 11 Pingyin County 254 128 1053 - 7

Jiyang County 444 212 1033 - 0Shanghe County 294 207 829 - 1

Hi-tech Industrial Zone 1340 718 2949 - 0Liaocheng City Liaocheng City 4191 2023 14203 13 15 Dongchangfu District 667 221 1524 - 0Linqing City 657 333 2330 - 0Yanggu County 505 263 1832 - 3

Xin County 398 189 1365 - 0

Renping County 238 149 1091 - 0162 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shandong Province Liaocheng City

Dong'e County 373 172 1077 - 1Guan County 377 216 1265 - 3Gaotang County 404 210 1252 - 5Dezhou City Dezhou City 3427 2220 14350 10 28 Decheng District 614 312 2413 - 6Leling City 323 178 1337 - 6Yucheng City 342 163 1436 - 5Ling County 225 114 949 - 2Pingyuan County 207 109 715 - 0

Xiajin County 247 135 1007 - 1Wucheng County 264 86 836 - 2

Qihe County 196 214 941 - 0Linyi County 160 99 702 - 2Ningjin County 158 113 851 - 0

Qingyun County 192 91 527 - 0Dongying City Dongying City 1927 936 8235 2 57 Dongying District 597 265 2455 - 5

Hekou District 266 76 679 - 0

Kenli County 94 40 693 - 10 Lijin County 90 54 345 - 2Guangrao County 629 361 2667 - 32 

> Zibo City

Zibo City 4036 2354 22435 33 70 

Zhangdian District 887 423 4400 - 3

Zichuan District 550 292 3512 - 3

Boshan District 310 225 2020 - 4Linzi District 365 236 2708 - 5

Zhoucun District 667 377 2534 - 5

Huantai County 269 243 1689 - 7Gaoqing County 288 150 780 - 4Yiyuan County 210 109 1798 - 9Wei fang City Weifang City 8700 4464 30659 64 77 

Kuiwen District 612 376 2356 - 1Trademark Statistics 

163 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shandong Province Weifang City

Weicheng District 553 328 2207 - 5

Hanting District 162 91 721 - 2Fangzi District 234 125 1087 - 1Anqiu City 533 286 2056 - 5Changyi City 257 149 1050 - 0Gaomi City 867 428 3004 - 18 

Qingzhou City 1022 490 3734 - 3

Zhucheng City 776 278 2692 - 7Shouguang City 1144 682 4523 - 11 Linqu County 713 290 1962 - 3Changle County 635 255 1662 - 1Yantai City Yantai City 5887 3472 28141 35 77 Laishan District 354 195 1352 - 1

Zhifu District 1408 739 6586 - 19 Fushan District 204 130 984 - 0

Mouping District 248 142 1289 - 1

Qixia City 197 160 833 - 1

Haiyang City 211 102 930 - 0Longkou City 624 405 2965 - 9Laiyang City 344 200 1663 - 4Laizhou City 467 309 2180 - 2Penglai City 420 259 2905 - 5

Zhaoyuan City 299 260 2014 - 14 Changdao County 45 42 188 - 0Weihai City Weihai City 2357 1332 10520 7 64 

Huancui District 349 118 1255 - 1

Rongcheng City 286 258 1848 - 12 

Rushan City 212 98 987 - 4Wendeng City 258 168 1638 - 10 

> Qingdao
> City

Qingdao City 18203 9272 62585 12 271 Shinan District 3038 1679 11331 - 15 Shibei District 1766 866 5719 - 9164 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shandong Province
> Qingdao City

Sifang District 709 362 2640 - 3

Huangdao District 208 67 580 - 4Laoshan District 1671 943 5875 - 18 Chengyang District 1683 854 5810 - 19 Licang District 978 515 3537 - 14 

Jiaozhou City 1497 697 3722 - 18 

Jimo City 2278 966 6715 - 18 Pingdu City 1106 409 2996 - 14 

Jiaonan City 1027 497 2975 - 18 Laixi City 803 398 2819 - 26 

> Rizhao City

Rizhao City 1997 751 6353 19 6Donggang District 284 122 792 - 2Lanshan District 218 117 622 - 0Wulian County 325 74 651 - 0

Ju County 610 166 1700 - 1Linyi City Linyi City 10184 5323 38715 18 32 Lanshan District 2809 1424 9595 - 2Luozhuang District 805 315 2714 - 1

Hedong District 1767 879 6019 - 2Tancheng County 525 282 1671 - 0Cangshan County 481 271 1465 - 2

Junan County 488 316 2076 - 1Yishui County 500 278 2772 - 2

Mengyin County 220 161 1188 - 0Pingyi County 494 207 1924 - 2Fei County 485 246 1442 - 2Yinan County 517 303 1843 - 1Linshu County 632 285 1698 - 3

> Zaozhuang City

Zaozhuang City 1973 1293 8920 5 10 

Xuecheng District 176 110 720 - 0Shizhong District 518 329 2014 - 3Yicheng District 160 65 605 - 1Trademark Statistics 

165 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shandong Province
> Zaozhuang
> City

Taierzhuang District 93 62 548 - 0Shanting District 222 155 1176 - 1Tengzhou City 696 511 3309 - 3

> Jining City

Jining City 4338 1815 14736 58 30 Shizhong District 302 134 1427 - 2

Rencheng District 285 141 1054 - 2

Qufu City 379 182 1643 - 3Yanzhou City 336 115 1152 - 3

Zoucheng City 412 167 1233 - 1Weishan County 278 88 582 - 1Yutai County 148 40 512 - 1

Jinxiang County 275 78 620 - 0

Jiaxiang County 265 119 1122 - 2Wenshang County 223 69 538 - 0Sishui County 259 123 733 - 1Liangshan County 366 150 1313 - 0Taian City Taian City 3448 1477 11998 16 16 Taishan District 423 187 1861 - 2Daiyue District 593 187 1484 - 2

Xintai City 385 178 1383 - 1Feicheng City 523 212 1722 - 3Ningyang County 264 73 1120 - 2Dongping County 308 128 967 - 0Laiwu City Laiwu City 524 402 2858 3 4Laicheng District 309 253 1596 - 3Gangcheng District 44 36 246 - 1

> Binzhou City

Binzhou City 2402 1532 9337 12 8

Bincheng District 205 114 814 - 2

Huimin County 181 94 582 - 0Yangxin County 109 91 392 - 1Wudi County 95 99 667 - 1

Zhanhua County 120 109 756 - 0166 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shandong Province
> Bin
> zhou City

Boxing County 640 361 2360 - 1

Zouping County 612 393 2271 - 1

> Heze City

Heze City 3468 1614 10070 5 10 

Mudan District 547 235 1133 - 2Cao County 636 224 1343 - 3Dingtao County 286 87 551 - 0Chengwu County 231 144 568 - 1Shan County 379 184 1090 - 0

Juye County 265 141 746 - 0Yuncheng County 401 188 1245 - 0

Juancheng County 230 91 542 - 0Dongming County 115 60 442 - 0

> Henan Province

Henan Province 57591 29410 184866 33 143 

> Zhengzhou City

Zhengzhou City 20127 11301 69084 4 36 

Zhongyuan District 1171 676 4186 - 1Erqi District 1909 1119 6049 - 2

Guancheng Hui District 2036 1111 6117 - 0

Jinshui District 7361 3615 19151 - 4Shangjie District 141 55 449 - 0

Huiji District 553 238 1721 - 0

Xinzheng City 878 629 3330 - 2Dengfeng City 314 202 1531 - 2

Xinmi City 392 193 1600 - 0Gongyi City 424 290 1648 - 2Yingyang City 310 207 1556 - 3

Zhongmou County 418 200 1476 - 0Sanmenxia City Sanmenxia City 615 311 2385 3 0

Hubin District 82 36 309 - 0Yima City 40 10 127 - 0Lingbao City 118 66 599 - 0

Mianchi County 125 31 478 - 0Shan County 49 26 151 - 0Trademark Statistics 

167 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Henan Province
> San men xia City

Lushi County 56 32 194 - 0Luoyang City Luoyang City 4062 1880 12568 3 26 

Xigong District 588 342 2159 - 4Laocheng District 112 51 411 - 0

Chanhe Hui District 64 40 191 - 0

Jianxi District 477 212 1406 - 1

Jili District 9 5 75 - 0Luolong District 454 202 1257 - 0Yanshi City 631 235 1622 - 1

Mengjin City 119 83 419 - 0

Xin'an County 205 144 669 - 0Luanchuan County 141 60 419 - 0Song County 166 40 216 - 0

Ruyang County 223 74 561 - 0Yiyang County 108 43 330 - 0Luoning County 68 16 137 - 0Yichuan County 402 172 713 - 0

> Jiaozuo City

Jiaozuo City 1810 1010 7780 5 6

Jiefang District 81 39 451 - 0Shanyang District 101 59 343 - 0

Zhongzhan District 24 10 168 - 0

Macun District 29 9 75 - 0

Mengzhou City 216 177 884 - 0

Qinyang City 130 93 715 - 1

Xiuwu County 174 61 741 - 0

Bo'ai County 180 76 665 - 1Wuzhi County 338 211 1311 - 0Wen County 257 155 1180 - 0

> Xinxiang City

Xinxiang City 2703 1616 11621 1 18 Weibin District 126 39 494 - 0

Hongqi District 115 61 430 - 0Fengquan District 45 69 239 - 2168 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Henan Province Xinxiang City

Muye District 135 94 692 - 0Weihui City 168 82 481 - 0

Huixian City 292 205 1515 - 0

Xinxiang County 114 66 558 - 1

Huojia County 91 36 520 - 0Yuanyang County 227 102 601 - 1Yanjin County 172 83 452 - 0Fengqiu County 261 112 737 - 0Changyuan County 388 401 2812 - 6

> Hebi City

Hebi City 587 291 2194 0 0

Qibin District 120 71 419 - 0Shancheng District 73 28 200 - 0

Heshan District 13 3 41 - 0

Jun County 223 119 772 - 0

Qi County 109 59 571 - 0Anyang City Anyang City 2169 1119 7964 1 0

Beiguan District 336 163 1157 - 0Wenfeng District 188 154 763 - 0Yindu District 70 52 665 - 0Long'an District 79 43 242 - 0Linzhou City 230 100 689 - 0Anyang County 243 122 828 - 0Tangyin County 174 79 521 - 0

Hua County 436 223 1177 - 0Neihuang County 286 83 592 - 0Puyang City Puyang City 1521 744 4136 1 6

Hualong District 206 92 297 - 1

Qingfeng County 113 86 466 - 0Nanle County 137 54 358 - 0Fan County 115 41 274 - 0Taiqian County 296 104 572 - 0

Hi-tech Area 20 15 54 - 0Trademark Statistics 

169 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Henan Province
> Pu yang City

Puyang County 213 87 681 - 4

> Kaifeng City

Kaifeng City 1948 801 5598 1 4Gulou District 87 36 287 - 2Longting District 71 77 253 - 0

Shunhe Hui District 57 22 238 - 1Yuwangtai District 42 23 194 - 0

Jinming District 185 77 361 - 0

Qi County 264 100 557 - 0Tongxu County 115 49 328 - 0Weishi County 372 168 1095 - 0

Kaifeng County 275 55 400 - 0Lankao County 206 83 514 - 1Shangqiu City Shangqiu City 3406 1602 9452 0 0Liyuan District 537 256 1384 - 0Suiyang District 380 180 1060 - 0Yongcheng City 397 145 1222 - 0Yucheng County 528 267 1276 - 0

Minquan County 249 162 780 - 0Ningling County 135 64 404 - 0Sui County 205 121 460 - 0

Xiayi County 541 211 1070 - 0

Zhecheng County 247 125 559 - 0

> Xuchang City

Xuchang City 2488 1358 7454 2 20 Weidu District 216 59 523 - 0Yuzhou City 539 251 1353 - 4Changge City 457 218 1731 - 2

Xuchang County 314 217 1088 - 5Yanling County 315 192 741 - 0

Xiangcheng County 262 91 515 - 0Luohe City Luohe City 1527 885 5203 0 2Yancheng District 293 147 729 - 0Yuanhui District 336 188 798 - 0170 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Henan Province
> Luohe City

Zhaoling District 195 90 402 - 0Wuyang County 138 131 464 - 0Linying County 240 159 908 - 0Pingdingshan City Pingdingshan City 1787 1000 5446 1 5

Xinhua District 168 107 607 - 0Weidong District 117 58 450 - 0

Zhanhe District 144 37 401 - 0Shilong District 35 6 25 - 0Wugang City 105 56 341 - 1

Ruzhou City 403 274 984 - 2

Baofeng County 110 80 330 - 0Ye County 152 63 509 - 0Lushan County 206 110 539 - 0

Jia County 163 74 439 - 0Nanyang City Nanyang City 4259 1997 11465 4 7Wolong District 379 146 816 - 0Wancheng District 215 109 698 - 0Dengzhou City 338 162 887 - 0Nanzhao County 105 56 329 - 0Fangcheng County 229 145 565 - 0

Xixia County 236 120 856 - 0

Zhenping County 391 235 889 - 1Neixiang County 162 66 413 - 0

Xichuan County 213 114 509 - 0Duqi County 170 95 453 - 0Tanghe County 276 123 573 - 0

Xinye County 153 80 497 - 0Tongbai County 348 164 799 - 0

> Xinyang City

Xinyang City 2848 1268 7719 5 2Shihe District 380 128 790 - 0Pingqiao District 200 72 487 - 0

Xi County 193 81 351 - 0Trademark Statistics 

171 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Henan Province Xinyang City

Huaibin County 104 39 278 - 0

Huangchuan County 212 106 598 - 2Guangshan County 218 110 562 - 0Gushi County 645 319 1955 - 0Shangcheng County 395 183 1034 - 0Luoshan County 143 79 483 - 0

Xin County 121 72 419 - 0

> Zhoukou City

Zhoukou City 3729 1456 9079 1 4Chuanhui District 263 85 397 - 0

Xiangcheng City 377 159 1053 - 2Fugou County 482 106 467 - 0

Xihua County 196 101 613 - 0Shangshui County 252 90 552 - 0Taikang County 605 258 1179 - 0Luyi County 393 154 1094 - 0Dancheng County 269 110 702 - 2

Huaiyang County 379 153 952 - 0Shenqiu County 289 163 1051 - 0

Huangfan County 0 4 25 - 0

> Zhumadian City

Zhumadian City 2069 1017 6088 1 5Yicheng District 193 108 504 - 1

Queshan County 147 59 344 - 0

Qinyang County 211 80 372 - 0Suiping County 120 67 409 - 0

Xiping County 206 103 622 - 0Shangcai County 254 133 629 - 1

Runan County 144 60 442 - 0Pingyu County 153 49 515 - 0

Xincai County 193 60 400 - 0

Zhengyang County 179 53 350 - 0

> Ji
> yuan City

Jiyuan City 422 241 1714 0 2172 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hubei Province

Hubei Province 37031 18190 132396 133 240 Wuhan City Wuhan City 17132 9022 71065 19 120 

Jiang'an District 1976 905 6936 - 13 

Jianghan District 2159 900 8946 - 9

Qiaokou District 1204 817 5129 - 9

Hanyang District 936 390 3798 - 7Wuchang District 2018 1063 7802 - 10 

Qingshan District 298 172 1267 - 3

Hongshan District 1795 1163 9054 - 19 Dongxihu District 1623 783 6129 - 8

Hannan District 140 135 853 - 0Caidian District 286 155 1158 - 2

Jiangxia District 555 199 2584 - 0

Huangpi District 990 389 2883 - 2

Xinzhou District 243 164 908 - 0Shiyan City Shiyan City 1254 452 4377 4 9

Maojian District 99 23 306 - 0

Zhangwan District 166 96 478 - 6Danjiangkou City 156 46 591 - 0Yun County 102 47 194 - 0

Zhushan County 97 15 168 - 0Fang County 108 22 212 - 0Yunxi County 80 31 207 - 0

Zhuxi County 67 12 171 - 0

> Xiangyang City

Xiangyang City 2228 1093 6889 14 2

Xiangcheng District 334 92 581 - 0Fancheng District 382 140 848 - 0

Xiangzhou District 230 151 617 - 0Laohekou City 88 67 429 - 0

Zaoyang City 253 172 855 - 1Yicheng City 155 64 358 - 1Nanzhang County 172 59 386 - 0Gucheng County 176 81 432 - 0Trademark Statistics 

173 

（Cont'd）   

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hubei Province Xiang yang
> City

Baokang County 125 74 280 - 0

> Jingmen City

Jingmen City 926 452 3162 3 4Dongbao District 157 75 436 - 2Duodao District 134 30 265 - 0

Zhongxiang City 237 98 769 - 1Shayang County 106 45 426 - 0

Jingshan County 192 109 698 - 0

> Xiaogan City

Xiaogan City 1908 1050 6790 7 6

Xiaonan District 273 141 1013 - 0Yingcheng City 232 139 791 - 0Anlu City 237 99 813 - 0

Hanchuan City 556 317 1960 - 5

Xiaochang County 154 71 319 - 0Dawu County 110 51 405 - 0Yunmeng County 196 120 797 - 0

> Huanggang City

Huanggang City 1821 763 5097 7 9

Huangzhou District 245 97 435 - 2

Macheng City 169 73 501 - 0Wuxue City 177 82 693 - 0

Hong'an County 197 43 336 - 0Luotian County 174 43 262 - 0Yingshan County 127 58 288 - 0

Xishui County 158 88 465 - 0

Qichun County 286 129 1110 - 5

Huangmei County 212 110 679 - 0Tuanfeng County 47 27 179 - 0Ezhou City Ezhou City 354 193 1558 14 2Echeng District 103 67 379 - 1Liangzihu District 50 19 132 - 0

Huarong District 37 14 146 - 0

> Huang
> shi City

Huangshi City 875 476 3252 2 15 

Xialu District 27 42 150 - 0174 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hubei Province Huang shi City

Huangshigang District 65 49 357 - 1

Xisaishan District 60 22 164 - 0Tieshan District 17 17 129 - 1Daye City 305 143 1061 - 7Yangxin County 274 119 567 - 0

> Xianning City

Xianning City 1205 605 3450 2 4

Xian'an District 157 109 526 - 0Chibi City 317 177 735 - 0

Jiayu County 198 81 416 - 1Tongcheng County 152 108 649 - 1Chongyang County 104 60 364 - 0Tongshan County 117 48 348 - 0

> Jingzhou City

Jingzhou City 2819 1444 8189 16 4Shashi District 449 264 1576 - 4

Jingzhou District 290 159 844 - 0Shishou City 339 104 715 - 0

Honghu City 304 188 1178 - 0Songzi City 333 122 766 - 0

Jiangling County 138 52 298 - 0Gong'an County 340 170 902 - 0

Jianli County 460 244 1267 - 0Yichang City Yichang City 2429 1016 7056 18 55 

Xiling District 227 73 586 - 0Wujiagang District 197 24 169 - 1Dianjun District 24 10 104 - 1

Huting District 52 17 119 - 0Yiling District 505 183 1152 - 1

Zhijiang City 123 107 763 - 2Yidu City 126 69 512 - 2Dangyang City 163 80 459 - 0Yuan'an County 219 41 353 - 0

Xingshan County 53 30 146 - 3Trademark Statistics 

175 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hubei Province
> Yichang City

Zigui County 49 35 188 - 2Changyang Tujia Autonomous County 122 65 328 - 0Wufeng Tujia Autonomous County 105 48 326 - 0Suizhou City Suizhou City 708 317 2810 2 5

Zengdu District 254 135 812 - 0Guangshui City 198 96 625 - 1Sui County 135 19 71 - 0

Xiantao City 588 344 2258 5 2Tianmen City 568 240 1741 1 1

Qianjiang City 493 158 971 2 1

Shennongjia Forestry Region 118 123 369 0 0

> Enshi Tujia and Miao Autonomous
> Prefecture

Enshi Tujia and Miao Autonomous Prefecture 1439 590 3427 17 1Enshi City 535 188 1034 - 0Lichuan City 293 90 583 - 0

Jianshi County 134 92 490 - 0

Badong County 139 92 406 - 0

Xuan'en County 95 26 216 - 0

Xianfeng County 88 24 202 - 0Laifeng County 66 45 196 - 0

Hefeng County 69 33 299 - 1

> Hunan Province

Hunan Province 41362 21453 139205 76 180 Changsha City Changsha City 17192 9662 61884 6 101 Yuelu District 1376 697 4763 - 1Furong District 3120 1755 11276 - 6Tianxin District 2056 950 4554 - 3

Kaifu District 1872 952 4823 - 2Yuhua District 3163 1950 9284 - 12 Liuyang City 1348 859 6043 - 12 Changsha County 709 514 2702 - 0Wangcheng District 675 383 2228 - 3Ningxiang County 856 458 2705 - 4

Hi-tech industrial Development Zone 30 21 86 - 0176 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013   

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hunan Province
> Chang sha City

Economic Development Zone 118 50 757 - 0

> Zhangjiajie City

Zhangjiajie City 494 394 1446 3 2Yongding District 252 158 610 - 0Wulingyuan District 21 90 228 - 0Cili County 115 72 295 - 0Sangzhi County 75 53 171 - 0Changde City Changde City 1903 1028 6792 6 5Wuling District 278 126 879 - 0Dingcheng District 202 108 681 - 0

Jinshi City 87 61 416 - 0Anxiang County 188 96 616 - 0

Hanshou County 187 106 533 - 0Li County 363 203 1135 - 0Linli County 104 55 359 - 2Taoyuan County 174 103 576 - 0Shimen County 229 128 642 - 0

Deshan Development Zone 68 24 338 - 0Yiyang City Yiyang City 2529 1139 7195 5 5

Heshan District 427 161 1054 - 0

Ziyang District 230 76 487 - 0

Ruanjiang City 281 114 1012 - 0Nan County 684 322 1691 - 1Taojiang County 297 99 765 - 0Anhua County 361 215 933 - 0Yueyang City Yueyang City 2497 1285 8884 6 15 Yueyanglou District 416 170 1148 - 0

Junshan District 85 68 342 - 0Yunxi District 39 32 630 - 0

Miluo City 206 128 634 - 3Linxiang City 223 175 626 - 2Yueyang County 186 85 655 - 3

Huarong County 290 110 752 - 2Trademark Statistics 

177 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hunan Province
> Yueyang City

Xiangyin County 358 175 1273 - 4Pingjiang County 444 190 1312 - 1

Quyuan District 0 0 1 - 0

> Zhuzhou City

Zhuzhou City 2404 1106 8906 10 24 Tianyuan District 364 172 1176 - 2

Hetang District 202 104 1026 - 1Lusong District 518 208 1265 - 1Shifeng District 128 66 721 - 0Liling City 409 220 1291 - 14 

Zhuzhou County 129 56 438 - 0You County 202 93 764 - 0Chaling County 238 104 480 - 0Yanling County 78 25 161 - 0

> Xiangtan City

Xiangtan City 2236 1281 9239 1 6Yuetang District 224 124 1182 - 0Yuhu District 270 139 1300 - 0

Xiangxiang City 291 204 955 - 1Shaoshan City 829 541 3483 - 2

Xiangtan County 440 195 1294 - 0

> Hengyang City

Hengyang City 2531 1273 7248 2 5

Zhengxiang District 219 52 528 - 0Yanfeng District 134 111 611 - 0

Zhuhui District 123 79 514 - 1Shigu District 139 99 804 - 2Nanyue District 80 10 223 - 0Changning City 176 141 399 - 0Leiyang City 358 209 798 - 1

Hengyang County 460 166 1055 - 1

Hengnan County 265 126 624 - 0

Hengshan County 97 52 328 - 0

Hengdong County 147 80 497 - 0

Qidong County 289 117 617 - 0178 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hunan Province
> Chenzhou City

Chenzhou City 1759 781 4301 3 1

Beihu District 220 112 599 - 0Suxian District 176 112 400 - 0

Zixing City 197 74 392 - 0Guiyang County 371 112 512 - 0Yongxing County 191 90 465 - 0Yizhang County 159 42 463 - 0

Jiahe County 76 38 290 - 1Linwu County 75 31 166 - 0

Rucheng County 76 40 190 - 0Guidong County 31 11 92 - 0Anren County 86 35 168 - 0Yongzhou City Yongzhou City 1704 772 4562 3 3Lengshuitan District 300 109 881 - 1Lingling District 158 65 459 - 0Dong'an County 122 60 329 - 0Dao County 96 81 376 - 0Ningyuan County 154 76 372 - 0

Jiangyong County 46 27 151 - 0Lanshan County 152 48 220 - 0

Xintian County 237 109 561 - 0Shuangpai County 64 26 159 - 0

Qiyang County 225 124 754 - 0

Jianghua Yao Autonomous County 148 47 193 - 0Shaoyang City Shaoyang City 3108 1766 11035 6 7Daxiang District 209 88 553 - 0Shuangqing District 214 81 486 - 0

Beita District 41 23 185 - 2Wugang District 178 74 418 - 0Shaodong County 851 540 3566 - 5Shaoyang County 469 316 2113 - 0

Xinshao County 299 113 875 - 0Trademark Statistics 

179 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hunan Province
> Shaoyang City

Longhui County 390 286 1176 - 0Dongkou County 149 67 416 - 0Suining County 70 34 189 - 0

Xinning County 112 60 341 - 0

Chengbu Miao Autonomous County 82 51 183 - 0

> Huaihua City

Huaihua City 1286 736 3481 12 2

Hecheng District 333 128 494 - 0

Hongjiang City 76 40 292 - 0

Ruanling County 152 77 338 - 0Chenxi County 89 26 187 - 0

Xupu County 127 68 304 - 1

Zhongfang County 67 44 276 - 0

Huitong County 68 57 113 - 0

Mayang Miao Autonomous County 62 60 286 - 1

Xinhuang Dong Autonomous County 43 25 142 - 0

Zhijiang Dong Autonomous County 69 49 177 - 0

Jingzhou Miao and Dong 

Autonomous County 80 37 116 - 0Tongdao Dong Autonomous County 41 28 114 - 0Loudi City Loudi City 1638 694 4613 1 2Louxing District 356 137 801 - 0Lengshuijiang City 84 42 359 - 0Lianyuan City 312 121 790 - 0Shuangfeng County 358 190 1111 - 0

Xinhua County 410 131 700 - 1

> XiangXi Tujia and Miao
> Autonomous Prefecture

XiangXi Tujia and Miao Autonomous Prefecture 958 353 2213 10 2

Jishou City 241 86 726 - 0Luxi County 22 17 78 - 0Fenghuang County 212 84 596 - 0

Huayuan County 81 27 106 - 2

Baojing County 89 39 128 - 0Guzhang County 65 21 120 - 0Yongshun County 86 32 193 - 0Longshan County 128 31 197 - 0180 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Guangdong Province

Guangdong Province 318789 162264 1126595 34 3852 Guangzhou City Guangzhou City 85078 44315 297074 1 1012 Yuexiu District 10468 5609 34062 - 64 Liwan District 5144 2759 16239 - 59 

Haizhu District 6186 3378 22222 - 36 Tianhe District 22964 11352 59997 - 108 

Baiyun District 18567 9088 46766 - 141 

Huangpu District 872 394 3480 - 14 Fanyu District 8554 4906 29808 - 103 Fanyu District 3794 2025 13511 - 70 Nansha District 623 268 1224 - 0Luogang District 713 297 3410 - 3

Zengcheng City 2740 1379 12221 - 79 Conghua City 897 481 3504 - 6

> Qingyuan City

Qingyuan City 1701 720 5538 3 13 

Qingcheng District 269 141 932 - 1Yingde City 358 172 1122 - 4Lianzhou City 221 71 435 - 0Fogang County 101 33 320 - 1Yangshan County 122 55 355 - 1

Qingxin County 380 121 892 - 1

Lianshan Zhuang and Yao 

Autonomous County 54 21 117 - 0Liannan Yao Autonomous County 34 17 164 - 0Shaoguan City Shaoguan City 1487 698 4543 1 3

Zhenjiang District 219 100 562 - 0Wujiang District 173 53 440 - 0

Qujiang District 195 96 701 - 0Lechang City 183 98 552 - 0Nanxiong City 144 92 421 - 0Shixing County 96 58 255 - 0Trademark Statistics 

181 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Guangdong Province Shaoguan City

Renhua County 186 52 288 - 0Wengyuan County 128 75 383 - 0

Xinfeng County 52 25 213 - 0

Ruyuan Yao Autonomous County 77 38 194 - 1

> Heyuan City

Heyuan City 1431 696 5176 0 9Yuancheng District 178 67 773 - 5

Zijin County 224 114 887 - 0Longchuan County 237 127 881 - 1Lianping County 176 53 479 - 0

Heping County 124 108 426 - 0Dongyuan County 161 122 881 - 0

> Meizhou City

Meizhou City 2756 1361 9498 1 5

Meijiang District 255 102 641 - 0

Xingning City 486 238 1580 - 0

Mei County 435 262 1592 - 0Dapu County 389 270 1296 - 0Fengshun County 252 119 902 - 2Wuhua County 363 155 1129 - 1Pingyuan County 143 77 679 - 0

Jiaoling County 167 45 387 - 1Chaozhou City Chaozhou City 6704 3747 29332 - 175 

Xiangqiao District 382 195 1229 - 8Chaoan County 4361 2548 19709 - 51 

Raoping County 863 491 2803 - 15 Fengxi District 704 305 1570 - 20 Shantou City Shantou City 19544 12911 97439 0 251 

Jinping District 1089 693 3351 - 1

Haojiang District 229 167 1012 - 2Longhu District 1973 1140 6069 - 17 Chaoyang District 3514 2153 23689 - 63 Chaonan District 7586 5274 29971 - 43 Chenghai District 3257 2212 14463 - 51 182 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013   

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Guangdong Province Shan tou City

Nan'ao County 95 73 278 - 0

> Jieyang City

Jieyang City 12662 7552 56984 2 51 

Rongcheng District 1760 945 7810 - 3Puning City 6608 4210 32136 - 21 

Jiedong County 1446 879 6606 - 9

Jiexi County 1187 727 4473 - 1

Huilai County 832 434 2427 - 2Shanwei City Shanwei City 3389 1656 13998 0 15 City Area 290 124 1237 - 0Lufeng City 762 365 2964 - 9

Haifeng County 1947 978 8248 - 2Luhe County 95 36 450 - 0

Honghaiwan Economic Development Zone 133 53 407 - 0

> Huizhou City

Huizhou City 7247 3277 25036 1 42 

Huicheng District 1165 784 3956 - 1

Huiyang District 938 572 3024 - 5

Boluo County 1077 481 3566 - 2

Huidong County 942 372 5045 - 6Longmen County 310 147 1109 - 0Dongguan City Dongguan City 26036 13000 82218 0 265 Shenzhen City Shenzhen City 86950 39527 237790 1 1032 Futian District 20452 10566 65953 - 213 Luohu District 10716 5508 38272 - 86 Nanshan District 15905 6307 42895 - 267 

Baoan District 19658 10554 51236 - 194 Longgang District 12783 5358 28764 - 132 Yantian District 748 383 2373 - 10 

> Zhuhai City

Zhuhai City 4758 3140 26135 0 118 

Xiangzhou District 1518 777 6301 - 19 Doumen District 297 171 1595 - 6

Jinwan District 464 412 1711 - 7 

> Zhongshan City

Zhongshan City 13912 7570 62305 0 227 Trademark Statistics 

183 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Guangdong Province
> Jiangmen City

Jiangmen City 5577 3606 27997 1 125 Pengjiang District 1174 644 3589 - 10 

Jianghai District 458 334 1663 - 2

Xinhui District 951 495 5284 - 11 Enping City 441 236 2029 - 12 Taishan City 387 202 1702 - 7

Kaiping City 876 539 4238 - 13 

Heshan City 736 548 3724 - 25 Foshan City Foshan City 27135 13735 112021 5 405 Chancheng District 5302 2559 16109 - 40 Nanhai District 8651 4667 33241 - 120 Shunde District 11116 5388 47617 - 132 Sanshui District 975 529 4453 - 23 Gaoming District 715 356 3311 - 11 

> Zhaoqing City

Zhaoqing City 2540 1114 9301 8 17 Duanzhou District 574 145 897 - 2Dinghu District 93 78 755 - 0Gaoyao City 596 262 2788 - 3Sihui City 342 162 1165 - 1Guangning County 247 129 712 - 0

Huaiji County 195 72 472 - 1Fengkai County 92 37 231 - 0Deqing County 121 69 398 - 0Yunfu City Yunfu City 1362 444 3499 2 9Yuncheng District 580 134 557 - 1Luoding City 287 114 1172 - 0Yuan'an County 38 11 141 - 0

Xinxing County 338 116 1085 - 5Yu'nan County 111 66 435 - 2Yangjiang City Yangjiang City 2230 1267 7895 2 39 

Jiangcheng District 715 301 2119 - 2Yangchun City 544 243 1520 - 2184 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Guangdong Province Yang jiang City

Yangxi County 167 72 637 - 1Yangdong County 611 466 2248 - 15 

> Maoming City

Maoming City 2793 1267 8870 4 6

Maonan District 282 153 941 - 0

Maogang District 274 129 894 - 0

Huazhou City 564 271 1459 - 2

Xinyi City 257 104 716 - 0Gaozhou City 606 207 1497 - 3Dianbai County 460 204 1759 - 0

> Zhanjiang City

Zhanjiang City 3161 1685 13613 0 33 Chikan District 161 115 1183 - 3

Xiashan District 382 219 1823 - 0Potou District 126 56 554 - 2

Mazhang District 112 95 630 - 2Wuchuan City 379 232 2187 - 0Lianjiang City 833 422 3374 - 12 Leizhou City 485 217 1694 - 4Suixi County 198 103 648 - 0

Xuwen County 141 43 289 - 0

> Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region

Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region 16652 8430 57656 28 99 Nanning City Nanning City 7054 3595 21286 1 10 

Qingxiu District 1734 630 1900 - 0

Xingning District 315 75 407 - 0

Jiangnan District 356 137 1000 - 0

Xixiangtang District 658 199 899 - 0Liangqing District 123 33 348 - 0Yongning District 48 14 263 - 0Wuming County 90 67 382 - 0

Heng County 113 40 430 - 2

Binyang County 171 63 525 - 0Shanglin County 41 10 114 - 0Long'an County 71 24 195 - 0Trademark Statistics 

185 

（Cont'd）   

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region
> Nan ning City

Mashan County 75 18 110 - 0Guilin City Guilin City 2031 901 8546 8 29 

Xiangshan District 161 76 570 - 1Diecai District 117 75 411 - 0

Xiufeng District 105 42 350 - 0

Qixing District 308 147 927 - 1Yanshan District 6 2 49 - 0Yangshuo County 61 35 275 - 0Lingui County 120 42 391 - 2Lingchuan County 132 65 433 - 0

Quanzhou County 102 30 302 - 0

Xing'an County 98 67 605 - 5Yongfu County 91 24 199 - 0Guanyang County 36 13 93 - 0

Ziyuan County 29 24 125 - 0Pingle County 88 28 203 - 0Lipu County 133 44 745 - 1Longsheng Ge Autonomous County 44 21 120 - 0Gongcheng Yao Autonomous County 17 6 63 - 0Liuzhou City Liuzhou City 1313 787 6068 3 24 Liubei District 149 49 409 - 1Chengzhong District 63 14 129 - 0Yufeng District 70 41 306 - 0Liunan District 120 46 485 - 0Liujiang County 88 34 555 - 0Liucheng County 32 42 128 - 0Luzhai County 104 137 416 - 0

Rong'an County 26 12 114 - 0Sanjiang Dong Autonomous County 81 32 149 - 0

Rongshui Miao Autonomous County 44 20 114 - 0Wuzhou City Wuzhou City 708 334 2691 0 15 Changzhou District 30 25 87 - 0186 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region
> Wuzhou City

Wanxiu District 31 19 113 - 0Dieshan District 15 8 84 - 0Cenxi City 115 69 340 - 1Cangwu County 128 50 303 - 1Teng County 133 66 354 - 0

Mengshan County 108 36 139 - 0Guigang City Guigang City 1109 624 3698 0 6Gangbei District 145 63 268 - 0Gangnan District 83 59 274 - 1Tantang District 54 40 203 - 0Guiping City 336 216 1177 - 3Pingnan County 345 211 1131 - 1Yulin City Yulin City 1359 710 5805 0 12 Yuzhou District 251 175 1195 - 0

Beiliu City 208 117 913 - 2

Xingye County 122 74 469 - 0

Rong County 154 49 674 - 0Luchuan County 107 75 419 - 0

Bobai County 142 64 515 - 0

> Qinzhou City

Qinzhou City 517 227 1499 0 1

Qinnan District 44 15 99 - 0

Qinbei District 27 15 112 - 0Lingshan County 168 98 413 - 0Pubei County 93 45 312 - 0

> Beihai City

Beihai City 437 239 2198 0 2

Haicheng District 62 21 290 - 0Yinhai District 10 6 39 - 0Tieshangang District 17 8 46 - 0

Hepu County 147 54 421 - 0Fang cheng gang City Fangchenggang City 305 143 872 0 0Gangkou District 109 55 240 - 0Fangcheng District 35 24 97 - 0Trademark Statistics 

187 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region
> Fang cheng gang City

Dongxing City 104 51 325 - 0Shangsi County 10 12 81 - 0Chongzuo City Chongzuo City 205 138 883 0 0

Jiangzhou District 11 48 80 - 0Pingxiang City 43 29 176 - 0Fusui County 41 8 131 - 0Daxin County 47 27 215 - 0Tiandeng County 10 1 58 - 0Ningming County 24 9 70 - 0Longzhou County 20 8 77 - 0

> Baise City

Baise City 503 263 1290 2 0Youjiang District 42 41 91 - 0Tianyang County 105 19 123 - 0Tiandong County 31 36 140 - 0Pingguo County 48 29 285 - 0Debao County 20 8 66 - 0

Jingxi County 35 14 71 - 0Napo County 20 3 36 - 0Lingyun County 80 32 73 - 0Leye County 23 20 87 - 0

Xilin County 22 3 23 - 0Tianlin County 16 16 71 - 0Longlin Ge Autonomous County 29 8 24 - 0

> Hechi City

Hechi City 604 296 1688 10 0

Jinchengjiang District 26 11 59 - 0Yizhou City 96 74 295 - 0Nandan County 44 12 114 - 0Tian'e County 7 9 43 - 0Fengshan County 26 15 119 - 0Donglan County 11 4 51 - 0

Bama Yao Autonomous County 197 89 461 - 0Du'an Yao Autonomous County 41 20 92 - 0188 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region Hechi City

Dahua Yao Autonomous County 32 13 88 - 0

Luocheng Melao Autonomous County 57 17 99 - 0

Huanjiang Maonan Autonomous County 36 14 90 - 0Laibin City Laibin City 233 125 709 0 0

Xingbin District 56 28 129 - 0

Heshan City 10 8 62 - 0

Xiangzhou County 43 26 118 - 0Wuxuan County 27 14 86 - 0

Xincheng County 11 12 67 - 0

Jinxiu Yao Autonomous County 45 20 97 - 0

> Hezhou City

Hezhou City 260 105 715 4 0

Babu District 108 36 231 - 0

Zhaoping County 51 23 139 - 0

Zhongshan County 29 15 83 - 0Fuchuan Yao Autonomous County 27 14 57 - 0

> Hainan Province

Hainan Province 7470 4022 28554 11 45 

> Haikou City

Haikou City 4146 2158 18647 0 40 Longhua District 520 93 1215 - 0

Xiuying District 188 89 879 - 2

Qiongshan District 360 148 820 - 1

Meilan District 438 123 828 - 2Sanya City 947 360 2042 1 1Wenchang City 252 140 742 1 0

Qionghai City 258 143 1022 0 1Wanning City 173 74 506 0 0Wuzhishan City 159 62 354 0 0Dongfang City 133 41 311 0 0Danzhou City 176 157 578 0 0Lingao County 125 56 206 2 0Chengmai County 354 193 1329 2 3Ding'an County 118 87 411 1 0Tunchang County 63 52 159 1 0Trademark Statistics 

189 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Hainan Province

Changjiang Li Autonomous County 98 30 132 0 0

Baisha Li Autonomous County 68 82 466 0 0

Qiongzhong Li and Miao Autonomous County 106 42 223 2 0Lingshui Li Autonomous County 71 88 279 0 0

Baoting Li and Miao Autonomous County 100 110 288 0 0Ledong Li Autonomous County 132 100 302 1 0Nansha Islands 0 0 0 0 0

Xi'nanzhongsha Islands Office 0 0 0 0 0

Xisha Islands 0 0 0 0 0Sansha City 0 0 0 0 0Chongqing Chongqing City 45751 25034 114889 173 173 Yuzhong District 3518 1759 10184 0 12 Dadukou District 574 329 1990 1 9

Jiangbei District 4001 2295 8528 0 19 Shapingba District 1996 1271 7933 0 19 

Jiulongpo District 3764 2607 11868 1 17 Nan'an District 2968 1196 7505 0 10 

Beibei District 1592 1083 4090 2 11 Wansheng District 173 93 505 7 0Yubei District 3970 2358 11030 0 7

Banan District 1177 761 4495 3 9Wanzhou District 1866 765 4015 7 12 Fuling District 2067 1057 4117 11 4

Qianjiang District 520 213 728 0 0Changshou District 682 443 1825 3 0

Jiangjin District 1213 890 3406 3 5

Hechuan District 1535 801 3326 12 3Yongchuan District 952 615 2488 10 2Nanchuan District 904 209 836 11 0

Qijiang County 974 211 1176 3 0Tongnan County 550 225 1046 0 0Tongliang County 894 358 1430 3 0Dazu District 1061 365 1795 3 1190 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Chongqing

Rongchang County 527 318 1619 6 0

Bishan County 1016 643 2324 3 2Dianjiang County 624 242 1135 6 1Wulong County 251 90 427 5 0Fengdu County 306 221 886 9 1Chengkou County 52 49 225 3 1Liangping County 649 620 2078 8 1

Kai County 731 433 1944 5 1Wuxi County 199 95 382 5 0Wushan County 151 117 482 2 1Fengjie County 404 235 805 3 1Yunyang County 469 306 1092 4 0

Zhong County 787 316 1032 2 0Shizhu Tujia Autonomous County 265 206 702 3 1

Pengshui Miao and Tujia Autonomous County 436 360 695 18 0

Youyang Tujia and Miao Autonomous County 337 183 554 5 0

Xiushan Tujia and Miao Autonomous County 293 81 387 7 0

Hi-tech Development Zone 10 8 201 0 0

Economic and Technical Development Zone 128 106 698 0 1Northern New District 985 635 2674 0 0Sichuan Province Sichuan Province 63649 31125 219938 119 338 Chengdu City Chengdu City 34760 17545 124893 13 201 

Qingyang District 3269 1519 10009 - 4

Jinjiang District 2665 1373 7209 - 11 

Jinniu District 3177 1615 10965 - 10 Wuhou District 6027 3023 17463 - 20 Chenghua District 2129 899 4297 - 2Longquanyi District 754 317 3191 - 4

Qingbaijiang District 282 182 1451 - 3

Xindu District 1427 925 5698 - 4Wenjiang District 917 442 3338 - 7Dujiangyan District 638 164 2443 - 1Pengzhou City 689 334 2036 - 2Trademark Statistics 

191 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Sichuan Province Chengdu City

Qionglai City 559 292 2861 - 7Chongzhou City 676 363 2852 - 9

Jintang County 303 220 1142 - 0Shuangliu County 1498 963 6273 - 6Pi County 1041 650 3625 - 7Dayi County 512 235 1964 - 1Pujiang County 247 79 1019 - 0

Xinjin County 434 356 1960 - 4Guangyuan City Guangyuan City 717 436 2539 14 0Lizhou District 164 73 764 - 0Yuanba District 42 29 154 - 0Chaotian District 29 24 101 - 0Wangcang County 46 36 291 - 0

Qingchuan County 47 76 220 - 0

Jiange County 75 46 271 - 0Cangxi County 184 64 364 - 0

> Mianyang City

Mianyang City 3129 1496 10694 4 20 Fucheng District 611 312 1521 - 0Youxian District 280 84 689 - 1

Jiangyou City 280 141 1116 - 1Santai County 273 131 775 - 0Yanting County 141 40 442 - 0An County 583 231 1693 - 2

Zitong County 127 50 418 - 0

Beichuan Qiang Autonomous County 141 126 426 - 0Pingwu County 57 11 234 - 0Deyang City Deyang City 2317 1148 8831 - 27 

Jingyang District 244 157 748 3 0Shifang City 329 189 1444 - 0Guanghan City 475 254 1971 - 4

Mianzhu City 548 228 2363 - 13 Luojiang County 142 39 267 - 0192 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Sichuan Province

Deyang City Zhongjiang County 288 137 746 - 2Nanchong City Nanchong City 2471 1237 7707 2 0Shunqing District 359 206 1123 - 0Gaoping District 177 112 676 - 0

Jialing District 197 84 536 - 0Langzhong City 433 245 1515 - 0Nanbu County 333 137 1256 - 0Yingshan County 175 87 452 - 0Peng'an County 123 56 446 - 0Yilong County 285 114 595 - 0

Xichong County 344 120 693 - 0Guang'an City Guang'an City 2361 824 4131 6 1Guang'an District 509 225 1645 - 0

Huaying City 277 98 475 - 0Yuechi County 413 97 572 - 0Wusheng County 382 197 633 - 0Linshui County 417 181 699 - 1Suining City Suining City 1347 617 4833 2 4Chuanshan District 241 135 798 - 0Anju District 164 65 315 - 0Pengxi County 152 91 384 - 0Shehong County 341 181 2160 - 3Daying County 174 68 378 - 0Neijiang City Neijiang City 1183 482 3753 3 3Shizhong District 230 80 762 - 1Dongxing District 230 89 576 - 1Weiyuan County 126 63 436 - 0

Zizhong County 201 74 692 - 0Longchang County 349 161 1075 - 0Leshan City Leshan City 1198 749 5932 7 9Shizhong District 348 162 1340 - 1Shawan District 51 17 151 - 0Trademark Statistics 

193 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Sichuan Province Leshan City

Wutongqiao District 129 73 696 - 1

Jinkouhe District 9 5 77 - 0Emeishan City 161 181 1426 - 3

Jianwei County 101 34 334 - 2

Jingyan County 70 69 339 - 1

Jiajiang County 136 92 718 - 0

Muchuan County 37 32 169 - 0Ebian Yi Autonomous County 14 15 103 - 0

Mabian Yi AutonomousCounty 52 34 159 - 0Yibin City 

Zigong City 1172 603 4259 2 10 

Ziliujing District 167 97 645 - 0Daan District 113 61 482 - 4Gongjing District 78 30 274 - 0Yantang District 111 41 260 - 0

Rong County 248 99 740 - 0Fushun County 296 143 1175 - 1Luzhou City Luzhou City 2929 1155 7665 3 16 

Jiangyang District 604 197 1589 - 0Naxi District 370 107 508 - 2Longmatan District 413 157 1005 - 0Lu County 389 195 1216 - 0

Hejiang County 161 103 555 - 0

Xuyong County 94 85 285 - 0Gulin County 281 134 694 - 4Yibin City Yibin City 1882 986 6811 7 18 Cuiping District 605 250 1144 - 0Yibin County 163 100 579 - 2Nanxi District 166 68 434 - 0

Jiang'an County 109 43 377 - 0Changning County 116 82 340 - 0Gao County 120 94 368 - 2

Junlian County 133 89 421 - 0194 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Sichuan Province Yibin City

Gong County 97 46 226 - 0

Xingwen County 101 52 247 - 0Pingshan County 49 19 102 - 0Panzhihua City Panzhihua City 910 680 3426 0 5Dong District 242 179 892 - 0

Xi District 307 260 1348 - 0

Renhe District 249 126 560 - 0

Miyi County 43 49 226 - 0Yanbian County 35 46 220 - 2

> Bazhong City

Bazhong City 682 378 2211 13 1

Bazhou District 255 192 650 - 0Tongjiang County 120 55 344 - 0Nanjiang County 92 50 378 - 0Pingchang County 178 46 562 - 0Dazhou City Dazhou City 1414 580 4030 5 1Tongchuan District 152 76 639 - 0Wanyuan City 77 30 382 - 0Da County 283 83 637 - 0

Xuanhan County 136 58 372 - 0

Kaijiang County 176 67 344 - 0Dazhu County 332 123 777 - 0

Qu County 228 128 774 - 1

> Ziyang City

Ziyang City 1556 577 5225 2 11 Yanjiang District 242 107 762 - 0

Jianyang City 631 245 2393 - 9Lezhi County 216 61 539 - 0Anyue County 447 151 1248 - 0

> Mei shan City

Meishan City 1754 977 7266 7 8Dongpo District 585 304 2107 - 0

Renshou County 316 175 1133 - 0Pengshan County 135 56 655 - 0

Hongya County 148 126 618 - 3Trademark Statistics 

195 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Sichuan Province
> Mei
> shan City

Danling County 61 49 313 - 0

Qingshen County 234 41 396 - 1Yaan City Yaan City 717 444 2720 10 0Yucheng District 108 74 666 - 0

Mingshan County 161 87 671 - 0Yingjing County 56 67 206 - 0

Hanyuan County 66 38 211 - 0Shimian County 103 83 225 - 0Tianquan County 101 25 161 - 0Lushan County 72 16 87 - 0

Baoxing County 16 44 117 - 0

> Aba Zang and Qiang Autonomous Prefecture

Aba Zang and Qiang Autonomous Prefecture 751 348 2022 9 1

Maerkang County 14 4 64 - 0Wenchuan County 99 75 403 - 0Li County 147 60 304 - 0

Mao County 223 76 269 - 0Songpan County 43 13 153 - 0

Jiuzhaigou County 48 20 308 - 1

Jinchuan County 70 15 52 - 0

Xiaojin County 27 22 111 - 0

Heishui County 9 3 90 - 0

Rangtang County 10 0 13 - 0Aba County 8 2 17 - 0

Ruoergai County 25 20 45 - 0

Hongyuan County 28 38 174 - 0

> Ganzi Zang Autonomous
> Prefecture

Ganzi Zang Autonomous Prefecture 510 154 1268 0 0

Kangding County 148 27 373 - 0Luding County 19 26 181 - 0Danba County 116 18 107 - 0

Jiulong County 18 4 53 - 0Yajiang County 8 0 52 - 0Daofu County 63 1 39 - 0196 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Sichuan Province
> Ganzi Zang Autonomous Prefecture

Luhuo County 13 14 63 - 0Ganzi County 3 0 12 - 0

Xinlong County 8 5 18 - 0Dege County 27 1 16 - 0

Baiyu County 7 7 92 - 0Shiqu County 5 0 29 - 0Seda County 27 1 18 - 0Litang County 9 7 34 - 0

Batang County 9 12 27 - 0

Xiangcheng County 23 3 46 - 0Daocheng County 2 22 57 - 0Derong County 2 6 27 - 0Liangshan Yi AutonomousLiangshan Yi AutonomousPrefecture Liangshan Yi AutonomousLiangshan Yi AutonomousPrefecture 836 571 2702 8 2

Xichang City 353 350 1412 - 0Yanyuan County 45 19 130 - 0Dechang County 62 48 139 - 0

Huili County 120 29 201 - 0

Huidong County 51 17 69 - 0Ningnan County 47 33 86 - 0Puge County 9 0 203 - 1

Butuo County 24 4 37 - 0

Jinyang County 39 14 92 - 0

Zhaojue County 12 1 30 - 0

Xide County 9 9 29 - 0

Mianning County 38 3 59 - 0Yuexi County 13 13 52 - 0Ganluo County 10 6 38 - 0

Meigu County 5 9 17 - 0Leibo County 9 9 42 - 0

Muli Zang Autonomous County 5 2 25 - 0Guizhou Province Guizhou Province 19814 9655 41448 43 23 Gui yang City  Guiyang City 7857 3474 17959 2 19 Trademark Statistics 

197 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Guizhou Province Guiyang City

Wudang District 239 130 1025 - 0Nanming District 1979 941 3461 - 0Yunyan District 1883 845 3697 - 1

Huaxi District 645 322 1321 - 0

Baiyun District 254 77 545 - 1

Xiaohe District 253 145 942 - 2

Qingzhen City 259 71 510 - 1

Kaiyang County 99 58 219 - 0

Xiuwen County 148 40 282 - 0

Xifeng County 97 25 167 - 0Liupanshui City Liupanshui City 855 381 1496 1 0

Zhongshan District 220 64 352 - 0Pan County 279 178 517 - 0Liuzhite District 102 43 224 - 0Shuicheng County 91 40 142 - 0

> Zunyi City

Zunyi City 5572 2909 9928 10 2

Huichuan District 397 169 582 - 1

Honghuagang District 419 210 874 - 0Chishui City 95 38 182 - 0

Renhuai City 2650 1538 4239 - 0

Zunyi County 289 160 644 - 0Tongzi County 248 43 248 - 0Suiyang County 122 92 260 - 0

Zheng'an County 77 49 172 - 0Fenggang County 137 52 242 - 0

Meitan County 240 70 333 - 0Yuqing County 36 23 167 - 0

Xishui County 589 322 868 - 0

Daozhen Gelao and Miao Autonomous County 63 17 68 - 0 

> Wuchuan Gelao and Miao Autonomous County

51 17 64 - 0Anshun City Anshun City 663 384 2115 5 1

Xixiu District 211 118 489 - 0198 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Guizhou Province Anshun City

Pingba County 143 33 413 - 0Puding County 57 12 112 - 0 

> Guanling Buyi and Miao Autonomous County

65 78 207 - 0 

> Zhenning Buyi and Miao Autonomous

County 70 20 189 - 0

Ziyun Miao and Buyi 41 19 105 - 0

> Bijie Area

Bijie Area 1429 939 2435 3 0

Bijie City 502 289 681 - 0Dafang County 152 164 344 - 0

Qianxi County 163 78 271 - 0

Jinsha County 169 136 385 - 0

Zhijin County 77 58 218 - 0Nayong County 164 54 123 - 0

Hezhang County 120 87 215 - 0 

> Weining Yi and Hui and Miao Autonomous County

82 52 170 - 0Tongren Area Tongren Area 1070 452 1565 8 1Tongren City 418 161 474 - 0

Jiangkou County 43 43 98 - 0Shiqian County 55 26 121 - 0Sinan County 101 59 179 - 0Dejiang County 97 23 76 - 0Yuping Dong AutonomousCounty 51 17 88 - 1 

> Yinjiang Tujia and Miao Autonomous County

100 26 130 - 0Yanhe Tujia Autonomous County 92 29 157 - 0

Songtao Miao AutonomousCounty 84 52 154 - 0Wanjiang District 27 15 84 - 0 

> Qiandongnan Miao and Dong
> Autonomous Prefecture
> Qiandongnan Miao and Dong Autonomous Prefecture

1063 403 2128 4 0

Kaili City 388 136 851 - 0

Huangping County 62 24 111 - 0Shibing County 27 18 79 - 0Sanhui County 26 25 57 - 0

Zhenyuan County 47 15 172 - 0Cengong County 28 10 42 - 0Trademark Statistics 

199 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Guizhou Province
> Qiandongnan Miao and Dong
> Autonomous Prefecture

Tianzhu County 47 19 99 - 0

Jinping County 43 8 39 - 0

Jianhe County 16 15 60 - 0Taijiang County 40 9 39 - 0Liping County 65 19 115 - 0

Rongjiang County 66 18 89 - 0Congjiang County 42 21 85 - 0Leishan County 56 31 152 - 0

Majiang County 32 6 40 - 0Danzhai County 78 29 95 - 0 

> Qiannan Buyi and Miao Autonomous Prefecture Qiannan Buyi and Miao Autonomous Prefecture

928 519 2242 3 0Duyun City 190 66 444 - 0Fuquan City 81 25 163 - 0Libo County 25 18 99 - 0Guiding County 106 87 332 - 0Weng'an County 106 104 266 - 0Dushan County 47 38 133 - 0Pingtang County 43 23 92 - 0Luodian County 33 15 125 - 0Changshun County 56 39 80 - 0Longli County 89 38 182 - 0

Huishui County 127 61 250 - 0Sandu Shui Autonomous County 31 5 75 - 0 

> Qianxinan Buyi and Miao
> Autonomous Prefecture
> Qianxinan Buyi and Miao Autonomous Prefecture

568 316 1604 7 0

Xingyi City 270 162 935 - 0

Xingren County 79 62 250 - 0Pu'an County 49 16 60 - 0

Qinglong County 34 25 64 - 0

Zhenfeng County 37 11 85 - 0Wangmo County 21 8 38 - 0Ceheng County 12 6 50 - 0Anlong County 67 23 109 - 0200 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Yunnan Province

Yunnan Province 28051 15637 87927 84 105 

> Kunming City

Kunming City 14873 8406 48520 2 66 Panlong District 1915 865 3121 - 1Wuhua District 892 488 2841 - 9Guandu District 1928 681 4339 - 1

Xishan District 1586 659 2762 - 1Dongchuan District 71 58 360 - 0Anning City 233 180 805 - 0Chenggong County 229 160 1600 - 1

Jinning County 155 147 850 - 0Fumin County 129 93 311 - 0Yiliang County 135 114 761 - 0Songming County 159 169 574 - 0Shilin Yi Autonomous County 161 150 502 - 0

Luquan Yi and Miao Autonomous County 122 73 236 - 0

Xundian Hui and Yi Autonomous County 97 61 351 - 0

Hi-Tec Development Zone 559 276 1580 - 0

> Qujing City

Qujing City 1484 878 4589 7 2

Qilin District 218 184 697 - 0

Xuanwei City 258 206 819 - 0

Malong County 179 44 170 - 0

Zhanyi County 70 18 241 - 0Fuyuan County 138 88 575 - 0Luoping County 144 46 275 - 0Shizong County 49 25 237 - 0Luliang County 100 34 286 - 0

Huize County 135 84 449 - 0Yuxi City Yuxi City 1591 813 5423 4 15 

Hongta District 992 352 2698 - 15 

Jiangchuan County 86 58 368 - 0Chengjiang County 29 34 173 - 0Tonghai County 115 102 682 - 0Trademark Statistics 

201 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Yunnan Province Yuxi City

Huaning County 92 46 185 - 0Yimen County 65 40 235 - 0Eshan Yi Autonomous County 33 16 117 - 0

Xinping Yi and Dai Autonomous County 102 123 264 - 0 

> Yuanjiang Hani, Yi and Dai Autonomous County

28 21 126 - 0

> Baoshan City

Baoshan City 693 446 2952 13 0Longyang District 231 187 964 - 0Shidian County 89 16 251 - 0Tengchong County 252 174 920 - 0Longling County 45 48 311 - 0Changning County 74 19 275 - 0

> Zhaotong City

Zhaotong City 751 309 1700 6 1

Zhaoyang District 176 88 440 - 0Ludian County 49 11 116 - 0

Qiaojia County 38 24 132 - 0Yanjin County 96 31 103 - 0Daguan County 23 19 72 - 0Yongshan County 54 17 86 - 0Suijiang County 23 13 49 - 0

Zhenxiong County 162 43 183 - 0Yiliang County 23 22 247 - 0Weixin County 31 20 75 - 0Shuifu County 64 17 91 - 1Lijiang City Lijiang City 744 479 2362 3 0Gucheng District 459 162 1263 - 0Yongsheng County 105 101 341 - 0

Huaping County 64 61 224 - 0Yulong Naxi Autonomous County 86 82 248 - 0Ninglang Yi Autonomous County 28 17 57 - 0Pu'er City Pu'er City 1144 667 2768 8 1Simao District 337 147 725 - 0

Ning'er Hani and Yi Autonomous County 57 28 189 - 1202 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Yunnan Province Pu'er City

Mojiang Hani Autonomous County 30 54 207 - 0

Jingdong Yi Autonomous County 73 65 206 - 0

Jinggu Dai and Yi Autonomous County 104 33 252 - 0 

> Zhenyuan Yi,Hani and Lagu Autonomous County

33 8 82 - 0

Jiangcheng Hani and Yi Autonomous County 78 65 213 - 0 

> Menglian Dai, Lagu and Wa Autonomous County

38 102 165 - 0Lancang Lagu Autonomous County 271 112 383 - 0

Ximeng Wa Autonomous County 95 19 37 - 0Lincang City Lincang City 865 462 2140 3 1Linxiang District 273 87 329 - 0Fengqing County 89 48 195 - 0Yun County 126 152 720 - 1Yongde County 30 24 142 - 0

Zhenkang County 63 26 60 - 0

Shuangjiang Lagu, Wa, Bulang and 

Dai Autonomous County 118 56 271 - 0Gengma Dai and Wa Autonomous County 27 11 92 - 0Cangyuan Wa AutonomousCounty 133 53 143 - 0 

> Dehong Dai and Jingpo
> Autonomous Prefecture
> Dehong Dai and Jingpo Autonomous Prefecture

463 464 2429 2 1

Mang City 132 137 823 - 1

Ruili City 261 283 1138 - 0Lianghe County 21 10 79 - 0Yingjiang County 16 30 261 - 0Longchuan County 26 2 96 - 0Nujiang Lili Autonomous Prefecture Nujiang Lili Autonomous Prefecture 182 155 411 0 0Lushui County 84 123 232 - 0Fugong County 16 6 18 - 0Gongshan Dulong and Nu Autonomous County 7 5 33 - 0

Lanping Bai and Pumi Autonomous County 75 21 120 - 0Diqing Tibet AutonomousPrefecture Diqing Tibet AutonomousPrefecture 381 207 1115 0 1Shangrila County 284 189 1030 - 0Deqin County 26 7 24 - 0Trademark Statistics 

203 

（Cont'd）   

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Yunnan Province Diqing Tibet Autonomous Prefecture

Weixi Lili Autonomous County 66 8 39 - 0

> Dali Bai Autonomous Prefecture

Dali Bai Autonomous Prefecture 1128 741 3418 9 3Dali City 500 346 1429 - 0

Xiangyun County 70 99 431 - 0

Binchuan County 87 57 244 - 0

Midu County 45 30 173 - 0Yongping County 53 44 190 - 0Yunlong County 38 12 53 - 0Eryuan County 53 22 205 - 0

Jianchuan County 35 31 82 - 0

Heqing County 84 32 179 - 0Yangbi Yi Autonomous County 13 5 54 - 0Nanjian Yi Autonomous County 48 18 155 - 0

Weishan Yi and Hui Autonomous County 64 32 174 - 0Chuxiong Yi Autonomous Prefecture Chuxiong Yi Autonomous Prefecture 784 396 2208 4 7Chuxiong City 172 146 859 - 3Shuangbai County 29 4 49 - 0

Mouding County 88 49 157 - 0Nanhua County 106 49 202 - 0Yaoan County 32 7 90 - 0Dayao County 59 28 160 - 0Yongren County 19 6 55 - 0Yuanmou County 28 21 109 - 0Wuding County 75 19 166 - 0Lufeng County 120 37 298 - 0

> Honghe Hani and Yi
> Autonomous Prefecture

Honghe Hani and Yi Autonomous Prefecture 1264 664 4282 16 4

Mengzi City 241 64 687 - 0Gejiu City 128 95 920 - 2

Kaiyuan City 104 68 396 - 1Luchun County 61 12 75 - 0

Jianshui County 117 88 360 - 0204 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Yunnan Province
> Honghe Hani and Yi Autonomous
> Prefecture

Shiping County 63 28 202 - 0

Mile County 192 60 471 - 0Luxi County 157 47 524 - 0Yuanyang County 33 53 175 - 0

Honghe County 51 16 100 - 0 

> Jinping Miao, Yao and Dai Autonomous County

30 32 89 - 0

Hekou Yao Autonomous County 54 41 148 - 0

Pingbian Miao Autonomous County 28 12 80 - 0

> Wenshan Zhuang and Miao Autonomous Prefecture

Wenshan Zhuang and Miao 

Autonomous Prefecture 726 588 2050 5 0Wenshan City 378 198 723 - 0Yanshan County 56 96 377 - 0

Xichou County 13 6 38 - 0

Malipo County 28 12 58 - 0

Maguan County 40 17 86 - 0

Qiubei County 29 174 418 - 0Guangnan County 109 50 185 - 0Funing County 67 31 152 - 0 

> Xishuangbanna
> Dai Autonomous Prefecture
> Xishuangbanna Dai Autonomous Prefecture

1018 364 2516 2 3

Jinghong City 581 184 1235 - 1

Menghai County 311 136 973 - 1

Mengla County 111 46 279 - 0

> Tibet Autonomous Region

Tibet Autonomous Region 1316 531 3667 11 4Lasa City Lasa City 888 343 2459 1 4Chengguan District 33 12 53 - 0Linzhou County 11 0 4 - 0Dangxiong County 2 2 84 - 1Nimu County 12 0 12 - 0

Qushui County 33 5 45 - 0Duilongdeqing County 13 1 74 - 0Dazi County 26 16 47 - 0

Mozhugongka County 6 0 12 - 0

Eco-Tec Development Zone 39 9 49 - 0Trademark Statistics 

205 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Tibet Autonomous Region
> Naqu Prefecture

Naqu Prefecture 53 15 46 4 0Naqu County 0 2 9 - 0

Jiali County 0 0 2 - 0

Biru County 1 0 1 - 0Nierong County 0 0 0 - 0Anduo County 0 0 2 - 0Shenzha County 0 0 2 - 0Suo County 0 0 4 - 0

Bange County 30 0 3 - 0

Baqing County 0 0 1 - 0Nima County 0 0 1 - 0Changdu Prefecture Changdu Prefecture 27 7 69 0 0Changdu County 21 5 20 - 0

Jiangda County 4 1 15 - 0Gongjue County 0 0 8 - 0Leiwuqi County 0 0 2 - 0Dingqing County 0 0 1 - 0Chaya County 0 1 3 - 0

Basu County 1 0 5 - 0

Zuogong County 0 0 1 - 0

Mangkang County 1 0 6 - 0Luolong County 0 0 2 - 0

Bianba County 0 0 0 - 0Linzhi Prefecture Linzhi Prefecture 136 44 367 3 0Linzhi City 16 6 44 - 0Gongbujiangda County 3 1 11 - 0

Milin County 6 8 58 - 0

Motuo County 6 4 16 - 0

Bomi County 9 0 8 - 0Chayu County 0 10 59 - 0Lang County 2 0 20 - 0Shannan Prefecture Shannan Prefecture 111 65 281 2 0206 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Tibet Autonomous Region
> Shan nan Prefecture

Naidong County 15 7 47 - 0

Zha'nang County 2 3 24 - 0Gongga County 3 2 18 - 0Sangri County 4 0 2 - 0

Qiongjie County 11 2 8 - 0

Qusong County 0 0 7 - 0Cuomei County 6 0 2 - 0Luozha County 1 0 7 - 0

Jiacha County 2 3 13 - 0Longzi County 13 0 6 - 0Cuona County 1 0 4 - 0Langkazi County 5 3 4 - 0

> Rikaze Prefecture

Rikaze Prefecture 52 64 225 1 0

Rikaze City 31 38 107 - 0Nanmulin County 0 0 9 - 0

Jiangzi County 0 0 15 - 0Dingri County 7 0 9 - 0Sajia County 1 0 3 - 0Lazi County 5 20 23 - 0Angren County 3 0 0 - 0

Xietongmen County 0 1 4 - 0

Bailang County 2 0 10 - 0

Renbu County 1 1 12 - 0

Kangma County 0 0 1 - 0Dingjie County 0 0 3 - 0

Zhongba County 0 2 7 - 0Yadong County 0 0 4 - 0

Jilong County 0 0 2 - 0Nielamu County 1 2 15 - 0Saga County 0 0 1 - 0Gangba County 0 0 0 - 0Ali Prefecture Ali Prefecture 54 6 30 0 0Trademark Statistics 

207 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Tibet Autonomous Region
> Ali Prefecture

Ger County 0 2 5 - 0Pulan County 0 1 3 - 0

Zhada County 50 0 0 - 0

Ritu County 0 0 0 - 0Geji County 0 0 0 - 0Gaize County 0 1 1 - 0Cuoqin County 0 2 2 - 0Shaanxi Province Shaanxi Province 40169 21209 104745 47 128 

> Xi'an City

Xi'an City 28636 15676 72695 1 99 Weiyang District 1645 867 3980 - 0Lianhu District 1551 685 3521 - 1

Xincheng District 942 673 3029 - 2

Beilin District 1396 737 4013 - 3

Baqiao District 664 189 1292 - 0Yanta District 2999 1701 6834 - 2Yanliang District 169 68 602 - 0Lintong District 224 152 917 - 1Chang'an District 1268 654 3267 - 0Lantian County 144 69 414 - 0

Zhouzhi County 257 107 770 - 0

Hu County 267 77 716 - 0

Hi-Tec Industrial Development Zone 14202 7060 22562 - 0

Eco-Tec Development Zone 774 337 2338 - 0

Qujiang New District 621 732 2041 - 0Chanba ecological zone 230 29 709 - 0

Yanliang National Aviation Industrial Base 58 2 21 - 0

Xi'an Aerospace IndustrialBase 214 63 208 - 0Gaoling County 96 30 193 - 0Yan'an City Yan'an City 673 411 2240 13 0

Baota District 200 82 747 - 0Yanchang County 25 14 99 - 0Yanchuan County 45 71 207 - 0208 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shaanxi Province Yan'an City

Zichang County 65 10 47 - 0Ansai County 20 16 68 - 0

Zhidan County 31 23 122 - 0Wuqi County 10 8 68 - 0Ganquan County 13 40 127 - 0Fu County 28 15 108 - 0Luochuan County 57 45 115 - 0Yichuan County 31 7 63 - 0

Huanglong County 16 6 36 - 0

Huangling County 54 9 83 - 0Tongchuan City Tongchuan City 275 182 853 3 0Yaozhou District 52 73 342 - 0Yijun County 11 6 42 - 0Wangyi District 91 18 143 - 0Yintai District 76 55 129 - 0Weinan City Weinan City 1747 904 6106 2 2Linwei District 214 117 661 - 0

Huayin City 34 31 370 - 0

Hancheng City 181 138 478 - 0

Hua County 71 21 181 - 0Tongguan County 32 23 167 - 0Dali County 214 90 592 - 0Pucheng County 262 133 1237 - 0Chengcheng County 78 51 316 - 0

Baishui County 136 91 297 - 2

Heyang County 84 33 198 - 0Fuping County 244 117 768 - 0

> Xianyang City

Xianyang City 2291 1077 7158 3 9

Qindu District 420 210 1106 - 0Yangling District 25 21 146 - 0Weicheng District 359 85 651 - 0

Xingping City 112 54 437 - 0Trademark Statistics 

209 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shaanxi Province
> Xianyang City

Sanyuan County 245 101 650 - 0

Jingyang County 278 113 561 - 1

Qian County 78 43 218 - 0Liquan County 71 75 252 - 0Yongshou County 14 5 57 - 0

Bin County 41 27 119 - 0Changwu County 25 8 51 - 0

Xunyi County 74 18 88 - 0Chunhua County 40 17 78 - 0Wugong County 33 23 268 - 0

> Baoji City

Baoji City 2162 1046 5929 3 13 

Jintai District 113 47 463 - 1Weibin District 464 162 895 - 2Chencang District 129 54 495 - 0Fengxiang County 224 50 400 - 0

Qishan County 144 51 308 - 0Fufeng County 93 103 378 - 0

Mei County 161 68 395 - 1Long County 75 26 235 - 0

Qianyang County 28 15 84 - 0Linyou County 28 4 32 - 0Feng County 58 28 171 - 0Taibai County 515 248 1107 - 0

> Hanzhong City

Hanzhong City 888 489 3104 8 4

Hantai District 160 95 698 - 0Nanzheng County 73 47 348 - 1Chenggu County 153 40 329 - 0Yang County 83 30 349 - 0

Xixiang County 134 102 390 - 0

Mian County 61 78 356 - 0Ningqiang County 67 29 159 - 0Lueyang County 63 12 102 - 0210 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shaanxi Province
> Hanzhong
> City

Zhenba County 28 14 63 - 0Liuba County 9 15 48 - 0Foping County 3 5 53 - 0Yulin City Yulin City 2196 1400 4318 8 1Yuyang District 598 266 882 - 1Shenmu County 372 379 935 - 0Fugu County 151 223 390 - 0

Hengshan County 151 131 272 - 0

Jingbian County 122 48 205 - 0Dingbian County 100 43 242 - 0Suide County 50 31 179 - 0

Mizhi County 127 13 282 - 0

Jia County 45 14 89 - 0Wubao County 17 12 52 - 0

Qingjian County 59 16 111 - 0

Zizhou County 41 45 99 - 0Ankang City Ankang City 844 325 1567 2 0

Hanbin District 236 84 343 - 0

Hanyin County 75 33 126 - 0Shiquan County 117 47 124 - 0Ningshan County 23 2 29 - 0

Ziyang County 61 28 110 - 0Langao County 59 21 196 - 0Pingli County 63 31 106 - 0

Zhenping County 13 6 37 - 0

Xunyang County 130 26 134 - 0

Baihe County 22 13 48 - 0Shangluo City Shangluo City 604 256 1471 4 0Shangzhou District 67 40 208 - 0Luonan County 103 27 238 - 0Danfeng County 40 16 93 - 0Shangnan County 86 49 240 - 0Trademark Statistics 

211 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Shaanxi Province Shangluo City

Shanyang County 130 36 254 - 0

Zhen'an County 69 61 263 - 0

Zhashui County 97 23 139 - 0

Yangling Agricultural Hi-tech Industry Demo Zone 402 223 1378 0 0Gansu Province Gansu Province 6293 2991 23887 49 10 Lanzhou City Lanzhou City 2430 1201 11208 2 7Chengguan District 1567 761 6804 - 4

Qilihe District 353 180 1633 - 1

Xigu District 130 70 635 - 0Anning District 141 83 592 - 0

Honggu District 30 4 75 - 0Yongdeng County 56 32 247 - 0Gaolan County 29 18 108 - 0Yuzhong County 85 39 419 - 0 

> Jiayuguan City

Jiayuguan City 87 35 413 0 0

> Jinchang
> City

Jinchang City 119 47 553 0 1

Jinchuan District 47 13 101 - 0Yongchang County 49 28 170 - 0

> Baiyin City

Baiyin City 303 169 1344 1 0

Baiyin District 102 51 268 - 0Pingchuan District 39 16 95 - 0

Jingyuan County 67 33 257 - 0

Huining County 36 27 187 - 0

Jingtai County 56 32 380 - 0Tianshui City Tianshui City 436 242 1898 4 0

Qinzhou District 97 58 526 - 0

Maiji District 102 47 388 - 0

Qingshui County 18 16 58 - 0

Qin'an County 46 26 302 - 0Gan'gu County 45 23 145 - 0212 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Gansu Province Tianshui City

Wushan County 41 17 85 - 0

Zhangjiachuan Hui Autonomous County 22 11 42 - 0Wuwei City Wuwei City 358 109 1006 4 0Liangzhou District 197 65 370 - 0

Minqin County 65 28 180 - 0Gulang County 52 5 49 - 0Tianzhu Tibet Autonomous County 29 3 61 - 0

> Jiuquan City

Jiuquan City 349 281 1218 2 1Suzhou District 148 91 335 - 0Yumen City 45 13 128 - 0Dunhuang City 71 115 327 - 0

Jinta County 22 22 101 - 0Guazhou County 47 28 74 - 0

Subei Mongolia Autonomous County 7 3 10 - 0

Akesai Kasak Autonomous County 1 6 16 - 0

> Zhangye City

Zhangye City 312 126 1106 2 0Ganzhou District 150 73 311 - 0

Minle County 39 11 187 - 0Linze County 35 7 88 - 0Gaotai County 25 2 88 - 0Shandan County 31 18 123 - 0Su'nan Yugu Autonomous County 15 13 54 - 0

> Qingyang City

Qingyang City 576 191 1192 5 0

Xifeng District 93 46 304 - 0

Qingcheng County 44 6 69 - 0

Huan County 14 8 61 - 0

Huachi County 59 5 35 - 0

Heshui County 56 11 49 - 0

Zhengning County 18 10 45 - 0Ning County 207 96 520 - 0

Zhenyuan County 81 13 98 - 0Pingliang City Pingliang City 271 155 907 7 0Trademark Statistics 

213 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Gansu Province Pingliang City

Kongtong District 82 41 238 - 0

Jingchuan County 32 12 75 - 0Lingtai County 14 2 76 - 0Chongxin County 7 11 27 - 0

Huating County 10 4 54 - 0

Zhuanglang County 14 16 45 - 0

Jingning County 60 46 194 - 0Dingxi City Dingxi City 386 187 1089 8 1Anding District 71 29 179 - 1Tongwei County 51 17 72 - 0Lingzhao County 55 29 292 - 0

Zhang County 9 3 28 - 0

Min County 36 8 102 - 0Weiyuan County 36 35 76 - 0Longxi County 128 61 262 - 0Longnan City Longnan City 307 152 1039 3 0Wudu District 74 22 207 - 0Cheng County 41 6 80 - 0Dangchang County 34 5 99 - 0

Kang County 22 10 150 - 0Wen County 21 32 137 - 0

Xihe County 17 9 70 - 0Li County 16 16 60 - 0Liangdang County 7 5 23 - 0

Hui County 75 42 203 - 0

> Linxia Hui Autonomous
> Prefecture

Linxia Hui Autonomous Prefecture 272 161 881 4 0Linxia City 91 26 315 - 0Linxia County 32 12 79 - 0

Kangle County 22 7 72 - 0Yongjing County 23 75 166 - 0Guanghe County 57 16 100 - 0

Hezheng County 11 6 44 - 0214 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Gansu Province
> Linxia Hui
> Autonomous Prefecture

Dongxiang Autonomous County 16 14 72 - 0

Jishishan Baoan,Dongxiang and 

Sala Autonomous County 16 4 31 - 0Gannan Tibet Autonomous Prefecture Gannan Tibet Autonomous Prefecture 198 55 658 8 0

Hezuo City 39 6 112 - 0Lintan County 26 4 67 - 0

Zhuoni County 27 6 46 - 0

Zhouqu County 18 5 26 - 0Diebu County 9 2 166 - 0

Maqu County 8 14 71 - 0Luqu County 5 2 47 - 0

Xiahe County 59 16 109 - 0

> Qinghai Province

Qinghai Province 2963 1717 10429 24 3

> Xi'ning City

Xi'ning City 1758 961 6392 3 1Chengzhong District 227 197 858 - 0Chongdong District 199 102 689 - 0Chengxi District 161 127 791 - 0Chengbei District 134 91 420 - 0

Datong Hui and Tu Autonomous County 47 117 278 - 0

Huangyuan County 10 17 141 - 0

Huangzhong County 90 31 362 - 0

> Haidong Area

Haidong Area 304 158 1267 8 1Ping'an County 39 8 211 - 0Ledu County 33 38 253 - 0

Minhe Hui and Tu Autonomous County 20 7 91 - 0

Huzhu Tu Autonomous County 122 35 281 - 1

Hualong Hui Autonomous County 6 3 84 - 0

Xunhua Sala Autonomous County 82 67 343 - 0

> Haibei Tibet
> Autonomous Prefecture

Haibei Tibet Autonomous Prefecture 89 68 382 5 0

Haiyan County 21 16 48 - 0

Qilian County 19 25 125 - 0Gangcha County 9 12 80 - 0Trademark Statistics 

215 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Qinghai Province

Menyuan Hui Autonomous County 28 12 86 - 0

> Hainan Tibet
> Autonomous Prefecture

Hainan Tibet Autonomous Prefecture 158 57 311 3 0Gonghe County 90 29 151 - 0Tongde County 5 1 13 - 0Guide County 27 11 85 - 0

Xinghai County 15 10 36 - 0Guinan County 20 3 19 - 0

> Huangnan Tibet
> Autonomous Prefecture

Huangnan Tibet Autonomous Prefecture 65 74 172 0 0Tongren County 23 49 73 - 0

Jianzha County 11 13 39 - 0

Zeku County 4 8 37 - 0

Henan Mongol Autonomous County 26 3 16 - 0Guoluo Tibet Autonomous Prefecture Guoluo Tibet Autonomous Prefecture 57 25 239 0 0

Maqin County 20 7 37 - 0

Banma County 12 9 23 - 0Gande County 6 5 8 - 0Dari County 5 1 11 - 0

Jiuzhi County 0 2 35 - 0

Maduo County 6 0 13 - 0Yushu Tibet Autonomous Prefecture Yushu Tibet Autonomous Prefecture 128 32 275 1 1Yushu County 73 15 173 - 1

Zaduo County 6 5 15 - 0Chengduo County 20 8 42 - 0

Zhiduo County 2 0 14 - 0Nangqian County 12 0 11 - 0

Qumalai County 13 2 8 - 0

> Haixi Mongolia and
> Tibet Autonomous Prefecture

Haixi Mongolia and Tibet 

Autonomous Prefecture 368 286 1281 0 0Delingha City 39 25 154 - 0Germu City 263 102 685 - 0Wulan County 18 14 96 - 0Dulan County 34 93 171 - 0216 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Qinghai Province Haixi Mongolia and
> Tibet Autonomous Prefecture

Tianjun County 11 49 76 - 0Lenghu Administration Committee 2 0 12 - 0

Mangya Administration Committee 0 0 68 - 0Dachaidan Administration Committee 0 1 11 - 0

> Xi'ning Eco-
> development
> Zone

Xi'ning Eco-development Zone 43 29 167 0 0

Nanchuan Industry Zone 34 29 135 - 0

Qinghai Bio-Tec Industrial Zone 2 0 1 - 0

> Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region

Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region 3689 2401 13411 15 19 Yinchuan City Yinchuan City 2410 1481 8116 2 10 

Xingqing District 801 430 1853 - 0

Jinfeng District 414 173 621 - 1

Xixia District 138 89 388 - 0Lingwu City 144 42 401 - 0Yongning County 187 97 618 - 1

Helan County 83 66 348 - 0Shizuishan City Shizuishan City 242 131 955 1 5Dawukou District 120 49 296 - 2

Huinong District 37 30 207 - 2Pingluo County 79 51 377 - 0Wuzhong City Wuzhong City 386 263 1453 4 3Litong District 112 39 296 - 0

Qingtongxia City 78 84 439 - 2Yanchi County 45 35 146 - 1Tongxin County 47 40 145 - 0

Hongsibao District 38 7 45 - 0Guyuan City Guyuan City 192 115 600 4 0Yuanzhou District 43 22 150 - 0

Xiji County 34 22 86 - 0Longde County 25 11 60 - 0

Jingyuan County 8 11 48 - 0Pengyang County 39 40 129 - 0 

> Zhong wei City

Zhongwei City 444 422 2282 2 1Trademark Statistics 

217 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region Zhong wei
> City

Shapotou District 129 70 178 - 0

Zhongning County 228 176 623 - 0

Haiyuan County 27 20 80 - 0

> Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous region

Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous region 16368 8767 57024 56 84 Urumqi City Urumqi City 7270 3452 23636 0 54 Tianshan District 1886 1001 3431 - 2Shayibake District 980 394 1165 - 1

Xinshi District 478 201 711 - 1Shuimogou District 686 125 585 - 0Toutunhe District 134 94 566 - 2Dabancheng District 26 26 149 - 0

Midong District 280 117 782 - 0Urumqi County 41 34 306 - 1

> Qaramay City

Qaramay City 175 89 1088 0 0

Qaramay District 42 12 108 - 0Dushanzi District 22 6 195 - 0

Baijiantan District 8 20 119 - 0Urhe District 1 1 34 - 0Shihezi City Shihezi City 195 101 1299 0 3Alar City Alar City 96 60 123 0 0Tumushuke City Tumushuke City 25 5 64 0 0Wujiaqu City Wujiaqu City 57 31 277 0 0

> Kashi Prefecture

Kashi Prefecture 1629 1177 4984 12 0

Kashi City 716 514 2623 - 0Shufu County 93 64 213 - 0Shule County 52 43 228 - 0Yingjisha County 39 62 181 - 0

Zepu County 116 39 130 - 0Shache County 148 95 383 - 0Yecheng County 129 84 288 - 0

Maigaiti County 42 54 147 - 0Yuepuhu County 31 22 125 - 0218 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous region Kashi
> Prefecture

Gashi County 78 44 167 - 0

Bachu County 104 84 300 - 0Taxkorgan Tajik Autonomous County 73 72 195 - 0Aksu Prefecture Aksu Prefecture 1014 581 3584 14 0Aksu City 346 158 1229 - 0Wensu County 105 82 381 - 0

Kuche County 147 108 547 - 0Shaya County 43 25 188 - 0

Xinhe County 89 28 254 - 0

Baicheng County 27 39 225 - 0Ushi County 41 14 81 - 0Awati County 157 107 560 - 0

Keping County 51 13 72 - 0

> Hetian Prefecture

Hetian Prefecture 1302 731 2425 4 1

Hetian City 409 305 982 - 0

Hetian County 159 74 236 - 0

Moyu County 347 182 638 - 0Pishan County 95 30 116 - 0Luopu County 112 72 180 - 0Cele County 66 29 91 - 0Yutian County 84 28 153 - 0

Minfeng County 2 10 23 - 0Turpan Prefecture Turpan Prefecture 174 184 1218 3 2Turpan City 95 125 655 - 0Shanshan County 41 43 383 - 2Toksun County 36 15 177 - 0

> Hami Prefecture

Hami Prefecture 310 112 942 2 0

Hami City 184 87 820 - 0Yiwu County 8 8 15 - 0

Balikun Hasake Autonomous County 57 15 92 - 0

Kizilsu Kirghiz Autonomous Prefecture 343 252 888 2 0Trademark Statistics 

219 

（Cont'd）  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous region Kizilsu Kirghiz
> Autonomous Prefecture

Atushi City 171 161 587 - 0Aktao County 36 45 100 - 0Ahqi County 1 3 14 - 0Wuqia County 107 20 120 - 0

> Bortala Mongol
> Autonomous Prefecture

Bortala Mongol Autonomous Prefecture 267 188 1190 1 2

Bole County 107 95 753 - 2

Jinghe County 50 57 194 - 0Wenquan County 99 30 205 - 0

> Changji Hui Autonomous
> Prefecture

Changji Hui Autonomous Prefecture 1144 494 4280 2 13 Changji City 471 240 2258 - 2Fukang City 177 31 397 - 1

Hutubi County 66 38 292 - 0

Manasi County 58 31 400 - 2

Qitai County 186 91 541 - 1

Jikesar County 55 37 249 - 0

Mulei Kasak AutonomousCounty 123 18 123 - 0 

> Bayingolin Mongol Autonomous
> Prefecture
> Bayingolin Mongol Autonomous Prefecture

956 692 4585 8 3

Korla City 531 390 2856 - 0Luntai County 27 7 126 - 0Weili County 87 26 146 - 0

Ruoqiang County 35 70 238 - 0

Qiemo County 23 18 73 - 0

Hejing County 50 21 317 - 0

Heshuo County 79 48 140 - 1

Bohu County 21 12 171 - 1

Yanqi Hui Autonomous County 89 96 448 - 1

> Yili Kasak Autonomous
> Prefecture

Yili Kasak Autonomous Prefecture 988 559 3567 4 5Yining City 300 201 1353 - 3

Kuitun City 109 45 366 - 0Yining County 68 48 227 - 0

Huocheng County 92 84 457 - 2Gongliu County 18 19 99 - 0220 

（Cont'd） 

Annual Development Report on China’s Trademark Strategy 2013  

> Province Applications Registrations Registrations in force Geographical Indications Madrid Registrations
> Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous region Yili Kasak
> Autonomous Prefecture

Xinyuan County 60 45 451 - 0

Zhaosu County 27 33 121 - 0Tekesi County 45 18 96 - 0Nileke County 29 18 110 - 0

Qapqal Xibe Autonomous County 225 41 234 - 0Tacheng Prefecture Tacheng Prefecture 336 124 1142 3 1Tacheng City 74 25 195 - 1Usu City 101 26 290 - 0Emin County 70 19 187 - 0Shawan County 28 16 199 - 0Tuoli County 45 19 122 - 0Yumin County 2 6 65 - 0

Hebukesair Mongol Autonomous 

County 13 13 76 - 0Altar Prefecture Altar Prefecture 216 134 770 1 0Altar City 50 32 206 - 0

Burjin County 20 11 128 - 0Fuyun County 37 20 116 - 0Fuhai County 33 27 95 - 0

Habahe County 27 22 86 - 0

Qinghe County 17 8 94 - 0

Jimunai County 27 10 34 - 0

Hongkong SAR 67889 29907 175097 0 6

Macao SAR 621 321 2778 0 0Taiwan Province 9844 10547 104095 3 274 Note:* one GI covering over two or more regions. 责任编辑 徐乃莹 权燕子 

统筹编辑 张亚丹 

封面设计 刘 伟

图书在版编目（CIP）数据 

中国商标战略年度发展报告. 2013 : 英文 / 国家工 商总局商标局, 商评委编著. -- 北京 : 中国工商出版社, 2014.4 ISBN 978-7-80215-707-1 Ⅰ. ①中… Ⅱ. ①国… ②商… Ⅲ. ①商标管理－研 究报告－中国－2013－英文 Ⅳ. ①F760.5 中国版本图书馆CIP数据核字(2014)第065779号 

书名 / 中国商标战略年度发展报告2013 （英文版） 

编著 / 中华人民共和国国家工商行政管理总局商标局 商标评审委员会 

出版·发行/ 中国工商出版社 

经销 / 新华书店 

印刷 / 北京翌新工商印制公司 

开本 / 889毫米×1194毫米 1/16 印张 / 14.5 字数 / 300千 

版本/ 2014年4月第1版 2014年4月第1次印刷 

社址 / 北京市丰台区花乡育芳园东里23号（100070） 

电话 / （010）63730074，83670785 电子邮箱： zggscbs@163.com 

出版声明 / 版权所有，侵权必究 

书号 ：ISBN 978-7-80215-707-1/F ·858 

定价： 90.00元 

（如有缺页或倒装，本社负责退换）
